[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01005)  [Next](cc01007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>Chapter 1

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
1:1-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** In principio creavit Deus coelum et
terram.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the earth was without form, and
void; and darkness *was* upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the waters.

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Terra autem erat informis et inanis;
tenebraeque erant in superficie voraginis, et Spiritus Dei agitabat se
in superficie aquarum.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And God said, Let there be light: and
there was light.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et dixit Deus, Sit lux. Et fuit lux.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And God saw the light, that *it was*
good: and God divided the light from the darkness.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Viditque Deus lucem quod bona esset;
et devisit Deus lucem a tenebris.

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And God called the light Day, and the
darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first
day.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et vocavit Deus lucem, Diem: et
tenebras vocavit Noctem. Fuitque vespera, et fuit mane dies primus.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And God said, Let there be a
firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from
the waters.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et dixit Deus, Sit extensio in medio
aquarum, et devidat aquas ab aquis.

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And God made the firmament, and
divided the waters which *were* under the firmament from the waters
which *were* above the firmament: and it was so.

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et fecit Deus expansionem: et divisit
aquas quae erant sub expansione, ab aquis quae erant super expansionem.
Et fuit ita.

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And God called the firmament Heaven.
And the and the morning were the second day.

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Vocavitque Deus expansionem Coelum.
Et fuit vespera, et fuit mane dies secundus.

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And God said, Let the waters under
the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry *land*
appear: and it was so.

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Postea dixit Deus, Congrentur aquae
quae sunt sub coelo, in locum unum, et appareat arida. Et fuit ita.

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And God called the dry *land* Earth;
and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw
that *it was* good.

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et vocavit Dues aridam, Terram:
congregationem vero aquarum appellavit Maria. Et vidit Deus quod esset
bonum.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And God said, Let the earth bring
forth grass, the herb yielding seed, *and* the fruit tree yielding fruit
after his kind, whose seed *is* in itself, upon the earth: and it was
so.

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Postea dixit Deus, Germinet terra
germen, herbam seminificantem semen, arboram fructiferam, facientem
fructum juxta speciem suam cui insit semen suum super terram. Et fuit
ita.

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And the earth brought forth grass,
*and* herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit,
whose seed *was* in itself, after his kind: and God saw that *it was*
good.

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et protulit terra germen, herbam
seminificantem semen juxta speciem suam, et arborem facientem fructum
cui semen suum inesset juxta speciem suam. Et vidit Deus quod esset
bonum.

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And the evening and the morning were
the third day.

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et fuit vespera, et fuit mane dies
tertius.

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And God said, Let there be lights in
the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let
them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Tunc dixit Deus, Sint luminaria in
firmamentum coeli, ut dividant diem a nocte, et sint in signa, et stata
tempora, et dies, et annos:

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And let them be for lights in the
firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et sint in luminaria in expansione
coeli, ut illuminent terram. Et fuit ita.

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And God made two great lights; the
greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night:
*he made* the stars also.

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et fecit Deus duo luminaria magna:
luminare majus in dominium diei, et luminare minu in dominium noctis, et
stellas.

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And God set them in the firmament of
the heaven to give light upon the earth,

<span id="vii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Posuitque ea Deus in expansione
coeli, ut illuminarent terram:

<span id="vii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And rule over the day and over the
night, and to divide the light from the darkness: amd God saw that *it
was* good.

<span id="vii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et ut dominarentur diei ac nocti, et
dividerent lucem a tenebris: et vidit Deus quod esset bonum.

<span id="vii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And the evening and the morning were
the fourth day.

<span id="vii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et fuit vespera, et fuit mane dies
quartus.

<span id="vii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And God said, Let the waters bring
forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl *that* may
fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

<span id="vii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Postea dixit Deus, Repere faciant
aquae reptile animae viventis, et volatile volet super terram in
superficie expansionis coeli.

<span id="vii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And God created great whales, and
every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth
abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and
God saw that *it was* good.

<span id="vii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et creavit Deus cetos magnos, et
omnem animum viventem, repentem, quam repere fecerunt aquae juxta
species suas: et omne volatile alatum secundum speciem cujusque. Et
vidit Deus quod esset bonum.

<span id="vii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And God blessed them, saying, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl
multiply in the earth.

<span id="vii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Beneedixitque eis, dicendo, Crescite
et multiplicate vos, et replete aquas in maribus; et volatile
multiplicet se in terra.

<span id="vii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And the evening and the morning were
the fifth day.

<span id="vii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et fuit vespera, et fuit mane dies
quintus.

<span id="vii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And God said, Let the earth bring
forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing,
and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.

<span id="vii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Postea dixit Deus, Producat terra
animam viventem secundum speciem suam, jumentum et reptile, et bestias
terrae secundum speciem suam. Et fuit ita.

<span id="vii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And God made the beast of the earth
after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that
creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that *it was* good.

<span id="vii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Fecitque Deus bestiam terrae
secundum speciem suam, et jumentum secundum speciem suam, et omne
reptile terrae secundum speciem suam: et vidit Deus quod esset bonum.

<span id="vii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And God said, Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of
the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all
the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

<span id="vii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et dixit Deus, Faciamus hominem in
imagine nostra, secundum similitudinem nostram; et dominetur piscibus
maris, et volatili coeli, et jumento, et omni terrae, et omni reptili
reptanti super terram.

<span id="vii.i-p54"></span>**27.** So God created man in his *own*
image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he
them.

<span id="vii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Creavit itaque Deus hominem ad
imaginem suam, ad imaginem *inquam* Dei creavit illum: masculum et
foeminam creavit eos.

<span id="vii.i-p56"></span>**28.** And God blessed them, and God said
unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and
subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl
of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

<span id="vii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et benedixit illis Deus, dixitque ad
eos Deus, Crescite, et multiplicate vos, et replete terram, et subjicite
eam, et dominemini piscibus maris, et volatili coeli, et omni bestiae
reptanti super terram.

<span id="vii.i-p58"></span>**29.** And God said, Behold, I have given
you every herb bearing seed, which *is* upon the face of all the earth,
and every tree, in the which *is* the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to
you it shall be for meat.

<span id="vii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Et dixit Deus, Ecce, dedi vobis
omnum herbam seminificantem semen, quae est in superficie universa
terrae, et omnem arborem in qua est fructus arboris seminificans semen:
ut vobis sit in escam.

<span id="vii.i-p60"></span>**30.** And to every beast of the earth, and
to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth upon the
earth, wherein *there is* life, *I have given* every green herb for
meat: and it was so.

<span id="vii.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et omni bestiae terrae, et omni
volatili coeli, et omni reptanti super terram in quo est anima vivans,
omne olus herbae *erit* in escam. Et fuit ita.

<span id="vii.i-p62"></span>**31.** And God saw every thing that he had
made, an behold, *it was* very good. And the evening and the morning
were the sixth day.

<span id="vii.i-p63"></span>**31.** Et vidit Deus omne quod fecerat, et
ecce bonum valde. Et fuit vespera, et fuit mane dies sextus.

<span id="vii.i-p64"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p65"></span><span id="vii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p66"></span>**1.** *In the beginning.* To expound the
term “beginning,” of Christ, is altogether frivolous. For Moses simply
intends to assert that the world was not perfected at its very
commencement, in the manner in which it is now seen, but that it was
created an empty chaos of heaven and earth. His language therefore may
be thus explained. When God in the beginning created the heaven and the
earth, the earth was empty and waste.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) He moreover teaches by the word
“created,” that what before did not exist was now made; for he has not
used the term <span id="vii.i-p67.2"></span>רצי, ( *yatsar,* ) which
signifies to frame or forms but <span id="vii.i-p67.3"></span>ארב, (
*bara,* ) which signifies to create.  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) Therefore his meaning is, that the world
was made out of nothing. Hence the folly of those is refuted who imagine
that unformed matter existed from eternity; and who gather nothing else
from the narration of Moses than that the world was furnished with new
ornaments, and received a form of which it was before destitute. This
indeed was formerly a common fable among heathens,  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) who had received only an obscure report
of the creation, and who, according to custom, adulterated the truth of
God with strange figments; but for Christian men to labor (as Steuchus
does  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) ) in maintaining this gross
error is absurd and intolerable. Let this, then be maintained in the
first place,  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) that the world is not
eternal but was created by God. There is no doubt that Moses gives the
name of heaven and earth to that confused mass which he, shortly
afterwards, (<span id="vii.i-p71.3"></span>[Ge
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="vii.i-p71.3"></span>.)
denominates *waters* . The reason of which is, that this matter was to
be the seed of the whole world. Besides, this is the generally
recognized division of the world.  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="vii.i-p73"></span>*God.* Moses has it *Elohim* , a noun of the
plural number. Whence the inference is drawn, that the three Persons of
the Godhead are here noted; but since, as a proof of so great a matter,
it appears to me to have little solidity, will not insist upon the word;
but rather caution readers to beware of violent glosses of this, kind.
 <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) They think that they have
testimony against the Arians, to prove the Deity of the Son and of the
Spirit, but in the meantime they involve themselves in the error of
Sabellius,  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) because Moses
afterwards subjoins that the *Elohim* had spoken, and that the *Spirit
of the Elohim* rested upon the waters. If we suppose three persons to be
here denoted, there will be no distinction between them. For it will
follow, both that the Son is begotten by himself, and that the Spirit is
not of the Father, but of himself. For me it is sufficient that the
plural number expresses those powers which God exercised in creating the
world. Moreover I acknowledge that the Scripture, although it recites
many powers of the Godhead, yet always recalls us to the Father, and his
Word, and spirit, as we shall shortly see. But those absurdities, to
which I have alluded, forbid us with subtlety to distort what Moses
simply declares concerning God himself, by applying it to the separate
Persons of the Godhead. This, however, I regard as beyond controversy,
that from the peculiar circumstance of the passage itself, a title is
here ascribed to God, expressive of that powers which was previously in
some way included in his eternal essence.  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)

<span id="vii.i-p79"></span><span id="vii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p80"></span>**2.** *And the earth was without form and
void.* I shall not be very solicitous about the exposition of these two
epithets, <span id="vii.i-p80.1"></span>והות, ( *tohu,* ) and <span
id="vii.i-p80.2"></span>והוב, ( *bohu.* ) The Hebrews use them when they
designate anything empty and confused, or vain, and nothing worth.
Undoubtedly Moses placed them both in opposition to all those created
objects which pertain to the form, the ornament and the perfection of
the world. Were we now to take away, I say, from the earth all that God
added after the time here alluded to, then we should have this rude and
unpolished, or rather shapeless chaos.  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) Therefore I regard what he immediately
subjoins that “darkness was upon the face of the abyss,”  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) as a part of that confused emptiness:
because the light began to give some external appearance to the world.
For the same reason he calls it the *abyss* and *waters* , since in that
mass of matter nothing was solid or stable, nothing distinct.

<span id="vii.i-p83"></span>*And the Spirit of God* Interpreters have
wrested this passage in various ways. The opinion of some that it means
the wind, is too frigid to require refutation. They who understand by it
the Eternal Spirit of God, do rightly; yet all do not attain the meaning
of Moses in the connection of his discourse; hence arise the various
interpretations of the participle <span id="vii.i-p83.1"></span>תפחרמ, (
*merachepeth* .) I will, in the first place, state what (in my judgment)
Moses intended. We have already heard that before God had perfected the
world it was an undigested mass; he now teaches that the power of the
Spirit was necessary in order to sustain it. For this doubt might occur
to the mind, how such a disorderly heap could stand; seeing that we now
behold the world preserved by government, or order.  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) He therefore asserts that this mass,
however confused it might be, was rendered stable, for the time, by the
secret efficacy of the Spirit. Now there are two significations of the
Hebrew word which suit the present place; either that the spirit moved
and agitated itself over the waters, for the sake of putting forth
vigor; or that He brooded over them to cherish them.  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) Inasmuch as it makes little difference in
the result, whichever of these explanations is preferred, let the
reader’s judgment be left free. But if that chaos required the secret
inspiration of God to prevent its speedy dissolution; how could this
order, so fair and distinct, subsist by itself, unless it derived
strength elsewhere? Therefore, that Scripture must be fulfilled,

<span id="vii.i-p86"></span>‘Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be
created, and thou shalt renew the face of the earth,’ (<span
id="vii.i-p86.1"></span>[Ps
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)<span id="vii.i-p86.1"></span>;)

<span id="vii.i-p87"></span>so, on the other hand, as soon as the Lord
takes away his Spirit, all things return to their dust and vanish away,
(<span id="vii.i-p87.1"></span>[Ps
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)<span id="vii.i-p87.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p88"></span><span id="vii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p89"></span>**3.** *And God said* Moses now, for the
first time, introduces God in the act of *speaking* , as if he had
created the mass of heaven and earth without the Word.  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) Yet John testifies that

<span id="vii.i-p91"></span>‘without him nothing was made of the things
which were made,’ (<span id="vii.i-p91.1"></span>[Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p91.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p92"></span>And it is certain that the world had been
*begun* by the same efficacy of the Word by which it was *completed*.
God, however, did not put forth his Word until he proceeded to originate
light;  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) because in the act of
distinguishing  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) his wisdom begins
to be conspicuous. Which thing alone is sufficient to confute the
blasphemy of Servetus. This impure caviler asserts,  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) that the first beginning of the Word was
when God commanded the light to be; as if the cause, truly, were not
prior to its effect. Since however by the Word of God things which were
not came suddenly into being, we ought rather to infer the eternity of
His essence. Wherefore the Apostles rightly prove the Deity of Christ
from hence, that since he is the Word of God, all things have been
created by him. Servetus imagines a new quality in God when he begins to
speak. But far otherwise must we think concerning the Word of God,
namely, that he is the Wisdom dwelling in God,  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) and without which God could never be; the
effect of which, however, became apparent when the light was created.
 <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52)

<span id="vii.i-p102"></span>*Let there be light* It we proper that the
light, by means of which the world was to be adorned with such excellent
beauty, should be first created; and this also was the commencement of
the distinction, (among the creatures.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) ) It did not, however, happen from
inconsideration or by accident, that the light preceded the sun and the
moon. To nothing are we more prone than to tie down the power of God to
those instruments the agency of which he employs. The sun an moon supply
us with light: And, according to our notions we so include this power to
give light in them, that if they were taken away from the world, it
would seem impossible for any light to remain. Therefore the Lord, by
the very order of the creation, bears witness that he holds in his hand
the light, which he is able to impart to us without the sun and moon.
Further, it is certain from the context, that the light was so created
as to be interchanged with darkness. But it may be asked, whether light
and darkness succeeded each other in turn through the whole circuit of
the world; or whether the darkness occupied one half of the circle,
while light shone in the other. There is, however, no doubt that the
order of their succession was alternate, but whether it was everywhere
day at the same time, and everywhere night also, I would rather leave
undecided; nor is it very necessary to be known.  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54)

<span id="vii.i-p105"></span><span id="vii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p106"></span>**4** *And God saw the light* Here God is
introduced by Moses as surveying his work, that he might take pleasure
in it. But he does it for our sake, to teach us that God has made
nothing without a certain reason and design. And we ought not so to
understand the words of Moses as if God did not know that his work was
good, till it was finished. But the meaning of the passage is, that the
work, such as we now see it, was approved by God. Therefore nothing
remains for us, but to acquiesce in this judgment of God. And this
admonition is very useful. For whereas man ought to apply all his senses
to the admiring contemplation of the works of God,  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) we see what license he really allows
himself in detracting from them.

<span id="vii.i-p108"></span><span id="vii.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p109"></span>**5.** *And God called the light* That is,
God willed that there should be a regular vicissitude of days and
nights; which also followed immediately when the first day was ended.
For God removed the light from view, that night might be the
commencement of another day. What Moses says however, admits a double
interpretation; either that this was the evening and morning belonging
to the first day, or that the first day consisted of the evening and the
morning. Whichever interpretation be chosen, it makes no difference in
the sense, for he simply understands the day to have been made up of two
parts. Further, he begins the day, according to the custom of his
nation, with the evening. It is to no purpose to dispute whether this be
the best and the legitimate order or not. We know that darkness preceded
time itself; when God withdrew the light, he closed the day. I do not
doubt that the most ancient fathers, to whom the coming night was the
end of one day and the beginning of another, followed this mode of
reckoning. Although Moses did not intend here to prescribe a rule which
it would be criminal to violate; yet (as we have now said) he
accommodated his discourse to the received custom. Wherefore, as the
Jews foolishly condemn all the reckonings of other people, as if God had
sanctioned this alone; so again are they equally foolish who contend
that this modest reckoning, which Moses approves, is preposterous.

<span id="vii.i-p110"></span>*The first day* Here the error of those is
manifestly refuted, who maintain that the world was made in a moment.
For it is too violent a cavil to contend that Moses distributes the work
which God perfected at once into six days, for the mere purpose of
conveying instruction. Let us rather conclude that God himself took the
space of six days, for the purpose of accommodating his works to the
capacity of men. We slightingly pass over the infinite glory of God,
which here shines forth; whence arises this but from our excessive
dullness in considering his greatness? In the meantime, the vanity of
our minds carries us away elsewhere. For the correction of this fault,
God applied the most suitable remedy when he distributed the creation of
the world into successive portions, that he might fix our attention, and
compel us, as if he had laid his hand upon us, to pause and to reflect.
For the confirmation of the gloss above alluded to, a passage from
Ecclesiasticus is unskilfully cited. ‘He who liveth for ever created all
things at once,’ (<span id="vii.i-p110.1"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
18:1](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p110.1"></span>.)
For the Greek adverb <span id="vii.i-p110.2"></span>κοινὣ which the
writer uses, means no such thing, nor does it refer to time, but to all
things universally.  <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)

<span id="vii.i-p112"></span><span id="vii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p113"></span>**6** *Let there be a firmament*  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) The work of the second day is to provide
an empty space around the circumference of the earth, that heaven and
earth may not be mixed together. For since the proverb, ‘to mingle
heaven and earth,’ denotes the extreme of disorder, this distinction
ought to be regarded as of great importance. Moreover, the word <span
id="vii.i-p114.4"></span>עיקר ( *rakia* ) comprehends not only the whole
region of the air, but whatever is open above us: as the word heaven is
sometimes understood by the Latins. Thus the arrangement, as well of the
heavens as of the lower atmosphere, is called <span
id="vii.i-p114.5"></span>עיקר ( *rakia* ) without discrimination between
them, but sometimes the word signifies both together sometimes one part
only, as will appear more plainly in our progress. I know not why the
Greeks have chosen to render the word <span
id="vii.i-p114.6"></span>ςτερέωμα, which the Latins have imitated in the
term, <span id="vii.i-p114.7"></span>*firmamentum*;  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) for literally it means *expanse* . And to
this David alludes when he says that ‘the heavens are stretched out by
God like a curtain,’ (<span id="vii.i-p115.3"></span>[Ps
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)<span id="vii.i-p115.3"></span>.)
If any one should inquire whether this vacuity did not previously exist,
I answer, however true it may be that all parts of the earth were not
overflowed by the waters; yet now, for the first time, a separation was
ordained, whereas a confused admixture had previously existed. Moses
describes the special use of this expanse, to divide the waters from the
waters from which word arises a great difficulty. For it appears opposed
to common sense, and quite incredible, that there should be waters above
the heaven. Hence some resort to allegory, and philosophize concerning
angels; but quite beside the purpose. For, to my mind, this is a certain
principle, that nothing is here treated of but the visible form of the
world. He who would learn astronomy,  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) and other recondite arts, let him go
elsewhere. Here the Spirit of God would teach all men without exception;
and therefore what Gregory declares falsely and in vain respecting
statues and pictures is truly applicable to the history of the creation,
namely, that it is the book of the unlearned.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) The things, therefore, which he relates,
serve as the garniture of that theater which he places before our eyes.
Whence I conclude, that the waters here meant are such as the rude and
unlearned may perceive. The assertion of some, that they embrace by
faith what they have read concerning the waters above the heavens,
notwithstanding their ignorance respecting them, is not in accordance
with the design of Moses. And truly a longer inquiry into a matter open
and manifest is superfluous. We see that the clouds suspended in the
air, which threaten to fall upon our heads, yet leave us space to
breathe.  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) They who deny that this
is effected by the wonderful providence of God, are vainly inflated with
the folly of their own minds. We know, indeed that the rain is naturally
produced; but the deluge sufficiently shows how speedily we might be
overwhelmed by the bursting of the clouds, unless the cataracts of
heaven were closed by the hand of God. Nor does David rashly recount
this among His miracles, that God layeth the beams of his chambers in
the waters, (<span id="vii.i-p118.3"></span>[Ps
104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)<span
id="vii.i-p118.3"></span>;) and he elsewhere calls upon the celestial
waters to praise God, (<span id="vii.i-p118.4"></span>[Ps
148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004)<span id="vii.i-p118.4"></span>.)
Since, therefore, God has created the clouds, and assigned them a region
above us, it ought not to be forgotten that they are restrained by the
power of God, lest, gushing forth with sudden violence, they should
swallow us up: and especially since no other barrier is opposed to them
than the liquid and yielding, air, which would easily give way unless
this word prevailed, ‘Let there be an expanse between the waters.’ Yet
Moses has not affixed to the work of this day the note that God saw that
it was good: perhaps because there was no advantage from it till the
terrestrial waters were gathered into their proper place, which was done
on the next day, and therefore it is there twice repeated.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)

<span id="vii.i-p120"></span><span id="vii.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p121"></span>**9.** *Let the waters... be gathered
together* This also is an illustrious miracle, that the waters by their
departure have given a dwelling-place to men. For even philosophers
allow that the natural position of the waters was to cover the whole
earth, as Moses declares they did in the beginning; first, because being
an element, it must be circular, and because this element is heavier
than the air, and lighter than the earth, it ought cover the latter in
its whole circumference.  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) But that
the seas, being gathered together as on heaps, should give place for
man, is seemingly preternatural; and therefore Scripture often extols
the goodness of God in this particular. See <span
id="vii.i-p122.1"></span>[Ps 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#007)<span
id="vii.i-p122.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.i-p123"></span>‘He has gathered the waters together on a
heap,  
and has laid them up in his treasures.’

<span id="vii.i-p124"></span>Also <span id="vii.i-p124.1"></span>[Ps
78:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#013)<span id="vii.i-p124.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.i-p125"></span>‘He has collected the waters as into a
bottle.’  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64)

<span id="vii.i-p127"></span><span id="vii.i-p127.1"></span>[Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022)<span id="vii.i-p127.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.i-p128"></span>‘Will ye not fear me? will ye not tremble
at my presence,  
who have placed the sand as the boundary of the sea?’

<span id="vii.i-p129"></span><span id="vii.i-p129.1"></span>[Job
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008)<span id="vii.i-p129.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.i-p130"></span>‘Who has shut up the sea with doors? Have
not I surrounded it with gates and bars?  
I have said,  
Hitherto shalt thou proceed; here shall thy swelling waves be broken.’

<span id="vii.i-p131"></span>Let us, therefore, know that we are
dwelling on dry ground, because God, by his command, has removed the
waters that they should not overflow the whole earth.

<span id="vii.i-p132"></span><span id="vii.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p133"></span>**11.** *Let the earth bring forth grass*
Hitherto the earth was naked and barren, now the Lord fructifies it by
his word. For though it was already destined to bring forth fruit, yet
till new virtue proceeded from the mouth of God, it must remain dry and
empty. For neither was it naturally fit to produce anything, nor had it
a germinating principle from any other source, till the mouth of the
Lord was opened. For what David declares concerning the heavens, ought
also to be extended to the earth; that it was

<span id="vii.i-p134"></span>‘made by the word of the Lord, and was
adorned and furnished by the breath of his mouth,’ (<span
id="vii.i-p134.1"></span>[Ps 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span
id="vii.i-p134.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p135"></span>Moreover, it did not happen fortuitously,
that herbs and trees were created before the sun and moon. We now see,
indeed, that the earth is quickened by the sun to cause it to bring
forth its fruits; nor was God ignorant of this law of nature, which he
has since ordained: but in order that we might learn to refer all things
to him he did not then make use of the sun or moon.  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) He permits us to perceive the efficacy
which he infuses into them, so far as he uses their instrumentality; but
because we are wont to regard as part of their nature properties which
they derive elsewhere, it was necessary that the vigor which they now
seem to impart to the earth should be manifest before they were created.
We acknowledge, it is true, in words, that the First Cause is
self-sufficient, and that intermediate and secondary causes have only
what they borrow from this First Cause; but, in reality, we picture God
to ourselves as poor or imperfect, unless he is assisted by second
causes. How few, indeed, are there who ascend higher than the sun when
they treat of the fecundity of the earth? What therefore we declare God
to have done designedly, was indispensably necessary; that we may learn
from the order of the creation itself, that God acts through the
creatures, not as if he needed external help, but because it was his
pleasure. When he says, ‘Let the earth bring forth the herb which may
produce seed, the tree whose seed is in itself,’ he signifies not only
that herbs and trees were then created, but that, at the same time, both
were endued with the power of propagation, in order that their several
species might be perpetuated. Since, therefore, we daily see the earth
pouring forth to us such riches from its lap, since we see the herbs
producing seed, and this seed received and cherished in the bosom of the
earth till it springs forth, and since we see trees shooting from other
trees; all this flows from the same Word. If therefore we inquire, how
it happens that the earth is fruitful, that the germ is produced from
the seed, that fruits come to maturity, and their various kinds are
annually reproduced; no other cause will be found, but that God has once
spoken, that is, has issued his eternal decree; and that the earth, and
all things proceeding from it, yield obedience to the command of God,
which they always hear.

<span id="vii.i-p137"></span><span id="vii.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p138"></span>**14.** *Let there be lights*  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) Moses passes onwards to the fourth day,
on which the stars were made. God had before created the light, but he
now institutes a new order in nature, that the sun should be the
dispenser of diurnal light, and the moon and stars should shine by
night. And He assigns them this office, to teach us that all creatures
are subject to his will, and execute what he enjoins upon them. For
Moses relates nothing else than that God ordained certain instruments to
diffuse through the earth, by reciprocal changes, that light which had
been previously created. The only difference is this, that the light was
before dispersed, but now proceeds from lucid bodies; which in serving
this purpose, obey the command of God.

<span id="vii.i-p140"></span>*To divide the day from the night* He means
the artificial day, which begins at the rising of the sun and ends at
its setting. For the natural day (which he mentions above) includes in
itself the night. Hence infer, that the interchange of days and nights
shall be continual: because the word of God, who determined that the
days should be distinct from the nights, directs the course of the sun
to this end.

<span id="vii.i-p141"></span>*Let them be for signs* It must be
remembered, that Moses does not speak with philosophical acuteness on
occult mysteries, but relates those things which are everywhere
observed, even by the uncultivated, and which are in common use. A
twofold advantage is chiefly perceived from the course of the sun and
moon; the one is natural, the other applies to civil institutions.
 <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) Under the term nature, I also
comprise agriculture. For although sowing and reaping require human art
and industry; this, nevertheless, is natural, that the sun, by its
nearer approach, warms our earth, that he introduces the vernal season,
that he is the cause of summer and autumn. But that, for the sake of
assisting their memory, men number among themselves years and months;
that of these, they form *lustra* and olympiads; that they keep stated
days; this I say, is peculiar to civil polity. Of each of these mention
is here made. I must, however, in a few words, state the reason why
Moses calls them signs; because certain inquisitive persons abuse this
passages to give color to their frivolous predictions: I call those men
Chaldeans and fanatics, who divine everything from the aspects of the
stars.  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) Because Moses declares that
the sun and moon were appointed for *signs* , they think themselves
entitled to elicit from them anything they please. But confutation is
easy: for they are called signs of certain things, not signs to denote
whatever is according to our fancy. What indeed does Moses assert to be
signified by them, except things belonging to the order of nature? For
the same God who here ordains signs testifies by Isaiah that he ‘will
dissipate the signs of the diviners,’ (<span
id="vii.i-p143.2"></span>[Isa
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#025)<span id="vii.i-p143.2"></span>;)
and forbids us to be ‘dismayed at the signs of heaven,’ (<span
id="vii.i-p143.3"></span>[Jer
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002)<span id="vii.i-p143.3"></span>.)
But since it is manifest that Moses does not depart from the ordinary
custom of men, I desist from a longer discussion. The word <span
id="vii.i-p143.4"></span>םידעומ ( *moadim,)* which they translate
‘certain times’, is variously understood among the Hebrews: for it
signifies both time and place, and also assemblies of persons. The
Rabbis commonly explain the passage as referring to their festivals. But
I extend it further to mean, in the first place, the opportunities of
time, which in French are called saisons, (seasons;) and then all fairs
and forensic assemblies.  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) Finally,
Moses commemorates the unbounded goodness of God in causing the sun and
moon not only to enlighten us, but to afford us various other advantages
for the daily use of life. It remains that we, purely enjoying the
multiplied bounties of God, should learn not to profane such excellent
gifts by our preposterous abuse of them. In the meantime, let us admire
this wonderful Artificer, who has so beautifully arranged all things
above and beneath, that they may respond to each other in most
harmonious concert.

<span id="vii.i-p145"></span><span id="vii.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p146"></span>**15.** *Let them be for lights* It is well
again to repeat what I have said before, that it is not here
philosophically discussed, how great the sun is in the heaven, and how
great, or how little, is the moon; but how much light comes to us from
them.  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) For Moses here addresses
himself to our senses, that the knowledge of the gifts of God which we
enjoy may not glide away. Therefore, in order to apprehend the meaning
of Moses, it is to no purpose to soar above the heavens; let us only
open our eyes to behold this light which God enkindles for us in the
earth. By this method (as I have before observed) the dishonesty of
those men is sufficiently rebuked, who censure Moses for not speaking
with greater exactness. For as it became a theologian, he had respect to
us rather than to the stars. Nor, in truth, was he ignorant of the fact,
that the moon had not sufficient brightness to enlighten the earth,
unless it borrowed from the sun; but he deemed it enough to declare what
we all may plainly perceive, that the moon is a dispenser of light to
us. That it is, as the astronomers assert, an *opaque* body, I allow to
be true, while I deny it to be a *dark* body. For, first, since it is
placed above the element of fire, it must of necessity be a fiery body.
Hence it follows, that it is also luminous; but seeing that it has not
light sufficient to penetrate to us, it borrows what is wanting from the
sun. He calls it a lesser light by comparison; because the portion of
light which it emits to us is small compared with the infinite splendor
of the sun.  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71)

<span id="vii.i-p149"></span><span id="vii.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p150"></span>**16.** *The greater light* I have said,
that Moses does not here subtilely descant, as a philosopher, on the
secrets of nature, as may be seen in these words. First, he assigns a
place in the expanse of heaven to the planets and stars; but astronomers
make a distinction of spheres, and, at the same time, teach that the
fixed stars have their proper place in the firmament. Moses makes two
great luminaries; but astronomers prove, by conclusive reasons that the
star of Saturn, which on account of its great distance, appears the
least of all, is greater than the moon. Here lies the difference; Moses
wrote in a popular style things which without instruction, all ordinary
persons, endued with common sense, are able to understand; but
astronomers investigate with great labor whatever the sagacity of the
human mind can comprehend. Nevertheless, this study is not to be
reprobated, nor this science to be condemned, because some frantic
persons are wont boldly to reject whatever is unknown to them. For
astronomy is not only pleasant, but also very useful to be known: it
cannot be denied that this art unfolds the admirable wisdom of God.
Wherefore, as ingenious men are to be honored who have expended useful
labor on this subject, so they who have leisure and capacity ought not
to neglect this kind of exercise. Nor did Moses truly wish to withdraw
us from this pursuit in omitting such things as are peculiar to the art;
but because he was ordained a teacher as well of the unlearned and rude
as of the learned, he could not otherwise fulfill his office than by
descending to this grosser method of instruction. Had he spoken of
things generally unknown, the uneducated might have pleaded in excuse
that such subjects were beyond their capacity. Lastly since the Spirit
of God here opens a common school for all, it is not surprising that he
should chiefly choose those subjects which would be intelligible to all.
If the astronomer inquires respecting the actual dimensions of the
stars, he will find the moon to be less than Saturn; but this is
something abstruse, for to the sight it appears differently. Moses,
therefore, rather adapts his discourse to common usage. For since the
Lord stretches forth, as it were, his hand to us in causing us to enjoy
the brightness of the sun and moon, how great would be our ingratitude
were we to close our eyes against our own experience? There is therefore
no reason why janglers should deride the unskilfulness of Moses in
making the moon the second luminary; for he does not call us up into
heaven, he only proposes things which lie open before our eyes. Let the
astronomers possess their more exalted knowledge; but, in the meantime,
they who perceive by the moon the splendor of night, are convicted by
its use of perverse ingratitude unless they acknowledge the beneficence
of God.

<span id="vii.i-p151"></span>*To rule*  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) He does not ascribe such dominion to the
sun and moon as shall, in the least degree, diminish the power of God;
but because the sun, in half the circuit of heaven, governs the day, and
the moon the night, by turns; he therefore assigns to them a kind of
government. Yet let us remember, that it is such a government as implies
that the sun is still a servant, and the moon a handmaid. In the
meantime, we dismiss the reverie of Plato who ascribes reason and
intelligence to the stars. Let us be content with this simple
exposition, that God governs the days and nights by the ministry of the
sun and moon, because he has them as his charioteers to convey light
suited to the season.

<span id="vii.i-p153"></span><span id="vii.i-p153.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p154"></span>**20.** *Let the waters bring forth... the
moving creature*  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) On the fifth day
the birds and fishes are created. The blessing of God is added, that
they may of themselves produce offspring. Here is a different kind of
propagation from that in herbs and trees: for there the power of
fructifying is in the plants, and that of germinating is in the seed;
but here generation takes place. It seems, however, but little consonant
with reason, that he declares birds to have proceeded from the waters;
and, therefore this is seized upon by captious men as an occasion of
calumny. But although there should appear no other reason but that it so
pleased God, would it not be becoming in us to acquiesce in his
judgment? Why should it not be lawful for him, who created the world out
of nothing, to bring forth the birds out of water? And what greater
absurdity, I pray, has the origin of birds from the water, than that of
the light from darkness? Therefore, let those who so arrogantly assail
their Creator, look for the Judge who shall reduce them to nothing.
Nevertheless if we must use physical reasoning in the contest, we know
that the water has greater affinity with the air than the earth has. But
Moses ought rather to be listened to as our teacher, who would transport
us with admiration of God through the consideration of his works.  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) And, truly, the Lord, although he is the
Author of nature, yet by no means has followed nature as his guide in
the creation of the world, but has rather chosen to put forth such
demonstrations of his power as should constrain us to wonder.

<span id="vii.i-p157"></span><span id="vii.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p158"></span>**21.** *And God created* A question here
arises out of the word *created* . For we have before contended, that
because the world was created, it was made out of nothing; but now Moses
says that things formed from other matter were created. They who truly
and properly assert that the fishes were created because the waters were
in no way sufficient or suitable for their production, only resort to a
subterfuge: for, in the meantime, the fact would remain that the
material of which they were made existed before; which, in strict
propriety, the word created does not admit. I therefore do not restrict
the creation here spoken of to the work of the fifth day, but rather
suppose it to refer to that shapeless and confused mass, which was as
the fountain of the whole world.  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)
God then, it is said, created *whales* (balaenas) and other fishes, not
that the beginning of their creation is to be reckoned from the moment
in which they receive their form; but because they are comprehended in
the universal matter which was made out of nothing. So that, with
respect to species, form only was then added to them; but creation is
nevertheless a term truly used respecting both the whole and the parts.
The word commonly rendered whales ( *cetos vel cete* ) might in my
judgment be not improperly translated *thynnus* or *tunny* *fish* , as
corresponding with the Hebrew word *thaninim.*  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)

<span id="vii.i-p161"></span>When he says that “the waters brought
forth,”  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) he proceeds to commend the
efficacy of the word, which the waters hear so promptly, that, though
lifeless in themselves, they suddenly teem with a living offspring, yet
the language of Moses expresses more; namely, that fishes innumerable
are daily produced from the waters, because that word of God, by which
he once commanded it, is continually in force.

<span id="vii.i-p163"></span><span id="vii.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p164"></span>**22.** *And God blessed them* What is the
force of this benediction he soon declares. For God does not, after the
manner of men, pray that we may be blessed; but, by the bare intimation
of his purpose, effects what men seek by earnest entreaty. He therefore
blesses his creatures when he commands them to increase and grow; that
is, he infuses into them fecundity by his word. But it seems futile for
God to address fishes and reptiles. I answer, this mode of speaking was
no other than that which might be easily understood. For the experiment
itself teaches, that the force of the word which was addressed to the
fishes was not transient, but rather, being infused into their nature,
has taken root, and constantly bears fruit.

<span id="vii.i-p165"></span><span id="vii.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p166"></span>**24.** *Let the earth bring forth* He
descends to the sixth day, on which the animals were created, and then
man. ‘Let the earth,’ he says, ‘bring forth living creatures.’ But
whence has a dead element life? Therefore, there is in this respect a
miracle as great as if God had begun to create out of nothing those
things which he commanded to proceed from the earth. And he does not
take his material from the earth, because he needed it, but that he
might the better combine the separate parts of the world with the
universe itself. Yet it may be inquired, why He does not here also add
his benediction? I answer, that what Moses before expressed on a similar
occasion is here also to be understood, although he does not repeat it
word for word. I say, moreover, it is sufficient for the purpose of
signifying the same thing,  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) that
Moses declares animals were created ‘according to their species:’ for
this distribution carried with it something stable. It may even hence be
inferred, that the offspring of animals was included. For to what
purpose do distinct species exist, unless that individuals, by their
several kinds, may be multiplied?  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)

<span id="vii.i-p169"></span>*Cattle*  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) Some of the Hebrews thus distinguish
between “cattle” and “beasts of the earth,” that the cattle feed on
herbage, but that the beasts of the earth are they which eat flesh. But
the Lord, a little while after, assigns herbs to both as their common
food; and it may be observed, that in several parts of Scripture these
two words are used indiscriminately. Indeed, I do not doubt that Moses,
after he had named *Behemoth* , (cattle,) added the other, for the sake
of fuller explanation. By ‘reptiles,’  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) in this place, understand those which are
of an earthly nature.

<span id="vii.i-p172"></span><span id="vii.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p173"></span>**26.** *Let us make man*  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) Although the tense here used is the
future, all must acknowledge that this is the language of one apparently
deliberating. Hitherto God has been introduced simply as *commanding* ;
now, when he approaches the most excellent of all his works, he enters
into *consultation* . God certainly might here command by his bare word
what he wished to be done: but he chose to give this tribute to the
excellency of man, that he would, in a manner, enter into consultation
concerning his creation. This is the highest honor with which he has
dignified us; to a due regard for which, Moses, by this mode of speaking
would excite our minds. For God is not now first beginning to consider
what form he will give to man, and with what endowments it would be
fitting to adorn him, nor is he pausing as over a work of difficulty:
but, just as we have before observed, that the creation of the world was
distributed over six days, for our sake, to the end that our minds might
the more easily be retained in the meditation of God’s works: so now,
for the purpose of commending to our attention the dignity of our
nature, he, in taking counsel concerning the creation of man, testifies
that he is about to undertake something great and wonderful. Truly there
are many things in this corrupted nature which may induce contempt; but
if you rightly weigh all circumstances, man is, among other creatures a
certain preeminent specimen of Divine wisdom, justice, and goodness, so
that he is deservedly called by the ancients <span
id="vii.i-p174.2"></span>μικρίκοσμος*,* “a world in miniature.” But
since the Lord needs no other counsellor, there can be no doubt that he
consulted with himself. The Jews make themselves altogether ridiculous,
in pretending that God held communication with the earth or with angels.
 <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) The earth, forsooth, was a most
excellent adviser! And to ascribe the least portion of a work so
exquisite to angels, is a sacrilege to be held in abhorrence. Where,
indeed, will they find that we were created after the image of the
earth, or of angels? Does not Moses directly exclude all creatures in
express terms, when he declares that Adam was created after the image of
God? Others who deem themselves more acute, but are doubly infatuated,
say that God spoke of himself in the plural number, according to the
custom of princes. As if, in truth, that barbarous style of speaking,
which has grown into use within a few past centuries, had, even then,
prevailed in the world. But it is well that their canine wickedness has
been joined with a stupidity so great, that they betray their folly to
children. Christians, therefore, properly contend, from this testimony,
that there exists a plurality of Persons in the Godhead. God summons no
foreign counsellor; hence we infer that he finds within himself
something distinct; as, in truth, his eternal wisdom and power reside
within him.  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84)

<span id="vii.i-p177"></span>*In our image, etc* Interpreters do not
agree concerning the meaning of these words. The greater part, and
nearly all, conceive that the word *image* is to be distinguished from
likeness. And the common distinction is, that image exists in the
substance, *likeness* in the accidents of anything. They who would
define the subject briefly, say that in the image are contained those
endowments which God has conferred on human nature at large, while they
expound likeness to mean gratuitous gifts.  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) But Augustine, beyond all others,
speculates with excessive refinement, for the purpose of fabricating a
Trinity in man. For in laying hold of the three faculties of the soul
enumerated by Aristotle, the intellect, the memory, and the will, he
afterwards out of one Trinity derives many. If any reader, having
leisure, wishes to enjoy such speculations, let him read the tenth and
fourteenth books on the Trinity, also the eleventh book of the “City of
God.” I acknowledge, indeed, that there is something in man which refers
to the Fathers and the Son, and the Spirit: and I have no difficulty in
admitting the above distinction of the faculties of the soul: although
the simpler division into two parts, which is more used in Scripture, is
better adapted to the sound doctrine of piety; but a definition of the
image of God ought to rest on a firmer basis than such subtleties. As
for myself, before I define the image of God, I would deny that it
differs from his likeness. For when Moses afterwards repeats the same
things he passes over the *likeness* , and contents himself with
mentioning the image. Should any one take the exception, that he was
merely studying brevity; I answer,  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)
that where he twice uses the word image, he makes no mention of the
likeness. We also know that it was customary with the Hebrews to repeat
the same thing in different words. besides, the phrase itself shows that
the second term was added for the sake of explanation, ‘Let us make,’ he
says, ‘man in our image, according to our likeness,’ that is, that he
may be like God, or may represent the image of God. Lastly, in the fifth
chapter, without making any mention of *image* , he puts likeness in its
place, (<span id="vii.i-p179.1"></span>[Ge
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p179.1"></span>.)
Although we have set aside all difference between the two words we have
not yet ascertained what this image or likeness is. The
*Anthropomorphites* were too gross in seeking this resemblance in the
human body; let that reverie therefore remain entombed. Others proceed
with a little more subtlety, who, though they do not imagine God to be
corporeal, yet maintain that the image of God is in the body of man,
because his admirable workmanship there shines brightly; but this
opinion, as we shall see, is by no means consonant with Scripture. The
exposition of Chrysostom is not more correct, who refers to the dominion
which was given to man in order that he might, in a certain sense, act
as God’s vicegerent in the government of the world. This truly is some
portion, though very small, of the image of God. Since the image of God
had been destroyed in us by the fall, we may judge from its restoration
what it originally had been. Paul says that we are transformed into the
image of God by the gospel. And, according to him, spiritual
regeneration is nothing else than the restoration of the same image.
(<span id="vii.i-p179.2"></span>[Col
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="vii.i-p179.2"></span>,
and <span id="vii.i-p179.3"></span>[Eph
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)<span id="vii.i-p179.3"></span>.)
That he made this image to consist in righteousness and true holiness,
is by the figure *synecdochee* ;  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)
for though this is the chief part, it is not the whole of God’s image.
Therefore by this word the perfection of our whole nature is designated,
as it appeared when Adam was endued with a right judgment, had
affections in harmony with reason, had all his senses sound and
well-regulated, and truly excelled in everything good. Thus the chief
seat of the Divine image was in his mind and heart, where it was
eminent: yet was there no part of him in which some scintillations of it
did not shine forth. For there was an attempering in the several parts
of the soul, which corresponded with their various offices.  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) In the mind perfect intelligence
flourished and reigned, uprightness attended as its companion, and all
the senses were prepared and moulded for due obedience to reason; and in
the body there was a suitable correspondence with this internal order.
But now, although some obscure lineaments of that image are found
remaining in us; yet are they so vitiated and maimed, that they may
truly be said to be destroyed. For besides the deformity which
everywhere appears unsightly, this evil also is added, that no part is
free from the infection of sin.

<span id="vii.i-p182"></span>*In our image, after our likeness* I do not
scrupulously insist upon the particles <span id="vii.i-p182.1"></span>ב,
( *beth,* ) and <span id="vii.i-p182.2"></span>כ, ( *caph*  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) ) I know not whether there is anything
solid in the opinion of some who hold that this is said, because the
image of God was only shadowed forth in man till he should arrive at his
perfection. The thing indeed is true; but I do not think that anything
of the kind entered the mind of Moses.  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) It is also truly said that Christ is the
only image of the Fathers but yet the words of Moses do not bear the
interpretation that “in the image” means “in Christ.” It may also be
added, that even man, though in a different respects is called the image
of God. In which thing some of the Fathers are deceived who thought that
they could defeat the Asians with this weapon that Christ alone is
God’s, image. This further difficulty is also to be encountered, namely,
why Paul should deny the *woman* to be the image of God, when Moses
honors both, indiscriminately, with this title. The solution is short;
Paul there alludes only to the domestic relation. He therefore restricts
the image of God to *government* , in which the man has superiority over
the wife and certainly he meant nothing more than that man is superior
in the degree of honor. But here the question is respecting that glory
of God which peculiarly shines forth in human nature, where the mind,
the will, and all the senses, represent the Divine order.

<span id="vii.i-p185"></span>*And let them have dominion*  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) Here he commemorates that part of dignity
with which he decreed to honor man, namely, that he should have
authority over all living creatures. He appointed man, it is true, lord
of the world; but he expressly subjects the animals to him, because they
having an inclination or instinct of their own,  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) seem to be less under authority from
without. The use of the plural number intimates that this authority was
not given to Adam only, but to all his posterity as well as to him. And
hence we infer what was the end for which all things were created;
namely, that none of the conveniences and necessaries of life might be
wanting to men. In the very order of the creation the paternal
solicitude of God for man is conspicuous, because he furnished the world
with all things needful, and even with an immense profusion of wealth,
before he formed man. Thus man was rich before he was born. But if God
had such care for us before we existed, he will by no means leave us
destitute of food and of other necessaries of life, now that we are
placed in the world. Yet, that he often keeps his hand as if closed is
to be imputed to our sins.

<span id="vii.i-p188"></span><span id="vii.i-p188.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p189"></span>**27.** *So God created man* The reiterated
mention of the image of God is not a vain repetition. For it is a
remarkable instance of the Divine goodness which can never be
sufficiently proclaimed. And, at the same time, he admonishes us from
what excellence we have fallen, that he may excite in us the desire of
its recovery. When he soon afterwards adds, that God created them male
and female, he commends to us that conjugal bond by which the society of
mankind is cherished. For this form of speaking, God created man, male
and female created he them, is of the same force as if he had said, that
the man himself was incomplete.  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)
Under these circumstances, the woman was added to him as a companion
that they both might be one, as he more clearly expresses it in the
second chapter. Malachi also means the same thing when he relates,
(<span id="vii.i-p190.2"></span>[Ge
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015)<span id="vii.i-p190.2"></span>,)
that one man was created by God, whilst, nevertheless, he possessed the
fullness of the Spirit.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) For he
there treats of conjugal fidelity, which the Jews were violating by
their polygamy. For the purpose of correcting this fault, he calls that
pair, consisting of man and woman, which God in the beginning had joined
together, *one man* , in order that every one might learn to be content
with his own wife.

<span id="vii.i-p192"></span><span id="vii.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p193"></span>**28.** *And God blessed them* This
blessing of God may be regarded as the source from which the human race
has flowed. And we must so consider it not only with reference to the
whole, but also, as they say, in every particular instance. For we are
fruitful or barren in respect of offspring, as God imparts his power to
some and withholds it from others. But here Moses would simply declare
that Adam with his wife was formed for the production of offspring, in
order that men might replenish the earth. God could himself indeed have
covered the earth with a multitude of men; but it was his will that we
should proceed from one fountain, in order that our desire of mutual
concord might be the greater, and that each might the more freely
embrace the other as his own flesh. Besides, as men were created to
occupy the earth, so we ought certainly to conclude that God has mapped,
as with a boundary, that space of earth which would suffice for the
reception of men, and would prove a suitable abode for them. Any
inequality which is contrary to this arrangement is nothing else than a
corruption of nature which proceeds from sin. In the meantime, however,
the benediction of God so prevails that the earth everywhere lies open
that it may have its inhabitants, and that an immense multitude of men
may find, in some part of the globe, their home. Now, what I have said
concerning marriage must be kept in mind; that God intends the human
race to be multiplied by generation indeed, but not, as in brute
animals, by promiscuous intercourse. For he has joined the man to his
wife, that they might produce a divine, that is, a legitimate seed. Let
us then mark whom God here addresses when he commands them to increase,
and to whom he limits his benediction. Certainly he does not give the
reins to human passions,  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) but,
beginning at holy and chaste marriage, he proceeds to speak of the
production of offspring. For this is also worthy of notice, that Moses
here briefly alludes to a subject which he afterwards means more fully
to explain, and that the regular series of the history is inverted, yet
in such a way as to make the true succession of events apparent. The
question, however, is proposed, whether fornicators and adulterers
become fruitful by the power of God; which, if it be true, then whether
the blessing of God is in like manner extended to them? I answer, this
is a corruption of the Divine institute; and whereas God produces
offspring from this muddy pool, as well as from the pure fountain of
marriage, this will tend to their greater destruction. Still that pure
and lawful method of increase, which God ordained from the beginning,
remains firm; this is that law of nature which common sense declares to
be inviolable.

<span id="vii.i-p195"></span>*Subdue it* He confirms what he had before
said respecting dominion. Man had already been created with this
condition, that he should subject the earth to himself; but now, at
length, he is put in possession of his right, when he hears what has
been given to him by the Lord: and this Moses expresses still more fully
in the next verse, when he introduces God as granting to him the herbs
and the fruits. For it is of great importance that we touch nothing of
God’s bounty but what we know he has permitted us to do; since we cannot
enjoy anything with a good conscience, except we receive it as from the
hand of God. And therefore Paul teaches us that, in eating and drinking
we always sin, unless faith be present, (<span
id="vii.i-p195.1"></span>[Ro
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span id="vii.i-p195.1"></span>.)
Thus we are instructed to seek from God alone whatever is necessary for
us, and in the very use of his gifts, we are to exercise ourselves in
meditating on his goodness and paternal care. For the words of God are
to this effect: ‘Behold, I have prepared food for thee before thou wast
formed; acknowledge me, therefore, as thy Father, who have so diligently
provided for thee when thou wast not yet created. Moreover, my
solicitude for thee has proceeded still further; it was thy business to
nurture the things provided for thee, but I have taken even this charge
also upon myself. Wherefore, although thou art, in a sense, constituted
the father of the earthly family,  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)
it is not for thee to be overanxious about the sustenance of animals.’
 <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97)

<span id="vii.i-p198"></span>Some infer, from this passages that men
were content with herbs and fruits until the deluge, and that it was
even unlawful for them to eat flesh. And this seems the more probable,
because God confines, in some way, the food of mankind within certain
limits. Then after the deluge, he expressly grants them the use of
flesh. These reasons, however are not sufficiently strong: for it may be
adduced on the opposite side, that the first men offered sacrifices from
their flocks.  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) This, moreover, is
the law of sacrificing rightly, not to offer unto God anything except
what he has granted to our use. Lastly men were clothed in skins;
therefore it was lawful for them to kill animals. For these reasons, I
think it will be better for us to assert nothing concerning this matter.
Let it suffice for us, that herbs and the fruits of trees were given
them as their common food; yet it is not to be doubted that this was
abundantly sufficient for their highest gratification. For they judge
prudently whomaintain that the earth was so marred by the deluge, that
we retain scarcely a moderate portion of the original benediction. Even
immediately after the fall of man, it had already begun to bring forth
degenerate and noxious fruits, but at the deluge, the change became
still greater. Yet, however this may be, God certainly did not intend
that man should be slenderly and sparingly sustained; but rather, by
these words, he promises a liberal abundance, which should leave nothing
wanting to a sweet and pleasant life. For Moses relates how beneficent
the Lord had been to them, in bestowing on them all things which they
could desire, that their ingratitude might have the less excuse.

<span id="vii.i-p200"></span><span id="vii.i-p200.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p201"></span>**31.** *And God saw everything* Once more,
at the conclusion of the creation, Moses declares that God approved of
everything which he had made. In speaking of God as *seeing* , he does
it after the manner of men; for the Lord designed this his judgment to
be as a rule and example to us; that no one should dare to think or
speak otherwise of his works. For it is not lawful for us to dispute
whether that ought to be approved or not which God has already approved;
but it rather becomes us to acquiesce without controversy. The
repetition also denotes how wanton is the temerity of man: otherwise it
would have been enough to have said, once for all, that God approved of
his works. But God six times inculcates the same thing, that he may
restrain, as with so many bridles, our restless audacity. But Moses
expresses more than before; for he adds <span
id="vii.i-p201.1"></span>דאמ, ( *meod* ,) that is, *very* . On each of
the days, simple approbation was given. But now, after the workmanship
of the world was complete in all its parts, and had received, if I may
so speak, the last finishing touch, he pronounces it perfectly good;
that we may know that there is in the symmetry of God’s works the
highest perfection, to which nothing can be added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc01006.htm#fr_34) <span
id="vii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p67"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p67.1"></span>La terre
estoit vuide, et sans forme, et ne servoit a rien.” — “The earth was
aempty, and without form, and was of no use.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc01006.htm#fr_35) <span
id="vii.i-p67.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p68"></span> <span id="vii.i-p68.1"></span>ארב It has a
twofold meaning — 1. To create out of nothing, as is proved from these
words, In the beginning, because nothing was made before them. 2. To
produce something excellent out of pre-existent matter; as it is said
afterwards, He created whales, and man. — See Fagius, Drusius, and
Estius, in Poole’s Synopsis.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc01006.htm#fr_36) <span
id="vii.i-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p69"></span> <span id="vii.i-p69.1"></span>Inter
profanos homines.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc01006.htm#fr_37) <span
id="vii.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p70"></span> Steuchus Augustinus was the Author of a
work, “<span id="vii.i-p70.1"></span>De Perennie Philosophia,” Lugd.
1540, and is most likely the writer referred to by Calvin. The work,
however, is very rare, and probably of little value.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc01006.htm#fr_38) <span
id="vii.i-p70.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p71"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p71.1"></span>Sit igitur
haec prima sententia. <span id="vii.i-p71.2"></span>Que ceci dont soit
premierement resolu.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc01006.htm#fr_39) <span
id="vii.i-p71.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p72"></span> Namely, into heaven and earth.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc01006.htm#fr_40) <span
id="vii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p74"></span> The reasoning of Calvin on this point is a
great proof of the candor of his mind, and of his determination to
adhere strictly to what he conceives to be the meaning of Holy
Scripture, whatever bearing it might have on the doctrines he maintains.
It may however be right to direct the reader, who wishes fully to
examine the disputed meaning of the plural word <span
id="vii.i-p74.1"></span>םיהלא which we translate God, to some sources of
information, whence he may be able to form his own judgment respecting
the term. Cocceius argues that the mystery of the Trinity in Unity is
contained in the word; and many other writers of reputation take the
same ground. Others contend, that though no clear intimation of the
Trinity in Unity is given, yet the notion of plurality of Persons is
plainly implied in the term. For a full account of all the arguments in
favor of this hypothesis, the work of Dr. John Pye Smith, on the
Scripture testimony of the Messiah — a work full of profound learning,
and distinguished by patient industry and calmly courteous criticism —
may be consulted. It must however be observed, that this diligent and
impartial writer has mot met the special objection adduced by Calvin in
this place, namely, the danger of gliding into Sabellianism while
attempting to confute Arianism. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc01006.htm#fr_41) <span
id="vii.i-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p75"></span> The error of Sabellius (according to
Theodoret) consisted in his maintaining, “that the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are one hypostasis, and one Person under three names,” or, in the
language of that eminent ecclesiastical scholar, the late Dr. Burton,
“Sabellius divided the One Divinity into three, but he supposed the Son
and the Holy Ghost to have no distinct personal existence, except when
they were put forth for a time by the Father.” — See Burton’s Lectures
on Ecclesiastical History, vol. 2, p. 365; and his Bampton Lectures,
Note 103. This will perhaps assist the reader to understand the nature
of Calvin’s argument which immediately follows. Supposing the word
Elohim to denote the Three Persons of the Godhead in the first verse, it
also denotes the same Three Persons in the second verse. But in this
second verse Moses says, the Spirit of Elohim, that is, the Spirit of
the Three Persons rested on the waters. Hence the distinction of Persons
is lost; for the Spirit is himself one of them; consequently the Spirit
is sent from himself. The same reasoning would prove that the Son was
begotten by himself; because he is one of the Persons of the Elohim by
whom the Son is begotten. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc01006.htm#fr_42) <span
id="vii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p76"></span> The interpretation above given of the
meaning of the word <span id="vii.i-p76.1"></span>םיהלא ( *Elohim* )
receives confirmation from the profound critical investigations of Dr.
Hengstenberg, Professor of Theology in the University of Berlin, whose
work, cast in a somewhat new form, and entitled “Dissertations on the
Genuineness of the Pentateuch,” appears in an English dress, under the
superintendence of the Continental Translation Society, while these
pages are passing through the press. With other learned critics, he
concludes, that the word is derived from the Arabic root Allah, which
means to worship, to adore, to be seized with fear. He, therefore,
regards the title more especially descriptive of the awful aspect of the
Divine character.

<span id="vii.i-p77"></span>On the plural form of the word he quotes
from the Jewish Rabbis the assertion, that it is intended to signify
‘<span id="vii.i-p77.1"></span>Dominus potentiarum omnium,’ ‘The Lord of
all powers’. He refers to Calvin and others as having opposed, though
without immediate effect, the notion maintained by Peter Lombard, that
it involved the mystery of the Trinity. He repels the profane intimation
of Le Clerc, and his successors of the Noological school, that the name
originated in polytheism; and then proceeds to show that “there is in
the Hebrew language a widely extended use of the plural which expresses
the intensity of the idea contained in the singular.” After numerous
references, which prove this point, he proceeds to argue, that “if, in
relation to earthly objects, all that serves to represent a whole order
of beings is brought before the mind by means of the plural form, we
might anticipate a more extended application of this method of
distinguishing in the appellations of God, in whose being and attributes
there is everywhere a unity which embraces and comprehends all
multiplicity.” “The use of the plural,” he adds, “answers the same
purpose which elsewhere is accomplished by an accumulation of the Divine
names; as in <span id="vii.i-p77.2"></span>[Jos
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#022)<span id="vii.i-p77.2"></span>;
the thrice holy in <span id="vii.i-p77.3"></span>[Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p77.3"></span>; and
<span id="vii.i-p77.4"></span>םינדא ינדא in <span
id="vii.i-p77.5"></span>[De 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017)<span
id="vii.i-p77.5"></span>. It calls the attention to the infinite riches
and the inexhaustible fullness contained in the one Divine Being, so
that though men may imagine innumerable gods, and invest them with
perfections, yet all these are contained in the one <span
id="vii.i-p77.6"></span>םיהלא ( *Elohim* ).” See Dissertations,
pp.268-273.

<span id="vii.i-p78"></span>It is, perhaps, necessary here to state,
that whatever treasures of biblical learning the writings of this
celebrated author contains, and they are undoubtedly great, the reader
will still require to be on his guard in studying them. For,
notwithstanding the author’s general strenuous opposition to the and —
supernaturalism of his own countrymen, he has not altogether escaped the
contagion which he is attempting to resist. Occasions may occur in which
it will be right to allude to some of his mistakes. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc01006.htm#fr_43) <span
id="vii.i-p80.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p81"></span> The words <span
id="vii.i-p81.1"></span>והבו והת are rendered in Calvin’s text <span
id="vii.i-p81.2"></span>informis et inanis, “shapeless and empty.” They
are, however, substantives, and are translated in <span
id="vii.i-p81.3"></span>[Isa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011)<span id="vii.i-p81.3"></span>,
“confusion” and “emptiness.” The two words standing in connection, were
used by the Hebrews to describe anything that was most dreary, waste,
and desolate. The Septuagint has <span id="vii.i-p81.4"></span>κὰι
ἀκατασκευάστος, invisible and unfurnished. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc01006.htm#fr_44) <span
id="vii.i-p81.5"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p82"></span> It is to be remarked, that Calvin does not
in his comment always adhere to his own translation. For instance, his
version here is, “<span id="vii.i-p82.1"></span>in superficiem
voraginis;” but in his Commentary he has it, “<span
id="vii.i-p82.2"></span>super faciem abyssi,” from the Latin Vulgate. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc01006.htm#fr_45) <span
id="vii.i-p83.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p84"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p84.1"></span>Temperamento
servari.” Perhaps we should say, “preserved by the laws of nature.” —
Ed.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc01006.htm#fr_46) <span
id="vii.i-p84.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p85"></span> The participle of the verb <span
id="vii.i-p85.1"></span>ףהר is here used instead of the regular tense.
“The Spirit was moving,” instead of “the Spirit moved.” The word occurs
in <span id="vii.i-p85.2"></span>[De
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)<span id="vii.i-p85.2"></span>,
where the eagle is represented as fluttering over her young. Vatablus,
whom Calvin here probably follows, says, the Holy Spirit cherished the
earth “by his secret virtue, that it might remain stable for the time.”
— See Poole’s Synopsis. The word, however, is supposed further to imply
a vivifying power; as that of birds brooding over and hatching their
young. Gesenius says that Moses here speaks, “<span
id="vii.i-p85.3"></span>Von der shaffenden und belebenden Kraft Gottes
die uber der chaotischen wasserbedeckten Erde schwebt gleichsam bruetet”
— “of the creative and quickening power of God, which hovered over the
chaotic and water — covered earth, as if brooding.” The same view is
given by P. Martyr on Genesis; others, however, are opposed to this
interpretation. Vide Johannes Clericus in loco. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc01006.htm#fr_47) <span
id="vii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p90"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p90.1"></span>Sans sa
Parole” — “without his Word.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc01006.htm#fr_48) <span
id="vii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p93"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p93.1"></span>Sed Deus
Verbum suum nonnisi in lucis origine, protulit.” — “<span
id="vii.i-p93.2"></span>Mais Dieu n’a point mis sa Parole en avant,
sinon en la creation de la lumiere.” — “But God did not put his Word
forward except in the creation of the light.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc01006.htm#fr_49) <span
id="vii.i-p93.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p94"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p94.2"></span>In
distinctione.” The French is somewhat different: “<span
id="vii.i-p94.3"></span>Pource que la distinction de sa Sagesse commenca
lors a apparoir evidemment.” — “Because that the distinction of his
Wisdom began then to appear evidently.” The printing of the word Wisdom
with a capital, renders it probable that by it Calvin means the Son of
God, who is styled Wisdom in the eighth chapter of Proverbs and
elsewhere. Whence it would seem that he intends the whole of what he
here says as an argument in favor of the Deity of Christ. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc01006.htm#fr_50) <span
id="vii.i-p94.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p95"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p95.1"></span>Latrat hic
obscoenus canis.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc01006.htm#fr_51) <span
id="vii.i-p95.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p96"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p96.1"></span>Mais il faut
bien autrement sentir de la Parole de Dieu, assavoir que c’est la
Sapience residente en luy.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc01006.htm#fr_52) <span
id="vii.i-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p97"></span> To understand this difficult and obscure
passage, it will be necessary to know something of the ground taken by
Servetus in his attempt to subvert the doctrine of the Trinity. He
maintained that Christ was not the Son of God as to his divine nature,
but only as to his human, and that this title belonged to him solely in
consequence of His incarnation. Yet he professed to believe in the Word,
as an emanation of some kind from the Deity; compounded — as he explains
it — of the essence of God, of spirit, of flesh, and of three uncreated
elements. These three elements appeared, as he supposes, in the first
light of the world, in the cloud, and in the pillar of fire. (See
Calvin’s Institutes, Book II. c. xiv.) This illustrates what Calvin
means when he says, that Servetus imagines a new quality in God when he
begins to speak. The distinct personality of the Word being denied,
qualities or attributes of Deity are put in his place. Against this
Calvin contends. His argument seems to be to the following effect: — The
creation of the indigested mass called heaven and earth, in the first
verse, was apparently — though not really — without the Word, inasmuch
as the Word is not mentioned. But when there began to be a distinction,
(such as light developed,) then the Word existed before he acted — the
cause was prior to its effect. We ought, therefore, to infer the eternal
existence of the Word, as he contends the Apostles do, from the fact
that all things were created by Him. Whatever quality God possessed when
he began to speak, he must have possessed before. His Word, or his
Wisdom, or his only-begotten Son, dwelt in Him, and was one with him
from eternity; the same Word, or Wisdom, acted really in the creation of
the chaotic mass, though not apparently. But in the creation of light,
the very commencement of distinguishing, (exordium distinctionis,) this
divine Word or Wisdom was manifest.

<span id="vii.i-p98"></span>Having given, to the best of my judgment, an
explanation of Calvin’s reasoning, truth obliges me to add, that it
seems to be an involved and unsatisfactory argument to prove —

<span id="vii.i-p99"></span>**1st** , That the Second Person of the
Trinity is distinctly referred to in the second verse of this chapter;
and,

<span id="vii.i-p100"></span>**2nd** , That He is truly though not
obviously the Creator of heaven and earth mentioned in the first verse.

<span id="vii.i-p101"></span>It furnishes occasion rather for regret
than for surprise, that the most powerful minds are sometimes found
attempting to sustain a good cause by inconclusive reasoning. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc01006.htm#fr_53) <span
id="vii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p103"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p103.1"></span>De la
distinction des les creatures.” — French Tr. That is, the beauties of
nature could not be perceived, nor the distinction between different
objects discerned without the light. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc01006.htm#fr_54) <span
id="vii.i-p103.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p104"></span> See Note at p. 61.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc01006.htm#fr_55) <span
id="vii.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p107"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p107.1"></span>L’homme
devroit estendere tous ses sens a considerer, et avoir en admiration les
oeuvres de Dieu.” — “Man ought to apply all his senses in considering
and having in admiration the works of God.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc01006.htm#fr_56) <span
id="vii.i-p110.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p111"></span> So the English translation: “He that
liveth forever made all things in general.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc01006.htm#fr_57) <span
id="vii.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p114"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p114.1"></span>Sit
extensio.” In the next verse he changes the word to “<span
id="vii.i-p114.2"></span>expansio”. “<span
id="vii.i-p114.3"></span>Fecit expansionem.” — “He made an expanse.”

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc01006.htm#fr_58) <span
id="vii.i-p114.8"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p115"></span> See the Septuagint and Vulgate, which have
both been followed by our English translators. Doubtless Calvin is
correct in supposing the true meaning of the Hebrew word to be expanse;
but the translators of the Septuagint, the Vulgate, and our own version,
were not without reasons for the manner in which they rendered the word.
The root, <span id="vii.i-p115.1"></span>עקר, signifies, according to
Gesenius, Lee, Cocceius, etc., to stamp with the foot, to beat or hammer
out any malleable substance; and the derivative, <span
id="vii.i-p115.2"></span>עיקר, is the outspreading of the heavens,
which, “according to ordinary observation, rests like the half of a
hollow sphere over the earth.” To the Hebrews, as Gesenius observes, it
presented a crystal or sapphire-like appearance. Hence it was thought to
be something firm as well as expanded — a roof of crystal or of
sapphire. The reader may also refer to the note of Johannes Clericus, in
his commentary on Genesis, who retains the word firmament, and argues at
length in vindication of the term. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc01006.htm#fr_59) <span
id="vii.i-p115.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p116"></span> <span id="vii.i-p116.1"></span>Astrologia.
This word includes, but is not necessarily confined to that empirical
and presumptuous science, (falsely so-called,) which we now generally
designate by the term astrology. As the word originally means nothing
but the science of the stars, so it was among our own earlier writers
applied in the same manner. Consequently, it comprehended the sublime
and useful science of astronomy. From the double meaning of the word,
Calvin sometimes speaks of it with approbation, and sometimes with
censure. But attention to his reasoning will show, that what he commends
is astronomy, and what he censures is astrology in the present
acceptation of the word. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc01006.htm#fr_60) <span
id="vii.i-p116.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p117"></span> The following are the words of Pope
Gregory I: <span id="vii.i-p117.1"></span>“Idcirco enim pictura in
ecclesiis adhibeter, ut hi qui literas nesciunt, saltem in parietibu
videndo legant quae legere in codicibus non valent.” Epis. cix. ad
Lerenum.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc01006.htm#fr_61) <span
id="vii.i-p117.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p118"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p118.1"></span>Capitibus
nostris sic minari, ut spirandi locus nobis relinquant.” The French is
more diffuse: “<span id="vii.i-p118.2"></span>Nous menacent, comme si
elles devoyent tomber sur nos testes; et toutesfois elle nous laissent
ici lieu our respirer.” “They threaten us, as if they would fall upon
our heads; and, nevertheless, they leave us here space to breathe.”

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc01006.htm#fr_62) <span
id="vii.i-p118.5"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p119"></span> The Septuagint here inserts the clause,
“God saw that it was good;” but, as it is found neither in the Hebrew
nor in any other ancient version, it must be abandoned. The Rabbis say
that the clause was omitted, because the angels fell on that day; but
this is to cut the knot rather than to untie it. There is more
probability in the conjecture of Picherellus, who supposes that what
follows in the ninth and tenth verses all belonged to the work of the
second day, though mentioned after it; and, in the same way, he contends
that the formation of the beasts, recorded in the 24th verse, belonged
to the fifth day, though mentioned after it. Examples of this kind, of
Hysteron proteron, are adduced in confirmation of this interpretation.
See Poole’s Synopsis in loco. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc01006.htm#fr_63) <span
id="vii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p122"></span> This reasoning is to be explained by
reference to the philosophical theories of the age. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc01006.htm#fr_64) <span
id="vii.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p126"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p126.1"></span>Velut in
utrem;” “from the Vulgate.” The English version is, “He made the waters
to stand as an heap.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc01006.htm#fr_65) <span
id="vii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p136"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p136.1"></span>Nullas
tunc soli et lunae partes concessit.” — “<span
id="vii.i-p136.2"></span>Il ne s’est point servi en cest endroit du
soleil ni de la lune.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc01006.htm#fr_66) <span
id="vii.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p139"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p139.1"></span>Luminaria”
— “Luminaries.” Hebrew <span id="vii.i-p139.2"></span>תוראמ. Instruments
of light, from <span id="vii.i-p139.3"></span>רוא, light, in verse 3.
“Lighters; that is lightsome bodies, or instruments that show light.” —
*Ainsworth*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc01006.htm#fr_67) <span
id="vii.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p142"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p142.1"></span>Altera ad
ordinaem politicum spectat.”

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc01006.htm#fr_68) <span
id="vii.i-p142.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p143"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p143.1"></span>Ex siderum
praesagiis nihil non divinant.”

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc01006.htm#fr_69) <span
id="vii.i-p143.5"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p144"></span> See the Lexicons of Schindler, Lee, and
Gesenius, and Dathe’s Commentary on the Pentateuch. The two latter
writers explain the terms “signs and seasons” by the Figure Hendiadys,
for “signs of seasons.” “<span id="vii.i-p144.1"></span>Zu Zeichen der
Zeiten.” The word stands — **1** . For the year. **2** . For an
assembly. **3** . For the place of assembling. **4** . For a signal. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc01006.htm#fr_70) <span
id="vii.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p147"></span> “Great lights;” that is, in our eyes, “to
which the sun and moon are nearer than the fixed stars and the greater
planets.” — Johannes Clericus in Genesin, p.10. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc01006.htm#fr_71) <span
id="vii.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p148"></span> The reader will be in no danger of being
misled by the defective natural philosophy of the age in which this was
written.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc01006.htm#fr_72) <span
id="vii.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p152"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p152.1"></span>In
dominum.” For dominion.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc01006.htm#fr_73) <span
id="vii.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p155"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p155.1"></span>Repere
faciant aquae reptile animae viventis.” — “Let the waters cause to creep
forth the reptile, (or creeping thing,) having a living soul.” This is a
more literal translation of the original than that of the English
version; yet it does not express more accurately the sense. The word
<span id="vii.i-p155.2"></span>ףרש, ( *sheretz* ,) as a substantaive,
signifies any worm or reptile, generally of the smaller kind, either in
land or water; and the corresponding verb rendered “to creep forthe”
signifies also “to multiply.” It is well known that this class of
animals multiply more abundantly than any other. The expression <span
id="vii.i-p155.3"></span>היח שפנ, ( *nepesh chayah* ,) “a living soul,”
does not refer (as the word soul in English often does) to the immortal
principle, but to the animal life or breath, and the words might here be
rendered “the breath of life.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc01006.htm#fr_74) <span
id="vii.i-p155.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p156"></span> For other opinions respecting the origin
of birds, see Poole’s Synopsis. Some argue from <span
id="vii.i-p156.1"></span>[Ge 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019)<span
id="vii.i-p156.1"></span>, that fowls were made of the earth; and would
propose an alteration in the translation of the verse before us to the
following effect, — “and let the fowl fly above the heaven.” — See Notes
on Genesis, etc., by Professor Bush, *in loco*. But Calvin’s view is
more generally approved. “<span id="vii.i-p156.2"></span>Natantium et
volatilium unam originem ponit Moses. 1. Quia aer, (locus avium,) et
aqua, (locus piscium,) elementa cognata sunt,” etc. — Castalio, Lyra,
Menochius, and others, in Poole. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc01006.htm#fr_75) <span
id="vii.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p159"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p159.1"></span>Ego vero
ad opus diei quinti non restringo creationem; sed potius ex illa infermi
et confusa massa pendere dico, quae fuit veluti scaturigo totius mundi.”
The passage seems to be obscure; and if the translation above given is
correct, the Old English version by Tymme has not hit the true meaning.
The French version is as follows: — “<span id="vii.i-p159.2"></span>Je
ne restrain point la creation a l’ouvrage du cinquieme jour; plustost je
di qu’elle depend de cette masse confuse qui a este comme la source de
tout le monde.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc01006.htm#fr_76) <span
id="vii.i-p159.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p160"></span> <span id="vii.i-p160.1"></span>םנינת.
“<span id="vii.i-p160.2"></span>Significat omnia ingentia animalia tam
terrestria ut dracones, quam aquatica ut balaenas.” “It signifies all
large animals, both terrestrial, as dragons, and aquatic, as whales.” —
Poole’s Synopsis. Sometimes it refers to the crocodile, and seems
obviously of kindred signfication with the word Leviathan. Schindler
gives this meaning among others, — serpents, dragons, great fishes,
whales, thinni. — See also Patrick’s Commentary, who takes it for the
crocodile. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc01006.htm#fr_77) <span
id="vii.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p162"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p162.1"></span>Aquas
fecisse reptare,” that “the waters caused to creep forth.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc01006.htm#fr_78) <span
id="vii.i-p166.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p167"></span> Namely, that God’s benediction was
virtually added, though no expressed in terms. See verse 22. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc01006.htm#fr_79) <span
id="vii.i-p167.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p168"></span> The reader is referred to Note 1, p. 81,
for another mode of interpreting these verses; and also to Poole’s
Synopsis on verse 24, where the opinion of Pichrellus is fully stated,
namely, that verses 24, 25, contain part of the work of the fifth day. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc01006.htm#fr_80) <span
id="vii.i-p169.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p170"></span> Cattle, <span
id="vii.i-p170.1"></span>המהב, ( *Behemah* ); plural, <span
id="vii.i-p170.2"></span>תומהב, ( *Behemoth* ).

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc01006.htm#fr_81) <span
id="vii.i-p170.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p171"></span> “Reptiles.” In the English version,
“creeping things,” the same expression which occurs in verse 20. But the
Hebrew word is different. In the twentieth verrse it is <span
id="vii.i-p171.1"></span>ףרש, (sharetz,) in the twenty-fourth it is
<span id="vii.i-p171.2"></span>שמר, (remes). The latter word is
generally, (though not always,) as here, referred to land animals. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc01006.htm#fr_82) <span
id="vii.i-p173.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p174"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p174.1"></span>Faciamus
hominem.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc01006.htm#fr_83) <span
id="vii.i-p174.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p175"></span> For the various opinions of Jewish writers
on this subject, see Poole’s Synopsis in loco. See also Bishop Patrick’s
Commentary on this verse. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc01006.htm#fr_84) <span
id="vii.i-p175.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p176"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p176.1"></span>Ut certe
aeterna ejus sapientia et virtus in ipso resident.” The expression is
ambiguous; but the French translation renders it, “<span
id="vii.i-p176.2"></span>Comme a la verite, sa Sapience eternelle, et
Vertu reside en luy;” which translation is here followed. By beginning
the words rendered Wisdom and Power with capitals, it would appear that
the second and third Persons of the Trinity were in the mind of the
writer when the passage was written. And perhaps this is the only view
of it which renders the reasoning of Calvin intelligible. See Notes 2
and 5, at page 75. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc01006.htm#fr_85) <span
id="vii.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p178"></span> Some here distinguish, and say the image
is in what is natural, the likeness in what is gratuitous. — *Lyra*.
Others blend them together, and say there is an Hendiadys, that is,
according to the image most like us. — *Tirinus*. — See Poole’s
Synopsis. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc01006.htm#fr_86) <span
id="vii.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p179"></span> “I answer,” is not in the original, but is
taken from the French translation. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc01006.htm#fr_87) <span
id="vii.i-p179.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p180"></span> Synecdoche is the figure which puts a part
for the whole, or the whole for a part. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc01006.htm#fr_88) <span
id="vii.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p181"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p181.1"></span>Erat erim
in singulis animae partibus temperatura quae suis numeris constabat.”

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc01006.htm#fr_89) <span
id="vii.i-p182.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p183"></span> The two prefixes to the Hebrew words
signifying image and likeness; the former of which is translated in, the
latter after, or still more correctly, according to. This sentence is
not translated either in the French or Old English version. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc01006.htm#fr_90) <span
id="vii.i-p183.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p184"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p184.1"></span>Innuit in
homine esse imaginem Dei, sed imperfectam et qualem umbrae.” — Oleaster
in Poli Synopsi.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc01006.htm#fr_91) <span
id="vii.i-p185.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p186"></span> “<span
id="vii.i-p186.1"></span>Dominetur.”

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc01006.htm#fr_92) <span
id="vii.i-p186.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p187"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p187.1"></span>Quae quum
habeant proprium nutum.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc01006.htm#fr_93) <span
id="vii.i-p189.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p190"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p190.1"></span>Acsi virum
dixisset esse dimidium hominem.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc01006.htm#fr_94) <span
id="vii.i-p190.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p191"></span> On this difficult passage see Lowth,
Archbishop Newcome, and Scott, who confirm in the main the
interpretation of Calvin. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc01006.htm#fr_95) <span
id="vii.i-p193.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p194"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p194.1"></span>Certe
fraenum viris et muliebris non laxavit, ut in vagas libidines ruierent,
absque delectu et pudore: sed a sancto castoque conjugio incipiens,
descendit ad generationem.”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc01006.htm#fr_96) <span
id="vii.i-p195.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p196"></span> “<span
id="vii.i-p196.1"></span>Paterfamilias in mundo.”

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc01006.htm#fr_97) <span
id="vii.i-p196.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p197"></span> See <span id="vii.i-p197.1"></span>[Gen.
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#030)<span id="vii.i-p197.1"></span>, in
which God promises the herbs and fruits of the earth, and every green
herb, to the beasts of the earth for food. The reader will perceive that
the subsequent observations of Calvin refer more especially to these
verses. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc01006.htm#fr_98) <span
id="vii.i-p198.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p199"></span> It does not appear that there is much
force in Calvin’s objections to the opinion, that flesh was not allowed
for human food till after the deluge. For if the sacrifices offered were
holocausts, then the skin only would be left for the use of man. See
notes on the offerings of Cain and Abel in the fourth chapter; and,
especially, Dr. Magee’s work on the Atonement, Dissertation LII, On the
date of the permission of animal food to man. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc01007)
