[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc01007)  [Next](cc01009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 1: Genesis, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3.

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
3:1-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now the serpent was more subtil than
any beast of the field which the LORD God had made. And he said unto the
woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Porro serpens erat callidior omni
bestia agri, quam fecerat Jehova Deus: et dixit ad mulierem, Etiamne
dixit Deus, Non comedetis ex omni arbore horti?

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the woman said unto the serpent, We
may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit mulier ad serpentem, De fructu
arborum horti vescimur.

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**3.** But of the fruit of the tree which *is*
in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it,
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>**3.** At de fructu arboris quae est in medio
horti, dixit Deus, Non comedetis ex ea, neque contingetis eam, ne forte
moriamini.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye
shall not surely die:

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Tunc dixit serpens ad mulierem, Non
moriendo moriemini.

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>**5.** For God doth know that in the day ye
eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods,
knowing good and evil.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Scit enim Deus quod in die qua
comedeits ex ea, aperientur oculi vestri, et eritis sicut dii, scientes
bonum et malum.

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span>**6.** And when the woman saw that the tree
*was* good for food, and that it *was* pleasant to the eyes, and a tree
to be desired to make *one* wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did
eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et vidit mulier quod bona esset arbor
ad vescendum, et quod delectabilis esset oculis, et desiderabilis arbor
ad intelligendum: et tulit de fructu ipsius, et comedit: deditque etiam
viro suo qui erat cum ea, et ipse comedit.

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the eyes of them both were opened,
and they knew that they *were* naked; and they sewed fig leaves
together, and made themselves aprons.

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et aperti sunt oculi amborumipsorum,
et cognoverunt quod nudi essent: et consuerunt folia ficus, feceruntque
sibi cingula.

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span>**8.** And they heard the voice of the LORD
God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife
hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of
the garden.

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span>**8.** Audierunt autem vocem Jehovae Dei
deambulantis per hortum ad auram diei: et abscondit se Adam et uxor ejus
a facie Jehovae Dei, in medio arborum horti.

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the LORD God called unto Adam, and
said unto him, Where *art* thou?

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span>**9.** Vocavitque Jehova Deus Adam, et dixit
ei Ubi es tu?

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span>**10.** And he said, I heard thy voice in the
garden, and I was afraid, because I *was* naked; and I hid myself.

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et ait, Vocem tuam audivi in horto,
et timui, quia nudus eram, et abscondi me.

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span>**11.** And he said, Who told thee that thou
*wast* naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that
thou shouldest not eat?

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span>**11.** Tunc dixit, Quis indicavit tibi quod
nudus esses? nonne ex ipsa arbore de qua praeceperam tibi ne comederes,
comedisti?

<span id="ix.i-p24"></span>**12.** And the man said, The woman whom thou
gavest *to be* with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

<span id="ix.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et ait Adam, Mulier quam dedisti ut
esset mecum, ipsa dedit mihi de arbore, et comedi.

<span id="ix.i-p26"></span>**13.** And the LORD God said unto the woman,
What *is* this *that* thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent
beguiled me, and I did eat.

<span id="ix.i-p27"></span>**13.** Dixitque Jehova Deus ad mulierem, Cur
hoc fecisti? Et ait mulier, Serpens seduxit me, et comedi.

<span id="ix.i-p28"></span>**14.** And the LORD God said unto the
serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou *art* cursed above all
cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou
go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:

<span id="ix.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et dixit Jehova ad serpentem, Quia
fecisti hoc, maledicuts eris prae omni animali, et prae omni bestia
agri: super ventrem tuum gradieris, et pulverem comedes omnibus diebus
vitae tuae.

<span id="ix.i-p30"></span>**15.** And I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy
head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.

<span id="ix.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et inimicitias ponam inter to et
inter mulierem, et inter semen tuum et inter semen ejus: ipsum
vulnerabit to in capite, et tu vulnerabis ipsum in calcaneo.

<span id="ix.i-p32"></span>**16.** Unto the woman he said, I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt
bring forth children; and thy desire *shall be* to thy husband, and he
shall rule over thee.

<span id="ix.i-p33"></span>**16.** Ad mulierem dixit, Multiplicando
multiplicabo dolorem tuum, et conceptum tuum: cum dolore paries filios,
et ad virum tuum erit desiderium tuum, ipseque dominabitur tibi.

<span id="ix.i-p34"></span>**17.** And unto Adam he said, Because thou
hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree,
of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed *is*
the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat *of* it all the days
of thy life;

<span id="ix.i-p35"></span>**17.** Adae vero ait, Quia paruisti voci
uxoris tuae, et comedisti ex arbore de qua praeceperam tibi, dicens, Non
comedes ex ea: maledicta terra propter to: in labore comedes eam cunctis
diebus vitae tuae.

<span id="ix.i-p36"></span>**18.** Thorns also and thistles shall it
bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;

<span id="ix.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et spinam et tribulum germinabit
tibi, et comedes herbam agri.

<span id="ix.i-p38"></span>**19.** In the sweat of thy face shalt thou
eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou
taken: for dust thou *art* , and unto dust shalt thou return.

<span id="ix.i-p39"></span>**19.** In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane,
donec revertaris in terram: quia ex ea sumptus es: nam pulvis es, et in
pulverem reverteris.

<span id="ix.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Adam called his wife’s name Eve;
because she was the mother of all living.

<span id="ix.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et vocavit Adam nomen uxoris suae
Hava, quia ipsa est mater omnis viventis.

<span id="ix.i-p42"></span>**21.** Unto Adam also and to his wife did
the LORD God make coats of skins, and clothed them.

<span id="ix.i-p43"></span>**21.** Fecitque Jehova Deus Adae et uxori
ejus tunicas pelliceas, et induit eos.

<span id="ix.i-p44"></span>**22.** And the LORD God said, Behold, the
man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put
forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for
ever:

<span id="ix.i-p45"></span>**22.** Tunc dixit Jehova Deus, Ecce, Adam
factus est tanquam unus ex nobis, sciendo bonum et malum: nunc autem ne
forte mittat manum suam, et accipiat etiam de arbore vitae, et comedat,
et vivat in seculum.

<span id="ix.i-p46"></span>**23.** Therefore the LORD God sent him forth
from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.

<span id="ix.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et emisit eum Jehova de horto Heden,
ad colendum terram ex qua sumptus fuerat.

<span id="ix.i-p48"></span>**24.** So he drove out the man; and he
placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword
which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.

<span id="ix.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et ejecit Adam, et collocavit ab
Oriente horti Heden cherubim, et laminam gladii versatilis, ad
custodiendum viam arboris vitae.

<span id="ix.i-p50"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p51"></span><span id="ix.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p52"></span>**1.** *Now the serpent was more subtil* In
this chapter, Moses explains, that man, after he had been deceived by
Satan revolted from his Maker, became entirely changed and so
degenerate, that the image of God, in which he had been formed, was
obliterated. He then declares, that the whole world, which had been
created for the sake of man, fell together with him from its primary
original; and that in this ways much of its native excellence was
destroyed. But here many and arduous questions arise. For when Moses
says that the serpent was crafty beyond all other animals, he seems to
intimate, that it had been induced to deceive man, not by the
instigation of Satan, but by its own malignity. I answer, that the
innate subtlety of the serpent did not prevent Satan from making use of
the animal for the purpose of effecting the destruction of man. For
since he required an instrument, he chose from among animals that which
he saw would be most suitable for him: finally, he carefully contrived
the method by which the snares he was preparing might the more easily
take the mind of Eve by surprise. Hitherto, he had held no communication
with men; he, therefore, clothed himself with the person of an animal,
under which he might open for himself the way of access. Yet it is not
agreed among interpreters in what sense the serpent is said to be <span
id="ix.i-p52.1"></span>םורע ( *aroom, subtle* ,) by which word the
Hebrews designate the *prudent* as well as the *crafty* . Some,
therefore, would take it in a good, others in a bad sense. I think,
however, Moses does not so much point out a fault as attribute praise to
nature because God had endued this beast with such singular skill, as
rendered it acute and quick-sighted beyond all others. But Satan
perverted to his own deceitful purposes the gift which had been divinely
imparted to the serpent. Some captiously cavil, that more acuteness is
now found in many other animals. To whom I answer, that there would be
nothing absurd in saying, that the gift which had proved so destructive
to the human race has been withdrawn from the serpent: just, as we shall
hereafter see, other punishments were also inflicted upon it. Yet, in
this description, writers on natural history do not materially differ
from Moses, and experience gives the best answer to the objection; for
the Lord does not in vain command his own disciples to be ‘prudent as
serpents,’ (<span id="ix.i-p52.2"></span>[Mt
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="ix.i-p52.2"></span>.)
But it appears, perhaps, scarcely consonant with reason, that the
serpent only should be here brought forward, all mention of Satan being
suppressed. I acknowledge, indeed, that from this place *alone* nothing
more can be collected than that men were deceived by the serpent. But
the testimonies of Scripture are sufficiently numerous, in which it is
plainly asserted that the serpent was only the mouth of the devil; for
not the serpent but the devil is declared to be ‘the father of lies,’
the fabricator of imposture, and the author of death. The question,
however, is not yet solved, why Moses has kept back the name of Satan. I
willingly subscribe to the opinion of those who maintain that the Holy
Spirit then purposely used obscure figures, because it was fitting that
full and clear light should be reserved for the kingdom of Christ. In
the meantime, the prophets prove that they were well acquainted with the
meaning of Moses, when, in different places, they cast the blame of our
ruin upon the devil. We have elsewhere said, that Moses, by a homely and
uncultivated style, accommodates what he delivers to the capacity of the
people; and for the best reason; for not only had he to instruct an
untaught race of men, but the existing age of the Church was so puerile,
that it was unable to receive any higher instruction. There is,
therefore, nothing absurd in the supposition, that they, whom, for the
time, we know and confess to have been but as infants, were fed with
milk. Or (if another comparison be more acceptable) Moses is by no means
to be blamed, if he, considering the office of schoolmaster as imposed
upon him, insists on the rudiments suitable to children. They who have
an aversion to this simplicity, must of necessity condemn the whole
economy of God in governing the Church. This, however, may suffice us,
that the Lord, by the secret illumination of his Spirit, supplied
whatever was wanting of clearness in outward expressions; as appears
plainly from the prophets, who saw Satan to be the real enemy of the
human race, the contriver of all evils, furnished with every kind of
fraud and villainy to injure and destroy. Therefore, though the impious
make a noise, there is nothing justly to offend us in this mode of
speaking by which Moses describes Satan, the prince of iniquity, under
the person of his servant and instrument, at the time when Christ, the
Head of the Church, and the Sun of Righteousness, had not yet openly
shone forth. Add to this, the baseness of human ingratitude is more
clearly hence perceived, that when Adam and Eve knew that all animals
were given, by the hand of God, into subjection to them, they yet
suffered themselves to be led away by one of their own slaves into
rebellion against God. As often as they beheld any one of the animals
which were in the world, they ought to have been reminded both of the
supreme authority, and of the singular goodness of God; but, on the
contrary, when they saw the serpent an apostate from his Creator, not
only did they neglect to punish it, but, in violation of all lawful
order, they subjected and devoted themselves to it, as participators in
the same apostasy. What can be imagined more dishonorable than this
extreme depravity? Thus, I understand the name of the serpent, not
allegorically, as some foolishly do, but in its genuine sense.

<span id="ix.i-p53"></span>Many persons are surprised that Moses simply,
and as if abruptly, relates that men have fallen by the impulse of Satan
into eternal destruction, and yet never by a single word explains how
the tempter himself had revolted from God. And hence it has arisen, that
fanatical men have dreamed that Satan was created evil and wicked as he
is here described. But the revolt of Satan is proved by other passages
of Scripture; and it is an impious madness to ascribe to God the
creation of any evil and corrupt nature; for when he had completed the
world, he himself gave this testimony to all his works, that they were
very good. Wherefore, without controversy, we must conclude, that the
principle of evil with which Satan was endued was not from nature, but
from defection; because he had departed from God, the fountain of
justice and of all rectitude. But Moses here passes over Satan’s fall,
because his object is briefly to narrate the corruption of human nature;
to teach us that Adam was not created to those multiplied miseries under
which all his posterity suffer, but that he fell into them by his own
fault. In reflecting on the number and nature of those evils to which
they are obnoxious, men will often be unable to restrain themselves from
raging and murmuring against God, whom they rashly censure for the just
punishment of their sin. These are their well-known complaints that God
has acted more mercifully to swine and dogs than to them. Whence is
this, but that they do not refer the miserable and ruined state, under
which we languish, to the sin of Adam as they ought? But what is far
worse, they fling back upon God the charge of being the cause of all the
inward vices of the mind, (such as its horrible blindness, contumacy
against God, wicked desires, and violent propensities to evil;) as if
the whole perverseness of our disposition had not been adventitious.
 <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) The design, therefore, of Moses
was to show, in a few words, how greatly our present condition differs
from our first original, in order that we may learn, with humble
confession of our fault, to bewail our evils. We ought not then to be
surprised, that, while intent on the history he purposed to relate, he
does not discuss every topic which may be desired by any person
whatever.

<span id="ix.i-p55"></span>We must now enter on that question by which
vain and inconstant minds are greatly agitated; namely, Why God
permitted Adam to be tempted, seeing that the sad result was by no means
hidden from him? That He now relaxes Satan’s reins, to allow him to
tempt us to sin, we ascribe to judgment and to vengeance, in consequence
of man’s alienation from himself; but there was not the same reason for
doing so when human nature was yet pure and upright. God, therefore,
 <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) permitted Satan to tempt man,
who was conformed to His own image, and not yet implicated in any crime,
having, moreover, on this occasion, allowed Satan the use of an animal
 <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) which otherwise would never
have obeyed him; and what else was this, than to arm an enemy for the
destruction of man? This seems to have been the ground on which the
Manichaeans maintained the existence of two principles.  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) Therefore, they have imagined that
Satan, not being in subjection to God, laid snares for man in opposition
to the divine will, and was superior not to man only, but also to God
himself. Thus, for the sake of avoiding what they dreaded as an
absurdity, they have fallen into execrable prodigies of error; such as,
that there are two Gods, and not one sole Creator of the world, and that
the first God has been overcome by his antagonist. All, however, who
think piously and reverently concerning the power of God, acknowledge
that the evil did not take place except by his permission. For, in the
first place, it must be conceded, that God was not in ignorance of the
event which was about to occur; and then, that he could have prevented
it, had he seen fit to do so. But in speaking of permission, I
understand that he had appointed whatever he wished to be done. Here,
indeed, a difference arises on the part of many, who suppose Adam to
have been so left to his own free will, that God would not have him
fall. They take for granted, what I allow them, that nothing is less
probable than that God should he regarded as the cause of sin, which he
has avenged with so many and such severe penalties. When I say, however,
that Adam did not fall without the ordination and will of God, I do not
so take it as if sin had ever been pleasing to Him, or as if he simply
wished that the precept which he had given should be violated. So far as
the fall of Adam was the subversion of equity, and of well-constituted
order, so far as it was contumacy against the Divine Law-giver, and the
transgression of righteousness, certainly it was against the will of
God; yet none of these things render it impossible that, for a certain
cause, although to us unknown, he might will the fall of man. It offends
the ears of some, when it is said God *willed* this fall; but what else,
I pray, is the *permission* of Him, who has the power of preventing, and
in whose hand the whole matter is placed, but his will? I wish that men
would rather suffer themselves to be judged by God, than that, with
profane temerity, they should pass judgment upon him; but this is the
arrogance of the flesh to subject God to its own test. I hold it as a
settled axiom, that nothing is more unsuitable to the character of God
than for us to say that man was created by Him for the purpose of being
placed in a condition of suspense and doubt; wherefore I conclude, that,
as it became the Creator, he had before determined with himself what
should be man’s future condition. Hence the unskilful rashly infer, that
man did not sin by free choice. For he himself perceives, being
convicted by the testimony of his own conscience, that he has been too
free in sinning. Whether he sinned by necessity, or by contingency, is
another question; respecting which see the Institution,  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) and the treatise on Predestination.

<span id="ix.i-p60"></span>*And he said unto the woman* The impious
assail this passage with their sneers, because Moses ascribes eloquence
to an animal which only faintly hisses with its forked tongue. And first
they ask, at what time animals began to be mute, if they then had a
distinct language, and one common to ourselves and them. The answer is
ready; the serpent was not eloquent by nature, but when Satan, by divine
permission, procured it as a fit instrument for his use, he uttered
words also by its tongue, which God himself permitted. Nor do I doubt
that Eve perceived it to be extraordinary, and on that account received
with the greater avidity what she admired. Now, if men decide that
whatever is unwonted must be fabulous, God could work no miracle. Here
God, by accomplishing a work above the ordinary course of nature,
constrains us to admire his power. If then, under this very pretext, we
ridicule the power of God, because it is not familiar to us, are we not
excessively preposterous? Besides, if it seems incredible that beasts
should speak at the command of God, how has man the power of speech, but
because God has formed his tongue? The Gospel declares, that voices were
uttered in the air, without a tongue, to illustrate the glory of Christ;
this is less probable to carnal reason, than that speech should be
elicited from the mouth of brute animals. What then can the petulance of
impious men find here deserving of their invective? In short, whosoever
holds that God in heaven is the Ruler of the world, will not deny his
power over the creatures, so that he can teach brute animals to speak
when he pleases, just as he sometimes renders eloquent men speechless.
Moreover the craftiness of Satan betrays itself in this, that he does
not directly assail the man, but approaches him, as through a mine, in
the person of his wife. This insidious method of attack is more than
sufficiently known to us at the present day, and I wish we might learn
prudently to guard ourselves against it. For he warily insinuates
himself at that point at which he sees us to be the least fortified,
that he may not be perceived till he should have penetrated where he
wished. The woman does not flee from converse with the serpent, because
hitherto no dissension had existed; she, therefore, accounted it simply
as a domestic animal.

<span id="ix.i-p61"></span>The question occurs, what had impelled Satan
to contrive the destruction of man? Curious sophists have feigned that
he burned with envy, when he foresaw that the Son of God was to be
clothed in human flesh; but the speculation is frivolous. For since the
Son of God was made man in order to restore us, who were already lost,
from our miserable over throw, how could that be foreseen which would
never have happened unless man had sinned? If there be room for
conjectures, it is more probable that he was driven by a kind of fury,
(as the desperate are wont to be,) to hurry man away with himself into a
participation of eternal ruin. But it becomes us to be content with this
single reasons that since he was the adversary of God, he attempted to
subvert the order established by Him. And, because he could not drag God
from his throne, he assailed man, in whom His image shone. He knew that
with the ruin of man the most dreadful confusion would be produced in
the whole world, as indeed it happened, and therefore he endeavored, in
the person of man, to obscure the glory of God.  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) Rejecting, therefore, all vain
figments, let us hold fast this doctrine, which is both simple and
solid.

<span id="ix.i-p63"></span>*Yea, has God said?* This sentence is
variously expounded and even distorted, partly because it is in itself
obscure, and partly because of the ambiguous import of the Hebrew
particle. The expression <span id="ix.i-p63.1"></span>יכ ףא ( *aph ki*
,) sometimes signifies “although” or “indeed,” and sometimes, “how much
more.”  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) David Kimchi takes it in
this last sense, and thinks that many words had passed between them on
both sides, before the serpent descended to this point; namely, that
having calumniated God on other accounts, he at length thus concludes,
Hence it *much more* appears how envious and malignant he is towards
you, because he has interdicted you from the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil. But this exposition is not only forced, it is proved to
be false by the reply of Eve. More correct is the explanation of the
Chaldean paraphrast, ‘Is it true that God has forbidden? etc.’  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) Again, to some this appears a *simple*
, to others an *ironical* interrogation. It would be a *simple*
interrogation, if it injected a doubt in the following manner: ‘Can it
be, that God should forbid the eating of any tree whatever?’ but it
would be ironical, if used for the purpose of dissipating vain fear; as,
‘It greatly concerns God, indeed, whether you eat of the tree or not! It
is, therefore, ridiculous that you should think it to be forbidden you!’
I subscribe the more freely to the former opinion, because there is
greater probability that Satan, in order to deceive more covertly, would
gradually proceed with cautious prevarications to lead the woman to a
contempt of the divine precept. There are some who suppose that Satan
expressly denies the word which our first parents had heard, to have
been the word of God. Others think, (with whom I rather agree,) that,
under the pretext of inquiring into the cause, he would indirectly
weaken their confidence in the word. And certainly the old interpreter
has translated the expression, ‘Why has God said?’  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) which, although I do not altogether
approve, yet I have no doubt that the serpent urges the woman to seek
out the cause, since otherwise he would not have been able to draw away
her mind from God. Very dangerous is the temptation, when it is
suggested to us, that God is not to be obeyed except so far as the
reason of his command is apparent. The true rule of obedience is, that
we being content with a bare command, should persuade ourselves that
whatever he enjoins is just and right. But whosoever desires to be wise
beyond measure, him will Satan, seeing he has cast off all reverence for
God, immediately precipitate into open rebellion. As it respects
grammatical construction, I think the expression ought to be translated,
‘Has God even said?’ or, ‘Is it so that God has said?’  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) Yet the artifice of Satan is to be
noticed, for he wished to inject into the woman a doubt which might
induce her to believe that not to be the word of God, for which a
plausible reason did not manifestly appear.

<span id="ix.i-p68"></span>*Of every tree of the garden* Commentators
offer a double interpretation of these words. The former supposes Satan,
for the sake of increasing envy, to insinuate that all the trees had
been forbidden. “Has God indeed enjoined that you should not dare to
touch any tree?” The other interpretation, however, is, “Have you not
then the liberty granted you of eating promiscuously from whatever tree
you please?” The former more accords with the disposition of the devil,
who would malignantly amplify the prohibitions and seems to be
sanctioned by Eve’s reply. For when she says, We do eat of all, one only
excepted, she seems to repel the calumny concerning a general
prohibition. But because the latter sense of the passage, which suggests
the question concerning the simple and bare prohibition of God, was more
apt to deceive, it is more credible that Satan, with his accustomed
guile, should have begun his temptation from this point, ‘Is it possible
for God to be unwilling that you should gather the fruit of any tree
whatever?’ The answer of the woman, that only one tree was forbidden,
she means to be a defense of the command; as if she would deny that it
ought to seem harsh or burdensome, since God had only excepted one
single tree out of so great an abundance and variety as he had granted
to them. Thus, in these words there will be a concession, that one tree
was indeed forbidden; then, the refutation of a calumny, because it is
not arduous or difficult to abstain from one tree, when others, without
number are supplied, of which the use is permitted. It was impossible
for Eve more prudently or more courageously to repel the assault of
Satan, than by objecting against him, that she and her husband had been
so bountifully dealt with by the Lord, that the advantages granted to
them were abundantly sufficient, for she intimates that they would be
most ungrateful if, instead of being content with such affluence they
should desire more than was lawful. When she says, God has forbidden
them to eat or to touch, some suppose the second word to be added for
the purpose of charging God with too great severity, because he
prohibited them even from the *touch*  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) But I rather understand that she
hitherto remained in obedience, and expressed her pious disposition by
anxiously observing the precept of God; only, in proclaiming the
punishment, she begins to give ways by inserting the adverb “perhaps,”
 <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) when God has certainly
pronounced, “Ye shall die the death.”  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) For although with the Hebrews <span
id="ix.i-p71.3"></span>ןפ ( *pen* ) does not always imply doubt, yet,
since it is generally taken in this sense, I willingly embrace the
opinion that the woman was beginning to waver. Certainly, she had not
death so immediately before her eyes, should she become disobedient to
God, as, she ought to have had. She clearly proves that her perception
of the true danger of death was distant and cold.

<span id="ix.i-p72"></span><span id="ix.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p73"></span>**4.** *And the serpent said unto the woman*
Satan now springs more boldly forward; and because he sees a breach open
before him, he breaks through in a direct assault, for he is never wont
to engage in open war until we voluntarily expose ourselves to him,
naked and unarmed. He cautiously approaches us at first with
blandishments; but when he has stolen in upon us, he dares to exalt
himself petulantly and with proud confidence against God; just as he now
seizing upon Eve’s doubt, penetrates further, that he may turn it into a
direct negative. It behaves us to be instructed, by much examples, to
beware of his snares, and, by making timely resistance, to keep him far
from us, that nearer access may not be permitted to him. He now,
therefore, does not ask doubtingly, as before, whether or not the
command of God, which he opposes, be true, but openly accuses God of
falsehood, for he asserts that the word by which death was denounced is
false and delusive. Fatal temptation! when while God is threatening us
with death, we not only securely sleep, but hold God himself in
derision!

<span id="ix.i-p74"></span><span id="ix.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p75"></span>**5.** *For God doth know.* There are those
who think that God is here craftily praised by Satan, as if He never
would prohibit men from the use of wholesome fruit. But they manifestly
contradict themselves, for they at the some time confess that in the
preceding member of the sentence he had already declared God to be
unworthy of confidence, as one who had lied. Others suppose that he
charges God with malignity and envy, as wishing to deprive man of his
highest perfection; and this opinion is more probable than the other.
Nevertheless, (according to my judgments) Satan attempts to prove what
he had recently asserted, reasoning, however, from contraries:  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) God, he says, has interdicted to you
the tree, that he may not be compelled to admit you to the participation
of his glory; therefore, the fear of punishment is quite needless. In
short, he denies that a fruit which is useful and salutary can be
injurious. When he says, God does know, he censures God as being moved
by jealousy: and as having given the command concerning the tree, for
the purpose of keeping man in an inferior rank.

<span id="ix.i-p78"></span>*Ye shall be as gods.* Some translate it, ‘Ye
shall be like angels.’ It might even be rendered in the singular number,
‘Ye shall be as God.’ I have no doubt that Satan promises them
*divinity* ; as if he had said, For no other reason does God defraud you
of the tree of knowledge, than because he fears to have you as
companions. Moreover, it is not without some show of reason that he
makes the Divine glory, or equality with God, to consist in the perfect
knowledge of good and evil; but it is a mere pretense, for the purpose
of ensnaring the miserable woman. Because the desire of knowledge is
naturally inherent in and happiness is supposed to be placed in it; but
Eve erred in not regulating the measure of her knowledge by the will of
God. And we all daily suffer under the same disease, because we desire
to know more than is right, and more than God allows; whereas the
principal point of wisdom is a well-regulated sobriety in obedience to
God.

<span id="ix.i-p79"></span><span id="ix.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p80"></span>**6.** *And when the woman saw* This impure
look of Eve, infected with the poison of concupiscence, was both the
messenger and the witness of an impure heart. She could previously
behold the tree with such sincerity, that no desire to eat of it
affected her mind; for the faith she had in the word of God was the best
guardian of her heart, and of all her senses. But now, after the heart
had declined from faith, and from obedience to the word, she corrupted
both herself and all her senses, and depravity was diffused through all
parts of her soul as well as her body. It is, therefore, a sign of
impious defection, that the woman now judges the tree to be good for
food, eagerly delights herself in beholding it, and persuades herself
that it is desirable for the sake of acquiring wisdom; whereas before
she had passed by it a hundred times with an unmoved and tranquil look.
For now, having shaken off the bridle, her mind wanders dissolutely and
intemperately, drawing the body with it to the same licentiousness. The
word <span id="ix.i-p80.1"></span>ליכשהל ( *lehaskil* ,) admits of two
explanations: That the tree was desirable either to be *looked upon* or
to impart *prudence* . I prefer the latter sense, as better
corresponding with the temptation.

<span id="ix.i-p81"></span>*And gave also unto her husband with her*
From these words, some conjecture that Adam was present when his wife
was tempted and persuaded by the serpent, which is by no means credible.
Yet it might be that he soon joined her, and that, even before the woman
tasted the fruit of the tree, she related the conversation held with the
serpent, and entangled him with the same fallacies by which she herself
had been deceived. Others refer the particle <span
id="ix.i-p81.1"></span>המע ( *immah* ,) “with her,” to the conjugal
bond, which may be received. But because Moses simply relates that he
ate the fruit taken from the hands of his wife, the opinion has been
commonly received, that he was rather captivated with her allurements
than persuaded by Satan’s impostures.  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) For this purpose the declaration of
Paul is adduced,

<span id="ix.i-p84"></span>‘Adam was not deceived, but the woman.’  
(<span id="ix.i-p84.2"></span>[1Ti
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)<span id="ix.i-p84.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p85"></span>But Paul in that place, as he is teaching
that the origin of evil was from the woman, only speaks comparatively.
Indeed, it was not only for the sake of complying with the wishes of his
wife, that he transgressed the law laid down for him; but being drawn by
her into fatal ambition, he became partaker of the same defection with
her. And truly Paul elsewhere states that sin came not by the woman, but
by Adam himself, (<span id="ix.i-p85.1"></span>[Ro
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="ix.i-p85.1"></span>.)
Then, the reproof which soon afterwards follows ‘Behold, Adam is as one
of us,’ clearly proves that he also foolishly coveted more than was
lawful, and gave greater credit to the flatteries of the devil than to
the sacred word of God.

<span id="ix.i-p86"></span>It is now asked, What was the sin of both of
them? The opinion of some of the ancients, that they were allured by
intemperance of appetite, is puerile. For when there was such an
abundance of the choicest fruits what daintiness could there be about
one particular kind? Augustine is more correct, who says, that pride was
the beginning of all evils, and that by pride the human race was ruined.
Yet a fuller definition of the sin may be drawn from the kind of
temptation which Moses describes. For first the woman is led away from
the word of God by the wiles of Satan, through unbelief.  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) Wherefore, the commencement of the
ruin by which the human race was overthrown was a defection from the
command of God. But observe, that men then revolted from God, when,
having forsaken his word, they lent their ears to the falsehoods of
Satan. Hence we infer, that God will be seen and adored in his word;
and, therefore, that all reverence for him is shaken off when his word
is despised. A doctrine most useful to be known, for the word of God
obtains its due honor only with few so that they who rush onward with
impunity in contempt of this word, yet arrogate to themselves a chief
rank among the worshippers of God. But as God does not manifest himself
to men otherwise than through the word, so neither is his majesty
maintained, nor does his worship remain secure among us any longer than
while we obey his word. Therefore, unbelief was the root of defection;
just as faith alone unites us to God. Hence flowed ambition and pride,
so that the woman first, and then her husband, desired to exalt
themselves against God. For truly they did exalt themselves against God,
when, honor having been divinely conferred upon them, they not contented
with such excellence, desired to know more than was lawful, in order
that they might become equal with God. Here also monstrous ingratitude
betrays itself. They had been made in the *likeness* of God; but this
seems a small thing unless *equality* be added. Now, it is not to be
endured that designing and wicked men should labor in vain, as well as
absurdly, to extenuate the sin of Adam and his wife. For apostasy is no
light offense, but detestable wickedness, by which man withdraws himself
from the authority of his Creator, yea, even rejects and denies him.
Besides it was not simple apostasy, but combined with atrocious
contumelies and reproaches against God himself. Satan accuses God of
falsehoods of envy, and of malignity, and our first parents subscribe to
a calumny thus vile and execrable. At length, having despised the
command of God, they not only indulge their own lust, but enslave
themselves to the devil. If any one prefers a shorter explanation, we
may say unbelief has opened the door to ambition, but ambition has
proved the parent of rebellion, to the end that men, having cast aside
the fear of God, might shake off his yoke. On this account, Paul teaches
use that by the disobedience of Adam sin entered into the world. Let us
imagine that there was nothing worse than the transgression of the
command; we shall not even thus have succeeded far in extenuating the
fault of Adam. God, having both made him free in everything, and
appointed him as king of the world, chose to put his obedience to the
proof, in requiring abstinence from one tree alone. This condition did
not please him. Perverse declaimers may plead in excuse, that the woman
was allured by the beauty of the tree, and the man ensnared by the
blandishments of Eve. Yet the milder the authority of God, the less
excusable was their perverseness in rejecting it. But we must search
more deeply for the origin and cause of sin. For never would they have
dared to resist God, unless they had first been incredulous of his word.
And nothing allured them to covet the fruit but mad ambition. So long as
they firmly believing in God’s word, freely suffered themselves to be
governed by Him, they had serene and duly regulated affections. For,
indeed, their best restraint was the thoughts which entirely occupied
their minds, that God is just, that nothing is better than to obey his
commands and that to be loved by him is the consummation of a happy
life. But after they had given place to Satan’s blasphemy, they began,
like persons fascinated, to lose reason and judgment; yea, since they
were become the slaves of Satan; he held their very senses bound. Still
further, we know that sins are not estimated in the sight of God by the
external appearance, but by the inward disposition.

<span id="ix.i-p88"></span>Again, it appears to many absurd, that the
defection of our first parents is said to have proved the destruction of
the whole race; and, on this accounts they freely bring an accusation
against God. Pelagius, on the other hand, lest, as he falsely feared,
the corruption of human nature should be charged upon God, ventured to
deny original sin. But an error so gross is plainly refuted, not only by
solid testimonies of Scripture, but also by experience itself. The
corruption of our nature was unknown to the philosophers who, in other
respects, were sufficiently, and more than sufficiently, acute. Surely
this stupor itself was a signal proof of original sin. For all who are
not utterly blinds perceive that no part of us is sound; that the mind
is smitten with blindness, and infected with innumerable errors; that
all the affections of the heart are full of stubbornness and wickedness;
that vile lusts, or other diseases equally fatal, reign there; and that
all the senses burst forth  <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) with
many vices. Since, however none but God alone is a proper judge in this
cause, we must acquiesce in the sentence which he has pronounced in the
Scriptures. In the first place, Scripture clearly teaches us that we are
born vicious and perverse. The cavil of Pelagius was frivolous, that sin
proceeded from Adam by imitation. For David, while still enclosed in his
mother’s womb, could not be an imitator of Adam, yet he confesses that
he was conceived in sin, (<span id="ix.i-p89.2"></span>[Ps
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="ix.i-p89.2"></span>.) A
fuller proof of this matter, and a more ample definition of original
sin, may be found in the Institutes;  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) yet here, in a single word, I will
attempt to show how far it extends. Whatever in our nature is vicious —
since it is not lawful to ascribe it to God — we justly reject as sin.
 <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) But Paul (<span
id="ix.i-p91.2"></span>[Ro 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010)<span
id="ix.i-p91.2"></span>) teaches that corruption does not reside in one
part only, but pervades the whole soul, and each of its faculties.
Whence it follows, that they childishly err who regard original sin as
consisting only in lust, and in the inordinate motion of the appetites,
whereas it seizes upon the very seat of reason, and upon the whole
heart. To sin is annexed condemnation,  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) or, as Paul speaks,

<span id="ix.i-p93"></span>‘By man came sin, and by sin, death,’ (<span
id="ix.i-p93.1"></span>[Ro 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="ix.i-p93.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p94"></span>Wherefore he elsewhere pronounces us to be
‘the children of wrath;’ as if he would subject us to an eternal curse,
(<span id="ix.i-p94.1"></span>[Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span id="ix.i-p94.1"></span>.) In
short, that we are despoiled of the excellent gifts of the Holy Spirit,
of the light of reason, of justice, and of rectitude, and are prone to
every evil; that we are also lost and condemned, and subjected to death,
is both our hereditary condition, and, at the same time, a just
punishments which God, in the person of Adam, has indicted on the human
race. Now, if any one should object, that it is unjust for the innocent
to bear the punishment of another’s sin, I answer, whatever gifts God
had conferred upon us in the person of Adams he had the best right to
take away, when Adam wickedly fell. Nor is it necessary to resort to
that ancient figment of certain writers, that souls are derived by
descent from our first parents.  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)
For the human race has not naturally derived corruption through its
descent frown Adam; but that result is rather to be traced to the
appointment of God, who, as he had adorned the whole nature of mankind
with most excellent endowments in one man, so in the same man he again
denuded it. But now, from the time in which we were corrupted in Adam,
we do not bear the punishment of another’s offense, but are guilty by
our own fault.

<span id="ix.i-p97"></span>A question is mooted by some, concerning the
*time* of this fall, or rather ruin. The opinion has been pretty
generally received, that they fell on the day they were created; and,
therefore Augustine writes, that they stood only for six hours. The
conjecture of others, that the temptation was delayed by Satan till the
Sabbath, in order to profane that sacred day, is but weak. And
certainly, by instances like these, all pious persons are admonished
sparingly to indulge themselves in doubtful speculations. As for myself,
since I have nothing to assert positively respecting the time, so I
think it may be gathered from the narration of Moses, that they did not
long retain the dignity they had received; for as soon as he has said
they were created, he passes, without the mention of any other thing, to
their fall. If Adam had lived but a moderate space of time with his
wife, the blessing of God would not have been unfruitful in the
production of offspring; but Moses intimates that they were deprived of
God’s benefits before they had become accustomed to use them. I
therefore readily subscribe to the exclamation of Augustine, ‘O wretched
freewill, which, while yet entire, had so little stability!’ And, to say
no more respecting the shortness of the time, the admonition of Bernard
is worthy of remembrance: ‘Since we read that a fall so dreadful took
place in Paradise, what shall we do on the dunghill?’ At the same time,
we must keep in memory by what pretext they were led into this delusion
so fatal to themselves, and to all their posterity. Plausible was the
adulation of Satan, ‘Ye shall know good and evil;’ but that knowledge
was therefore accursed, because it was sought in preference to the favor
of God. Wherefore, unless we wish, of our own accord, to fasten the same
snares upon ourselves, let us learn entirely to depend upon the sole
will of God, whom we acknowledge as the Author of all good. And, since
the Scripture everywhere admonishes us of our nakedness and poverty, and
declares that we may recover in Christ what we have lost in Adams let
us, renouncing all self-confidence, offer ourselves empty to Christ,
that he may fill us with his own riches.

<span id="ix.i-p98"></span><span id="ix.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p99"></span>**7.** *And* *the* *eyes* *of* *them* *both*
*were* *opened* . It was necessary that the eyes of Eve should be veiled
till her husband also was deceived; but now both, being alike bound by
the chain of an unhappy consent, begin to be sensible of their
wretchedness although they are not yet affected with a deep knowledge of
their fault. They are ashamed of their nakedness, yet, though convinced,
they do not humble themselves before God, nor fear his judgements as
they ought; they even do not cease to resort to evasions. Some progress,
however, is made; for whereas recently they would, like giants, assault
heaven by storm; now, confounded with a sense of their own ignominy,
they flee to hiding-places. And truly this opening of the eyes in our
first parents to discern their baseness, clearly proves them to have
been condemned by their own judgment. They are not yet summoned to the
tribunal of God; there is none who accuses them; is not then the sense
of shame, which rises spontaneously, a sure token of guilt? The
eloquence, therefore, of the whole world will avail nothing to deliver
those from condemnation, whose own conscience has become the judge to
compel them to confess their fault. It rather becomes us all to open our
eyes, that, being confounded at our own disgrace, we may give to God the
glory which is his due. God created man flexible; and not only
permitted, but willed that he should be tempted. For he both adapted the
tongue of the serpent beyond the ordinary use of nature, to the devil’s
purpose, just as if any one should furnish another with a sword and
armor; and then, though the unhappy event was foreknown by him, he did
not apply the remedy, which he had the power to do. On the other hand,
when we come to speak of man, he will be found to have sinned
voluntarily, and to have departed from God, his Maker, by a movement of
the mind not less free than perverse. Nor ought we to call that a light
fault, which, refusing credit to the word of God, exalted itself against
him by impious and sacrilegious emulation, which would not be subject to
his authority, and which, finally, both proudly and perfidiously
revolted from him. Therefore, whatever sin and fault there is in the
fall of our first parents remains with themselves; but there is
sufficient reason why the eternal counsel of God preceded it, though
that reason is concealed from us. We see, indeed, some good fruit daily
springing from a ruin so dreadful, inasmuch as God instructs us in
humility by our miseries and then more clearly illustrates his own
goodness; for his grace is more abundantly poured forth, through Christ,
upon the world, than it was imparted to Adam in the beginning. Now, if
the reason why this is so lies beyond our reach, it is not wonderful
that the secret counsel of God should be to us like a labyrinth.  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)

<span id="ix.i-p101"></span>*And* *they* *sewed* *fig* *-* *leaves*
*together* . What I lately said, that they had not been brought either
by true shame or by serious fear to repentance, is now more manifest.
They sew together for themselves girdles of leaves.  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) For what end? That they may keep God
at a distance, as by an invincible barrier! Their sense of evil,
therefore, was only confused, and combined with dulness, as is wont to
be the case in unquiet sleep. There is none of us who does not smile at
their folly, since, certainly, it was ridiculous to place such a
covering before the eyes of God. In the meanwhile, we are all infected
with the same disease; for, indeed, we tremble, and are covered with
shame at the first compunctions of conscience; but self-indulgence soon
steals in, and induces us to resort to vain trifles, as if it were an
easy thing to delude God. Therefore unless conscience be more closely
pressed there is no shadow of excuse too faint and fleeting to obtain
our acquiescence; and even if there be no pretext whatever, we still
make pleasures for ourselves, and, by an oblivion of three days’
duration, we imagine that we are well covered.  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) In short, the cold and faint  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) knowledge of sin, which is inherent in
the minds of men, is here described by Moses, in order that they may be
rendered inexcusable.  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) Then (as
we have already said) Adam and his wife were yet ignorant of their own
vileness, since with a covering so light they attempted to hide
themselves from the presence of God.

<span id="ix.i-p106"></span><span id="ix.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p107"></span>**8.** *And* *they* *heard* *the* *voice*
*of* *the* *Lord* *God* . As soon as the voice of God sounds, Adam and
Eve perceive that the leaves by which they thought themselves well
protected are of no avail. Moses here relates nothing which does not
remain in human nature, and may be clearly discerned at the present day.
The difference between good and evil is engraven on the hearts of all,
as Paul teaches, (<span id="ix.i-p107.1"></span>[Ro
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015)<span id="ix.i-p107.1"></span>;)
but all bury the disgrace of their vices under flimsy leaves till God,
by his voice, strikes inwardly their consciences. Hence, after God had
shaken them out of their torpor, their alarmed consciences compelled
them to hear his voice. Moreover, what Jerome translates, ‘at the breeze
after midday,’  <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) is, in the
Hebrew, ‘at the wind of the day;’  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) the Greeks, omitting the word ‘wind,’
have put ‘at the evening.’  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) Thus
the opinion has prevailed, that Adam, having sinned about noon, was
called to judgment about sunset. But I rather incline to a different
conjecture, namely, that being covered with their garment, they passed
the night in silence and quiet, the darkness aiding their hypocrisy;
then, about sunrise, being again thoroughly awakened, they recollected
themselves. We know that at the rising of the sun the air is naturally
excited; together, then, with this gentle breeze, God appeared; but
Moses would improperly have called the *evening* air that of the *day* .
Others take the word as describing the southern part or region; and
certainly <span id="ix.i-p110.2"></span>חור ( *ruach* ) sometimes among
the Hebrews signifies one or another region of the world.  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) Others think that the time is here
specified as one least exposed to terrors, for in the clear light there
is the greater security; and thus, they conceive, is fulfilled what the
Scripture declares that they who have accusing consciences are always
anxious and disquieted, even without any danger. To this point they
refer what is added respecting the wind, as if Adam was terrified at the
sound of a falling leaf. But what I have advanced is more true and
simple, that what was hid under the darkness of the night was detected
at the rising of the sun. Yet I do not doubt that some notable symbol of
the presence of God was in that gentle breeze; for although (as I have
lately said) the rising sun is wont daily to stir up some breath of air,
this is not opposed to the supposition that God gave some extraordinary
sign of his approach, to arouse the consciences of Adam and his wife.
For, since he is in himself incomprehensible, he assumes, when he wishes
to manifest himself to men, those marks by which he may be known. David
calls the winds the messengers of God, on the wings of which he rides,
or rather flies, with incredible velocity. (<span
id="ix.i-p111.3"></span>[Ps 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)<span
id="ix.i-p111.3"></span>.) But, as often as he sees good, he uses the
winds, as well as other created things, beyond the order of nature,
according to his own will. Therefore, Moses, in here mentioning the
wind, intimates (according to my judgment) that some unwonted and
remarkable symbol of the Divine presence was put forth which should
vehemently affect the minds of our first parents. This resource, namely,
that of fleeing from God’s presence, was nothing better than the former;
since God, with his voice alone, soon brings back the fugitives. It is.
written,

<span id="ix.i-p112"></span>‘Whither shall I flee from thy presence? If
I traverse the sea, if I take wings and ascend above the clouds, if I
descend into the profound abyss, thou, Lord, wilt be everywhere,’  
(<span id="ix.i-p112.2"></span>[Ps
139:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#007)<span id="ix.i-p112.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p113"></span>This we all confess to be true; yet we do
not, in the meantime, cease to snatch at vain subterfuges; and we fancy
that shadows of any kind will prove a most excellent defense. Nor is it
to be here omitted, that he, who had found a few leaves to be
unavailing, fled to whole trees; for so we are accustomed, when shut out
from frivolous cavils, to frame new excuses, which may hide us as under
a denser shade. When Moses says that Adam and his wife hid themselves
‘in the midst of the *tree*  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) of
Paradise,’ I understand that the singular member is put for the plural;
as if he had said, among the *trees*.

<span id="ix.i-p115"></span><span id="ix.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p116"></span>**9.** *And* *the* *Lord* *God* *called*
*unto* *Adam* . They had been already smitten by the voice of God, but
they lay confounded under the trees, until another voice more
effectually penetrated their minds. Moses says that Adam was called by
the Lord. Had he not been called before? The former, however, was a
confused sound, which had no sufficient force to press upon the
conscience. Therefore God now approaches nearer, and from the tangled
thicket of trees  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) draws him,
however unwilling and resisting, forth into the midst. In the same
manner we also are alarmed at the voice of God, as soon as his law
sounds in our ears; but presently we snatch at shadows, until he,
calling upon us more vehemently, compels us to come forward, arraigned
at his tribunal. Paul calls this the life of the Law,  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) when it slays us by charging us with
our sins. For as long as we are pleased with ourselves, and are inflated
with a false notion that we are alive, the law is dead to us, because we
blunt its point by our hardness; but when it pierces us more sharply, we
are driven into new terrors.

<span id="ix.i-p119"></span><span id="ix.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p120"></span>**10.** *And* *he* *said* *,* *I* *heard*
*thy* *voice* . Although this seems to be the confession of a dejected
and humbled man, it will nevertheless soon appear that he was not yet
properly subdued, nor led to repentance. He imputes his fear to the
voice of God, and to his own nakedness, as, if he had never before heard
God speaking without being alarmed, and had not been even sweetly
exhilarated by his speech. His excessive stupidity appears in this, that
he fails to recognize the cause of shame in his sin; he, therefore,
shows that he does not yet so feel his punishment, as to confess his
fault. In the meantime, he proves what I said before to be true, that
original sin does not reside in one part of the body only, but holds its
dominion over the whole man, and so occupies every part of the soul,
that none remains in its integrity; for, notwithstanding his fig-leaves,
he still dreads the presence of God.

<span id="ix.i-p121"></span><span id="ix.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p122"></span>**11.** *Who* *told* *thee* *that* *thou*
*wast* *naked* *?* An indirect reprimand to reprove the sottishness of
Adam in not perceiving his fault in his punishment, as if it had been
said, not simply that Adam was afraid at the voice of God, but that the
voice of his judge was formidable to him because he was a sinner. Also,
that not his nakedness, but the turpitude of the vice by which he had
defiled himself, was the cause of fear; and certainly he was guilty of
intolerable impiety against God in seeking the origin of evil in nature.
Not that he would accuse God in express terms; but deploring his own
misery, and dissembling the fact that he was himself the author of it,
he malignantly transfers to God the charge which he ought to have
brought against himself. What the Vulgate translates, ‘Unless it be that
thou hast eaten of the tree,’  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186)
is rather an interrogation.  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) God
asks, in the language of doubt, not as if he were searching into some
disputable matter, but for the purpose of piercing more acutely the
stupid man, who, laboring under fatal disease, is yet unconscious of his
malady; just as a sick man, who complains that he is burning, yet thinks
not of fever. Let us, however remember that we shall profit nothing by
any prevarications but that God will always bind us by a most just
accusation in the sin of Adam. The clause, “whereof I commanded thee
that thou shouldest not eat,” is added to remove the pretext of
ignorance. For God intimates that Adam was admonished in time; and that
he fell from no other cause than this, that he knowingly and voluntarily
brought destruction upon himself. Again, the atrocious nature of sin is
marked in this transgression and rebellion; for, as nothing is more
acceptable to God than obedience, so nothing is more intolerable than
when men, having spurned his commandments, obey Satan and their own
lust.

<span id="ix.i-p125"></span><span id="ix.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p126"></span>**12.** *The* *woman* *whom* *thou* *gavest*
*to* *be* *with* *me* . The boldness of Adam now more clearly betrays
itself; for, so far from being subdued, he breaks forth into coarser
blasphemy. He had before been tacitly expostulating with God; now he
begins *openly* to contend with him, and triumphs as one who has broken
through all barriers. Whence we perceive what a refractory and
indomitable creature man began to be when he became alienated from God;
for a lively picture of corrupt nature is presented to us in Adam from
the moment of his revolt.

<span id="ix.i-p127"></span>‘Every one,’ says James, ‘is tempted by his
own concupiscence,’ (<span id="ix.i-p127.1"></span>[Jas
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014)<span id="ix.i-p127.1"></span>;)

<span id="ix.i-p128"></span>and even Adam, not otherwise than knowingly
and willingly, had set himself, as a rebel, against God. Yet, just as if
conscious of no evil, he puts his wife as the guilty party in his place.
‘Therefore I have eaten,’ he says, ‘because she gave.’ And not content
with this, he brings, at the same time, an accusation against God;
objecting that the wife, who had brought ruin upon him, had been given
by God. We also, trained in the same school of original sin, are too
ready to resort to subterfuges of the same kind; but to no purpose; for
howsoever incitements and instigations from other quarters may impel us,
yet the unbelief which seduces us from obedience to God is within us;
the pride is within which brings forth contempt.

<span id="ix.i-p129"></span><span id="ix.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p130"></span>**13.** *And* *the* *Lord* *God* *said*
*unto* *the* *woman* . God contends no further with the man, nor was it
necessary; for he aggravates rather than diminishes his crime, first by
a frivolous defense, then by an impious disparagement of God, in short,
though he rages he is yet held convicted. The Judge now turns to the
woman, that the cause of both being heard, he may at length pronounce
sentence. The old interpreter thus renders God’s address: ‘Why hast thou
done this?’  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) But the Hebrew
phrase has more vehemence; for it is the language of one who wonders as
at something prodigious. It ought therefore rather to be rendered, ‘How
hast thou done this?’  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) as if he
had said, ‘How was it possible that thou shouldst bring thy mind to be
so perverse a counsellor to thy husband?’

<span id="ix.i-p133"></span>*The* *serpent* *beguiled* *me* . Eve ought
to have been confounded at the portentous wickedness concerning which
she was admonished. Yet she is not struck dumb, but, after the example
of her husband, transfers the charge to another; by laying the blame on
the serpent, she foolishly, indeed, and impiously, thinks herself
absolved. For her answer comes at length to this: ‘I received from the
serpent what thou hadst forbidden; the serpent, therefore, was the
impostor.’ But who compelled Eve to listen to his fallacies, and even to
place confidence in them more readily than in the word of God? Lastly,
how did she admit them, but by throwing open and betraying that door of
access which God had sufficiently fortified? But the fruit of original
sin everywhere presents itself; being blind in its own hypocrisy, it
would gladly render God mute and speechless. And whence arise daily so
many murmurs, but because God does not hold his peace whenever we choose
to blind ourselves?

<span id="ix.i-p134"></span><span id="ix.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p135"></span>**14.** *And* *the* *Lord* *God* *said*
*unto* *the* *serpent* . He does not interrogate the serpent as he had
done the man and the woman; because, in the animal itself there was no
sense of sin, and because, to the devil he would hold out no hope of
pardon. He might truly, by his own authority, have pronounced sentence
against Adam and Eve, though unheard. Why then does he call them to
undergo examination, except that he has a care for their salvation? This
doctrine is to be applied to our benefit. There would be no need of any
trial of the cause, or of any solemn form of judgment, in order to
condemn us; wherefore, while God insists upon extorting a confession
from us, he acts rather as a physician than as a judge. There is the
same reason why the Lords before he imposes punishment on man, begins
with the serpent. For corrective punishments (as we shall see) are of a
different kind, and are inflicted with the design of leading us to
repentance; but in this there is nothing of the sort.

<span id="ix.i-p136"></span>It is, however, doubtful to whom the words
refer, whether to the serpent or to the devil. Moses, indeed, says that
the serpent was a skillful and cunning animal; yet it is certain, that,
when Satan was devising the destruction of man, the serpent was
guiltless of his fraud and wickedness. Wherefore, many explain this
whole passage allegorically, and plausible are the subtleties which they
adduce for this purpose. But when all things are more accurately
weighed, readers endued with sound judgment will easily perceive that
the language is of a mixed character; for God so addresses the serpent
that the last clause belongs to the devil. If it seem to any one absurd,
that the punishment of another’s fraud should be exacted from a brute
animal, the solution is at hand; that, since it had been created for the
benefit of man, there was nothing improper in its being accursed from
the moment that it was employed for his destruction. And by this act of
vengeance God would prove how highly he estimates the salvation of man;
just as if a father should hold the sword in execration by which his son
had been slain. And here we must consider, not only the kind of
authority which God has over his creatures, but also the end for which
he created them, as I have recently said. For the equity of the divine
sentence depends on that order of nature which he has sanctioned; it
has, therefore, no affinity whatever with blind revenge. In this manner
the reprobate will be delivered over into eternal fire with their
bodies; which bodies, although they are not self-moved, are yet the
instruments of perpetrating evil. So whatever wickedness a man commits
is ascribed to his hands, and, therefore, they are deemed polluted;
while yet they do not more themselves, except so far as, under the
impulse of a depraved affection of the heart, they carry into execution
what has been there conceived. According to this method of reasoning,
the serpent is said to have done what the devil did by its means. But if
God so severely avenged the destruction of man upon a brute animal, much
less did he spare Satan, the author of the whole evil, as will appear
more clearly in the concluding part of the address.

<span id="ix.i-p137"></span>*Thou* *art* *cursed* *above* *all* *cattle*
This curse of God has such force against the serpents as to render it
despicable, and scarcely tolerable to heaven and earth, leading a life
exposed to, and replete with, constant terrors. Besides, it is not only
hateful to us, as the chief enemy of the human race, but, being
separated also from other animals, carries on a kind of war with nature;
for we see it had before been so gentle that the woman did not flee from
its familiar approach. But what follows has greater difficulty because
that which God denounces as a punishment seems to be natural; namely,
that it should creep upon its belly and eat dust. This objection has
induced certain men of learning and ability to say, that the serpent had
been accustomed to walk with an erect body before it had been abused by
Satan.  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) There will, however, be
no absurdity in supposing, that the serpent was again consigned to that
former condition, to which he was already naturally subject. For thus
he, who had exalted himself against the image of God, was to be thrust
back into his proper rank; as if it had been said, ‘Thou, a wretched and
filthy animal, hast dared to rise up against man, whom I appointed to
the dominion of the whole world; as if, truly, thou, who art fixed to
the earth, hadst any right to penetrate into heaven. Therefore, I now
throw thee back again to the place whence thou hast attempted to emerge,
that thou mayest learn to be contented with thy lot, and no more exalt
thyself, to man’s reproach and injury.’ In the meanwhile he is recalled
from his insolent motions to his accustomed mode of going, in such a way
as to be, at the same time, condemned to perpetual infamy. To eat dust
is the sign of a vile and sordid nature. This (in my opinion) is the
simple meaning of the passage, which the testimony of Isaiah also
confirms, (<span id="ix.i-p138.1"></span>[Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025)<span id="ix.i-p138.1"></span>;)
for while he promises under the reign of Christ, the complete
restoration of a sound and well-constituted nature, he records, among
other things, that dust shall be to the serpent for bread. Wherefore, it
is not necessary to seek for any fresh change in each particular which
Moses here relates.

<span id="ix.i-p139"></span><span id="ix.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p140"></span>**15.** *I* *will* *put* *enmity* . I
interpret this simply to mean that there should always be the hostile
strife between the human race and serpents, which is now apparent; for,
by a secret feeling of nature, man abhors them. It is regarded, as among
prodigies, that some men take pleasure in them; and as often as the
sight of a serpent inspires us with horrors the memory of our fall is
renewed. With this I combine in one continued discourse what immediately
follows: ‘It shall wound thy head, and thou shalt wound its heel.’ For
he declares that there shall be such hatred that on both sides they
shall be troublesome to each other; the serpent shall be vexatious
towards men, and men shall be intent on the destruction of serpents.
Meanwhile, we see that the Lord acts mercifully in chastising man, whom
he does not suffer Satan to touch except in the *heel* ; while he
subjects the *head* of the serpent to be wounded by him. For in the
terms *head* and *heel* there is a distinction between the superior and
the inferior. And thus God leaves some remains of dominion to man;
because he so places the mutual disposition to injure each other, that
yet their condition should not be equal, but man should be superior in
the conflict. Jerome, in turning the first member of the sentence, ‘Thou
shalt bruise the head;’  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) and the
second, “Thou shalt be ensnared in the heel”,  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) does it without reason, for the same
verb is repeated by Moses; the difference is to be noted only in the
head and the heel, as I have just now said. Yet the Hebrew verb whether
derived from <span id="ix.i-p142.2"></span>ףוש ( *shooph* ,) or from
<span id="ix.i-p142.3"></span>הפש ( *shapha* ,) some interpret to
*bruise* or to *strike* , others to *bite*  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) I have, however, no doubt that Moses
wished to allude to the name of the serpent which is called in Hebrew
<span id="ix.i-p143.2"></span>ןופיפש ( *shipiphon* ,) from <span
id="ix.i-p143.3"></span>הפש ( *shapha* ,) or <span
id="ix.i-p143.4"></span>ףוש ( *shooph* ).  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)

<span id="ix.i-p145"></span>We must now make a transition from the
serpent to the author of this mischief himself; and that not only in the
way of comparison, for there truly is a literal *anagogy*;  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) because God has not so vented his
anger upon the outward instrument as to spare the devil, with whom lay
all the blame. That this may the more certainly appear to us, it is
worth the while first to observe that the Lord spoke not for the sake of
the serpent but of the man; fur what end could it answer to thunder
against the serpent in unintelligible words? Wherefore respect was had
to men; both that they might be affected with a greater dread of sin,
seeing how highly displeasing it is to God, and that hence they might
take consolation for their misery, because they would perceive that God
is still propitious to them. But now it is obvious to and how slender
and insignificant would be the argument for a good hope, if mention were
here made of a serpent only; because nothing would be then provided for,
except the fading and transient life of the body. Men would remain, in
the meanwhile, the slaves of Satan, who would proudly triumph over them,
and trample on their heads. Wherefore, that God might revive the
fainting minds of men, and restore them when oppressed by despair, it
became necessary to promise them, in their posterity victory over Satan,
through whose wiles they had been ruined. This, then, was the only
salutary medicine which could recover the lost, and restore life to the
dead. I therefore conclude, that God here chiefly assails Satan under
the name of the serpent, and hurls against him the lightning of his
judgment. This he does for a twofold reason: first, that men may learn
to beware of Satan as of a most deadly enemy; then, that they may
contend against him with the assured confidence of victory.

<span id="ix.i-p147"></span>Now, though all do not dissent in their
minds from Satan yea, a great part adhere to him too familiarly — yet,
in reality, Satan is their enemy; nor do even those cease to dread him
whom he soothes by his flatteries; and because he knows that the minds
of men are set against him, he craftily insinuates himself by indirect
methods, and thus deceives them under a disguised form.  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) In short, it is in grafted in us by
nature to flee from Satan as our adversary. And, in order to show that
he should be odious not to one generation only, God expressly says,
‘between thee and the seed of the woman,’ as widely indeed, as the human
race shall be propagated. He mentions the woman on this account,
because, as she had yielded to the subtlety of the devils and being
first deceived, had drawn her husband into the participation of her
ruin, so she had peculiar need of consolation.

<span id="ix.i-p149"></span>*It* *shall* *bruise*  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) This passage affords too clear a proof
of the great ignorance, dullness, and carelessness, which have prevailed
among all the learned men of the Papacy. The feminine gender has crept
in instead of the masculine or neuter. There has been none among them
who would consult the Hebrew or Greek *codices* , or who would even
compare the Latin copies with each other.  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) Therefore, by a common error, this
most corrupt reading has been received. Then, a profane exposition of it
has been invented, by applying to the mother of Christ what is said
concerning her seed.

<span id="ix.i-p152"></span>There is, indeed no ambiguity in the *words*
here used by Moses; but I do not agree with others respecting their
*meaning*; for other interpreters take the seed for *Christ*, without
controversy; as if it were said, that some one would arise from the seed
of the woman who should wound the serpent’s head. Gladly would I give my
suffrage in support of their opinion, but that I regard the word *seed*
as too violently distorted by them; for who will concede that a
*collective* noun is to be understood of one man *only*? Further, as the
perpetuity of the contest is noted, so victory is promised to the human
race through a continual succession of ages. I explain, therefore, the
*seed* to mean the posterity of the woman generally. But since
experience teaches that not all the sons of Adam by far, arise as
conquerors of the devil, we must necessarily come to one head, that we
may find to whom the victory belongs. So Paul, from the seed of Abraham,
leads us to Christ; because many were degenerate sons, and a
considerable part adulterous, through infidelity; whence it follows that
the unity of the body flows from the head. Wherefore, the sense will be
(in my judgment) that the human race, which Satan was endeavoring to
oppress, would at length be victorious.  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) In the meantime, we must keep in mind
that method of conquering which the Scripture describes. Satan has, in
all ages, led the sons of men “captive at his will”, and, to this day,
retains his lamentable triumph over them, and for that reason is called
the prince of the world, (<span id="ix.i-p153.2"></span>[Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)<span id="ix.i-p153.2"></span>.)
But because one stronger than he has descended from heaven, who will
subdue him, hence it comes to pass that, in the same manner, the whole
Church of God, under its Head, will gloriously exult over him. To this
the declaration of Paul refers,

<span id="ix.i-p154"></span>“The Lord shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly,”  
(<span id="ix.i-p154.2"></span>[Ro
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)<span id="ix.i-p154.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p155"></span>By which words he signifies that the power
of bruising Satan is imparted to faithful men, and thus the blessing is
the common property of the whole Church; but he, at the same time,
admonishes us, that it only has its commencement in this world; because
God crowns none but well-tried wrestlers.

<span id="ix.i-p156"></span><span id="ix.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p157"></span>**16.** *Unto* *the* *woman* *he* *said* .
In order that the majesty of the judge may shine the more brightly, God
uses no long disputation; whence also we may perceive of what avail are
all our tergiversations with him. In bringing the serpent forward, Eve
thought she had herself escaped. God, disregarding her cavils, condemns
her. Let the sinner, therefore, when he comes to the bar of God, cease
to contend, lest he should more severely provoke against himself the
anger of him whom he has already too highly offended. We must now
consider the kind of punishment imposed upon the woman. When he says, ‘I
will multiply thy pains,’ he comprises all the trouble women sustain
during pregnancy  <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200)

<span id="ix.i-p159"></span>It is credible that the woman would have
brought forth without pain, or at least without such great suffering, if
she had stood in her original condition; but her revolt from God
subjected her to inconveniences of this kind. The expression, ‘pains and
conception,’ is to be taken by the figure *hypallage*,  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) for the pains which they endure in
consequence of conception. The second punishment which he exacts is
*subjection*. For this form of speech, “Thy desire shall be unto thy
husband,” is of the same force as if he had said that she should not be
free and at her own command, but subject to the authority of her husband
and dependent upon his will; or as if he had said, ‘Thou shalt desire
nothing but what thy husband wishes.’ As it is declared afterwards, Unto
thee shall be his desire, (<span id="ix.i-p160.1"></span>[Ge
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007)<span id="ix.i-p160.1"></span>.)
Thus the woman, who had perversely exceeded her proper bounds, is forced
back to her own position. She had, indeed, previously been subject to
her husband, but that was a liberal and gentle subjection; now, however,
she is cast into servitude.

<span id="ix.i-p161"></span><span id="ix.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p162"></span>**17.** *And* *unto* *Adam* *he* *said* . In
the first place, it is to be observed, that punishment was not inflicted
upon the first of our race so as to rest on those two alone, but was
extended generally to all their posterity, in order that we might know
that the human race was cursed in their person; we next observe, that
they were subjected only to temporal punishment, that, from the
moderation of the divine anger, they might entertain hope of pardon.
God, by adducing the reason why he thus punishes the man, cuts off from
him the occasion of murmuring. For no excuse was left to him who had
obeyed his wife rather than God; yea, had despised God for the sake of
his wife, placing so much confidence in the fallacies of Satan, — whose
messenger and servant she was, — that he did not hesitate perfidiously
to deny his Maker. But, although God deals decisively and briefly with
Adam, he yet refutes the pretext by which he had tried to escape, in
order the more easily to lead him to repentance. After he has briefly
spoken of Adam’s sin, he announces that the earth would be cursed for
his sake. The ancient interpreter has translated it, ‘In thy work;’
 <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) but the reading is to be
retained, in which all the Hebrew copies agree, namely, the earth was
cursed *on account of Adam* . Now, as the *blessing* of the earth means,
in the language of Scripture, that fertility which God infuses by his
secret power, so the curse is nothing else than the opposite privation,
when God withdraws his favor. Nor ought it to seem absurd, that, through
the sin of man, punishment should overflow the earth, though innocent.
For as the *primum mobile*  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203)
rolls all the celestial spheres along with it, so the ruin of man drives
headlong all those creatures which were formed for his sake, and had
been made subject to him. And we see how constantly the condition of the
world itself varies with respect to men, according as God is angry with
them, or shows them his favor. We may add, that, properly speaking, this
whole punishment is exacted, not from the earth itself, but from man
alone. For the earth does not bear fruit for itself, but in order that
food may be supplied to us out of its bowels. The Lord, however,
determined that his anger should like a deluge, overflow all parts of
the earth, that wherever man might look, the atrocity of his sin should
meet his eyes. Before the fall, the state of the world was a most fair
and delightful mirror of the divine favor and paternal indulgence
towards man. Now, in all the elements we perceive that we are cursed.
And although (as David says) the earth is still full of the mercy of
God, (<span id="ix.i-p164.2"></span>[Ps
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#005)<span id="ix.i-p164.2"></span>,)
yet, at the same time, appear manifest signs of his dreadful alienation
from us, by which if we are unmoved, we betray our blindness and
insensibility. Only, lest sadness and horror should overwhelm us, the
Lord sprinkles everywhere the tokens of his goodness. Moreover although
the blessing of God is never seen pure and transparent as it appeared to
man in innocence yet, if what remains behind be considered in itself,
David truly and properly exclaims, ‘The earth is full of the mercy of
God.’

<span id="ix.i-p165"></span>Again, by ‘eating of the earth,’ Moses means
‘eating of the *fruits’* which proceed from it. The Hebrew word <span
id="ix.i-p165.1"></span>ןובצע ( *itsabon* ,) which is rendered *pain* ,
 <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) is also taken for *trouble* and
*fatigue* . In this place, it stands in antithesis with the pleasant
labor in which Adam previously so employed himself, that in a sense he
might be said to play; for he was not formed for idleness, but for
action. Therefore the Lord had placed him over a garden which was to be
cultivated. But, whereas in that labor there had been sweet delight; now
servile work is enjoined upon him, as if he were condemned to the mines.
And yet the asperity of this punishment also is mitigated by the
clemency of God, because something of enjoyment is blended with the
labors of men, lest they should be altogether ungrateful, as I shall
again declare under the next verse.

<span id="ix.i-p167"></span><span id="ix.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p168"></span>**18.** *Thorns* *also* *and* *thistles*
*shall* *it* *bring* *forth* . He more largely treats of what he has
already alluded to, namely, the participation of the fruits of the earth
with labor and trouble. And he assigns as the reason, that the earth
will not be the same as it was before, producing perfect fruits; for he
declares that the earth would degenerate from its fertility, and bring
forth briers and noxious plants. Therefore we may know, that whatsoever
unwholesome things may be produced, are not natural fruits of the earth,
but are corruptions which originate from sin. Yet it is not our part to
expostulate with the earth for not answering to our wishes, and to the
labors of its cultivators as if it were maliciously frustrating our
purpose; but in its sterility let us mark the anger of Gods and mourn
over our own sins. It here been falsely maintained by some that the
earth is exhausted by the long succession of time, as if constant
bringing forth had wearied it. They think more correctly who acknowledge
that, by the increasing wickedness of men, the remaining blessing of God
is gradually diminished and impaired; and certainly there is danger,
unless the world repent, that a great part of men should shortly perish
through hunger, and other dreadful miseries. The words immediately
following, Thou shalt eat the herb of the field, are expounded too
strictly (in my judgment) by those who think that Adam was thereby
deprived of all the fruits which he had before been permitted to eat.
God intends nothing more than that he should be to such an extent
deprived of his former delicacies as to be compelled to use, in addition
to them, the herbs which had been designed only for brute animals. For
the mode of living at first appointed him, in that happy and delightful
abundance, was far more delicate than it afterwards became. God,
therefore, describes a part of this poverty by the word *herbs* , just
as if a king should send away any one of his attendants from the upper
table, to that which was plebeian and mean; or, as if a father should
feed a son, who had offended him, with the coarse bread of servants; not
that he interdicts man from all other food, but that he abates much of
his accustomed liberality. This, however might be taken as added for the
purpose of consolation, as if it had been said, ‘Although the earth,
which ought to be the mother of good fruits only, be covered with thorns
and briers, still it shall yield to thee sustenance whereby thou mayest
be fed.’

<span id="ix.i-p169"></span><span id="ix.i-p169.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p170"></span>**19.** *In* *the* *sweat* *of* *thy* *face*
. Some indeed, translate it ‘labor;’ the translation, however, is
forced. But by “sweat” is understood hard labor and full of fatigue and
weariness, which, by its difficulty produces sweat. It is a repetition
of the former sentence, where it was said, ‘Thou shalt eat it in labor.’
Under the cover of this passage, certain ignorant persons would rashly
impel all men to manual labor; for God is not here teaching as a master
or legislator, but only denouncing punishment as a judge. And, truly, if
a *law* had been here prescribed, it would be necessary for all to
become husband men, nor would any place be given to mechanical arts; we
must go out of the world to seek for clothing and other necessary
conveniences of life. What, then, does the passage mean? Truly God
pronounces, as from his judgment-seat, that the life of man shall
henceforth be miserable, because Adam had proved himself unworthy of
that tranquil, happy and joyful state for which he had been created.
Should any one object that there are many inactive and indolent persons,
this does not prevent the curse from having spread over the whole human
race. For I say that no one lies torpid in such a degree of sloth as not
to be under the necessity of experiencing that this curse belongs to
all. Some flee from troubles, and many more do all they can to grasp at
immunity from them; but the Lord subjects all, without exception, to
this yoke of imposed servitude. It is, nevertheless, to be, at the same
time, maintained that labor is not imposed equally on each, but on some
more, on others less. Therefore, the labor common to the whole body is
here described; not that which belongs peculiarly to each member, except
so far as it pleases the Lord to divide to each a certain measure from
the common mass of evils. It is, however, to be observed, that they who
meekly submit to their sufferings, present to God an acceptable
obedience, if, indeed, there be joined with this bearing of the cross,
that knowledge of sin which may teach them to be humble. Truly it is
faith alone which can offer such a sacrifice to God; but the faithful
the more they labor in procuring a livelihood, with the greater
advantage are they stimulated to repentance, and accustom themselves to
the mortification of the flesh; yet God often remits a portion of this
curse to his own children, lest they should sink beneath the burden. To
which purpose this passage is appropriate,

<span id="ix.i-p171"></span>‘Some will rise early and go late to rest,
they will eat the bread of carefulness, but the Lord will give to his
beloved sleep,’  
(<span id="ix.i-p171.2"></span>[Ps
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)<span id="ix.i-p171.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p172"></span>So far, truly, as those things which had
been polluted in Adam are repaired by the grace of Christ, the pious
feel more deeply that God is good, and enjoy the sweetness of his
paternal indulgence. But because, even in the best, the flesh is to be
subdued, it not infrequently happens that the pious themselves are worn
down with hard labors and with hunger. There is, therefore, nothing
better for us than that we, being admonished of the miseries of the
present life, should weep over our sins, and seek that relief from the
grace of Christ which may not only assuage the bitterness of grief, but
mingle its own sweetness with it.  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) Moreover, Moses does not enumerate all
the disadvantages in which man, by sin, has involved himself; for it
appears that all the evils of the present life, which experience proves
to be innumerable, have proceeded from the same fountain. The inclemency
of the air, frost, thunders, unseasonable rains, drought, hail, and
whatever is disorderly in the world, are the fruits of sin. Nor is there
any other primary cause of diseases. This has been celebrated in
poetical fables, and was doubtless handed down, by tradition, from the
fathers. Hence that passage in Horace: —

<span id="ix.i-p175"></span>*“When from Heaven’s fane the furtive hand  
Of man the sacred fire withdrew,  
A countless host* — *at God’s command* — *  
To earth of fierce diseases flew;  
And death* — *till now kept far away  
Hastened his step to seize his prey.*  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206)

<span id="ix.i-p178"></span>But Moses, who, according to his custom,
studies a brevity adapted to the capacity of the common people, was
content to touch upon what was most apparent, in order that, from one
example, we may learn that the whole order of nature was subverted by
the sin of man. Should any one again object, that no suffering was
imposed on men which did not also belong to women: I answer, it was done
designedly, to teach us, that from the sin of Adam, the curse flowed in
common to both sexes; as Paul testifies, that ‘all are dead in Adam,’
(<span id="ix.i-p178.1"></span>[Ro
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="ix.i-p178.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p179"></span>One question remains to be examined — ‘When
God had before shown himself propitious to Adam and his wife, — having
given them hope of pardon, — why does he begin anew to exact punishment
from them? Certainly in that sentence, ‘the seed of the woman shall
bruise the head of the serpent,’ the remission of sins and the grace of
eternal salvation is contained. But it is absurd that God, after he has
been reconciled, should actually prosecute his anger. To untie this
knot, some have invented a distinction of a twofold remission, namely, a
remission of the *fault* and a remission of the *punishment*, to which
the figment of *satisfactions* was afterwards annexed. They have feigned
that God, in absolving men from the fault, still retains the punishment;
and that, according to the rigour of his justice, he will inflict at
least a temporal punishment. But they who imagined that punishments are
required as *compensations*, have been preposterous interpreters of the
judgments of God. For God does not consider, in chastising the faithful,
what they deserve; but what will be useful to them in future; and
fulfils the office of a physician rather than of a judge.  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) Therefore, the absolution which he
imparts to his children is complete and not by halves. That he,
nevertheless, punishes those who are received into favor, is to be
regarded as a kind of chastisement which serves as medicine for future
time, but ought not properly to be regarded as the vindictive punishment
of sin committed. If we duly consider how great is the torpor of the
human mind, then, how great its lasciviousness, how great its contumacy,
how great its levity, and how quick its forgetfulness, we shall not
wonder at God’s severity in subduing it. If he admonishes in words, he
is not heard; if he adds stripes, it avails but little; when it happens
that he is heard, the flesh nevertheless perversely spurns the
admonition. That obstinate hardness which, with all its power opposes
itself to God, is worse than lasciviousness. If any one is naturally
endued with such a gentle disposition that he does not disown the duty
of submission to God, yet, having escaped from the hand of God, after
one allowed sin, he will soon relapse, unless he be drawn back as by
force. Wherefore, this general axiom is to be maintained, that all the
sufferings to which the life of men is subject and obnoxious, are
necessary exercises, by which God partly invites us to repentance,
partly instructs us in humility, and partly renders us more cautious and
more attentive in guarding against the allurements of sin for the
future.

<span id="ix.i-p181"></span>*Till* *thou* *return* . He denounces that
the termination of a miserable life shall be death; as if he would say,
that Adam should at length come, through various and continued kinds of
evil, to the last evil of all. Thus is fulfilled what we said before,
that the death of Adam had commenced immediately from the day of his
transgression. For this accursed life of man could be nothing else than
the beginning of death. ‘But where then is the victory over the serpent,
if death occupies the last place? For the words seem to have no other
signification, than that man must be ultimately crushed by death.
Therefore, since death leaves nothing to Adam, the promise recently
given fails; to which may be added, that the hope of being restored to a
state of salvation was most slender and obscure.’ Truly I do not doubt
that these terrible words would grievously afflict minds already
dejected, from other causes, by sorrow. But since, though astonished by
their sudden calamity, they were yet not deeply affected with the
knowledge of sin; it is not wonderful that God persisted the more in
reminding them of their punishment, in order that he might beat them
down, as with reiterated blows. Although the consolation offered be in
itself obscure and feeble, God caused it to be sufficient for the
support of their hope, lest the weight of their affliction should
entirely overwhelm them. In the meantime, it was necessary that they
should be weighed down by a mass of manifold evils, until God should
have reduced them to true and serious repentance. Moreover, whereas
death is here put as the final issue,  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) this ought to be referred to man;
because in Adam himself nothing but death will be found; yet, in this
way, he is urged to seek a remedy in Christ.

<span id="ix.i-p183"></span>*For* *dust* *thou* *art* . Since what God
here declares belongs to man’s *nature* , not to his *crime* or *fault*
, it might seem that death was not superadded as adventitious to him.
And therefore some understand what was before said, ‘Thou shalt die,’ in
a spiritual sense; thinking that, even if Adam had not sinned, his body
must still have been separated from his soul. But, since the declaration
of Paul is clear, that

<span id="ix.i-p184"></span>‘all die in Adams as they shall rise again
in Christ,’  
(<span id="ix.i-p184.2"></span>[1Co
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="ix.i-p184.2"></span>,)

<span id="ix.i-p185"></span>this wound also was inflicted by sin. Nor
truly is the solution of the question difficult, — ‘Why God should
pronounce, that he who was taken from the dust should return to it.’ For
as soon as he had been raised to a dignity so great, that the glory of
the Divine Image shone in him, the terrestrial origin of his body was
almost obliterated. Now, however, after he had been despoiled of his
divine and heavenly excellence, what remains but that by his very
departure out of life, he should recognize himself to be earth? Hence it
is that we dread death, because dissolution, which is contrary to
nature, cannot naturally be desired. Truly the first man would have
passed to a better life, had he remained upright; but there would have
been no separation of the soul from the body, no corruption, no kind of
destruction, and, in short, no violent change.

<span id="ix.i-p186"></span><span id="ix.i-p186.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p187"></span>**20.** *And* *Adam* *called* *,* *etc* .
There are two ways in which this may be read. The former, in the
*pluperfect* tense, ‘Adam had called.’ If we follow this reading, the
sense of Moses will be, that Adam had been greatly deceived, in
promising *life* to himself and to his posterity, from a wife, whom he
afterwards found by experience to be the introducer of *death* . And
Moses (as we have seen) is accustomed, without preserving the order of
the history, to subjoin afterwards things which had been prior in point
of time. If, however we read the passage in the *preterite* tense, it
may be understood either in a good or bad sense. There are those who
think that Adam, animated by the hope of a more happy condition, because
God had promised that the head of the serpent should be wounded by the
seed of the woman, called her by a name implying life.’  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) This would be a noble and even heroic
fortitude of mind; since he could not, without an arduous and difficult
struggle, deem *her* the mother of the living, who, before any man could
have been born, had involved all in eternal destruction. But, because I
fear lest this conjecture should be weak, let the reader consider
whether Moses did not design rather to tax Adam with thoughtlessness,
who being himself immersed in death, yet gave to his wife so proud a
name. Nevertheless, I do not doubt that, when he heard the declaration
of God concerning the prolongation of life, he began again to breathe
and to take courage; and then, as one revived, he gave his wife a name
derived from *life* ; but it does not follow, that by a faith accordant
with the word of God, he triumphed, as he ought to have done, over
death. I therefore thus expound the passage; as soon as he had escaped
present death, being encouraged by a measure of consolation, he
celebrated that divine benefit which, beyond all expectation, he had
received, in the name he gave his wife.  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210)

<span id="ix.i-p190"></span><span id="ix.i-p190.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p191"></span>**21.** *Unto* *Adam* *also* *,* *and* *to*
*his* *wife* *,* *did* *the* *Lord* *God* *make* *,* *etc* . Moses here,
in a homely style, declares that the Lord had undertaken the labor of
making garments of skins for Adam and his wife. It is not indeed proper
so to understand his words, as if God had been a furrier, or a servant
to sew clothes. Now, it is not credible that skins should have been
presented to them by chance; but, since animals had before been destined
for their use, being now impelled by a new necessity, they put some to
death, in order to cover themselves with their skins, having been
divinely directed to adopt this counsel; therefore Moses calls God the
Author of it. The reason why the Lord clothed them with garments of skin
appears to me to be this: because garments formed of this material would
have a more degrading appearance than those made of linen or of woolen.
 <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) God therefore designed that our
first parents should, in such a dress, behold their own vileness, — just
as they had before seen it in their nudity, — and should thus be
reminded of their sin.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) In the
meantime, it is not to be denied, that he would propose to us an
example, by which he would accustom us to a frugal and inexpensive mode
of dress. And I wish those delicate persons would reflect on this, who
deem no ornament sufficiently attractive, unless it exceed in
magnificence. Not that every kind of ornament is to be expressly
condemned; but because when immoderate elegance and splendor is
carefully sought after, not only is that Master despised, who intended
clothing to be a sign of shame, but war is, in a certain sense, carried
on against nature.

<span id="ix.i-p195"></span><span id="ix.i-p195.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p196"></span>**22.** *Behold* *,* *the* *man* *is*
*become* *as* *one* *of* *us*  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213)
An ironical reproof, by which God would not only prick the heart of man,
but pierce it through and through. He does not, however, cruelly triumph
over the miserable and afflicted; but, according to the necessity of the
disease, applies a more violent remedy. For, though Adam was confounded
and astonished at his calamity, he yet did not so deeply reflect on its
cause as to become weary of his pride, that he might learn to embrace
true humility. We may add, that God inveighed, by this irony,  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) not more against Adam himself then
against his posterity, for the purpose of commending modesty to all
ages. The particle, “Behold,” denotes that the sentence is pronounced
upon the cause then in hand. And, truly, it was a sad and horrid
spectacle; that he, in whom recently the glory of the Divine image was
shining, should lie hidden under fetid skins to cover his own disgrace,
and that there should be more comeliness in a dead animal than in a
living man! The clause which is immediately added, “To know good and
evil,” describes the cause of so great misery, namely, that Adam, not
content with his condition, had tried to ascend higher than was lawful;
as if it had been said, ‘See now whither thy ambition and thy perverse
appetite for illicit knowledge have precipitated thee.’ Yet the Lord
does not even deign to hold converse with him, but contemptuously draws
him forth, for the sake of exposing him to greater infamy. Thus was it
necessary for his iron pride to be beaten down, that he might at length
descend into himself, and become more and more displeased with himself.

<span id="ix.i-p199"></span>*One* *of* *us* . Some refer the plural
number here used to the angels, as if God would make a distinction
between man, who is an earthly and despised animal, and celestial
beings; but this exposition seems farfetched. The meaning will be more
simple if thus resolved, ‘After this, Adam will be so like Me, that we
shall become companions for each other.’ The argument which Christians
draw from this passage for the doctrine of the three Persons in the
Godhead is, I fear, not sufficiently firm.  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) There is not, indeed, the same reason
for it as in the former passage, “Let us make man in our image,” since
here Adam is included in the word Us; but, in the other place, a certain
distinction in the essence of God is expressed.

<span id="ix.i-p201"></span>*And* *now* *,* *lest* *,* *etc* . There is
a defect in the sentence which I think ought to be thus supplied: ‘It
now remains that in future, he be debarred from the fruit of the tree of
life;’ for by these words Adam is admonished that the punishment to
which he is consigned shall not be that of a moment, or of a few days,
but that he shall always be an exile from a happy life. They are
mistaken who think this also to be an irony; as if God were denying that
the tree would prove advantageous to man, even though he might eat of
it; for he rather, by depriving him of the symbol, takes also away the
thing signified. We know what is the efficacy of sacraments; and it was
said above that the tree was given as a pledge of life. Wherefore, that
he might understand himself to be deprived of his former life, a solemn
excommunication is added; not that the Lord would cut him off from all
hope of salvation, but, by taking away what he had given, would cause
man to seek new assistance elsewhere. Now, there remained an expiation
in sacrifices, which might restore him to the life he had lost.
Previously, direct communication with God was the source of life to
Adam; but, from the moment in which he became alienated from God, it was
necessary that he should recover life by the death of Christ, by whose
life he then lived. It is indeed certain, that man would not have been
able, had he even devoured the whole tree, to enjoy life against the
will of God; but God, out of respect to his own institution, connects
life with the external sign, till the promise should be taken away from
it; for there never was any intrinsic efficacy in the tree; but God made
it life-giving, so far as he had sealed his grace to man in the use of
it, as, in truths he represents nothing to us with false signs, but
always speaks to us, as they say, with effect. In short, God resolved to
wrest out of the hands of man that which was the occasion or ground of
confidence, lest he should form for himself a vain hope of the
perpetuity of the life which he had lost.

<span id="ix.i-p202"></span><span id="ix.i-p202.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p203"></span>**23.** *Therefore* *the* *Lord* *God*
*sent* *him* *forth*  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) Here Moses
partly prosecutes what he had said concerning the punishment inflicted
on man, and partly celebrates the goodness of God, by which the rigour
of his judgment was mitigated. God mercifully softens the exile of Adam,
by still providing for him a remaining home on earth, and by assigning
to him a livelihood from the culture — although the labourious culture —
of the ground; for Adam thence infers that the Lord has some care for
him, which is a proof of paternal love. Moses, however, again speaks of
punishment, when he relates that man was expelled and that cherubim were
opposed with the blade of a turning sword,  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) which should prevent his entrance into
the garden. Moses says that the cherubim were placed in the eastern
region, on which side, indeed, access lay open to man, unless he had
been prohibited. It is added, to produce terror, that the sword was
turning or sharpened on both sides. Moses, however, uses a word derived
from *whiteness* or *heat*  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218)
Therefore, God having granted life to Adam, and having supplied him with
food, yet restricts the benefit, by causing some tokens of Divine wrath
to be always before his eyes, in order that he might frequently reflect
that he must pass through innumerable miseries, through temporal exile,
and through death itself, to the life from which he had fallen; for what
we have said must be remembered, that Adam was not so dejected as to be
left without hope of pardon. He was banished from that royal palace of
which he had been the lord, but he obtained elsewhere a place in which
he might dwell; he was bereft of his former delicacies, yet he was still
supplied with some kind of food; he was excommunicated from the tree of
life, but a new remedy was offered him in sacrifices. Some expound the
‘turning sword’ to mean one which does not always vibrate with its point
directed against man, but which sometimes shows the side of the blade,
for the purpose of giving place for repentance. But allegory is
unseasonable, when it was the determination of God altogether to exclude
man from the garden, that he might seek life elsewhere. As soon,
however, as the happy fertility and pleasantness of the place was
destroyed, the terror of the sword became superfluous. By cherubim, no
doubt, Moses means angels and in this accommodates himself to the
capacity of his own people. God had commanded two cherubim to be placed
at the ark of the covenant, which should overshadow its covering, with
their wings; therefore he is often said to sit between the cherubim.
That he would have angels depicted in this form, was doubtless granted
as an indulgence to the rudeness of that ancient people; for that age
needed puerile instructions, as Paul teaches, (<span
id="ix.i-p206.3"></span>[Ga 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003)<span
id="ix.i-p206.3"></span>;) and Moses borrowed thence the name which he
ascribed to angels, that he might accustom men to that kind of
revelation which he had received from God, and faithfully handed down;
for God designed, that what he knew would prove useful to the people,
should be revealed in the sanctuary. And certainly this method is to be
observed by us, in order that we, conscious of one own infirmity may not
attempt, without assistance, to soar to heaven; for otherwise it will
happen that, in the midst of our course, all our senses will fail. The
ladders and vehicles, then, were the sanctuary, the ark of the covenants
the altar, the table and its furniture. Moreover, I call them vehicles
and ladders, because symbols of this kind were by no means ordained that
the faithful might shut up God in a tabernacle as in a prison, or might
attach him to earthly elements; but that, being assisted by congruous
and apt means, they might themselves rise towards heaven. Thus David and
Hezekiah, truly endued with spiritual intelligence, were far from
entertaining those gross imaginations, which would fix God in a given
place. Still they do not scruple to call upon God, who sitteth or
dwelleth between the cherubim, in order that they may retain themselves
and others under the authority of the law.

<span id="ix.i-p207"></span>*Finally* , In this place angels are called
cherubim, for the same reason that the name of the *body of Christ* is
transferred to the sacred bread of the Lord’s Supper. With respect to
the etymology, the Hebrews themselves are not agreed. The most generally
received opinion is, that the first letter, <span
id="ix.i-p207.1"></span>כ ( *caf* ) is a servile letter, and a note of
similitude, and, therefore, that the word cherub is of the same force as
if it were said, ‘like a boy.’  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219)
But because Ezekiel, who applies the word in common to different
figures, is opposed to this signification; they think more rightly, in
my judgment, who declare it to be a general name. Nevertheless, that it
is referred to angels is more than sufficiently known. Whence also
Ezekiel (<span id="ix.i-p208.3"></span>[Eze
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#014)<span id="ix.i-p208.3"></span>)
signalizes the proud king of Tyre with this title, comparing him to a
chief angel.  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc01008.htm#fr_153) <span
id="ix.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p54"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p54.1"></span>Quasi non
accidentalis esset.” As if it had not been accidental, where the word
accidental is used in the sense of the schoolmen and logicians, as
opposed to the word essential. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc01008.htm#fr_154) <span
id="ix.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p56"></span> The reader will observe that Calvin is here
putting forward the argument of an objector. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc01008.htm#fr_155) <span
id="ix.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p57"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p57.1"></span>Mesme il luy a
preste le serpent.” — French Tr.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc01008.htm#fr_156) <span
id="ix.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p58"></span> On the intricate subject of Manichaeism, and
its various cognate heresies, the reader may refer to the Bampton
Lectures of the late Dr. Burton, who, with incredible erudition and
industry, has searched the records of ancient and modern times, and has
examined, with the greatest candor, the various conflicting sentiments
which have been entertained by learned men in reference to this
question. The fundamental error of Manes seems to have been, that, with
nearly all the Oriental philosophers of antiquity, he held the necessary
and independent existence of matter, which, in his view, was the origin
of all evil. — See Burton’s Bampton Lectures, p. 294; and Lardner’s
Credibility, etc. part 2, c. 63.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc01008.htm#fr_157) <span
id="ix.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p59"></span> Calvin’s Institutes, Book III c. 1 Vol. 2,
p. 73, of the Calvin Society’s edition.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc01008.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ix.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p62"></span> “Being under a final and irreversible doom,
he looked on God as an irreconcileable enemy; and, not being able to
injure his essence, he struck at his image. He singled out Adam as the
mark of his malice, that by seducing him from his duty, he might defeat
God’s design, which was to be honored by man’s obedience, and so obscure
his glory, as if he had made man in vain.” — Bates’ Harmony of the
Divine Attributes.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc01008.htm#fr_159) <span
id="ix.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p64"></span> <span id="ix.i-p64.1"></span>יכ ףא, “<span
id="ix.i-p64.2"></span>Hebraeis tantundem valet interdum ac Latinis,
Etiamsi, vel enimvero; interdum, quanto magis.”

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc01008.htm#fr_160) <span
id="ix.i-p64.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p65"></span> See the Chaldee paraphrase in Walton’s
Polyglott. The Latin translation is as follows: “<span
id="ix.i-p65.1"></span>Verumne est quod dixit Deus, non comedatis ex
omni arbore horti?” Gesenius gives the same explanation: “<span
id="ix.i-p65.2"></span>Solte denn das wahr seyn, dass Gott gesagt
haette?” “Can it be true, that God has said?” etc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc01008.htm#fr_161) <span
id="ix.i-p65.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p66"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p66.1"></span>Cur praecepit
vobis Deus,” etc. — *Vulgate*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc01008.htm#fr_162) <span
id="ix.i-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p67"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p67.1"></span>Vertendum
censeo, Etiamne, vel Itane?”

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc01008.htm#fr_163) <span
id="ix.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p69"></span> “Neither shall ye touch it.” “The woman
herself adds this, which certainly in the divine law we are not
permitted to do.” — Peter Martyr’s Commentary on Genesis.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc01008.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ix.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p70"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p70.1"></span>Ne forte
moriamini,” lest perhaps ye may die.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc01008.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ix.i-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p71"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p71.1"></span>Moriendo
moriemini.” <span id="ix.i-p71.2"></span>תומת תומ. ( *Mot tamoot* .)

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc01008.htm#fr_166) <span
id="ix.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p76"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p76.1"></span>Sumpta a
contraria ratione.”

<span id="ix.i-p77"></span>The meaning of the passage seems to be this:
Satan had first said in plain terms, “Ye shall not surely die;” and
then, to confirm his position, had argued that, supposing God had
forbidden the tree, he must have done it out of envy, lest he should be
compelled to raise them to an equality with himself, and therefore on no
possible supposition had they any ground to fear; for they had only to
eat in order to be beyond the reach of his vengeance. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc01008.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ix.i-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p82"></span> So our great Poet: —

<span id="ix.i-p83"></span>He scrupled not to eat  
Against his better knowledge, not deceived,  
But fondly overcome with female charm.  
Paradise Lost, Book IX

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc01008.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ix.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p87"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p87.1"></span>Per
infidelitatem.”

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc01008.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ix.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p89"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p89.1"></span>Scatere,” send
forth as from a fountain.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc01008.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ix.i-p89.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p90"></span> Calvin’s Institutes, Book II, chap. 1, 2, 3.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc01008.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ix.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p91"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p91.1"></span>Merito in
peccatum rejicimus.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc01008.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ix.i-p91.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p92"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p92.1"></span>Peccato
annexus est reatus.”

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc01008.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ix.i-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p95"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p95.1"></span>Quod animae ex
traduce oriuntur.” — “<span id="ix.i-p95.2"></span>Que les ames
procedent de celle d’Adam.” That souls proceed from that of Adam. —
French Tr.

<span id="ix.i-p96"></span>It can be scarcely necessary to inform the
reader, that a controversy of some magnitude engaged the attention of
the learned, on the subject to which Calvin here alludes; namely,
whether the souls of men are, like their bodies, propagated by descent
from Adam, or whether they proceed immediately from God. The supposed
descent of the soul from Adam was said to be <span
id="ix.i-p96.1"></span>ex traduce, by traduction. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc01008.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ix.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p100"></span> To the question, ‘Why God did not create
man without a possibility of sinning’, Peter Martyr replies: “Because
such a state could not be suitable to the nature of any rational
creature; since the creature, as a creature, remains infirm and feeble;
whereas, also, he is not entirely one with the rule by which he is to be
directed, (otherwise he would be God, the chief good, and chief
rectitude,) it follows, that his nature may diverge from that rule. It
was, however, possible for grace to confirm him so that he should not
sin, which is believed to be the state of angels and of saints in
heaven. But that dignity or reward would not be so highly esteemed, if
this fallible and inconstant state of man had not preceded it.” — Peter
Martyr, in Gen., fol. 14. Tiguri, 1579. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc01008.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ix.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p102"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p102.1"></span>Ex foliis
perizomata.”

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc01008.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ix.i-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p103"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p103.1"></span>Imo si
nullus fucus suppetat, facimus tamen nobis delicias, et tridui oblivione
putamus nos bene esse tectos.”

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc01008.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ix.i-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p104"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p104.1"></span>Semimortua.”

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc01008.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ix.i-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p105"></span> What immediately follows is here given in
the original:  
“<span id="ix.i-p105.2"></span>Quaeritamen potest, si tota natura
peccati sordibus infecta est, cur tantum una in parte corporis
deformitas appareat. Neque enim faciem vel pectus operiunt Adam et Heva:
sed tantum pudenda quae vocamus. Hac occasione factum esse arbitror ut
vulgo non aliam vitae corruptelam agnoscerent quam in libidine venerea.
Atqui expendere debebant, non minorem fuisse in oculis et auribus
verecundiae causam, quam in parte genitali, quae peccato nondum foedata
erat: quum aures et oculi inquinassent Adam et Heva, et diabolo quasi
arma praebuissent. Sed Deo fuit satis, extare in corpore humano aliquam
pudendam notam, quae nos peccati commonefaciat.”

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc01008.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ix.i-p107.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p108"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p108.1"></span>Ad auram
post meridiem.” Vulgate.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc01008.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ix.i-p108.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p109"></span> <span id="ix.i-p109.1"></span>םויה חורל, (
*leruach hayom* ).

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc01008.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ix.i-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p110"></span> <span id="ix.i-p110.1"></span>Τὸ δειλινόν.
Sept.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc01008.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ix.i-p110.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p111"></span> This criticism, it is presumed, cannot be
maintained. It seems to derive no countenance whatever but from some
passages of Scripture, which speak of God as scattering his people to
the four winds of heaven. (See <span id="ix.i-p111.1"></span>[Jer
49:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#032)<span id="ix.i-p111.1"></span>,
and <span id="ix.i-p111.2"></span>[Jer
52:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#023)<span id="ix.i-p111.2"></span>.)
The common interpretation given in our version, “the cool of the day,”
as applied to evening, is supported by the highest authorities, such as
Cocceius, Schindler, Gesenius, and Lee. Le Clerc, however, adopts the
same interpretation as Calvin. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc01008.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ix.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p114"></span> <span id="ix.i-p114.1"></span>וגה ץע ךיתב.
( *Betok aitz haggan* .) “<span id="ix.i-p114.2"></span>In medio ligni
Paradisi.” — Vulgate. <span id="ix.i-p114.3"></span>Εν μέσω του ξύλου
του παραδείσου — Sept. Where the singular number is used in each case.
It may be translated, “in the midst of the wood of Paradise;” and wood
may be, as in English, used collectively for a number of trees, a
forest, or a thicket. Calvin, in his version, translates the clause,
“<span id="ix.i-p114.4"></span>in medio arborum horti.”

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc01008.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ix.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p117"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p117.1"></span>Ex
multiplici arborum complexu.”

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc01008.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ix.i-p117.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p118"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p118.1"></span>Vitam
Legis.” The life or power of the law. — See <span
id="ix.i-p118.2"></span>[Ro 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006)<span
id="ix.i-p118.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc01008.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ix.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p123"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p123.1"></span>Nisi quod de
arbore,” are the words which Calvin gives. The expression of the Vulgate
really is — “<span id="ix.i-p123.2"></span>Nisi quod ex ligno.” There is
no difference in the sense. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc01008.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ix.i-p123.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p124"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p124.1"></span>Nonne ex
ipsa arbore... comedisti?” as in our own version.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc01008.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ix.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p131"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p131.1"></span>Quare hoc
fecisti?” — *Vulgate*.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc01008.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ix.i-p131.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p132"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p132.1"></span>Quomodo hoc
fecisti?” <span id="ix.i-p132.2"></span>תישע תאז-המ

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc01008.htm#fr_190) <span
id="ix.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p138"></span> See Bishop Patrick’s Commentary.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc01008.htm#fr_191) <span
id="ix.i-p140.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p141"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p141.1"></span>Conteres
caput.” The version of the Vulgate is, “<span
id="ix.i-p141.2"></span>conteret caput.” But this does not affect the
validity of Calvin’s criticism, his object being to show the inpropriety
of translating the same Hebrew word by Latin words of such different
meaning as <span id="ix.i-p141.3"></span>contero and <span
id="ix.i-p141.4"></span>insidior. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc01008.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ix.i-p141.5"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p142"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p142.1"></span>Insidiaberis
calcaneo.”

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc01008.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ix.i-p142.4"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p143"></span> See Cocceius, Gesenius, and Professor Lee,
sub voce <span id="ix.i-p143.1"></span>ףוש. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc01008.htm#fr_194) <span
id="ix.i-p143.5"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p144"></span> There would appear greater force in
Calvin’s criticism if this had been the name given to the serpent in the
narrative of Moses. The word here used, however, is <span
id="ix.i-p144.1"></span>שחנ, ( *nachash* ,) which gives no countenance
to the supposed reference; besides, the word quoted by Calvin only
refers to a particular kind of serpent, not to the whole species. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc01008.htm#fr_195) <span
id="ix.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p146"></span> <span id="ix.i-p146.1"></span>*Anagogy*.
This word is inserted from the original for want of a more generally
intelligible term in our own language to express the author’s meaning.
It is from the Greek <span id="ix.i-p146.2"></span>Αναγωγή, which
signifies “a raising on high, especially elevation of the mind above
earthly things to abstract speculations, (in ecclesiastical writings,)
to the contemplation of the sublime truths and mysteries of Holy
Scripture.” The meaning of Calvin is, that there was an intentional
transition from the serpent to the spiritual being who made use of it. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc01008.htm#fr_196) <span
id="ix.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p148"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p148.1"></span>Et les
decoit en se masquant de la personne d’autruy.” — *French Trans*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc01008.htm#fr_197) <span
id="ix.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p150"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p150.1"></span>Ipsum
vulnerabit.”

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc01008.htm#fr_198) <span
id="ix.i-p150.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p151"></span> See the Vulgate. “<span
id="ix.i-p151.1"></span>Ipsa conteret,” — She shall bruise. The
following judicious note from Professor Lee’s Hebrew Lexicon confirms
the criticism of Calvin: — “The attempt that has been made gravely to
justify a blunder of the Vulgate, which here reads <span
id="ix.i-p151.2"></span>ipsa for <span id="ix.i-p151.3"></span>ipse, is
a melancholy proof of the great neglect of the study of Hebrew in this
country. Any one acquainted with the first elements of the grammar would
see that, to make the Vulgate correct, we must substitute <span
id="ix.i-p151.4"></span>רפושת for <span id="ix.i-p151.5"></span>ךפושי,
and <span id="ix.i-p151.6"></span>הנפושת for <span
id="ix.i-p151.7"></span>ונפושת,” — that is, both the form and the
affixes of the verb would require alteration, in order to accommodate
themselves to the change of gender. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc01008.htm#fr_199) <span
id="ix.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p153"></span> The judicious reader will hardly
acknowledge the reasoning of Calvin to be valid. The whole subject here
referred to is discussed with great learning and acuteness, as well as
with great force of language, by Bishop Horsley, in his second Sermon on
Peter <span id="ix.i-p153.1"></span>[1 Pet.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021)<span id="ix.i-p153.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc01008.htm#fr_200) <span
id="ix.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p158"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p158.1"></span>Quum dicit,
Multiplicabo dolores, complecitur quicquid molestiae sustinent mulieres,
ex quo gravidae esse incipiunt, fastidium cibi, deliquia, lassitudines,
aliaque innumera, usque dum ventum est ad partum, qui acerbissima
tormenta secum affert. Est enim credibile,” etc.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc01008.htm#fr_201) <span
id="ix.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p160"></span> The use of one word for another.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc01008.htm#fr_202) <span
id="ix.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p163"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p163.1"></span>In opere
tuo.” — *Vulgate* . The Septuagint makes the same mistake; <span
id="ix.i-p163.2"></span>Εν τοῖς ἕργοις σου. In thy works.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc01008.htm#fr_203) <span
id="ix.i-p163.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p164"></span> The <span id="ix.i-p164.1"></span>primum
mobile of ancient astronomy was held to be the ninth heaven, which
surrounded those of the fixed stars, planets, and the atmosphere, and
was regarded as the first mover of all the heavenly bodies. These bodies
were at that time supposed to be carried round the earth by this
powerful agent, while the earth itself remained as the center of the
system. The Newtonian philosophy put all such theories to flight. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc01008.htm#fr_204) <span
id="ix.i-p165.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p166"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p166.1"></span>Quod vertunt
dolorem.” In Calvin’s own text it is, “<span id="ix.i-p166.2"></span>In
labore“; in the Vulgate, “<span id="ix.i-p166.3"></span>In laboribus.”
Gesenius renders the word “<span id="ix.i-p166.4"></span>Saure Arbeit,”
severe labor. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc01008.htm#fr_205) <span
id="ix.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p173"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p173.1"></span>Sed etiam
dulci temperamento condiat.”

<span id="ix.i-p174"></span>“<span id="ix.i-p174.1"></span>Laquelle non
seulement appaise l’aigreur des douleurs, mais aussi leur donne saveur,
meslant le sucre parmi le vinaigre.” — Which not only relieves the
sourness of griefs, but also gives them savor, mixing sugar with the
vinegar. — French Trans.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc01008.htm#fr_206) <span
id="ix.i-p175.6"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p176"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p177"></span>*"*<span id="ix.i-p177.1"></span>*Post ignem
aetheria domo  
Subductum, macies et nova febrium  
Terris incubuit cohors;  
Semotique prius tarda necessitas  
Leti corripuit gradum.”* — *Hor. Carm. in. Lib. I.*

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc01008.htm#fr_207) <span
id="ix.i-p179.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p180"></span> “The punishments inflicted by God are the
remedies and the restraints of our vitiated nature.” — Peter Martyr, in
Genesis fol. 17.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc01008.htm#fr_208) <span
id="ix.i-p181.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p182"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p182.1"></span>Quasi ultima
linea.” “<span id="ix.i-p182.2"></span>Comme le bout.” — *French Trans*.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc01008.htm#fr_209) <span
id="ix.i-p187.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p188"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p188.1"></span>Vocasse eam
vivificam.”

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc01008.htm#fr_210) <span
id="ix.i-p188.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p189"></span> It is probable, however, that more than
this is here meant. The Hebrew word <span id="ix.i-p189.1"></span>הוח, (
*chavah* ,) Eve, is in the Septuagint rendered <span
id="ix.i-p189.2"></span>ζωή, *life* ; and, as Fagius observes, Adam
comforted himself in his wife, because he should, through Eve, produce a
posterity in which (as parents in their children) they should be
permanently victorious. — Pol. Syn. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc01008.htm#fr_211) <span
id="ix.i-p191.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p192"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p192.1"></span>Quia
\[vestes\] ex ea materia confectae, belluinum quiddam magis saperent,
quam linae vel laneae.”

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc01008.htm#fr_212) <span
id="ix.i-p192.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p193"></span> “As the prisoner, looking on his irons,
thinketh on his theft, so we, looking on our garments, should think on
our sins.” — *Trapp*.

<span id="ix.i-p194"></span>For an ample discussion of the reasons why a
more comprehensive view should be taken of this subject than Calvin here
adopts, the reader may turn to Dr. Magee’s learned “Discourses and
Dissertations on the Scriptural Doctrines of Atonement and Sacrifice;”
where he will see, that the origin of the clothing with skins was most
probably connected with a previous appointment of the sacrifice of
animals. — See *Magee*, note 52:— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc01008.htm#fr_213) <span
id="ix.i-p196.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p197"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p197.1"></span>Adam quasi
unus.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc01008.htm#fr_214) <span
id="ix.i-p197.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p198"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p198.1"></span>Hac
subsannatione.”

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc01008.htm#fr_215) <span
id="ix.i-p199.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p200"></span> Bishop Patrick, who contends for the
interpretation here opposed, says, “Like one of us. These words plainly
insinuate a plurality of Persons in the Godhead, and all other
explications of them seem forced and unnatural; that of Mr. Calvin’s
being as disagreeable to the Hebrew phrase as that of Socinus to the
excellency of the Divine nature.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc01008.htm#fr_216) <span
id="ix.i-p203.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p204"></span> <span id="ix.i-p204.1"></span>שרג, (
*gairesh* ,) to expel, drive out, or eject by force.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc01008.htm#fr_217) <span
id="ix.i-p204.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p205"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p205.1"></span>Cum lamina
gladii versatilis.” <span id="ix.i-p205.2"></span>ברחה טהל, ( *lahat
hacherab* .)

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc01008.htm#fr_218) <span
id="ix.i-p205.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p206"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p206.1"></span>A candore,
vel adore.”

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc01008.htm#fr_219) <span
id="ix.i-p207.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p208"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p208.1"></span>בורכ, (
*cherub* .) An image like a youth, which the Chaldeans call <span
id="ix.i-p208.2"></span>יבר, ( *rabia* .)” — *Schindler* . Other writers
give a different derivation, and consequently a different meaning to the
word. But Professor Lee says, “It would be idle to offer anything on the
etymology; nothing satisfactoroy having yet been discovered.” — See
Lexicon. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc01008.htm#fr_220) <span
id="ix.i-p208.4"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p209"></span> <span id="ix.i-p209.1"></span>Primario
angelo. It is clear that Ezekiel, in the chapter referred to, has both
the garden of Eden and the ark of the covenant in his view, when
speaking of the king of Tyre. Thus, in the 17th verse, it is said, “Thou
hast been in Eden, the garden of God;” and, in the next verse, “Thou art
the anointed cherub that acovereth;” (namely, that covereth the ark,)
“and I have set thee so; thou wast upon the holy mountain of God.” —
*Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc01009)
