[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml04)  [Next](tml06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

# INTRODUCTION

"Teutonic Myth and Legend" applies to the ancient religious conceptions
and traditional tales of the "non-Celtic" northern peoples, whom
Continental scholars prefer to call "Germanic" in the widest sense of
the term. The myths varied in different districts and at different
periods. It is doubtful if there ever was in any particular age complete
uniformity of religious belief over a wide area of separated States. In
fact, there are indications that sects and creeds were at least as
numerous among Teutonic peoples in early times as at the present day.
Stories repeated orally were also subject to change; they were
influenced by popular taste, and rendered more effective by the
introduction of local colouring.

Teutonic Mythology survives in its most concrete form in Scandinavian
literature. On that account it has to be considered from the northern
point of view, although much of it is clearly not of northern origin.
Our principal sources of knowledge of this great Pagan religious system
are the two Eddas of Iceland.

These Eddas are collections of mythical and heroic poems and stories.
One is called the Elder or Poetic Edda; the other, Snorri's or the Prose
Edda. The latter was discovered first; it came into the possession of
appreciative scholars in the seventeenth century, by whom it was studied
and carefully preserved.

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

The Prose Edda is a synopsis of Northern Mythology, with poetic
quotations from lost poems and references to an earlier work. It was
partly written and partly compiled by the great Icelandic scholar,
Snorri Sturlason. He was born some time between 1179 and 1181, and was
the son of a chief. Adopted by the learned Jon Loptsson, grandson of
Saemund the Wise, he passed his early years at Oddi, where his literary
tendencies were fostered and cultivated. He married a wealthy heiress,
and settled in 1206 at Reykjaholt, where he lived in comparative luxury.
Nominally a Christian, he was in reality an educated Pagan. He was a
poet and historian, a lawyer and a politician; he combined great
ambition with want of courage, and avarice with "aversion from effort";
he was also of loose morals. In 1215 he became President of Iceland, and
afterwards resided for a time in Norway, where he was a Court poet. In
1222 he was again President of his native island. He held office for
about ten years, and exercised his influence at every opportunity to
enrich himself. He obtained a divorce from his wife, after living with
her for twenty-five years, and married an heiress. It is not surprising,
therefore, to find him involved in serious quarrels with his kinsmen.
There were also political complications which had a tragic sequel. He
was murdered by his son-in-law in 1241, at the instigation of the King
of Norway.

In addition to the Prose Edda, Snorri's works included Heimskringla, or
Sagas of Norse Kings, which opens with Ynglinga Saga, and the History of
Olaf.

The discovery of Snorri's Edda in the seventeenth century caused a
search to be made for the older collection to which it referred. Happily
the quest was fruitful, and the lost manuscript came into the hands

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

of an Icelandic bishop, who called it for the first time the "Edda of
Saemund".

Saemund was a scion of the royal house of Norway, who was born in 1056
and died in 1133. He studied in France and Germany, and was afterwards
parish priest of Oddi in Iceland. According to tradition, he was the
author of a prose work on mythology which unfortunately perished. It is
probable, however, that Snorri was acquainted with the lost manuscript
while resident at Oddi, and he may have used it when compiling the Prose
Edda. At any rate, scholars are now agreed that Saemund was neither the
author nor compiler of the particular Edda which was long associated
with his name.

The Elder Edda is a collection of mythical and heroic poems--lays of the
gods and lays of the Volsung and other heroes--by various unknown
authors. They are valuable treasures of antiquity, for they throw great
light on northern beliefs and manners and customs. Some survive in
fragments; others are fairly complete, and are introduced by brief prose
summaries. A portion of them were evidently of pre-Christian origin.

As literary productions they are of unequal merit. They are all
ear-poems, composed to be sung or recited, and therefore melodious,
musically vowelled, and clear, as compared with the eye-poems of many
modern authors, which have more harmony than melody, and are composed
for the reader. A particular group of these Eddic poems are more
dramatic and imaginative than the others, and certain critics are
inclined to hold that their high development was caused by Celtic
influence. Iceland was peopled not only from Norway, but also from the
Hebrides, where the Vikings mingled with the people and married the
island maidens. Many

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

settlers were also of mixed Irish descent. Nor was the old English
element absent, as certain borrowed words show clearly. But, when these
facts are given adequate consideration, it must be borne in mind that
literature, and especially poetry, owes usually more to the individual
than to the race. If we knew as little of Keats as we do of the author
of *Beowulf*, it might be held that he was a son of Greek parents who
settled in England.

The survival of these Pagan Eddic poems in Christian times is suggestive
of the slow extinction of old beliefs. Christianity was adopted in
Iceland in 1000, a century after it had spread throughout Norway, and
two hundred years before the people of Sweden can be said to have
abandoned their ancient religion. It must not be inferred, however, that
the Icelanders were exemplary Christians in Saemund's day or even in
Snorri's. The bulk of them were, no doubt, half-Pagan, like those
Ross-shire Highlanders in the vicinity of Loch Maree, who, as late as
the seventeenth century, offered up sacrifices of bulls and performed
other heathenish rites, to the horror of the Presbytery of Dingwall. The
Icelanders must have clung, long after the introduction of Christianity,
to the Pagan beliefs and practices of the great sea kings. They
continued, we know, to chant the lays and recite the old traditional
tales about the gods and ocean heroes of the mother country. The
collectors may, indeed, have had more than a literary appreciation of
oral song and haunting tradition.

When Snorri was a boy, a Danish priest named Saxo was engaged writing a
history of his native land. The first nine books are like the *Histories
of the Kings of Britain* by Geoffrey of Monmouth, for they are founded
on the traditional poems and tales of the time. Saxo Grammaticus ("the
Lettered") writes of Odin and the

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

other gods as if they were men, and when he refers to them as "gods" he
takes occasion to scorn the hollowness of the claim, rarely failing to
comment on the absurdity of the beliefs entertained by ignorant people.
His history is a quarry of folklore and romance. To it we owe our
Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, for the story which is retold in these pages
from the Danish priest's immortal work, was the original source of our
great poet's inspiration.

This "history" is indispensable to students of Scandinavian religion.
Rydberg, the poet and folklorist of Sweden, is the author of a
monumental work on *Teutonic Mythology*, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) in which he made exhaustive and critical
examination of the tales embedded in Saxo's works, showing their
relation to the Eddas and Sagas and existing oral poems of the north,
and making masterly endeavour by their aid to reconstruct the great
mythological drama of the northern peoples. He has not escaped
criticism, but his reputation has withstood much of it. On every point
he has raised he cannot be regarded as conclusive, but no scholar before
or since has shown greater aptitude for restoring form from mythological
chaos. His intimate knowledge of his native lore gave him special
equipment for his work. Not infrequently scholars, by a process of
detached reasoning, miss the mark when dealing with folklore, because
their early years, unlike Rydberg's, were not passed in its strange
atmosphere. The theorist is never as reliable as he who was aforetime a
faithful believer in giants and elves, spirit voices and awesome omens.

"No one," wrote Frederick York Powell, <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)
"has

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

commented upon Saxo's mythology with such brilliancy, such minute
consideration, and such success as the Swedish scholar, Victor Rydberg.
. . . Sometimes he stumbles badly, but he has placed the whole subject
on a fresh footing, and much that is to follow will be drawn from his
*Teutonic Mythology*."

To Rydberg the writer owns his indebtedness in the present work, a
portion of which is constructed according to his conclusions.

Edda is a word of uncertain origin. In a twelfth-century poem it is used
to mean "great grandmother", and it is suggested that late sceptical
compilers applied it to signify "old wives' tales". The theory has a
somewhat modern note, for in legends, especially those of Scotland, the
"old wife" is either feared or respected. The Hag, who is the terrible
mother of giants, is called Cailleach Mor, "the big old wife", and the
wise witch who imparts secrets and powers to men is simply "old wife".

Edda became associated in Iceland with the technical rules of verse.
"Never to have seen Edda" signified a complete ignorance of poetic art,
so it may be that among a mingled people the "great grandmother" was an
imported Muse of a Matriarchal tribe. Saga, we know, was individualized
as a maiden, and was wooed by Odin. A recent theory <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) is that Edda is derived from "Oddi", the
place where Saemund preached and Snorri studied.

The Eddas are, of course, the collected folk-songs and folk-tales of the
northern peoples. In addition we have also available, for purposes of
study, other old manuscripts and a considerable mass of valuable lore
gleaned in recent years from oral sources, as well as the renowned
surviving Sagas and minor poems of the skalds (song-smiths), which
abound with mythological references.

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

Some folk-tales are fragments of forgotten mythologies; others are part
of the floating material from which mythologies were made. The two
classes should therefore be studied together for purposes of
elucidation, while consideration must ever be given to folk-customs
which also enshrine ancient religious beliefs. The gods evolved from
beliefs, and these loomed vast and vague on man's mental horizon ere
they were given definite and symbolic expression. Indeed, detached
stories of gods, especially Nature-gods, must have existed for
indefinite periods ere they were subjected to a unifying process and
embraced in a complete philosophy of life. A Mythology, therefore, must
not be regarded as a spontaneous creation of a particular Age, but
rather as a growth which had of necessity a history like, for instance,
the Art of a finely sculptured stone, or that of the shapely and
decorated Celtic bronze shield found embedded in Thames mud.

Matthew Arnold regarded poetry as a "criticism of life". That definition
may, in a restricted sense, be applied to a Mythology, especially one of
highly developed and complicated construction. We can conclude that it
evolved from a school of thought which made critical selection of
existing material when the work was undertaken of systematizing
religious beliefs to suit the needs of a particular Age. As religion and
law had in ancient times most intimate association, an official religion
was ever a necessity in a well-organized State, and especially in one
composed of mingled peoples. A Mythology, therefore, was probably the
product of a national movement, and closely connected with the process
of adjusting laws and uniting tribes under a central government. In the
union and classification of gods we have suggested the union of peoples
and the

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

probable political relations of one tribe with another. No deity could
be overlooked, if the interests of all sections were to be embraced,
because the destinies of each were controlled by a particular god or
group of gods of immemorial import. The gods of subject peoples would,
of course, become subject to those of their rulers.

A Mythology was therefore not only a criticism; it was also a
compromise. The lesser gods were accepted by those who imposed the
greater, and new tales had to be invented to adjust their relationships
one to another. Contradictory elements were thus introduced. The gods
differed greatly. Some had evolved from natural phenomena; others were
deified heroes. A seaside tribe showed reverence to gods which had
origin in their own particular experiences and ideals, which differed to
a marked degree from those, for instance, of an inland, forest-dwelling
people. Settled communities and nomadic peoples professed beliefs in
accordance with their particular modes of life. Between the various
classes of a single social organization, even, there would exist
religious conceptions which were fundamentally opposed. Invaders who
formed a military aristocracy would import and perpetuate their own
particular beliefs and rites, while those of the conquered people
continued as aforetime. Indeed, archæological remains demonstrate to the
full that different burial customs were practised simultaneously in the
same district, although each had origin in religious conceptions of
divergent character. Two examples may be cited--(1) the crouched burial
with food vessel, associated with the belief that the spirits of the
dead haunted the place of interment and had to be propitiated, and (2)
the cremation burial which ensured that the spirit, like that of
Patroklos, would never again return from Hades when it had received its
meed of fire

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*Iliad* xxiii.
75). In our northern tales there are evidences of various burial
customs. Balder is cremated in Asgard, but he is interred in a barrow in
the heroic story from Saxo. Beowulf and Sigurd are burned, Helgi is
given sepulture in a mound, and Sigmund and his son are enclosed in a
chambered grave when buried alive.

But while peoples who were mingled together practised different
religious rites, invaders ever showed reverence, as did the Romans, to
local gods and local beliefs. In the process of time one section would
be influenced by the other. A fusion of religions would result from a
fusion of peoples, but every district and every community would not be
similarly affected. The clash of ideas would also be productive of
speculative thought, and each Age would contribute something new from
its accumulated ideas and experiences. Yet in the midst of the mass of
floating lore there would ever survive beliefs of remote conception, for
a folk-religion is conservative in essence. A people's inherited
superstitions are not readily eradicated. The past endures in the
present. Even in our own day folk-beliefs and folk-customs of Pagan
origin have tardy survival after many long centuries of Christian
influence.

When, therefore, the thinkers and teachers of Scandinavia framed their
great Mythological system, they had to select and compromise; they were
not only critics but diplomatists as well. New tales had to be invented,
and old tales adjusted, to instruct and convert and unite all sections.
Social relationships were given a religious bearing; the gods of the
common people were shown to be subject to those of their rulers. All
outstanding popular beliefs had to be accounted for, with the result
that heroic tales were mingled with Nature myths, and the whole was
infused with ethical and political purpose.

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Mythology was
thus coloured by the thought of the times and the conditions and
character of the people, while it was given, of course, appropriate
setting amidst local scenery.

Northern Teutonic Mythology must have had gradual growth. It appears to
have attained its highest development in the Viking Age, when a united
and masterful people, stirred, no doubt by well-organized political
conditions, to a great awakening, spread far and wide to impose their
rule and their culture upon alien peoples. When earlier migrations took
place, amidst the battle storms of violent tribal fusion, the new
religious system was in process of formation. The Angles and Saxons, for
instance, were not greatly influenced by the Odin cult when they reached
these island shores. Their deified tribal heroes were still predominant.
That has been made abundantly clear by Stopford Brooke in his masterly
study, *History of Early English Literature*.

So far as we are able to reconstruct the Mythology--nor can we expect
complete agreement among the experts in this regard--it appears to have
been highly developed and adjusted to the minutest detail. The official
religion, of course, may not have been accepted in its completeness by
all classes; sections may have still clung to favoured deities, while
they recognized others unknown to their ancestors. Odin, we know, was
esteemed more highly by scholarly skalds than by fighting men, who
continued to exalt and worship Thor as chief or most influential god,
and to repose their trust in the magical influence exercised in battle
by the shadowy but ancient war-god Tyr. No doubt the teachers remained
the while serenely confident that ultimately the spirit-god would be
held in greater regard by thinking men than gods of physical might. But
the growth of

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

this great Pagan mythology was arrested by the gradual advance of
Christianity, and it is given popular reconstruction in these pages as
it possibly existed, especially ill the north, when the influence of the
new and greater religion coloured the Balder story, and the idea was
interpolated of a greater All-father than Odin. The Saxo stories are
drawn upon to fill gaps, although gaps may have ever existed. We may add
that we call the Mythology Northern Teutonic in preference to
"Germanic", because of its geographical setting, and for the pregnant
reason that it has survived mainly in the form given to it by the
mingled peoples of the North.

The local character of this particular mythological system is strongly
emphasized in "the story of creation". Only a Northern people living in
close proximity to Arctic ice-fields could have conceived of a
chaos-gulf bounded on the north by a cold and darksome Nifelheim, and on
the south by a warm and bright Muspelheim. Life begins to be when and
where the ice-blocks are thawed. The gods and their doings are also
coloured by their Scandinavian environment. "Light -battles" and fierce
Nature-wars are emphasized in a land of pronounced seasonal changes. No
matter whence certain deities; were imported, here in the land of long
winter nights they are acclimatized and naturalized. They contend
against indigenous frost-giants; they fight and then become the allies
of indigenous Vana-gods; they visit a sea-folk's terrible storm-god Æger
in his hall at the sea bottom; they acquire northern temperaments and
become fatalists like all seafarers, ancient and modern.

Teutonic gloom overspreads Teutonic Mythology. Odin and his Asa clan
live ever under the shadow of Ragnarok, "The Dusk of the gods". This
gloom hangs heavily as northern storm-clouds over early "Teutonic"

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

literature. It haunts the Eddas and Sagas; it permeates Anglo-Saxon
poetry. Dr. Clark Hall says of *Beowulf*, "There is undoubtedly less
colour about the second part than the first, and more gloom. The habit
of foreboding which is noticeable in Part I is so prominent in Part II
as to give a general tone of fatalistic hopelessness to it. Sunshine and
shadow no longer alternate shadow is over all." The same comment might
be applied with equal force to the Nibelungenlied. Although "gloomy" and
"Celtic" have become synonymous terms of late years, yet Celtic (Irish)
Mythology and old Gaelic literature both in Scotland and in Ireland
strike, in comparison with what is termed Teutonic, a brighter and more
cheerful note. It may be that the gloom is aboriginal--pre-Celtic and
pre-Teutonic--a shadow of primitive but persistent mental habits.

In Teutonic Mythology, as in Greek, there are evidences of remote
race-memories. The Asiatic "broad-heads" who crossed Europe in "waves",
which began to arrive in the vast periods of the late Stone Age, must
have imported not only new customs and new weapons, but also fragments
of immemorial myths. Superstitions survive longer than stone monuments,
and they pass through language to language, and from land to land, with
the buoyancy of American timber which drifts across the Atlantic to
Hebridean shores. An instance may be noted in the northern "Story of
Creation". The body of Ymer, the chaos-giant, is cut to pieces; his
flesh and bones become soil and rocks; his skull is the sky dome; his
progeny is engulfed in his blood, which is the sea. Babylonian tablets
relate a similar story. In the beginning Bel-Merodach slew the
chaos-giantess Tiawath; he cut up her body, and with one part he framed
the earth and with the other the heavens. Her blood was forced

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

to flow southward by a strong north wind--it became the river which
filled the sea.

Comparisons may also be drawn between Teutonic and Greek Mythologies.
But these will be found to be of slighter character. Those elements,
common to both, which are not Asiatic may be of early Mediterranean
origin, for as ancient cities lie below ancient cities) so do ancient
mythologies rest upon the wrecks of others of still greater antiquity.
As Jubainville has shown in *Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais et la
Mythologie Celtique*, Greek and Celtic are closely related and mainly of
common origin. They are children of one mother; but Scandinavian
Mythology cannot be regarded as other than a distant relation.

In all three Mythologies there is a central Nature-myth tragedy. In
Greek it is the slaying of Night by Dawn. Hermes, surnamed Argeiphontes,
in his character as Dawn-god, slays Argus, the many-eyed, who is Night,
with a round stone, which is the Sun. In Celtic (Irish) Mythology the
Dawn-god, Lugh, kills Balor of the Evil-eye, who is Night, with the same
round sun-stone. The myth also applies to the slaying of Winter by
Summer and of Evil by Good. The tragedy of Scandinavian Mythology, on
the other hand, is the slaying of Day (or Summer) by Night (or Winter).
Blind Hoder shoots Balder (in his Edda character as Summer Sun-god) with
the wintry mistletoe-arrow. He is prompted by Loke, the Scandinavian
Mephistopheles, who plots to hasten the downfall of the gods. Light is
thus overcome by Darkness, Summer by Winter, and Good by Evil.

Another broad and fundamental contrast is afforded by the conceptions of
Night in the Northern and other European Mythologies. Instead of the
tyrannical Balor of Ireland, or the monstrous Argus of Greece, we have

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

the beneficent northern Night-goddess Nat, daughter of Mimer (Wisdom)
and sister of Urd (Fate). She brings to mankind refreshment and
inspiration. Her lover is Delling, the red elf of dawn, and their son is
Dag (Day).

Nat is evidently of eastern origin. In the Rig-veda the goddess of night
(dark daughter of day) is, like Nat, both noble of aspect and character;
she "increases riches". In the tenth Mandala she is thus addressed:--

Kind goddess, be propitious to thy servants  
Who at thy coming straightway seek repose.  
   .       .       .       .       .       .  
Drive thou away from us, O Night, the wolf,  
Drive thou away the thief, and bear us safely  
Across thy borders. . . .

In Teutonic Mythology, Evil is not necessarily associated with Darkness.
The tempter and plotter is handsome Loke in his character as a fire-god;
he is evidently an ally of Surtur, who burns up the world at Ragnarok.
Loke is corrupted by the Hag of Ironwood, the "Mother of Evil", whose
evil progeny includes the fierce wolves--one of which swallows the moon,
while the other devours Odin--the great Midgard Serpent, and the
repulsive, torture-loving Hel. Her Babylonian counterpart is Tiawath,
among whose offspring are immense serpents, fiery dragons, raging
hounds, fish-men, &c. The Northern Hag's husband, Gymer, is keeper of
her flock, as is also the husband, Kingu, of Tiawath's.

The World, according to northern belief, is supported by a great tree
which is ever green. This conception is not peculiar to Scandinavia, but
nowhere else is an ash-tree similarly exalted in dignity. At its roots
are three wells, and in one is a gnawing dragon or serpent. The gods
dwell under its branches; they sit in judgment upon the dead beneath the
ash in the Underworld. It

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

trembles when Ragnarok is at hand; it is the oracle. Evidently the
worship of trees and wells was so prevalent in the north, that no more
popular idea could be conceived than that of a tree-supported universe.
Even in our own day the superstitious reverence shown for
"wishing-wells" is not uncommon, and the trees connected with them still
flutter with prayer-rags. In Celtic Mythology, Dagda, the oak-god, has
for wife Boann, the River Boyne. The well at the river source is one of
the many celebrated in dragon-myth story. Finn Magnusen would have us
regard "the world-tree" as the symbol of universal nature, but it was
more probably a concession to popular belief, and dignified to accord
with the general mythological scheme.

Odin would appear to have been originally an isolated tribal god--a
deified martial chief, who became associated with a Nature Myth. He is a
war-god and a magician; he controls battles and is the inventor of
runes; he hangs on the world-ash, which bears one of his names, "Ygg's
gallows" (Ygdrasil), as if he were, as he probably was, a king who was
sacrificed. Yet his universal character is emphasized by his sky-dome
hat and sky cloak flecked with cloud-spots. He is a one-eyed giant, a
Cyclops; his lost eye sinks in Mimer's well as the sun sinks in the sea.
He is also the wind-god--the Wild Huntsman in the Raging Host. As
wind-god he is the "spirit-god" in accordance with the widespread
association of "wind" and "breath" and "soul" (spirit, for in stance, is
derived from *spiro*, I breathe). He gives "soul" to the logs of ash and
alder which become the first man and the first woman. He is All-father,
the framer of the world. Odin was probably exalted, because he was the
spirit-god, by the wise men of Scandinavia, and made chief ruler in
their Asgard, but his connection with the

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

other gods is slight and arbitrary. Thor, his son, was originally an
oak-god, and, like Jupiter, is wielder of the thunderbolt. It is,
however, in keeping with the sublime character of Northern Teutonic
Mythology that the "spirit-god" should be supreme, and the constant
friend of his kinsman Mimer (Wisdom), whose daughter is Urd (Fate).

The giant stories were constructed on a lower plane of thought. A single
exception is Thor's adventure in the palace of Utgard-Loki, where he
wrestles in vain with the Hag, who is Old Age, and endeavours to drink
up the ocean. The mythical interpretations of the others cannot be
pressed too closely, lest more be read into them than was ever intended.
It is evident that the reciter's imagination was allowed to run riot,
and that the narratives assumed their extended form as popular
wonder-tales.

When the tribal heroes of northern peoples were glorified by
story-tellers, they were invariably depicted as giant-killers. In the
half-mythical history of Geoffrey of Monmouth, Corineus contended
successfully against the giants of Cornwall--he slew them in dozens--and
after wrestling with the greatest, Goemagot, he cast him over a cliff.
Siegfried, in the Nibelungenlied, and Dietrich, in his Thunor (Thor)
character, are also slayers of giants. In Highland giant-lore there are
several similar heroes who, like Thor, are friends of the agricultural
people. The hunting-folks had their own hunting-giants, like the
Highland Finn and his warrior band, who are not militiamen as in
Ireland.

It has been remarked that the Northern Teutonic frost-giants are
indigenous. But there is another class of giants who are as widely
scattered as the drinking-cup urns of the ancient and mysterious people
that settled

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

in the fertile districts of these islands and of Scandinavia, and have
been traced through mid-Europe. These are the Mountain -giants. In the
neglected archaic lore of Scotland they are called Fomors <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md), but they are not the Fomors of Ireland, nor
have they a necessary connection with the sea or with darkness. As
river-goddesses in flight are personifications of rivers, so do these
Fomors personify the hills they inhabit. Scottish mountain-giants never
leave their mountains. They fight continuously one against the other,
tossing boulders over wide valleys or arms of the sea. To each is
allowed one throw daily: A flings his boulder against B on Monday; B
retaliates on Tuesday, and so on. The Holmgang duel would therefore
appear to be of hallowed antiquity. These giants sleep at night and
share men's terrors in darkness. Three friendly Inverness giants throw
from one to the other, each morning, a stone hammer to signify that all
is well. Greater than the males are their mothers, the Hags <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md), who also fight with boulders, but have
power to change their shapes. There are also Thunder-cloud hags who
throw fireballs, tempest-hags, firebrand-hags, sea-hags, &c. They
invariably wrestle with human beings like the giants of Cornwall.

Another class of Scottish giants inhabit caves, and some of them are
many-headed. They hoard and guard treasure. Heroes who fight against
them are invariably assisted by dogs (dogs "which have their day"), and
they are instructed by indispensable wise women <span
id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5.md) who possess magic wands. What appears to be
the oldest Thor story belongs to this class. When Thor sets out to visit
Geirrod

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

he has neither hammer nor belt of strength. The Hag Grid, like the
Scottish "wise-woman", warns and instructs him, and gives him her belt
and magic wand. In this story Thor flings a boulder and breaks the back
of a giantess. He may have wielded thunder-boulders ere his iron hammer
was invented.

Scottish giants, therefore, are more like the Scandinavian than the
Irish variety. If it is held that they were imported by the Vikings, it
might be asked why Thor was forgotten, and why the Asa-gods and the Vans
were left behind? If they are classed as Irish, it should be noted that
the Danann gods, who overcame the Fomors in Erin, are not found in
Scotland. Call it be maintained that the Irish brought over their "gods
of Night" and left behind their "gods of Day"? In Wales and Cornwall
there are also giants of the Scottish type. Geoffrey of Monmouth, in
fact, tells us that giants were the sole inhabitants of ancient Britain
when Brute and the first men arrived.

Beyond the realms of Gaul, beneath the sunset  
Lieth an island, girt about by ocean,  
Guarded by ocean--*erst the haunt of giants*. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)  
                                            *S. Evans's Trans*.

It would appear that archaic giant-lore is pre-Celtic and pre-Teutonic,
and therefore a common inheritance. In the wars of the Olympians and
Titans, of the Irish Danann gods and the Fomors, and of the Asa-gods and
the Jotuns, we may have echoes of ancient racial conflicts. The old
tribal peoples attributed their successes to their gods, and remembered
their battles as the battles of rival gods. For these giants are also
gods of archaic conception. In Scotland certain of them are associated
with the fortunes of families and tribes. On the other hand, gods

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

are but exalted giants; the boisterous Olympians find their counterpart
in the boisterous Scandinavian Jotuns rather than in the more refined
Asa-gods and Vans.

With these giants are associated the elves. In Teutonic lore, which is
not necessarily wholly of Teutonic origin, the male elves predominate.
In Scotland, as in Greece, elves are mainly females, who are ruled over
by a queen. There are also Scottish fairy-smiths, but they are one-eyed
and Cyclopean, and not always distinguishable from giants. In fact, the
Fian-giants are confused with fairies in ail Inverness mound, and Thomas
the Rhymer is added in the character of one of the "Seven Sleepers".
Danann gods and fairies are similarly mingled in Ireland. It should be
noted in this connection that Teutonic elf-smiths are allies of the
giants, and they are sometimes stronger than them. When Siegfried
overcame the giant doorkeeper of Nibelung, he found that the dwarf was a
still more powerful opponent. Thor is friendly with the elves, but
Svipdag, son of Egil, the elf, destroys the thunder-god's hammer with
the "Sword of Victory".

The other class of elves--the "Light-elves"--are vaguely defined in
Northern Teutonic Mythology. Frey was their ruler in his youth, which
suggests that he is himself an elf exalted to a god. The wise Vans are
also elfin in character, and were probably the spirit-folk of ail early
seafaring people. The story of the unhappy marriage of Njord and Skade
may contain a germ of historic fact-the uncongenial association of a
tribe of seafarers with a tribe of huntsmen.

The female elves of the commoner type become valkyries; they are also
swan-maidens who have tragic liaisons with mankind. Brynhild is a
swan-maiden and a valkyrie; she is also in the Nibelungenlied a boulder

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

throwing hag. The Balder story, regarding which much has been written,
is not, therefore, the only one that underwent radical changes in the
process of Mythology-making. According to Professor Frazer in the
*Golden Bough*, Balder was originally a tree-god whose soul was in the
mistletoe. The theory is as weighty as is the reputation of that Darwin
of folklore.

But perhaps the most interesting class of elves are the sons of
Ivalde--Volund and his brothers. They display the attributes now of
dwarfs, now of giants, and anon of star deities. It would appear that
they absorbed more than one ancient personality in an older Mythology
than that in which the Odin cult predominates. Rydberg shows that Volund
(Wieland) and the giant Thjasse are indistinguishable. A close study of
northern folklore supports that view, and an intimate acquaintance with
the mental habits of fairy-and-giant-believing people assists one to
appreciate it fully. Thjasse is the only giant who is winged like
Volund, as Loke and Freyja are the only members of the Asa-clan who can
assume bird guise. Thjasse and Volund are also symbolized as mountain
wolves; they are both star deities; they are more like one another than
the two Balders, and appear to be products of the same ancient welded
lore of an earlier mythological system.

In the Northern "Story of Creation" these elves, or black dwarfs, are,
it is evident, intentionally belittled. They have their origin, like
maggots, in Ymer's flesh. Yet they provide the gods with indispensable
gifts--Odin with his spear, Thor with his hammer, and Frey with his boar
and wondrous ship. In Thjasse's flight to Asgard we may have a story
invented purposely to account for his fall, because, like Odin, he is a
spirit-god. His other names, Byrr and Gustr, signify wind and gale.

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

It is not possible now to reconstruct what appears to be a pre-Odin-cult
Mythology, in which Ivalde and his sons predominate. The "Milky Way" is
"Irmin's Way", and Irmin, invoked by old Hildebrand in the Dietrich
story, is "the ruling god It is also Bil's way (Bil is Ivalde's
daughter), and as "Bil-rost", according to Rydberg, is the original of
Bif-rost. The Anglo-Saxons called the "Milky Way" "Watling
Street". <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md)

Volund's brother Egil, the archer, is associated with the clouds and the
sea. Sleet and rain are his arrows; his arrows are also "herrings that
leap from the hands of Egil", and herrings are "arrows of the
sea". <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md) Egil's son, the Iceland Hamlet,
is the guardian of the World-Mill; his son Svipdag, with shining sword,
resembles a light-hero.

In the older moon-myth Gevar, the Gewar of the Hother-Balder story, is
the ward of the moon-ship, and it is attacked and burned by Ivalde. The
myth is obscure but suggestive; it survives in fragments only. The
swan-maids are wooed by Ivalde's three sons, and Ivalde and Gevar have
quarrelled violently as rival lovers.

This group are hunters, skee-runners, and musicians. They are also
connected with an early form of the Balder story. Svipdag, as Hotherus,
is the wooer of Gevar's daughter Nanna, and Balder, his rival, falls a
victim to his "magic sword" in the heroic story in Saxo. If Balder, as a
tree-god, was associated with the tree-well, he may have wooed Nanna of
the moon by reflecting her image. In this connection it may be noted
that wells sprang up in the hoof marks of Balder's horse,

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

and in Saxo's story he provides wells for his thirsting soldiers. His
rival would thus be the light-hero Svipdag, with his shining summer
sword, which was concealed for a season in the Underworld cave where lie
the Seasonal "Seven Sleepers". In Northern Teutonic Mythology the
popular Balder becomes the Summer Sun-god. instead of Svipdag, and the
only husband of Nanna. If the original story was thus transformed by
displacing or changing a hero, the process is a familiar one. The
shadowy Hoder may be the original rival lover altered to fit into the
new mythological system.

It is to this group of ancient tales of rival lovers and swan-maids and
moon-maids that we owe the treasures of Middle Age popular romance. The
Volsunga-saga and the Nibelungenlied and the Balder heroic story were
developed from what Rydberg calls the "Ivalde myth". Svipdag, too, is
the original of Siegfried and Sigurd. In his character as a wronged son
he suggests Hamlet and Finn-mac-Coul. The latter has a hammer (Ord na
Feinne) which links him with Thor, as Thor links with the other
giant-killers-Sigurd, Siegfried, and Dietrich. A tribal hero invariably
absorbs the attributes of his predecessors, and develops and changes to
suit the tastes of audiences and minstrels in various ages and in
various countries. In Scandinavia, when the Asa-gods were threatened by
the advance of Christianity, Svipdag, as Eric, was exalted as a rival to
Christ, and suffered the fate of being associated with the Devil, who
was afterwards called "old Erik". Odin was similarly treated; as Nik he
became "the old Nick" of Perdition. Finn-mac-Coul was also pictured by
early Christian missionaries as an inhabitant of "the lower regions."

The Beowulf story is an interesting link between the

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

heroic lore of the northern Continental peoples and that of the early
Britons. Beowulf, like Dietrich, may have been a historical personage,
but in the poem he is a hero of the Svipdag order, yet not necessarily a
"light-hero". He slays the warrior-devouring Grendel. Dietrich, in one
of the poems of his cycle, also rids the neighbourhood of Attila's court
of a man-eating monster. In the next part of *Beowulf*, which is
evidently an addition, whether by the same author or another it matters
not here, the hero slays Grendel's mother. Although the poet suggests
that she is less formidable than her son, she proves to be a more
ferocious opponent. Only by the familiar "magic sword" can she be slain.
In this respect she resembles Hilde, the wife of Grim, in the Dietrich
story; but she bears a closer resemblance to the British Hag, the mother
of the giants. Finn-mac-Coul, when in "The Kingdom of Big Men," had
similarly, after slaying sea-giants, to contend against the terrible
Sea-Hag-mother. There are several similar stories in Highland
giant-lore, and no doubt they were prevalent at one time throughout
Britain, especially among members or descendants of the Matriarchal
tribes referred to by Cæsar.

Stopford Brooke, in his *History of Early English Literature*, "wonders
if the Grendel tale may not be a Celtic story which in very ancient
times became Teutonic," and quotes the close Icelandic parallel, the
Glam story. "It is a curious question," he says, "how it came to pass
that the story of Beowulf and Grendel did not, like the other Sagas of
the north, become a part of the north German cycle of romance. . . . I
have sometimes thought that the Angles alone threw the myths and tales
of it into lays, and that when the whole body of them emigrated to our
island, they left the Continent naked

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

of the tale. . . . I conjecture that something broke the literary
connection on the Continent, or that the story was developed only when
the Angles got into Britain." The latter supposition, considered in the
light of existing Scottish giant-lore, which was evidently at one time
general in ancient Britain, is the more convincing of the two. The
theory of a complete and wholesale Anglian migration is as improbable as
the theory of a complete and wholesale extermination of the early
Britons, which, although still surviving, has really no reliable basis.
Dr. Clark Hall, the scholarly translator and editor of *Beowulf*,
accepts the hero as "a thoroughly historical character". So was Dietrich
as the Emperor Theodoric. But while, like Stopford Brooke and other
rationalistic critics, he dismisses the solar-myth theory, he errs, we
think, in the opposite direction. He says: "Is it not possible that
besides performing many heroic deeds in war against ordinary mortals,
our hero (Beowulf) had two or three mysterious encounters with wild
beasts, which grew into our Grendel and dragon stories by the process of
exaggeration. . . . I have myself heard, in the nineteenth century, from
the lips of an ancient mariner, a passably truthful and not very
imaginative man, an amazing yarn about a sea serpent which I have no
doubt had some foundation in fact." <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md)

To the audiences who heard the *Beowulf* poem sung, Grendel was as real
as the hero; and no doubt there were, in those ancient days, many
similar tales which perished because no great poet enshrined them in
enduring verse.

It is believed by scholars that *Beowulf* was composed in the early part
of the eighth century. Whether it was the work of one man or of several
is a disputed point.

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There appears,
however, to be general agreement that it is of Pagan origin, and that
the Christian references are interpolations. The only surviving
manuscript, which is in the handwriting of two copyists, is preserved in
the British Museum. "There are clear indications," says Dr. Clark Hall,
"that the poem was originally composed in the Anglian (probably Mercian)
dialect, but it has come down to us in West Saxon, with some Kentish
forms, in the part copied by the second scribe."

Scattered through the poem are older stories told by the minstrels,
including the myths of Scyld and Hermod and the ancient Sigmund story,
which found its highest artistic development in the Volsunga-saga and
Nibelungenlied. Reference has already been made to the theory that
certain lays of the Elder Edda show traces of British influence. Those
students who desire to have fuller knowledge of the literature,
mythology, and history of our mingled ancestors may examine with profit
the conjectures of the various scholars, including Schwartz, Frazer,
Bugge, Stopford Brooke, York Powell, Vigfusson, and others.

The Nibelungenlied, or "Lay of the Nibelung", dates in its united form
from the latter part of the twelfth century, and is supposed to be, as a
poem, of Austrian or Tyrolese origin; but on this point there is no
generally accepted opinion. The versification is in Middle High German.
There is a large number of existing old manuscripts. The three most
important were made by copyists in the thirteenth century. When the
oldest of these was discovered in 1755, it was published by a Swiss
scholar. Other manuscripts were subsequently brought to light, but the
first complete published edition did not attract much attention. In

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

fact, Frederick the Great, to whom it was dedicated, refused to have it
in his library, and said it was hardly worth a charge of powder. To-day
it is the pride of the Fatherland.

It is evident that the Sigurd and Siegfried stories had a common origin
in an ancient nature myth of which the Svipdag legend is an early form.
The stories developed as popular stories; their mythological
significance was forgotten, and, in course of time, historical
personages were identified with certain of the characters. Other
legends, like those of Helgi in the Norse version, and of Dietrich in
the German, were also attached to the original plot. Both great Sagas
were coloured by the civilizations in which they developed.

How floating myths and legends gathered round the memory of a popular
hero is clearly shown in the lays of the Dietrich cycle. Dietrich Von
Bern is Theoderic the Great. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md)
Although he was born two years after the death of Attila, Emperor of the
Huns, he is found at his Court in the Nibelungenlied. Ermenerich
(Hermanric) was Emperor of the Ostrogoths, and, when an old man, his
dominions were overrun by fiery and savage Huns from Asia. He is
believed to have died on the battlefield, where his power was shattered
(about 374 A.D.). The Ostrogoths were subject to the Huns until Attila's
death in 453 A.D. King Walamer defeated them in a great battle in 454
A.D., and once again the Ostrogoths were made independent. The king's
two brothers were Theudemir, father of Theoderic (Dietrich) and Widemer,
and they were subsidized from Rome for protecting the frontiers of the
Eastern Empire. When payment was suddenly discontinued, Illyria was
successfully invaded by Widemer, with the result that the treat), was
renewed. Theoderic

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

was taken as a peace hostage to Constantinople, where he resided for ten
years and received a Roman education. Theudemir succeeded his brother,
and when he died, Theoderic ruled the wandering Ostrogoths.

In 480 A.D. Odoacer, a German captain of mercenaries, deposed Romulus
Augustulus, the last of the Western Emperors, who was but a boy of
seventeen. Eight years later Zeno, the Eastern Emperor, commissioned
Theoderic to invade Italy. Odoacer was overthrown, and our Dietrich of
the legends became a great and powerful king in Rome, owing nominal
allegiance to the Eastern Emperor. He died in 526, and was buried in a
great marble tomb at Ravenna. A fine statue of him, clad in full armour,
may be seen in the church of the Franciscans at Innsbruck.

In the Dietrich story Ermenerich is confused with Odoacer, and the hero
is depicted as an exile, and thus identified with his father. A mass of
floating legends attached to the memory of Dietrich, including the
Hildebrand story, which originated in the ancient and world-wide
father-and-son conflict theme, and the myths of Thunor (Thor) the
thunder-god, the slayer of giants and dwarfs. But even Thor has his
human side. He may have been originally a tribal hero who was identified
both with an oak-deity and the central figure of a Nature-myth. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) He remains "the friend of man" even when
elevated to Asgard. All the heroes of the minstrels of Europe link one
with another as the fictional descendants of an ancient deified
personage, or a

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

humanized deity, of a remoter and simpler mythology than that in which
Odin is the chief ruler.

One of the most interesting problems associated with Teutonic Mythology
refers to the story of the "Seven Sleepers". Mimer's seven sons lie in
magic sleep in the Underworld, awaiting the blast of the horn at
Ragnarok. This horn hangs in a cave. Thorkill, who visited Geirrod's
domains with King Gorm and his company, saw the suspended horn which
turned into a dragon when a man seized it greedily.

Rydberg argued that the various "Seven Sleepers" legends in Europe and
North Africa originated in Scandinavia, and were distributed by the
northern warriors who overran Italy, Greece, Asia Minor, and Egypt. His
main argument rests on one very remarkable coincidence. The "Seven
Sleepers" of Ephesus were Christians who were condemned to death by the
Emperor Decius. They were given time to renounce their faith, but
concealed themselves in a cave, where they lay wrapped in sleep "for 360
years". <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) During the reign of
Theodosius, the Roman Emperor, a shepherd entered the cave, and the
sleepers were awakened. Rydberg notes that Decius fell in battle with
the Goths "who a few years later invaded Asia Minor and captured Ephesus
among other places".

Seven men, who were attired like Romans, lay asleep in a cave in Western
Germany. An eighth-century legend relates that a man who discovered them
attempted to disrobe one, and his arm withered. In the vicinity dwelt a
tribe of Skritobians (Skridfinns).

In Arabia a dog lies with "the sleepers". Mahomet made them foretell his
coming, and the dog, named

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kratim, is one of
the ten animals which will enter Paradise.

If the legend originated in Scandinavia, it is a curious fact that this
dog should be found also in the Highland stories, with which Rydberg and
others who have dealt with the legend were unfortunately unacquainted.
The sleepers are found in Craig-a-howe, Black Isle; Ossian's Cave,
Glencoe; and Smith's Rock, in Skye. In each case they are Fians
(Fingalians), and beside Finn-mac-Coul lies his dog Bran. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) In Tomnahurich, Inverness, the chief
steeper is Thomas the Rhymer, who also reposes under the Eildon hills.

In the Scottish caves a horn hangs from the roof When it is blown three
times, the sleepers will issue forth. A shepherd found the cave (it is
always a shepherd) and blew two blasts on the horn. But he was so
terrified by the ferocious appearance of the warriors and by a voice
which cried, "If the horn is blown once again the world will be upset
altogether", that he fled, leaving the warriors resting on their elbows.
The Fians cried, "Alas! you have left us worse than you found us". The
shepherd locked the door and threw the key into the sea. At Inverness
there is a Gaelic saying, "When the horn is blown, True Thomas shall
come forth".

If this Highland story was imported by the Norsemen, why should the
Arabian dog be a "sleeper" also? It is possible that in Arabia and in
the Highlands the tale is found in its most archaic form, and that it is
part of the floating material from which Teutonic Mythology was
constructed. <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14.md)

What appears to be a very old version of the legend

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

is found in South Uist. It was taken down from a minister thirty years
ago by an Inspector of Schools, who related it to the writer as
follows:--

The Fians (Féinne) were lying in a cave, each resting on his elbow, chin
upon hand, self-absorbed, not asleep.

They heard the falling waters, and the storms went over them unheeded. .
. . Thousands of years went past.

They were still resting there, musing, when one of them moved his elbow
and said:--

"Och! och! 's mi tha sgith." (Och! och! it's me that's tired.)

Thousands of years went past. . . . They heard the falling waters, and
the storms went over them unheeded.

Then a great Fian said sharply, "Mur a' sguir sibh dhe 'n chonnspoid
seo, theid mi mach 's fagaidh mi an uaimh agaibh fhein." (If you do not
stop this wrangling I'll go out, and leave the cave to yourselves.)

Thousands of years went past. . . . They heard the falling waters, and
the storms went over them unheeded.

In various legends the movements of the "sleepers" (who do not sleep in
Uist) were associated with sorrow and disaster or seasonal changes.
Edward the Confessor had a vision, while sitting at a banquet in his
palace at Westminster, in which he saw the Ephesian sleepers turning
round. A messenger was sent to Ephesus, and it was found that they had
turned from their right sides to their left. This was taken as a sign of
approaching disaster, and was, in fact, associated with the miseries
that Christendom endured from the Saracens. The seasonal reference
survives in the St. Swithin's day belief.

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

Various heroes lie asleep, including Charlemagne, Frederick of
Barbarossa, William Tell in Switzerland, Brian Boroimhe in Ireland, and
Arthur in Wales. The warning that when the sleepers leave the cave "the
world will be upset" was transformed into the popular belief that
certain heroes would issue forth in the hour of their country's direst
need. The French peasants believed in the coming of Napoleon, as the
Swiss did in the return of William Tell. During the Russo-Japanese war
the peasantry of Russia were confident that General Skobeleff would
hasten to Manchuria to lead the armies to victory. To this day there are
many Highlanders who remain convinced that General Sir Hector Macdonald
is not dead, but is waiting his hour of return. A similar belief
attached to James IV, who fell at Flodden. So do "immemorial modes of
thought" survive in the twentieth century from, perhaps, that remote
Stone Age period when the fair-haired and blue-eyed "long-heads" spread
from North Africa over the undivided lands of ancient Europe to mingle
with earlier inhabitants and later "broad-heads" from Asia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xxi:1](tml05.htm#fr_0.md) An English translation by
R. B. Anderson was published in London in 1889, but is out of print.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xxi:2](tml05.htm#fr_1.md) Introduction to English
translation of Saxo Grammaticus.--Nutt.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xxii:1](tml05.htm#fr_2.md) Eirikr Magnusson's.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xxxiii:1](tml05.htm#fr_3.md) In Scottish Gaelic,
Fomhair and Famhair, pronounced "foo-ar" and "faa-har". The Fomorib (men
of the sea) theory has long been abandoned by Prof. Rhys.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xxxiii:2](tml05.htm#fr_4.md) In Gaelic, Cailleach
Mor.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xxxiii:3](tml05.htm#fr_5.md) In pre-Christian times
witches were the friends of man, and helped him to combat against hags
and giants.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xxxiv:1](tml05.htm#fr_6.md) In Old English the
giants are "eotens".

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxxvii:1](tml05.htm#fr_7.md) In Ireland the "Milky
Way" is "Lugh's chain". Lugh is the dawn-god, and grandson of the
night-god.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxxvii:2](tml05.htm#fr_8.md) Saga Library, Morris
and Magnusson, Vol. I, 339.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xl:1](tml05.htm#fr_9.md) *Beowulf*, Clark Hall,
Introduction, lix-lx.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xlii:1](tml05.htm#fr_10.md) Dietrich is the High
German equivalent of Theoderic. Bern is Verona.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xliii:1](tml05.htm#fr_11.md) The western Hittites
had a storm-god, named Tarku, at the head of their pantheon. The eastern
Hittites called him Teshup. This god is a warrior who holds in one hand
a hammer, and in the other three wriggling flashes of lightning. The
hammer is the symbol of fertility. Thor brings his goats back to life by
waving his hammer over them.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xliv:1](tml05.htm#fr_12.md) This calculation is
according to the legends.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xlv:1](tml05.htm#fr_13.md) See *Finn and His
Warrior Band*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xlv:2](tml05.htm#fr_14.md) The dog also figures in
a "Seven Sleepers" legend in North Afghanistan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Story of Creation](tml06.md)
