[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml07)  [Next](tml09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### CHAPTER III

# The Deeds of Odin

The Brooding God--Mimer's Well--Draught of Wisdom--The Eye
Sacrifice--Revolt of Ivalde--Murder of Moon--god--Combat with Hyuki--The
Stolen Song--Mead--Odin seeks to Recapture it--Descent to Surtur's Deep
Dales--The Giant Suttung--Odin's Bridegroom--Guise--"The Champion
Drinker"--Marriage with Gunlad--Ivalde's Fate--Odin's Escape--"The Man
in the Moon"--Hyuki is Slagfin and Hengest--Odin's Apparel--His Ravens
and Wolf Dogs--Odin the First Poet--Saga--Secret Runes--Thor and other
Gods--Odin's Wives.

ODIN was the chief ruler of the gods. He was tall and old, and his
aspect was wise and reverend. White was his beard and long, and he
seemed ever to brood deeply over the mysteries of life and death. He had
but one eye, because the other he sacrificed so that he might be dowered
with great wisdom. Indeed he had In his youth drunk deeply of the magic
mead of Mimer's well.

Every morning grave Mimer drank a draught with the Gjallar-horn, and
Odin when he was yet young had deep desire to receive the wisdom and
strength which the egg-white mead alone can give. He entreated Mimer to
give him a draught, and the price he paid was an eye, which was cast
into the well. From that hour when he drained Gjallar-horn he became
worthy to rule over gods and men. 'Twas thus he sang in after-time of
the powers which the mead imparted to him:

Then began I to bloom,  
To be wise, <span id="page_22">p. 22</span>  
To grow and to thrive;  
Word came to me  
From word,  
Deed came to me  
From deed.

Thus Odin taught to all men that in youth there must needs be
self-sacrifice of great account so that wisdom and power may be
obtained.

From the moon-car in heaven did Odin also drink of the song-mead which
was in the pitcher that Hyuki and Bil had carried from the secret well
on the mountain, and Mani, the moon-god, captured. But wroth was
Vidfinner at his loss, and he mourned more for the mead than for his
children. Vidfinner is also called Ivalde, the sworn watchman of
Hvergelmer and the Rivers Elivagar, and another of his names is Svigdur,
"the champion drinker". There came a day when he broke his oath of
fealty to the gods and fled from his post. Then raging heavenwards he
attacked the moon-god, whom he slew and burned. His son Hyuki fought
against him without avail, and suffered a fierce wound--as a maker of
poems has sung--"clean to the thigh bone". For this dread crime
Ivalde-Svigdur was condemned, but he fled towards Surtur's deep dales
and unto the dwelling of Suttung, son of Surtur, the giant sentinel of
Muspelheim. For Surtur and his clan were at enmity with Mimer and the
Vana-gods, and also with the gods of Asgard since the creation of Asgard
and the dividing of the worlds. To Suttung Ivalde gave the previous
skaldic mead, and for reward he was promised for wife Gunlad, the
giant's daughter.

Odin, seeing all that happened as he sat in his high throne, resolved to
recapture the mead by cunning. So he set out to visit the hall of
Suttung, "the mead wolf".

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Now the realm of
Surtur is difficult to reach, and full of peril for the gods. It lies in
the dark underworld which is lower than and beyond Hela. Suttung's hall
is within a mountain to which, in a deep abyss, there is but one entry,
and it is guarded by a fierce dwarf sentinel.

But Odin secured the confidence of the dwarf, who promised to aid him so
that his enterprise might be crowned with success. Heimdal, the sentinel
of Bif-rost, also gave his service. His other name is Rati, "the
traveller", and he bored through the mountain a narrow tunnel through
which Odin might escape in eagle-guise. Thus, having completed his
designs, Odin went towards the door of the dwelling of the great
fire-giant Suttung, who is also called Fjalar.

A great feast was held within, and the evil frost-giants were as guests
there to welcome Svigdur, the wooer of the giant--maid Gunlad. Odin
assumed the form of Svigdur, and like him he spoke also, lest he should
by uttering words of wisdom and weight be suspected and put to death.
Thus he prevailed against the sons of Surtur with their own methods, for
they were given to creating illusions and travelling forth in disguise
to work evil and destruction.

A high seat of gold awaited the expected wedding-guest, and when Odin
entered in the form of Svigdur, "the champion drinker", he was welcomed
with ardour. And well he played the part, for he was given to drink of
the nectar of the giants, and partook to the full, so that he was made
drunk. Yet he observed great caution, that he might not be discovered.

As he sat at the feast, Gunlad came forward and gave him a draught of
the stolen mead. Then was the marriage celebrated with solemnity and in
state. The holy ring

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

was placed upon the finger of the giant-maid, and she swore to be
faithful to him who wooed her.

Meantime Ivalde-Svigdur, the real lover, reached the door of Suttung's
hall, and came to know that Odin was within. He was filled with wrath,
and he sought to denounce the high god so that he might be slain by the
giants. But the dwarf sentinel accomplished Ivalde-Svigdur's
destruction. He created an illusion, and opened a door on the side of
the mountain which showed a lighted hall within and the wedding guests
as they sat round Suttung's board. Gunlad was at Odin's side.
Ivalde-Svigdur leapt towards the vision of the high god of Asgard, and
thus dashed himself against the rock. The door was shut behind, and the
mountain swallowed him.

Ere the wedding feast was ended Odin had spoken words which caused the
giants to suspect him. But he retired with Gunlad to the bridal chamber,
and there he found the precious mead which Ivalde-Svigdur had robbed
from the moon-god. Then Gunlad came to know that her lover was Odin, but
she helped him to make his escape in eagle-guise. So Odin flew through
the tunnel which Heimdal-Rati had made, and reached Asgard in safety
with the precious mead.

In the morning the giants went towards the bridal chamber, remembering
the words that their guest had spoken, and when they found he had
escaped they called him Bolverkin, "the evildoer".

But although Odin conferred great good upon gods and men by capturing
the mead, the consequences of the evil he wrought towards that end were
doomed to bring disaster in after-time, when Surtur, issuing forth to
avenge the wrong done to Gunlad, set the world aflame. For good cannot
follow evil, even although it is accomplished for the sake of good.

 

<span id="img_02400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THOR AND THE
GIANTS&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the painting by M. E.
Winge&lt;/i&gt;](tn/02400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02400.jpg)  
THOR AND THE GIANTS  
*From the painting by M. E. Winge*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

Odin's joy was great when he returned in triumph to Asgard, but he spoke
words of pity for the giant-maid whom he had betrayed, and who wept
because he left her.

Ivalde-Svigdur, who perished in the mountain, was refused an abode among
the blessed dead in Hela's glittering plains. Him the gods condemned to
dwell forever in the moon. There he suffers eternal punishment for his
evildoings, for he is ever drunk with the stolen mead, which is venom to
him, and is ever beaten with the rod of thorns by the god he slew and to
whom life was again given. Ivalde's son, Hyuki, is revered among men.
Another name he bears is Slagfin, and by Saxon warriors he is called
Hengest. He is also Gelder, and his symbol is the gelding. Among
skee-runners he is the chief upon land and on the sea.

Many names have the gods, and for Odin there are nine-and-forty. And the
reason is, as skalds have told, that people speaking different tongues
must needs call the gods by different names, while the gods have also
been given names according to their various attributes and the great
deeds they have done.

Thus Odin was called All-father, like the Mighty One who was at "time's
first dawn", because he was father of the gods; and Val-father, the
father of the brave who dwell in Valhal in high Asgard.

When Odin sat in his high golden throne, he wore a cloak which was
striped with many colours of sunset splendour and summer radiance. Its
hood was blue as is the sky, and speckled with grey like clouds. His hat
was blue also, and its broad brims curved downward like the heavens.
When he left Asgard to travel over the worlds he wore a burnished
helmet, and sometimes he went among men wearing a hat which was tilted
to conceal the hollow of his lost eye.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

As Odin sat brooding and listening in Asgard two ravens perched on his
shoulder. Their names are Hugin, which is "reflection", and Munin, which
means "memory". When day dawned Odin sent them forth, and they returned
at eve to whisper in his ears all the doings of men. Thus was he called
Rafnagud, the "raven-god". He had also two wolf dogs, and they are named
Gere, "the greedy", and Freke, "the voracious". These Odin fed with the
food which was placed before him at the feast of heroes, for he ate not
and for nourishment drank nectar.

When Odin drank of the song-mead he composed poems which for sweetness
and grandeur have never been surpassed. He was the first poet, and knew
well the magic of the mead. For the source of it was secret, and was
discovered only by Ivalde, the watchman of the primeval fount from which
life first came and by which life is ever sustained. Then was it carried
to the beauteous car of the moon, and from thence to the regions of
fire. There it was won by love mixed with wrong, and when the high god
who descended to the deeps drank of it, he soared as an eagle to heaven,
which he filled with song. From heaven has song descended upon earth,
and in song are all the sufferings which were begotten over the mead.

Odin is also the friend and companion of the goddess Saga, whose
dwelling in Asgard is Sokvabek, "the deep stream". Precious thoughts
well up from the fountain source and flow along as words of gold. They
tell of things that were, and Odin ponders. Day after day and night
after night the high god sits with the goddess listening to the flowing
stream, which grows deeper and wider as it wends its way onward, and
their minds are refreshed by the glories of the past.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

Secret runes, which have magical influence, did Odin also invent. For
nine whole nights he hung on the high branches of Ygdrasil, pondering
and searching out the secrets of the mind and of the Universe. For the
power of runes was before the beginning of man. They are mixed with
fate, and their potency did Odin discover when he drank from Mimer's
well. They have also power over death and the world beyond. Runes there
are to ward off strife and care, to charm away sickness and disease, to
blunt the foeman's sword, to break fetters that bind, to still the
storms, to ward off the attacks of demons, to make the dead to speak, to
win the love of a maid, and to turn away love that is not desired. And
many more there be also.

When runes are carved in mystic symbols the powers they convey are given
to the weapons, or to the men that bear them, for they govern all things
and impart power to conquer and power to subdue. He who has a certain
desire shall achieve it if he but knows the rune which can compel its
fulfilment, for the runes come from Odin, the chief ruler of the
Universe, the god most wise. His power and great knowledge are enshrined
in them.

Next to Odin the mightiest of the gods was his son Thor, whose mother
was Jord, "the earth". In Asgard was built for him a great mansion
called Bilskirnir, with five hundred and forty halls and a roof of
shining silver. He drave forth in a car which was drawn by two goats.
Three precious things were his possessions: the great hammer Mjolnir,
which struck fire from the mountains and has slain many frost giants;
the belt of prowess, which gave him threefold strength; and his mighty
iron gauntlets, which he put on ere he could wield his hammer.

Another of Odin's sons was Balder the Beautiful,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

whose mother was Frigg, queen of goddesses, daughter of Nat and sister
of Njord. Fair and comely was Balder, with silver hair that shone like
sunshine. He was full of wisdom and was exceedingly mild and had great
eloquence. In Asgard and Midgard there was no god more greatly loved
than Balder.

Njord of the Vans was in Asgard as hostage to the Asa-gods. He was
father of the god Frey and the beautiful Freyja, who was next to Frigg
among the goddesses. Honer, Odin's brother, was sent to Vanaheim, where
he was made ruler over the Vana-gods. He chose not his part and his
judgments were weak.

Great was Tyr, the war-god, who gave valour to warriors and by whom he
was invoked.

Brage, god of music and poetry, had for wife Idun, Ivalde's daughter,
who was keeper of the apples of immortal youth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. How Evil entered Asgard](tml09)
