[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml25)  [Next](tml27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

### CHAPTER XXI

# Hother and Balder

Hother's Accomplishments--His Love for Nanna--Balder becomes his
Rival--The Valkyries' Warning--The Sword of Victory--Where it was
concealed--Hother's journey to the Other-world--Miming is
overcome--Helgi and Thora--War between Gods and Mortals--Hother
overcomes Thor--Love-sick Balder--Hother in Solitude--The Great
Battle--How Balder was slain--Odin woos Rinda--Balder's Death is
avenged.

HOTHER was but a lad when his father Hodbrodd was slain, and him did
King Gewar take to his castle to be reared as his own son. Strong and
nimble he became, and very comely to behold. He could perform mightier
feats than any of his foster-brothers: he could swim deftly and far like
to a sea bird, he was a skilled archer, and he could box well with the
gloves. Great gifts of mind had Hother also. He was a singer of songs,
and a sweet musician. With rare skill he fingered the harp, and played
the lute, and such power had he with stringed instruments that he could
at will make his hearers merry or sad; he could fill their hearts with
pleasure, or stir them with strange terror.

Pleasing indeed was this fair youth, unto beauteous Nanna, his
foster-sister, the daughter of King Gewar. Her heart was moved with love
towards him, and no less passionately did he love her also. Dear unto
Nanna were the fond embraces of Hother.

Now there came a fateful day when Balder, son of Odin, saw Nanna while
she bathed. The vision held

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

him spellbound, and he was consumed with burning love by reason of the
splendour and beauty of her comely body. When she vanished, the day was
made dim, and Balder sighed full oft as he thought with tenderness of
the beautiful maid; but when he remembered his rival he was moved to
anger, for full well he knew that Hother would be the chief obstacle
between him and his heart's desire. In the end he resolved to slay the
young hero.

Hother soon came to know of Balder's burning love, and his fierce and
bloody purpose. One day he went hunting alone in a deep wood. A deep
mist drave over the land and enveloped the trees, so that he knew not
whither he was wandering. In time he came to the dwelling of wood
maidens. They called him "Hother", and he marvelled greatly thereat.
When he asked them who they were, they told him that it was their lot to
decide the issue of battle conflicts <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43); invisible they fought in the fray,
assisting those whom they favoured so that victory might be achieved.
Hother wondered to hear. Then they told him that Balder had gazed with
eyes of love upon Nanna while she bathed, and was possessed with burning
desire to have her for his bride. Hother did they warn not to combat
with his rival, because that he was a demigod whose body was charmed
against wounds. But to Hother they gave a sword-proof coat of mail, so
that he might have protection like unto Balder. They made promise to aid
him in battle.

Then the maidens vanished, and their dwelling also, vanished from before
the eyes of the young hero, and he found himself standing alone upon a
barren plain, where there was not tree nor any shelter whatsoever. The
mist was driven before the wind.

The youth thereafter returned quickly unto King

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gewar, to whom he
related what he had seen, and what had been told unto him concerning
Balder. He also made request that Nanna should be his bride.

Gewar was willing indeed that his daughter should wed Hother, but he
said that he feared greatly the wrath of Balder, if he came seeking for
Nanna and were refused.

"No weapon," Gewar said, "can do hurt to Balder save a certain
sword <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) which is guarded in a cave by
Miming, the wood satyr. A wondrous ring doth he also possess, which hath
power to increase the wealth of him who owns it. . . . But long and
dangerous is the road which leads unto the satyr's lair," the king
added; "it is wintry cold, indeed, and hardly to be endured."

Hother, however, was resolved to win the sword with which to combat
against Balder, and Gewar counselled him to yoke reindeer to his car so
that he might be able to traverse the region of extreme and bitter cold
with great swiftness.

"When thou dost reach the cave of Miming," Gewar said, "thou must set up
thy tent so that its shadow may not fall upon the satyr, for if that
should happen he would remain within. Thou must needs wait until the
satyr goes out, when the sword and the ring will await for thee."

As Gewar advised, so did Hother do. He went swiftly with his reindeer
over the bleak wintry way until he came unto Miming's cave, where he
pitched his tent. But long he waited ere the wood satyr came forth. Sad
and dreary were the days, and restless and anxious the nights, Then,
after waiting through a night of long darkness, Miming came forth, and
his shadow fell upon

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hother's tent. The
youth sprang to his feet, and struck down the satyr with his spear, and
then bound him securely. Terrible were the threats of Hother, who vowed
that he would slay Miming if he gave not unto him the sword and the
bracelet. The satyr held life more dearly than wealth, and gave Hother
the ransom which he demanded. In triumph did the young hero return unto
the kingdom of Gewar, and his fame was mooted abroad.

Then Gelder, King of Saxony, came to know that Miming had been robbed,
and he urged his war-men to go against Hother, so great was his desire
to become possessed of the treasure. But Gewar, who had magical powers,
divined Gelder's purpose, and he counselled Hother to meet him with his
band, and receive the shower of his javelins until there was none left,
and then to fall upon the bold invaders.

So Hother went to meet the men from Saxony; he awaited them on the
seashore. Eager were Gelder's heroes to make onslaught, and fast and
furious did they cast their spears and javelins. But Hother had bidden
his trained war-men to resist the missiles with shields interlocked, and
not to cast a weapon. When the men of Saxony saw that, they were all the
more eager to attack, and soon they flung away all their spears and
javelins. Then Hother's men began to hurtle the weapons against the
enemy, driving them back in confusion, whereat Gelder) in great alarm,
hoisted up, on the mast of his ship, a crimson shield to make known that
he desired to surrender, so that his life might be spared. But Hother
showed nor anger nor vengeance against him; he approached the king with
smiling face and offered his friendship. Thus became he victor by reason
of his kindliness as well as his might.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

A strong friend to Hother was Helgi, King of Halogaland, who loved
Thora, daughter of Cuse, the ruler of the Finns and the Bjarmians. The
monarch had a blemish of tongue, so that he stuttered greatly, and was
unable to utter with eloquence the sweet speeches of love. Indeed, he
not only shrank from addressing strangers, but rarely spoke in his own
household. He sent messengers unto Cuse, pleading for his daughter's
hand, but they were rejected with disdain, for the king said that the
man who could not urge his own suit was unworthy of love's prize.

Then did Helgi seek the aid of Hother, who could speak with fluency and
charm, and promised him his lifelong service if he would win for him the
heart of Thora. A great fleet did Hother fit out, and he voyaged to
Norway, fully resolved to take, by reason of his strength, the maid whom
words would conquer not. To Cuse he spake first with eloquent tongue,
and the king said that his daughter must first be heard, for he deemed
it not right that he should prevail against her wishes, or decide before
her will was made known. So Thora was ushered in, and when she heard
what Hother said, she gave consent to be Helgi's queen.

But while Hother was thus engaged, Balder invaded the kingdom of Gewar
with an armed band, and demanded that he should have Nanna for his
bride. The king said that he must needs make request of the maiden, and
before her did Balder plead his cause with choice speech and flattering
address. But she said that a humble maiden could not be wooed by one of
divine birth, and that the pledges of the gods were often broken. Thus
did the maiden reject the love of him who sought her.

When Hother returned, Gewar told him of what had happened, and the young
hero was filled with wrath

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

because of Balder's presumption. With Helgi he took counsel and together
they debated how they could inflict punishment upon the god. They had no
recourse save to battle-blows, and Hother fitted out his fleet and went
against his rival. Helgi gave him strong aid, as did also Gelder.

Then broke out a war in which the gods fought against mortals. With
Balder fought Odin and Thor, clad in full armour, and when the opposing
fleets met at sea a great conflict was waged. Hother in sword-proof mail
attacked the gods with fury. Now Thor was swinging his great club, and
while he urged those about him to press forward, he called upon his
foemen to attack. The black-browed god dealt furious blows; he struck
down his enemies' shields; he broke through their ranks; for long none
could withstand him. Terrible, indeed, was the slaughter, and to the
gods it seemed that victory was being given. But Hother went against
Thor with Miming's sword. He feared him not, and struck at the great
club, which he severed in twain with his keen-edged sword. . . . Then
the gods took flight before Hother, and the ships that remained were
destroyed by the victors.

Hother rejoiced in his triumph, but he sorrowed greatly because that
Gelder had been slain. A great pyre he caused to be built with the
wreckage of Balder's warships, and the corpses of the oarsmen were
placed there in a heap. Then above these was laid with reverence the
body of the dead king. Torches were applied and the flames rose high and
bright. The ashes of King Gelder were afterwards laid in a great mound
which was erected to his memory, and there was much mourning for him.

Then did Hother return to Gewar, and Nanna and

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

he were wed with great ceremony, while the people rejoiced. To Helgi and
Thora, who were also united in their joy, did the young hero give gifts
of treasure. Then Hother ruled over Zeeland and Sweden.

As greatly as was Hother praised by men, Balder was mocked because that
he had fled.

But the strife came not to an end. In a land battle did Balder contend
against his rival, and drove him from the field. For fickle indeed are
the fortunes of war. Hother took refuge with Gewar; he who had achieved
victory as a subject, was defeated when a king.

Balder's army was afflicted by a water famine, but the divine one dug
wells and water streamed forth, so that his parched soldiers were able
to slake their thirst. To this day is a spring called Balder's-brynd.

Even by night was Balder made unhappy in his sleep, because he was
tormented by dreams of Nanna. His love consumed him like fire, and he
grew melancholy and thin and careworn. At length he could no longer
walk, and he was taken about in his chariot. He took no pleasure in his
victory, because that he had not won Nanna. There was a magical food
prepared for Balder, so that he might not be brought unto death.

At this time Frey, who ruled for the gods, took up his abode nigh to
Upsala, and revived the abhorrent rites of human sacrifice.

To Sweden did Hother take flight, and Balder possessed himself of
Zeeland, where he received the willing service of the Danes, who before
had reverenced. his rival. In due season Hother, having fitted out a
fleet, again engaged in war with Balder, but was defeated and put to
flight. He took refuge in Jutland, in a town which to this day bears the
name of Horsens; then he returned to Sweden.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

Sad at heart was Hother <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45); he was
weary of life and refused to be comforted, and he took farewell of all,
and wandered alone through solitary places and trackless forests, for
solitude is dear to the sick at heart. The people were angry with him
because that he had concealed himself in a place apart.

One day Hother, as he wandered through the deep forest, came to a cave
in a lonely place in which dwelt the maidens who had given to him the
sword-proof coat of mail. They received him with eyes of wonder, and
they asked why he paid visit to them. Whereupon Hother bewailed his fate
and with sorrow spake of the afflictions he endured. The maidens did he
also reproach because that they had not helped him as they had promised.
But they told him that he had inflicted greater disasters than he deemed
of, and promised him ultimate triumph.

"Victory will assuredly be thine," they said, if thou shalt but find the
magical food with which Balder is nourished so that his strength may
have increase. Possess thyself of it and he shall certainly die."

Then once again did Hother, encouraged by what the maidens had said,
raise a great army to wage war against Balder. A fierce and long
conflict was fought, and when night fell the issue was undecided,
because that the forces were of equal strength.

Hother could not sleep, for he was afflicted with anxiety, and he went
forth to reconnoitre the opposing camp. . . . He beheld three maidens
who prepared the magical food for Balder, and followed their footprints
through the dewy grass when they fled from him, so that he reached their
dwelling and entered therein.

The maidens asked him who he was, for they perceived

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

that he was an enemy, and he said that he was a musician. Then gave they
to him a lyre, and he played sweetly thereon, so that their ears were
charmed.

He saw them prepare the food for Balder. They had three serpents and
their venom dropped into the mixture. One of the maidens offered Hother
a portion, but the elder one said that to do so would be treason,
because it would increase the strength of one of their foes. But in the
end Hother was given to eat, and the maidens also conferred upon him a
shining girdle which had power to assure him of victory in conflict.

Then did Hother leave the dwelling to return to his camp. But he had not
gone far when he met Balder. Drawing his sword he thrust it in his foe's
side so that he fell wounded nigh unto death.

There was great rejoicing in Hother's camp when he returned and told how
he had stricken his rival; in Balder's camp there were loud
lamentations.

Next day, when the battle was renewed, Balder bade his men to carry him
into the midst of the fray upon a stretcher, so that he might not meet
with death in his tent.

When night again fell Balder saw standing beside him the vision of
Proserpine <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46), and she told him that on
the morrow she would have him for her guest. At the time appointed
Balder died, and he was buried in a great grave mound with pomp and deep
mourning.

In after days Harold <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) and other men
sought to rob Balder's mound of its treasure, but when they pierced it a
great flood of water burst forth <span id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48) and
they fled in confusion. So was terror implanted in the minds of

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

youths there, so that they feared to disturb the mound again.

Hother again ruled over his kingdom, but he had great sorrow when Gewar
was attacked and burned in his castle by Gunno, a jarl who served him.
He took speedy vengeance, and burned Gunno alive upon a pyre.

When Odin came to know of Balder's death, he went unto prophets to
divine how he could be avenged, and he came to know that a son would be
born to him of Rinda; his name would be Boe, and he would slay Hother.

Now Rinda was a daughter of the king of the Ruthenians, and Odin went
forth disguised and entered the service of that monarch. He became the
captain of a band and won a distinguished victory; then he fought
singlehanded against a host and achieved renown above all other men.
There was great wonder thereat. Great gifts were given unto him, and he
was honoured in the royal household. Then he secretly told the king of
his love for Rinda, and his suit was favoured, but he must needs woo the
fair princess and win her heart ere he would have her for his bride.

Not easily was Rinda wooed, because when Odin sought to kiss her, she
smote him with anger. A year passed by, and then he went to the Court in
foreign guise and said he was a wonder-smith. With bronze did he fashion
many fair ornaments, for which he received much gold. To Rinda he made
offer of a rare bracelet and rings, but again she smote him when he
sought to woo her. Although her sire remonstrated with her, she scorned
to wed a man of many years, especially as she was herself of tender age.
A third time went Odin to woo the maid. He was disguised as a young
warrior, but again he was repulsed. Then had he recourse to magic arts.
He had with him a piece of bark on which

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

runes were graven, and with that he touched her, so that she was seized
with madness.

Odin returned next in the guise of a woman who was a skilled physician,
and offered to cure Rinda, who was prostrate with sickness. In the end
he prevailed and won the maiden for himself, and she became the mother
of Boe.

At this time the gods ruled at Byzantium, and they were moved to wrath
against Odin because that he had practised magic arts; so they deprived
him of his high honours and drove him into exile. Oller ruled in his
stead. Not until ten years had passed was Odin recalled to the throne,
and then Oller fled to Sweden, where he was slain by certain Danes. It
is said of Oller that he possessed a bone, graven with fearsome spells,
with which he could cross the ocean as if it were a ship.

Odin reigned with greater dignity and power than before, and his renown
was spread far among men. Then found he Boe, his son by Rinda, and him
he constrained to go forth to avenge the death of Balder.

Thus it came that Hother was slain by Rinda's son in a fierce battle,
but Boe <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) was wounded unto death, so
that he was borne from the field upon his shield. Next day he died, and
the Ruthenian soldiers buried him in a stately mound, so that his memory
might not perish in after days, but ever have renown among men.

After Hother's death his son Rorik became king.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[222:1](tml26.htm#fr_43) Valkyries.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[223:1](tml26.htm#fr_44) The Sword of Victory
concealed in Mimer's realm. Hother resembles Svipdag very closely. Gewar
is the moon-god of the Ivalde myth.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[228:1](tml26.htm#fr_45) Like King Hrethel in
Beowulf.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[229:1](tml26.htm#fr_46) Urd.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[229:2](tml26.htm#fr_47) Believed to be a
historical personage who lived in the twelfth century.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[229:3](tml26.htm#fr_48) Balder is associated
with well worship. Wells sprang from his horse's hoofmarks, and he found
water for his soldiers. Water defends his mound.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[231:1](tml26.htm#fr_49) Vale, who in mythology
is the slayer of the wolf, is thus Boe (Beowulf) in Saxo's Danish
legend. He receives his deathwound when he slays Hother, who, as
Svipdag, was a dragon guarding beneath a grey rock great treasure, which
shone like fire in the flood. At the same time Hother is confused with
Hoder, Balder's blind brother. One of Svipdag's names was Odur. So do
the divine and heroic elements of a passing mythology intermix in
tradition. Each age, each race, and each bard leaves in turn impresses
upon a persistent legend. The memory of the mythical hero may survive,
or his deeds may become associated with the traditions of a national
hero. Mythological incidents which appeal to the popular imagination not
infrequently develop into independent narratives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. The Traditional Hamlet](tml27)
