[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml28)  [Next](tml30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

### CHAPTER XXIV

# Land of the Not-dead and many Marvels

King Gorm and Thorkill--Voyage of Exploration--Isle of
Giants--Adventures in Geirrod's Land--City of Dreadful Night--Giants in
Torture--The Treasures--Battle with Demons--Thorkill's Second
Voyage--Loke bound--Erik in Odainsaker--The Magic Tower--Helge
Thoreson--His Demon Bride --Spells, Blessings, and Prayers--Why Helge
was made blind--Hadding in the Underworld--The Flowers of Hela.

THERE was a King in Denmark whose name was Gorm, and he had more desire
to obtain knowledge than to win great glory in battle. He had royal
courage, which he sought to prove in searching out the profound
mysteries of the dread Unknown rather than by engaging in bloody
conflict with his fellow men.

Now, Gorm came to hear of a lone, undiscovered land in the distant
north, where vast treasure was concealed in caves. The giant Geirrod
dwelt there, and although the way to his abode was full of peril for
mortals, Gorm. was consumed with desire to explore it. Many travellers
who had ventured forth to discover the giant's country never again
returned; they had to pay the dues of death.

To reach the abode of Geirrod ships must needs cross the vast
tempestuous ocean that encircles the earth, and voyage on through
horrors undreamt of, until the sunway is passed and the stars vanish
from sight. For in that dread land there is no light, nor warmth of
summer; winter endures without end, and there is ever eternal darkness
unbroken and deep.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

But Gorm was without fear. No peril daunted him, nor could fear of
suffering hold him back. He sought not wealth, although treasure
abounded in the land of night; he desired rather the glory of
achievement in searching out marvels unbeholden by living men.

So it came that the king made known his purpose to the people, and three
hundred of his choicest war-men clamoured to share his renown. There was
among them one braver than the rest, and it was he who had brought
intelligence to Gorm of the dark undiscovered land. His name was
Thorkill; he had coasted the perilous shores and knew well the path of
ocean thither, so he was chosen to be leader of the exploring band.

Thorkill counselled that there should be built three strong and
commodious ships, covered with thick ox hides to afford shelter from
tempest spray, for vast food stores must needs be taken in them. As
Thorkill advised, so did Gorm of Denmark do. He had the vessels built,
they were covered with skins, and well laden with provisions and arms.
In due season the voyage was begun. Northward sailed the billow-cleaving
galleys, wind-driven through seething foam, and in each there were a
hundred chosen men.

Ere long they came to Halogaland, and they had favoured progress on
pleasant waters; but then the waves grew fierce, and the winds opposed
them so that the galleys were tossed and stayed on perilous seas, driven
hither and thither. and turned divers ways from their proper course. So
they suffered delay, and their voyage was prolonged until their food
stores were all but consumed, and hunger menaced them with death. In
dire straits they made meagre pottage and fed sparingly thus on scanty
fare for many days.

But at length their sufferings had end. One night in

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

thick darkness they heard, booming hard on the wind, the breaking surf
of shoreland billows. To the masthead at dawn a youth climbed nimbly,
and in the distance he saw, hazed by spray, the high beetling cliffs of
a rocky isle. Towards it were the galleys steered, and with glad eyes
the wasted men gazed upon the welcoming land, rough and desolate as it
was. Against wind and tide they made their way, until at length they
reached a haven of refuge. Then they went ashore, scrambling over broken
rocks, and climbed by slippery paths the stern precipitous heights of
the island until they reached the level ground.

On a green place nigh to a deep forest they beheld great herds of
browsing cattle. They were easy prey, for they feared not men, whom they
had never before beheld; indeed the beasts assembled together to gaze
with wonder on the sea-roving band.

Thorkill had knowledge of the island perils, and he counselled the men
to slay not more of the cattle than were needful for a single repast,
lest the giants who kept watch there might be angered, and should seek
to prevent their departure. But the men heeded him not So great was
their greed that they slew many cattle and filled the galleys with their
flesh. Heavily they feasted and were made glad, but there were those of
them who paid dearly for their rashness.

When night fell black, there were threats of dire vengeance. The forest
resounded with loud bellowing, and from the rocky beach dread monsters
dashed through the surf and beset the galleys. One, greater and fiercer
than the others, strode knee-deep in the sea, swinging angrily a
tree-like club. He rated the seafarers because they had slaughtered the
cattle, and demanded to be given a man from each galley because of the
loss which the island had suffered. There was no choice but to

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

accept of the monster's terms; the few must oft be sacrificed so that
the many may escape. So Thorkill cast lots. and three men were thus
chosen and delivered unto the monsters who guarded the island herds.

Thereafter a favourable wind sprang up; the sails were set, and the
ships drave onwards. Swiftly they voyaged and far. The days grew shorter
and dimmer, until at length the sun was left behind and the stars
vanished. . . . So traversing seas unknown they came nigh to Outer
Bjarmaland. It was a dreary land, ice-cold and dark; the snows never
melt there, and eternal night prevails.

Blacker than all else, the men saw dimly deep pathless forests through
which ever roam strange ferocious beasts, unseen elsewhere. Many rivers
were foaming seaward over sharp and treacherous reefs.

Thorkill at length found the haven he sought, and the ships were drawn
high on the beach. Then were the tents pitched.

"From here" said Thorkill, "the journey to Geirrod's dwelling is short.
. . . Now unto all give I timely warning. Let no man open his mouth unto
any monster that comes nigh, lest words should be spoken which would
give them power to injure you. None save one who knows the customs of
this land can converse safely with its strange people."

Soon there came towards the seafarers a giant who called each seafarer
by his name and spoke freely. The men were stricken with terror, and
answered him not. Thorkill told them that the giant was Geirrod's
brother. and was named Gudmund <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61); he
was guardian of that weird land, and protected from peril all men who
sojourned there.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

Gudmund spoke unto Thorkill and asked him why the men answered him not,
and the wily seafarer answered that they had little knowledge of his
language, and were ashamed to speak it.

Then the giant bade them all to a feast, and led the way along the banks
of a river. Soon the travellers came to a golden bridge, and they
desired to cross it, so fair did it seem, but Gudmund warned them that
the river which they gazed upon divided the land of mortals from the
land of horrid sights, and that the opposite bank was by sacred decree
declared unlawful for mortals to tread. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) So they went onward by the road they had
taken, until they came to the dwelling place of Gudmund.

Privily did Thorkill then speak unto his companions, and warned them to
eat not of the food placed before them, or drink of the liquor, or touch
any man who was there.

As he commanded them so did they do, and at the feast they partook of
their own viands only.

The feasting hall was ablaze with splendour. With Gudmund were his
twelve stately sons and twelve beauteous daughters, and they made merry.
But when the host perceived that King Gorm partook not of the food or
the wine placed before him, and that the others likewise refused the
fare, he spake to Thorkill, protesting that his hospitality was
despised. But that wily seafarer said that his companions had long been
unaccustomed to such rich fare, and feared to eat of the dainties lest
they should be sickened.

Gudmund was ill-pleased, because the food was prepared with spells so
that the guests might be made forgetful of the past and compelled to
remain for ever ill

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

the dismal shade among creatures non--human and weird.

So the giant sought to tempt them further. To the king he offered his
daughter for wife, and unto the others he would fain give brides also.
But Thorkill prevailed upon them to make refusal. All save four of the
men obeyed him, and these were made insane. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63)

Then Gudmund invited the king to visit his garden, so that he might
partake of its wondrous fruits; but Gorm was warned by Thorkill and
refused to be lured thither. So the host perceived that he was baffled;
and consented to guide them to the dwelling of Geirrod. He then
conducted the travellers over the river, and promised to await their
return.

They entered a dismal land which was fraught with peril and full of
terrors. Not long did Thorkill and his companions travel when they
beheld a strange city which seemed to be composed of vapour. Dismal and
gloomy it was, and covered with dust and slime as if it were neglected
and deserted. Yet was it thickly peopled by sorrowing folk. The not-dead
inhabited it amidst horrors and illusions.

Lofty were the battlements that surrounded the city, and surmounting
them on stakes were the heads of fallen war-men. The gates were situated
so high that they could not be reached save by ladders, and fierce
hel-hounds kept watch before them. Thorkill went first, and climbed
towards the entrance, which is ever open. To the hounds he flung a horn
smeared with fat, and they licked it greedily and were appeased. Then
his companions followed him, and together they entered the gloomy city
of the not-dead.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

Horrible were the shades that hastened past them with faces fixed
aghast, and ever screaming woefully. They came and went beholding
naught--

                          A great stream  
  Of people there was hurrying to and fro,  
  Numerous as gnats upon the evening gleam,

All hastening onward, yet none seemed to know  
  Whither he went, or whence he came, or why  
  He made one of the multitude, and so

Was borne amid the crowd, as through the sky  
  One of the million leaves of summer's bier;  
  Old age and youth, manhood and infancy

Mixed in one mighty torrent did appear,  
  Some flying from the thing they feared, and some  
  Seeking the object of another's fear.  
                                                        *Shelley*

The streets were misty and loathsome; putrid scum and miry filth--

Stifled the air till the dead wind stank.

Every sense was offended; every man was repulsed. The reeking foulness
and nameless horrors froze Gorm and his followers with agonized
loathing.

Then they came to Geirrod's mountain lair. The door opened on the ledge
of a black precipice, but they faltered with icy dread before it; they
shrank back lest they might be overcome. But Thorkill. spake words of
encouragement and bade them fear not, but he warned them not to touch
aught which might tempt them--gems, or gold, or any treasure--nor to be
terrified by what was horrible and weird. If a hand were laid upon
anything within, he told them, it could never be withdrawn;

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

it would be bound; it would be knotted up. Then he bade them all to
enter in companies of four. Broder and Buchi, the skilful archers. with
Thorkill and the king went first; the others followed in order.

The doorposts were black with soot, which was centuries old and very
deep; filth lay everywhere. Gaunt monster sentinels were on guard; they
were numerous. noisy, restless, and menacing. Some leapt about with
maniac-like frenzy, playing a strange repulsive game.

No man spoke. Half-stunned by belching filth reek from within they
entered falteringly. The dwelling was wellnigh a ruin; the walls were
dark and loathsome in the faint twilight; horrors loomed through the
shadows. A roof of arrowy stings was above them, and the floors were
made of venomous snakes steeped in foulness. Thorkill's companions were
quaking with. terror, and they could scarcely endure the violent and
suffocating fumes. Yet they could not forbear gazing about them,
confused with horror and mute with alarm. Vast giants were stretched as
if dead upon benches of iron; in silent agony they lay as if carved from
stone. Others wallowed in torture.

Thorkill led the strangers through a rocky fissure, and they beheld,
sitting on a high ledge, the old giant Geirrod. His body was transfixed
to the cliff by a javelin. Three giant maids with broken spines lay
squirming beside him. These were the monsters whom Thor had thus
punished because that they sought to overcome him with treachery. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64)

From the halls of torture the bold seafarers passed to a chamber of
treasures, where the air was sweet. Fair indeed was the spectacle they
beheld. Tankards of mead stood around them; these were encircled with
fine gold

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

and decorated with rings of silver. Among the treasures were a gleaming
ivory tusk, circled with gold, a golden armlet, and a great
drinking-horn, graven with pictures and set with sparkling gems.

Three men with covetous hearts could resist not their desire to be
possessed of these rare treasures, and seized them greedily. Then did
they pay life's cost for their boldness. The tusk became a sword which
pierced the heart of him who laid hands upon it, the armlet became a
venomous snake which stung to death the man who held it, and the great
horn was transformed into a fiery dragon which devoured the
robbers. <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65)

The other men were stricken anew with terror in that dread land, and
they, all feared they would share the fate of their companions. But they
passed in safety to another chamber, which had greater splendour than
that which they left. It was filled with shining armour and bright
weapons, and rich apparel radiant with silver and gold and ablaze with
jewels. Fairest of all were a great king's robe, with his splendid
headgear and his graven gem-decked waistbelt.

Thorkill. who had warned others, could not resist his desire to possess
some of the rare treasure, so, impulsively he seized the royal mantle. .
. . Then did dire disaster threaten them. The chamber tottered as if
shaken by earthquake; women's screams were heard, and wailing voices
asked if these despoilers were to be endured any longer.... The whole
dwelling was stirred with noisy alarm. Monstrous beings who seemed to
lie dead sprang suddenly to their feet, menacing and horrible, and with
hordes of wail and shadowy furies made fierce

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

attack upon the strangers, who were begirt with awesome peril. It was
well for Thorkill and the others that the skilled archers, Broder and
Buchi, were with them, for they bent their bows and shot magic arrows
against the assailing horde. Spears were also cast and deadly missiles
were flung from ready slings. So were the Furies beaten back. although
many men fell, to be torn asunder by monsters. Those who survived made
speedy escape from Geirrod's dwelling, and from the city of the
not-dead, and returned to Gudmund. who waited for them, as he had
promised. Then did the giant ferry them over the river and take them
unto his own dwelling.

Again they were feasted and again did they resist the temptation to
partake of the food and wine, and have for brides the demon maids that
were offered to them. But Buchi, the archer, was stricken with love for
a daughter of Gudmund, and he was driven insane in her embrace. He who
contended against the monsters in Geirrod's dwelling was overcome by a
maiden of gentle seeming, and he never again returned to his native
land, for when Thorkill and the king took their departure he followed
them towards the shore, but he was caught in a river and dashed to
death.

The king and Thorkill, mourning for those who had fallen, and especially
Buchi, made haste to leave the land of terror. But their voyage homeward
was beset with perils; the seas wallowed in tempest, and the galleys
were driven hither and thither by contrary winds, so that they suffered
great delay. The food stores were at length exhausted and many died of
hunger. Prayers were made to divers gods without avail, but at length
the king made vows and offerings to Utgard-Loke, whereat the seas were
calmed, and a favourable wind drove the vessels towards the haven of
home. Of the three hundred

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

men who had set forth to visit the land of the not-dead, but twenty
returned to Denmark.

The king sought not further adventures over perilous seas towards
distant lands. He lived at peace after sore travail, and he engaged in
meditation regarding the mysteries of life and death. Certain teachers
convinced him that to men's souls immortal life is given, and Gorm
wondered whether the gods would cause him to suffer torture or reward
him with bliss, because that he had spent his days in adoration and had
given peace offerings.

Now the god whom the king favoured most was Utgard-Loke, and his friends
counselled him that he should send Thorkill to appease that deity in the
land of night. They also made grave accusations of treachery against the
brave seafarer, who waxed wroth and demanded that these evil advisers of
the king should accompany him on his fearsome voyage. Gorm forced the
men to sail with Thorkill, and unwillingly they went forth to face the
perils of the Unknown.

Great were the sufferings of the men who went towards the dwelling of
Utgard-Loke. Many died from starvation ere they came to the land of
eternal darkness. At length they reached a rocky shore on which there
was a black tremendous precipice. Thorkill and his companions went
ashore, and they came to the narrow entrance of a vast cavern. Iron
benches were seen within by the light of the torches carried, and they
perceived that the floor swarmed with venomous snakes. They went inward
on a rocky ledge, and passed a warm and foul river, and afterwards
entered a chamber which reeked with loathsome vapour and was strewn with
slime. Then did they behold Utgard-Loke. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) He was bound to the

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

rock with great fetters. So long had he lain there that his hair and his
beard had grown hard as elk horns. Desiring to return homeward with
proof of his achievement, Thorkill snatched out a single hair of
Utgard-Loke's beard, whereat a foul stench came forth. Then flying
serpents made attack upon the strangers, spouting venom which caused
limbs to wither and heads to be struck off, so that but few men escaped
to the galleys.

When Thorkill returned to Denmark he was so greatly disfigured by the
venom that his friends hardly knew him. He went to the king and related
all he had seen and what had happened to him, and he showed the
horn-like hair of Loke's beard from which deadly fumes escaped and
suffocated several who were nigh. Gorm was terror-stricken when he came
to know of the horrors of the foul dwelling of his favoured god, Loke,
and he fell back dead ere Thorkill had finished his tale.

Beyond the realms of torture are "the Glittering Plains", where good men
and women who have died upon earth live ever in bliss and amidst scenes
of beauty. This part of the Other-world is also called Odainsaker, "the
acre of the not-dead", and Jord lifanda manna, "the earth of living
men".

Erik, a prince of Denmark, made a vow that he would go thither, and
another prince from Norway, who was named Erik also, set forth with him
and their followers towards the east, and they journeyed a great
distance beyond India, until they reached a dark forest, in a land where
the sun never shone and the stars were beholden by day. Onward they went
through perilous places until there was light again. They came at length
to a river, which was spanned by a bridge of stone, and on the other
side was a green and level plain. A great dragon stood upon the bridge,
keeping constant guard,

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

and its jaws gaped wide, issuing forth flame and smoke. Erik of Denmark
feared to go farther, and said they must needs return; but Erik of
Norway drew his sword, and seizing the right hand of one of his
followers rushed forward with him. In horror and anguish the others
beheld the two men vanishing in the dragon's jaws, so they mourned for
them greatly and returned home by the way they had come.

Many years passed by, and at length Erik of Norway and his companion
appeared in their native land. They told that when they went nigh to the
dragon they were blinded by smoke, but they pressed on. Soon the air was
cleared, and they found that they had crossed the bridge and were
travelling over a glittering plain which was covered with gleaming
flowers that gave forth sweet odours. It was ever summer there and ever
bright and warm, but there were no shadows cast by flowers or trees or
living beings. They journeyed on until they saw a beauteous tower
suspended in mid-air. A ladder hung from it, and they climbed towards
the door. Fair was the room they entered. The carpet was of hushing
velvet, and on a gleaming table, which was laden with rich dainties,
stood dishes of silver and wine goblets of graven gold. Sumptuous beds
were in the tower also, and the air was filled with faint perfume. Erik
and his companion were made glad, because they deemed that they had at
length come unto Odainsaker.

Now while Erik lay in soft slumber there appeared before him a shining
youth, who was his guardian spirit, <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67)
and he asked the prince if he desired to remain there forever. But Erik
said that it was his desire to return, so that he might relate the
wonders he had beheld. Then the spirit told him he had reached not
Odainsaker, which

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

lay beyond, and was so very fair that the tower and the land over which
it was suspended seemed dreary and unlovely in comparison. But no man
who ever went thither could return again. It was the prince's choice,
however, to seek his fatherland; and when he returned and told of the
wondrous things he had beheld he was called Erik the Far-travelled.

Helge Thoreson also visited the Glittering Plains. In a great forest he
met Gudmund and his twelve daughters, who were clad in scarlet robes,
and rode upon stately steeds harnessed with gold. Ingeborg, the fairest
of the maids, was moved with love towards Helge, who remained with her
for three days. A great tent was erected and a feast prepared; rich were
the dainties, and the dishes were of silver and gold. When Helge took
his departure he received much treasure from Gudmund, and he returned
with it to his sire, nor were men ever told whence it was obtained.

There came a great tempest on Yule-night, and in the midst of it two
strange men entered the dwelling of Helge's sire, and took the young man
away.

When a year had gone past Helge appeared again with the two men, and
stood before King Olav Trygveson in his feasting hall. The strangers
gave to the monarch .two great drinking horns, which were decorated with
gold, and said that they were sent to him by Gudmund. These were then
filled with mead, and the bishop blessed them, <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) but when the horns were handed to the
strangers they threw them away. Then the fire went out; every light was
extinguished; there was clamour and confusion

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

in the feasting hall and the guests were terror-stricken. Afterwards it
was found that Helge and the strangers had vanished. Then were prayers
offered up for Helge's return.

At next Yuletide the strangers came back with Helge unto the king, and
immediately went away, leaving behind them the young man, who was
stricken with blindness. He told that he had spent happy days with
Gudmund, but he was forced to return because of the prayers which were
offered up. Ere he parted from his spirit bride she made him blind, lest
his eyes should ever gaze with love upon the daughters of men.

Now after Hadding, son of Halfdan, had slain the sea dragon <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) he had strange adventures. He rescued,
from a great giant Ragnhild, the fair daughter of the King of Nitheri,
and she became his bride. One evening, in midwinter, while they feasted
together, a spirit woman rose up, and she bore with her a bunch of white
cowbanes, freshly plucked, and she asked Hadding, who wondered greatly
to see summer flowers at such a time, if be had desire to behold the
place where they grew. The young king answered her that he would fain
see it, whereat she flung her mantle over him and together they
disappeared.

'Twas thus it came that Hadding set forth to journey towards Hela. He
went through a dark land, and black were the mists about him, while the
air was ice-cold. Then he came to a road which was daily trod by many
feet, and he walked on until he reached a swiftly flowing river which
was filled with sharp and pointed weapons. With his guide Hadding
crossed the bridge, and came to a plain where two great armies contended
in battle. Thus did many men who were sword-slain upon earth

 

<span id="img_26800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HUNDINGSBANE'S
RETURN TO VALHAL&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the painting by E.
Wallcousins&lt;/i&gt;](tn/26800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26800.jpg)  
HUNDINGSBANE'S RETURN TO VALHAL  
*From the painting by E. Wallcousins*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

choose to live in Hela, where they performed again their deeds of might
and fell without fear.

At length the woman took Hadding towards a place which was surrounded by
a high wall. He had already gazed from afar off, as he descended the
hills, upon the beauties of the enclosure, where grew the flowers which
were plucked in midwinter and stately beings in robes of purple had
blissful dwelling.

The old woman tried to leap over the wall, but was unable to do so. She,
however, showed Hadding that the place within was indeed the land of
life. She seized a fowl which she carried with her, and flung its head,
which he wrung off, over the wall. The head was speedily restored again,
and the bird crowed loudly.

Hadding thereafter returned again unto his own land, and he endured many
perils upon the way.

### Spenser's Mimer

Guyon finds Mammon in a delve  
  Sunning his treasure hoar,  
Is by him tempted and led down  
  To see his secret store.

At last he came upon a gloomy glade,  
Covered with boughs and shrubs from heaven's light,  
Whereas he sitting found in secret shade  
An uncouth, savage and uncivil wight, <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70)  
Of grisly hue and foul ill-favoured sight;  
His face with smoke was tann'd and eyes were bleared,  
His head and beard with soot were ill bedight,  
His coal-black hands did seem to have been seared  
In smith's fire-spitting forge, and nails like claws appeared.

 

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

His iron coat, all overgrown with rust,  
Was underneath envelopèd with gold  
Whose glittering gloss, darkened with filthy dust,  
Well yet appearèd to have been of old  
A work of rich entail and curious mould,  
Woven with antiques and wild imag'ry:  
And in his lap a mass of coin he told  
And turnèd upside down, to feed his eye  
And covetous desire with his huge treasury

   .       .       .       .       .       .

And round about him lay on every side  
Great heaps of gold that never could be spent;  
Of which some were rude ore, not purified  
Of Mulciber's devouring element;  
Some others were new driven, and distent  
Into great ingots and to wedges square;  
Some in round plates withouten moniment <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71);  
But most were stampt, and in their metal bare  
The antique shapes of Kings and Kesars strong and rare

   .       .       .       .       .       .

"What secret place," quoth he, <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72) "can
safely hold  
So huge a mass, and hide from heaven's eye?  
Or where hast thou thy wonne <span id="fr_73"></span>[3](#fn_73), that
so much gold  
Thou canst preserve from wrong and robbery?"  
"Come thou," quoth he, "and see." So by and by  
Through that thick covert he him led, and found  
A darksome way, which no man could descry,  
That deep descended through the hollow ground,  
And was with dread and horror compassèd around.

So soon as Mammon there <span id="fr_74"></span>[4](#fn_74) arrived, the
door  
To him did open and afforded way:  
Him followed eke Sir Guyon evermore,  
Ne darkness him ne danger might dismay.  
Soon as he entered was, the door straightway <span id="page_271">p.
271</span>  
Did shut, and from behind it forth there leapt  
An ugly fiend, more foul than dismal day;  
The which with monstrous stalk behind him stept;  
And ever as he went due watch upon him kept.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

Both roof, and floor, and walls, were all of gold,  
But overgrown with dust and old decay,  
And hid in darkness, that none could behold  
The hue thereof; for view of cheerful day  
Did never in that house itself display,  
But a faint shadow of uncertain light,  
Such as a lamp, whose life does fade away;  
Or as the moon, cloathèd with cloudy night,  
Does shew to him that walks in fear and sad affright.

In all that room was nothing to be seen  
But huge great iron chests, and coffers strong,  
All barr'd with double bends, that none could weene  
Them to enforce with violence or wrong;  
On every side they placèd were along,  
But all the ground with skulls was scatterèd  
And dead men's bones, which round about were flung  
Whose lives, it seemèd, whilome there were shed,  
And their vile carcases now left unburièd

They forward pass; ne Guyon yet spoke word,  
Till that they came unto an iron door  
Which to them opened of its own accord,  
And showed of riches such exceeding store,  
As eye of man did never see before,  
Ne ever could within one place be found,  
Though all the wealth, which is or was of yore,  
Could gathered be through all the world around,  
And that above were added to that underground.

The charge thereof unto a covetous spright  
Commanded was, who thereby did attend,  
And warily awaited day and night,  
From other covetous fiends it to defend, <span id="page_272">p.
272</span>  
Who it to rob and ransack did intend.  
Then Mammon, turning to that warrior, said:  
"Lo, here the worldës bless! lo, here the end  
To which all men do aim, rich to be made!  
Such grace now to be happy is before thee laid."

He brought him, through a darksome narrow strayt <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75),  
To a broad gate all built of beaten gold:  
The gate was open; but therein did wait  
A sturdy villain, striding stiff and bold,  
As if the Highest God defy he would:  
In his right hand an iron club he held  
But he himself was all of golden mould,  
Yet had both life and sense, and well could weld  
That cursed weapon, when his cruel foes he quell'd.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

He brought him in. The room was large and wide,  
As it some guild or solemn temple were;  
Many great golden pillars did up-bear  
The massy roof, and riches huge sustain;  
And every pillar decked was full dear  
With crowns and diadems, and titles vain,  
Which mortal princes wore while they on earth did reign.

A route of people there assembled were,  
Of every sort and nation under sky  
Which with great uproar pressed to draw near  
To th' upper part, where was advanced high  
A stately siege <span id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76) of sovran majesty;  
And thereon sat a woman gorgeous gay,  
And richly clad in robes of royalty,  
That never earthly prince in such array  
His glory did enhance, and pompous pride display.

 

<span id="img_27200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [!['And all that
press did round about her swell&lt;br&gt; To catchen hold of that long
chain, thereby&lt;br&gt; To climb aloft, and others to excell:&lt;br&gt;
That was Ambition, rash desire to sty,&lt;br&gt; And every link thereof
a step of dignity.''&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;After the drawing by Walter
Crane. By permission of Messrs. George Allen &
Co&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/27200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/27200.jpg)  
'And all that press did round about her swell  
To catchen hold of that long chain, thereby  
To climb aloft, and others to excell:  
That was Ambition, rash desire to sty,  
And every link thereof a step of dignity.''  
*After the drawing by Walter Crane. By permission of Messrs. George
Allen & Co*.  
</span>

 

Her face right wondrous fair did seem to be,  
That her broad beauties beam great brightness threw  
Through the dim shade, that all men might it see;  
Yet was not that same her own native hue <span id="page_273">p.
273</span>  
But wrought by art and counterfeited shew,  
Thereby more lovers unto her to call;  
Natheless most heavenly fair in deed and view  
She by creation was, till she did fall;  
Thenceforth she sought for helps to cloak her crime withal.

There, as in glist'ring glory she did sit,  
She held a great gold chain y-linkèd well,  
Whose upper end to highest heaven was knit,  
And lower part did reach to lowest hell;  
And all that press did round about her swell  
To catchen hold of that long chain, thereby  
To climb aloft, and others to excell:  
That was Ambition, rash desire to sty <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77),  
And every link thereof a step of dignity.

Which whenas Guyon saw, he gan enquire,  
What meant that press about that lady's throne,  
And what she was that did so high aspire?  
Him Mammon answerèd: "That goodly one  
Whom all that folk with such contention  
Do flock about, my dear, my daughter is; <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78)  
Honour and dignity from her alone  
Derivèd are, and all this worldës bliss,  
For which ye men do strive; few get, but many miss.  
           *From* "*The Faerie Queene*", *Book II*, *Canto VII*.

### The Garden of Hela

                          Him forth thence led  
Through grisly shadows by a beaten path  
Into a garden goodly garnishèd  
With herbs and fruits, whose kinds mote not be redd <span
id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_79):  
Not such as earth out of her fruitful womb  
Throws forth to men, sweet and well savourèd, <span id="page_274">p.
274</span>  
But direful deadly black, both leaf and bloom,  
Fit to adorn the dead and deck the dreary tomb.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

The garden of Pròserpina <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) this
hight:  
And in the midst thereof a silver seat,  
With a thick arbour goodly over dight,  
In which she often used from open heat  
Herself to shroud, and pleasures to entreat:  
Next thereunto did grow a goodly tree  
With branches broad dispread and body great,  
Cloathèd with leaves, that none the wood might see  
And laden all with fruit as thick as it might be.

Their fruit were golden apples glist'ring bright  
That goodly was their glory to behold;  
On earth like never grew, no living wight  
Like ever saw, but they from hence were sold. . . .

   .       .       .       .       .       .

The war-like elf much wondered at this tree <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81)  
So fair and great, that shadowed all the ground;  
And his broad branches laden with rich fee  
Did stretch themselves, without the utmost bound  
Of this great garden, compassed with a mound. . . .

### The River of Torture

Which to behold he clomb up to the bank;  
And, looking down, saw many damnèd wights  
In those sad waves, which direful deadly stank,  
Plongèd continually of cruel sprites,  
That with their piteous cries and yelling shrightes <span
id="fr_82"></span>[3](#fn_82),  
They made the further shore resounden wide:  
Amongst the rest of those same rueful sights  
One cursèd creature he by chance espied  
That drenchèd lay full deep under the garden side.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

Deep was he drenchèd to the upmost chin,  
Yet gapèd still as coveting to drink  
Of the cold liquor which he waded in;  
And, stretching forth his hand, did often think  
To reach the fruit which grew upon the brink;  
But both the fruit from land, and flood from mouth,  
Did fly a-back, and made him vainly swink;  
The whiles he starved with hunger, and with drouth  
He daily died, yet never throughly dyen couth <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83).

He looked a little further and espied  
Another wretch, whose carcas deep was drent <span
id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84)  
Within the river which the same did hide.  
But both his hands most filthy feculent <span
id="fr_85"></span>[3](#fn_85)  
Above the water were on high extent,  
And feigned to wash themselves incessantly.  
Yet nothing clearer were for such intent,  
But rather fouler seemèd to the eye;  
So lost his labour vain and idle industry.

### The Fruit of Forgetfulness

Infinite more tormented in like pain  
He there beheld, too long here to be told;  
Ne Mammon would there let him long remain,  
For terror of the tortures manifold,  
In which the damnèd souls he did behold,  
But roughly him bespake, "Thou fearful fool  
Why takest not of that same fruit of gold?  
Ne sittest down on that same silver stool,  
To rest thy weary person in the shadow cool?"

All which he did to do him deadly fall  
In frail intemperance through sinful bait  
To which if he inclined had at all  
That dreadful fiend, which did behind him wait, <span id="page_276">p.
276</span>  
Would him have rent in thousand pieces straight;  
But he was wary wise in all his way  
And well perceivèd his deceitful sleight,  
Ne suffered lust his safety to betray;  
So goodly did beguile the guiler of his prey.

And now he was so long remainèd there  
That vital powers gan wax both weak and wan  
For want of food and sleep, which two up-bear  
Like mighty pillars, this frail life of man,  
That none without the same enduren can:  
For now three days of men were overwrought,  
Since be this hardy enterprise began:  
Forthy <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) great Mammon fairly he
besought  
Into the world to guide him back as he him brought.

The god, though loth, yet was constrained t' obey;  
For longer time than that no living wight  
Below the earth might suffered be to stay:  
So back again him brought to living light.  
But all so soon as his enfeebled spright  
Gan suck this vital air into his breast,  
As overcome with too exceeding might,  
The life did flit away out of her nest,  
And all his senses were with deadly fit oppressed.

### Hela in the Border Ballads

### The Three Roads

True Thomas lay on Huntlie bank;  
  A ferlie he spied wi' his ee;  
And there he saw a ladye bright,  
  Come riding doon by the Eildon Tree.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

"Harp and carp, Thomas," she said;  
  "Harp and carp along wi' me;  
And if ye dare to kiss my lips,  
  Sure of your bodie I will be."

Betide me weal, betide me woe,  
  That weird <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87) shall never daunton
me."--  
Syne he has kissed her rosy lips,  
  All underneath the Eildon Tree.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

She's mounted on her milk-white steed;  
  She's taen true Thomas up behind:  
And aye, whene'er her bridle rung,  
  The steed flew swifter than the wind.

O they rade on, and farther on;  
  The steed gaed swifter than the wind;  
Until they reach'd a desert wide,  
  And living land was left behind.

Light down, light down, now, true Thomas,  
  And lean your head upon my knee;  
Abide and rest a little space  
  And I will shew you ferlies three.

O see ye not yon narrow road  
  So thick beset with thorns and briers?  
That is the path of righteousness,  
  Though after it but few enquires.

And see ye not that braid, braid road,  
  That lies across that lily leven?  
That is the path of wickedness,  
  Though some call it the road to heaven.

"And see not ye that bonny road,  
  That winds aboot the fernie brae?  
That is the road to fair Elfland,  
  Where thou and I this night maun gae.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

"But, Thomas, ye maun hold your tongue,  
  Whatever ye may hear or see;  
For, if you speak word in Elfyn land,  
  Ye 'll ne'er get back to your ain countrie."

O they rade on, and farther on,  
  And they waded through rivers aboon the knee,  
And they saw neither sun nor moon,  
  But they heard the roaring o' the sea.

It was mirk, mirk night, and there was nae starn light,  
  And they waded through red blood to the knee;  
For a' the blood that 's shed on earth  
  Rins through the springs o' that countrie.

Sync they came on to a garden green,  
  And she pu'd an apple frae a tree--  
"Take this for thy wages, true Thomas;  
  It will gie thee the tongue that can never lee."  
                                    *Thomas The Rhymer*.

### The Mountains

"O where have you been, my long, long love,  
  This long seven years and more?"--  
"O I'm come to seek my former vows  
  Ye granted me before."--

   .       .       .       .       .       .

She has taken up her two little babes,  
  Kissed them baith cheek and chin;  
"O fare ye weel, my ain two babes,  
  For I'll ne'er see you again."

   .       .       .       .       .       .

She had not sailed a league, a league,  
  A league but barely three,  
When dismal grew his countenance,  
  And drumlie grew his ee.

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

The masts that were like the beaten gold,  
  Bent not on the heaving seas;  
But the sails, that were o' the taffetie,  
  Fill'd not in the east land breeze.

They had not sailed a league, a league,  
  A league but barely three,  
Until she espied his cloven foot,  
  And she wept right bitterlie.

O hold your tongue of your weeping," says he,  
  "Of your weeping now let it be;  
I will show you how the lilies grow  
  On the banks of Italy."--

"O what hills are yon, yon pleasant hills,  
  That the sun shines sweetly on?"--  
"O yon are the hills of heaven," he said,  
  "Where you will never win."--

"O whaten a mountain is yon," she said,  
  "All so dreary wi' frost and snow?"--  
"O yon is the mountain of hell," he cried,  
  "Where you and I will go."  
                                    *The Demon Lover*.

### Demon Vengeance

Up then spake the Queen o' Fairies  
  Out o' a bush o' broom--  
"She that has borrowed young Tamlane  
  Has gotten a stately groom."--

Up then spake the Queen o' Fairies  
  Out o' a bush o' rye--  
"She's taen awa' the bonniest Knight  
  In a' my companie.

"But had I kenn'd, Tamlane," she says,  
  "A lady wad borrowed thee, <span id="page_280">p. 280</span>  
I wad ta'en out thy twa grey een,  
  Put in twa een o' tree.

Had I kenn'd, Tamlane," she says,  
  "Before ye came frae hame--  
I wad ta'en out your heart o' flesh,  
  Put in a heart o' stane."

"Had I but had the wit yestreen  
  That I hae coft the day--  
I'd paid my kane seven times to hell  
  Ere you'd been won away."  
                             *The Young Tamlane*.

### The Birk o' Paradise

There lived a wife at Usher's Well,  
  And a wealthy wife was she,  
She had three stout and stalwart sons,  
  And sent them o'er the sea.

They hadna been a week from her,  
  A week but barely ane,  
When word came to the carline wife  
  That her three sons were gane.

They hadna been a week from her,  
  A week but barely three,  
When word came to the carline wife,  
  That her sons she 'd never see.

"I wish the wind may never cease,  
  Nor fishes in the flood,  
Till my three sons come hame to me,  
  In earthly flesh and blood." <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88)

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

It fell about the Martinmas,  
  When nights are lang and mirk,  
The carline wife's three sons came hame,  
  And their hats were o' the birk.

It neither grew in syke or ditch,  
  Nor yet in ony sheugh;  
But at the gates of Paradise  
  That birk grew fair eneugh.

### Gilly Flowers

The fields aboot this city fair  
  Were a' wi' roses set,  
Gilly flowers and carnations rare  
  Which canker could not fret."  
                               *Clerk Saunders*

### The Garden Fruit

She led him intil a fair herbere,  
  There fruit groand was gret plenté,  
Pears and apples, both ripe they were,  
  The date and eke the damsyn tree,  
  The fig and eke the wineberry.

   .       .       .       .       .       .

He pressed to pull the fruit with his hand,  
  As man for food was nyhonde faint,  
She said, "Thomas let that stand,  
  Or else the fiend will thee attent.

"If thou pull them, sooth to say,  
  Thy soul goes to the fire of Hell  
It comes not out till Domisday  
  And there ever in pain to dwell."  
                            *Thomas The Rhymer*.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[257:1](tml29.htm#fr_61) Mimer.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[258:1](tml29.htm#fr_62) Saxo's words are:
"Cujus transeundi cupidos revocavit, docens, eo alveo humana a
monstrosis rerum secrevisse naturam, nec mortalibus ultra fas esse
vestigiis."

<span id="fn_63"></span>[259:1](tml29.htm#fr_63) In Highland lore these
unions are followed by speedy death. The demon brides crush their
lovers.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[261:1](tml29.htm#fr_64) See chapter "Thor in
Peril".

<span id="fn_65"></span>[262:1](tml29.htm#fr_65) Thjasse-Volund's Sword
of Victory and multiplying ring. Here we have the treasure which was
cursed, and the dragon guardian of Beowulf, Volsunga saga, &c. The horn
is Gjallar-horn which Heimdal is to blow at Ragnarok.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[264:1](tml29.htm#fr_66) This is evidently Loke,
not the Utgard-Loki in the chapter "The City of Enchantments ". Loke's
place of torture was situated in the utmost part of Nifel hel.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[266:1](tml29.htm#fr_67) His Hamingje.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[267:1](tml29.htm#fr_68) The blessing
counteracts the evil influence of a spell. In the Highlands a child
should be blessed ere its name is asked, and strangers should bless a
house on entering it. The blessing is not only a proof of friendly
intentions, but a preventive, for he who blesses is unable to practise
black magic for the time being.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[268:1](tml29.htm#fr_69) See Chapter "The Gods
Reconciled".

<span id="fn_70"></span>[269:1](tml29.htm#fr_70) This is Spenser's
Mammon. He resembles very closely Gudmund-Mimer, the chief of elfin
smiths who in Norse mythology produce the vast stores of treasure
accursed.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[270:1](tml29.htm#fr_71) Superscription, image.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[270:2](tml29.htm#fr_72) The Knight Guyon.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[270:3](tml29.htm#fr_73) Dwelling.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[270:4](tml29.htm#fr_74) The gate of hell.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[272:1](tml29.htm#fr_75) Street, narrow passage.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[272:2](tml29.htm#fr_76) Throne.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[273:1](tml29.htm#fr_77) Ascend.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[273:2](tml29.htm#fr_78) Urd, goddess of fate,
is Mimer's daughter.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[273:3](tml29.htm#fr_79) Must not be declared.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[274:1](tml29.htm#fr_80) In Saxo she is Urd.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[274:2](tml29.htm#fr_81) Like Ygdrasil.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[274:3](tml29.htm#fr_82) Shrieks.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[275:1](tml29.htm#fr_83) Could.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[275:2](tml29.htm#fr_84) Drenched.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[275:3](tml29.htm#fr_85) Muddy, foul.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[276:1](tml29.htm#fr_86) Therefore.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[277:1](tml29.htm#fr_87) Urd--destiny.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[280:1](tml29.htm#fr_88) She had evidently power
to work a spell and secure her wish. Belief in wishing power is not yet
quite extinct in Scotland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. The Doom of the Volsungs](tml30)
