[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml36)  [Next](tml38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

### CHAPTER XXXII

# Siegfried and the Nibelungs

The Hero's Youth--His Service with Mimer--Wieland overcome--Forging the
Sword--The Dragon Regin--The Combat--How Siegfried became
invulnerable--Language of Birds--Mimer is slain--Prince journeys to
Isenland--Queen Brunhild--Combat with Giants--The Dwarf Alberich--Cloak
of Obscurity--The Nibelung Hoard--Quest of Kriemhild.

SIEGFRIED <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md) was a great and noble
prince whose fame, by reason of his mighty deeds, hath endurance through
the Ages. His sire was King Siegmund of the Netherlands and his mother
was named Sigelinde. Ere yet he had reached the years that are mellowed
by wisdom, Siegfried was of proud and haughty spirit and brooked not
restraint. Great was his strength, and if his playfellows obeyed not his
will in all things, he smote them harshly, so that they hated as much as
they feared him. Wild and wilful was the prince as a lad may be.

Of Siegfried's doings complaint was made unto the king, who resolved to
set him to work among strong and skilful men. Accordingly the prince was
sent unto

 

<span id="img_35400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE
NIBELUNGENLIED&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the fresco by Professor E.
Ille&lt;/i&gt;](tn/35400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/35400.jpg.md)  
THE NIBELUNGENLIED  
*From the fresco by Professor E. Ille*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mimer, the wonder
smith, who dwelt in a deep forest, so that he might acquire such
knowledge of how weapons were made as would serve him well in aftertime.
Mimer gave the lad heavy tasks to perform, and kept him working at anvil
and bellows from morn till even. Skilful in time he became, and his
strength increased beyond knowledge.

The years went past, and the lad endured the burden of servitude and the
blows of his elders with humility. But one day he fell upon Wieland, the
strongest and most cunning smith that was in Mimer's service, and
dragged him by the locks through the smithy. Mimer was wroth, but
Siegfried had discovered the full measure of his might and he commanded
haughtily, as befits a prince, that a strong sword should be forged for
him. The master smith realized that he must needs obey, however
unwilling he might be; so he drew from the furnace a bar of glowing
iron, and bade the lad to beat out for himself a worthy blade.

Siegfried swung high the great hammer and struck a blow which shook the
smithy. The iron was splintered to pieces, the hammer snapped asunder,
and the anvil was driven deep into the ground.

Mimer spake with anger, but Siegfried smote him heavily, and the other
assistant he smote also.

Then the lad demanded to be given a sword equal to his strength. Mimer
made promise to forge it for him. But in his heart he vowed to be
avenged. First he went through the forest to the place where dwelt his
brother Regin, who had been, by reason of his evil doings, transformed
into a dragon. Mimer roused the monster to anger and bade him lie in
wait for Siegfried. Thereafter he returned to the smithy and asked the
lad to hasten through the forest unto the dwelling of the

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

charcoal-burner, so that be might procure sufficient good fuel with
which to forge the promised sword.

Siegfried seized his club and went forth. He came to a forest swamp
which swarmed with venomous snakes and great lind-worms and toads; but
he had more loathing than terror. When he reached the charcoal-burner he
besought him for fire, so that be might destroy the reptiles.

"Alas, for thee!" the charcoal-burner exclaimed; "for if thou dost
return again by the way thou didst come the dragon Regin will come forth
to devour thee."

The prince scorned to be afraid, and snatching a fiery brand he returned
through the forest and set in flames the trees and shrubbage of the
swamp, so that all the loathsome reptiles were destroyed.

Then came forth the great dragon, bellowing loud and spouting venom. The
earth trembled as he came. But Siegfried was not afraid. Thrice he smote
the monster with his club and thus slew it. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107.md)

Perceiving that the dragon was dead, the prince cut it up, and a deep
stream of blood issued forth. He dipped his finger into it, and
marvelled to find that the skin had become hard as horn.

Now shall I render myself invulnerable against battle wounds, he said.

So he cast off his clothing and plunged into the hot stream. His whole
body was then made horn-hard, save a single spot between his shoulders,
to which a gummy leaf had adhered.

Siegfried was well pleased. He clad himself and cooked pieces of the
dragon's flesh, so that he might receive a meed of its strength. As he
watched the flesh

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

broiling, he tasted a portion to discover if it were ready. When he did
that the forest was filled with magic voices, for he could understand
the language of birds.

Marvelling greatly, he listened to the birds as they sang:

If Siegfried knew what we know,  
  What we know this day,  
He would seek, O, he would seek  
  The wonder smith to slay;  
For Mimer sent him to the wood  
  To be the Dragon's prey.

Let Siegfried know what we know,  
  And ponder o'er our song . . .  
The wonder smith would fain, O fain,  
  Avenge his brother's wrong--  
Smite to live, or wait his blow  
  And live not long.

Siegfried heard with understanding, and his heart was hardened against
the wonder smith. He cut off the dragon's head, and, hastening unto the
smithy, he flung the trophy at Mimer's feet, bidding him to eat thereof.
Wieland and his fellow fled, fearing greatly the prince's wrath, but
Mimer sought to appease him with flattering words, and at length made
offer, for life ransom, of the steed Grane, which was of Sleipner's
race.

Siegfried accepted the gift, and then, remembering what the birds had
sung, he smote Mimer with his club and slew him.

Then returned the young hero unto his sire, King Siegmund, who reproved
him for killing the master smith, but he took pride in the lad because
that he had slain the dragon.

Soon afterwards Siegfried was given arms and armour, and became a
complete warrior. A banquet was held,

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

and beakers were drained, when, with loud acclamations, the prince was
hailed as heir to the kingdom of the Netherlands.

Thereafter Siegmund's strong son went forth to will renown in distant
lands, and northward he bent his way towards Isenland. On the shore of
the Netherlands a ship awaited him. A great gale blew, and the master
mariner feared to go forth. But Siegfried would brook not delay, and
crossed the stormy seas without fear, despite the peril he endured.

He landed in safety and journeyed towards the castle of Queen Brunhild.
The gates were shut and bolted, but he broke them open. Then did the
knights who were on guard rush against him, and they began to fight. But
Brunhild came forth and bade that the combat should cease, and she gave
the prince right courtly welcome.

Now Brunhild was very fair, and was a battle maiden of wondrous strength
and prowess. Many wooed her, but no knight came nigh who was worthy her
skill; those who encountered her were slain one by one. Maid attendants
she had, too, and they were clad in armour and bravely were they wont to
fight for their queen.

Siegfried saw that Brunhild had great beauty, but he had no desire to
win her by combat against her knights or by vying with her in feats of
strength.

"She whom I shall have for wife," he said, "must be gentle and womanly.
I love not the battle maiden."

Yet he departed not without display of prowess, for he seized a boulder
and flung it so great a distance that all who saw the feat performed
wondered greatly. <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108.md)

The prince then went on his way until he came to the land of the
Nibelungs. It chanced that the king had died, and his two sons, Nibelung
and Schilbung, disputed

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

over the treasure hoard. Unto Siegfried they made offer of a wondrous
sword, which had been forged by the dwarfs, if he would make just
division of their father's riches. He did as they desired, but they
sought to repay him with treachery. For when he was given the sword,
which was named Balmung, they said that he had kept back part of the
treasure for himself. A quarrel was stirred up, and it waxed fierce.
Then the king's sons called forth twelve giants, so that the prince
might be overcome and bound, and thereafterwards imprisoned in the
treasure cavern of the mountain.

But Siegfried feared not any foe. He fought bravely against the giants.

Then spells were wrought, and a thick mist gathered in the place of
conflict; but the sword Balmung was wielded by Siegfried to such good
purpose that he prevailed. A thunderstorm raged; <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md) the mountains resounded with dread
clamour and the earth trembled. Yet did the prince fight on, until he
had slain giant after giant and none remained alive.

Thereafter the dwarf Alberich came forth against him, seeking to be
avenged. A cunning foeman was he, and not easy to combat against, for he
had power to become invisible. He possessed a cloak of obscurity, and
when he put it on Siegfried must needs combat with menacing nothingness.
Long they fought, and in the end the prince had the dwarf in his
power. <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110.md)

Although Siegfried put to death the two sons of the

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

king, he spared Alberich, from whom he won the Cloak of Obscurity, which
could, when he wore it, render him invisible. For he followed the dwarf
as he fled towards the mountain cavern in which the treasure was
concealed. Then did the masterful hero possess himself of the hoard, and
he made Alberich the keeper of it when he vowed to obey his commands.

The Nibelung people acclaimed Siegfried as their king, but he tarried
not long in their midst. He took with him twelve bold war-men, and set
sail again for the Netherlands. His fame went speedily abroad, and his
deeds were sung of by gleemen in many a hall.

A right valiant and noble prince did Siegfried become; all men honoured
him, and by women was he loved. Many a fair maiden sighed because he
sought not to win one or another. But he rejoiced in warlike feats and
in games, and his heart was moved not with desire for any damsel.

There came a time, however, when gleemen sang of the beauty and grace of
the Princess Kriemhild, the daughter of the King of Burgundy. In the
wide world there was none fairer, and Siegfried loved her in secret ere
yet he beheld her, for he knew that she was his heart's desire, and he
resolved that he would woo her right speedily.

He spake to his knights thereanent, and they told both king and queen of
Siegfried's bold intent. Siegmund and Sigelinde sought to repress his
desire, but the prince would not be restrained.

The king warned his son that the warriors of Burgundy were fierce in
war, and among them were Gunther and strong and vengeful Hagen.

"What I shall obtain not by fair request," Siegfried said, "I may win in
battle."

 

<span id="img_36000"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![SIEGFRIED&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the Painting by F. Leeke. By
permission of Franz Hanfstaengl&lt;/i&gt;](tn/36000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/36000.jpg.md)  
SIEGFRIED  
*From the Painting by F. Leeke. By permission of Franz Hanfstaengl*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

His sire made offer of a great army, but the prince said he would go
forth as one of twelve knights. He scorned to win Kriemhild by force,
and vowed he would woo her by reason of brave deeds.

Then were preparations made for the journey, and the queen caused rich
and gorgeous apparel to be fashioned for Siegfried and his men, and when
they rode forth they were indeed of noble seeming.

Siegmund and Sigelinde sorrowed greatly when their son kissed them
farewell.

"Grieve not," Siegfried said, "for no evil shall come nigh me."

Then rode he away, the noble prince, to share his meed of joy and meet
his doom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[354:1](tml37.htm#fr_106.md) Siegfried is the hero
of the Nibelungenlied, the great Upper German poetic romance (see
Introduction). He is identical with the northern Sigurd of the Eddic
poems and Volsunga saga. The various versions of the popular tale
developed from an older legend. The Nibelungenlied is here introduced by
a summary from Thidrek saga, a Norse poem composed about the middle of
the thirteenth century, which was based on the Lower German version of
the legend and the Dietrich poems. Our introduction gives a consecutive
narrative. The Nibelungenlied opens abruptly by introducing Kriemhild,
who takes the place of the Norse Gudrun. Siegfried's early exploits are
afterwards referred to briefly.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[356:1](tml37.htm#fr_107.md) The necessity for
more than one blow recalls Thor's conflicts with the Midgard serpent in
Hymer's boat and at the Ragnarok battle.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[358:1](tml37.htm#fr_108.md) He resembles the
boulder-flinging mountain giants.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[359:1](tml37.htm#fr_109.md) Thor is suggested
here.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[359:2](tml37.htm#fr_110.md) There is a curious
Banffshire story of two mountain fairies who fought for the love of a
fairy lady. One was dark and the other was white. The former had power
to render himself invisible, but when he did so in the duel a red spot
remained. The white fairy saw the red spot floating in the air, and shot
an arrow through it. The dark fairy was slain because the red spot was
his heart. This story is not of a common type, and is evidently very
old. The fairies occupied opposing hills, as if they were the usual
Scottish mountain giants. Of course, giants and fairies have much in
common.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. The Promise of Kriemhild](tml38.md)
