[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml34)  [Next](tml36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

### CHAPTER XXX

# The Last of the Volsungs

Brynhild's Daughter--Escape to Norway--Her Protector murdered--Why she
was called Krake--The Princess Thora--Her Dragon--like Serpents--How
Ragnar won his Bride--The Northern Cinderella--Wooed by the Viking--The
Slave becomes a Queen--Story of Svanhild--Wife of Jormunrek
(Ermenrich)--Bikki (Sibech) the Accuser--Fate of Gudrun's Daughter.

Now when Brynhild died, Heimer feared that Giuki's vengeful sons would
slay Aslog because that she was the last of the Volsungs, and might rear
up a son who would come against them. So he prepared to take flight. He
made a harp, in which he concealed Brynhild's child with certain of her
treasures, and voyaged to Norway, where he made pretence to be a
minstrel. He went to a house in Spangerejd and dwelt in it. He revealed
not there the secret of the child's concealment. But one day the
housewife perceived that there was treasure in the harp, for the door of
Aslog's harp-chamber was not closed, and a portion of rich cloth
protruded from it. Then was Heimer murdered in his sleep, and Aslog was
taken forth with the treasure that was hers.

The child grew up in the strange household, and her foster-parents were
not only poor but cruel and harsh; the high-born girl was made a slave,
and was set to work at menial tasks. As the years passed by her beauty
shone forth, and her captors, fearing that blame would fall upon them
for doing evil, kept her clad in rags, and

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

smeared her face with soot and tar, so that no eye might gaze upon her
with wonder. Then was she nicknamed Krake, which signifies "the crow".

Thus did Aslog abide with harsh and strange folk until the coming of the
great viking Ragnar Lodbrog, who had fame not only on the high seas for
deeds of valour, but also because he had slain the venomous serpents
which were the bane of King Heroth's kingdom.

It chanced that the king had gone hunting in the woods, where he found
two young snakes; these he bore home with him to his daughter Thora, by
whom they were fed until they grew so large that she dreaded to approach
them. Each then began to devour an ox daily; and they both became so
powerful that they laid waste the countryside, and killed men and beasts
with their venomous breath.

King Heroth feared to contend against the serpents, but he offered his
daughter in marriage to the man who would slay them. Now Thora was fair
to behold, and many heroes went forth to fight the monsters; but they
suffered death one after another, and the affliction grew greater, so
that all people were in constant fear and peril.

The day came when Ragnar heard of Thora, whom he desired for wife, being
set up as a reward for serpent-slaying, and he resolved to win her by
mighty deeds. So he bade that a mantle and breeches of wool be fashioned
for him, and when they were ready he gave King Heroth to know that he
would make attack on the serpents.

It was the season of winter, and he dipped his woollen attire in a
stream and it was soon frozen hard. Clad thus, he was protected against
the venom, so he girt on his sword and took a spear in his right hand
and a shield

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

in his left and went forth to fight, so that Thora might be his bride.

A great serpent came against him, but he feared not, and prepared to
combat with it. Then another great serpent hastened to the aid of the
first, and he was soon in dire peril. They spouted venom upon Ragnar,
but his frost-bound clothing protected him; and they smote him with
their tails, but he stood firm. Terrible was the conflict which was
waged, and the king and all who were with him were filled with alarm,
and sought high and narrow hiding places, fearing that Ragnar would be
overcome.

The serpents were enraged, and they made ferocious attack with monstrous
jaws agape, but Ragnar raised his shield against them each time they
sought to bite. He was indeed sore pressed and greatly wearied; but at
length he cast his spear at them and it went through their hearts, so
that they were both slain.

A great shout was raised by those who were in hiding, and the king came
forth to honour Ragnar. He laughed to see the strange attire of the
hero, and nicknamed him "Lodbrog", which signifies "shaggy-breeches".

Then was a great banquet given. Ragnar was attired ill splendour, and he
was given Thora for wife. But when she had borne him two sons she died,
although young and fair, and her husband mourned for her.

Ragnar then plundered on the high seas and raided Scotland and Pictland.
He set a new king over the Orkneys, and went against Norway.

It chanced that he came one day to Spangerejd, and there he sent men
ashore to procure bread. When they returned with the food he was made
angry because that it was burned. The men told him that they had gone to

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

a house in which there was a beautiful maiden: they could refrain not
from gazing upon her, and so the bread was burned.

Now Ragnar bethought him to have such a maiden for his bride, so that he
might forget his grief for Thora. He sent to her a message bidding her
to come unto him. Desiring to put her wisdom to test, he told his
messengers to ask her to come not on foot nor yet driving; not attired
and yet not naked; not feasting and yet not fasting; not with anyone and
yet not alone.

Aslog, who was named Krake in her poor dwelling, came towards the great
sea king neither driving nor on foot but riding upon a goat with her
feet trailing upon the ground; she came without attire, but yet not
naked, because her hair was so long and bountiful that it covered her
body, and she drew a net about her; she came not feasting nor yet
fasting, because she held an onion to her lips and tasted of it; she was
not alone, because her dog walked by her side. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md)

Ragnar, who was now a great king, took beauteous Aslog, the daughter of
Sigurd and Brynhild, for his bride, and their sons were named Ingvar and
Ubbe. <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101.md)

After Sigurd's death Gudrun had a daughter who was named Svanhild. She
was given for wife to Jormunrek, <span id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_102.md)

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King of the Gauts.
Like to a sunbeam was she in the hall of Giuki, and there was great
sorrow when she went forth with her bondmaids. Much treasure was she
given, but the curse of Andvari's gold followed her. It fell that she
was falsely accused by Bikki of unfaithfulness with a prince, and so
greatly enraged did the king become that he ordered that she should be
put to death by being trampled under the hoofs of horses.

Then was Svanhild bound and left lying on a plain; but although the
horses ran over her they injured her not, some say because of her
surpassing beauty, and others because of the brightness of her Volsung
eyes.

The king deemed that his fair bride was innocent, because she had
escaped injury, but Bikki, her accuser, poisoned the king's ear, and
persuaded him to command that Svanhild should be laid upon the ground
with her face downward. Then were the horses driven over her again, and
she was trodden deep down into the earth by the multitudinous hoofs. So
perished Svanhild, daughter of Gudrun, while Aslog, daughter of
Brynhild, reigned as Ragnar's queen in a northern land. In Norway, s
royal line alone doth the blood of the Volsungs flow.

The young prince, who was Jormunrek's son, was condemned to death by his
sire and was hanged. <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md)

 

<span id="img_34200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![KRAKE&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;From the painting by M. E. Winge&lt;/i&gt;](tn/34200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/34200.jpg.md)  
KRAKE  
*From the painting by M. E. Winge*  
</span>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[341:1](tml35.htm#fr_100.md) So did Grainne come
to Diarmid in the Highland Fian tale. Grimm also gives a version of the
story with numerous references to similar tales in other languages than
Gaelic and German. In Saxo (Book 9) there is a more sordid account of
Ragnar's wooing of "a certain young woman" who became the mother of
Ubbe. Like Odin, when he wooed Rhine, Ragnar made use of female attire.
Our version is from Ragnar's saga. The Volsunga saga drops Aslog at the
point where she became Krake.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[341:2](tml35.htm#fr_101.md) Here we meet history.
By one authority Ingvar and Ubbe are said to be the northmen who
murdered King Eadmund of England. Others identify them as the avenging
sons who carved an eagle on the back of King Ella in Yorkshire, because
he had driven their half-brother Ivar from the throne. Krake is a
northern Cinderella, sung of in Norway and Denmark. She was a link
between Odin and the Norse kings, who prided themselves in their descent
from the Asa-god.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[341:3](tml35.htm#fr_102) Ermenrich (Hermanric.md)
of the Ostrogoths.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[342:1](tml35.htm#fr_103.md) Saxo gives an account
of a sham execution, but in the Dietrich story he is actually put to
death. Bikki is Sibech.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. Gudrun's Vengeance](tml36.md)
