[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml35)  [Next](tml37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

### CHAPTER XXXI

# Gudrun's Vengeance

Gudrun's Flight--Grimhild follows her--The Reconciliation--Wooed by King
Atle--Doom Dreams--The Fafner Hoard--Coveted by Atle--Invitation to
Gudrun's Brothers--Fateful Journey--Treachery--A Fierce Conflict--How
Hogne died--Gunnar among Vipers----Queen slays Atle--Becomes Bride of
Jonaker--Her Sons--Svanhild is avenged.

WHEN Sigurd and his son were burned with Brynhild on the pyre, Gudrun
refused to be comforted, nor could she abide to remain in the Hall of
Giuki among the oath-breakers, her brothers, who had brought her husband
to his death. So she went forth alone to wander in the forest with
desire that wolves should devour her. Five days she journeyed in her
sorrow, knowing not whither she went, until she came to the Hall of King
Alv. There was she received with pity and tenderness, and she had for
companion Thora, daughter of Hakon, King of Denmark. She was well loved,
and with Thora she sat and embroidered on fair tapestry the deeds of
Sigurd and Sigmund.

Three summers went past and four winters ere Queen Grimhild came to know
where Gudrun had her dwelling. She desired that her daughter should
return again, because King Atle the Mighty, the brother of Brynhild,
sought her for his bride. So Grimhild gave much treasure to her sons,
and went forth with them to appease Gudrun with gifts of gold, so that
the blood

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

feud might have end. Five hundred war-men rode with Grimhild and Gunnar
and Hogne, and they greeted Gudrun and made offer to her of the treasure
which they bore with them. Then did Gunnar give to Gudrun a golden
goblet filled with the drink of forgetfulness, which Grimhild had
brewed, so that she might put past old sorrows and hate. Gudrun drank
and her grief faded.

Thereafter Grimhild told her daughter that King Atle desired her for
wife, and said that she would be given more treasure when she was wed to
him.

"I desire not another husband," Gudrun said; "nor could I live happily
with the brother of Brynhild."

"If thou wilt wed Atle," said Grimhild, "thou shalt have sons, and it
shall seem to thee that Sigurd and Sigmund are: again in life."

"I seek not nor hope for gladness any more while I live," Gudrun
answered.

But her mother pleaded: "Atle is foremost among kings. A nobler husband
thou canst not find. May thou never he wed to any man," she added, "if
thou shalt spurn this mighty ruler."

"Alas!" sighed Gudrun; "bid me not wed the brother of Brynhild, for he
will bring great evil upon our kin, and be the death-bane of Hogne and
Gunnar. By my own hand must he fall in the end if I become his bride."

Grimhild wept, nor listened to what Gudrun said. "I shall give thee
lands and many war-men," she told her daughter, "if thou wilt take Atle
to be thy husband. Thou shalt have joy with him until thy life's end.
Besides, by marrying him thou wilt bring great honour unto thy kin."

"Alas! I must then be wed to him," said Gudrun, "although my heart
desireth him not. But there is no

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

gladness in store for me, for he will be a bane to my kin."

Grimhild rejoiced because that she at length worked her will, and soon a
great company set forth towards the kingdom of Atle the Mighty. They
travelled for seven days by land, and then for seven days they voyaged
over the sea, and thereafter they travelled by land again for seven days
'ere they came unto the Hall of the King. A great banquet was held, and
King Atle and Gudrun were wed. But the bride's heart was sad within her,
nor did she ever have joy in the Hall of Brynhild's brother.

One morning when Atle woke from sleep he was greatly troubled because of
the dreams he had dreamed. He spoke to Gudrun, saying: "It seemed that
thou didst thrust a sword through my breast."

"To dream of iron," the queen said, "is to dream of fire."

"And I dreamt also," continued the king, "that two water-reeds grew up
in my hall. By the roots were they pulled up, and they dripped red
blood; of them was I asked to partake. . . . Then it seemed that two
hungry hawks flew from my wrist, and they went to Hela. Hearts had they
steeped in honey, and I ate them. . . . Thereafter I dreamt that two
cubs gambolled at my feet; of these did I also partake."

"Thy dreams forebode much ill," Gudrun said; "verily, thy sons are nigh
unto life's end. Black grief is at hand."

Weeks passed and then years, and the doom dreams faded from the king's
memory. Yet was there more unhappiness between the ill-mated pair.

Then a time came when Atle spoke much of the accursed treasure which
Sigurd had found when he

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

slew Fafner. Well he knew that Gunnar and Hogne had kept from Gudrun the
greater part, so that they could boast of immense riches. In his heart
Atle coveted the hoard, and desired it for himself; so he took counsel
with his nobles, and decided to invite Gunnar and Hogne to visit his
Hall. A trusted messenger, whose name was Vinge, was sent forth with a
company of war-men to make promises to the brothers and induce them to
journey to Hunaland. Gudrun knew well that there was evil intent in her
husband's heart, so she carved runes of warning upon a gold ring and
gave it to Vinge as her gift to Hogne. But Atle's messenger changed the
runes so that they seemed to convey a speedy welcome from the queen.

When Vinge reached the Hall of Giuki he made his mission known. The
brothers consulted one with another, suspecting treachery and Atle's
lust for gold; but Gudrun's ring reassured them, and after they had
drunk mead with the messengers, they promised to go forth with them.

But Hogne's wife, Kostbera, made keen scrutiny of Gudrun's ring in her
bedchamber, and she saw that the runes had been altered from warning to
welcome. To her husband she spoke thereanent. She had also dreamt an
ominous dream, in which she saw the Hall overthrown by a rising flood.

But Hogne chided her for thinking ill of Atle. He had given his promise
to Vinge to fare forth with him, and scorned to break it.

Gunnar's wife had also dreams of warning. She saw her husband pierced by
a sword, while wolves howled about him.

"Little dogs will bark at us," Gunnar said.

"Methought I also saw," his wife continued, "a

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

battle maiden of sad visage entering the hall. She seemed to be a
valkyrie."

"A man must die at his appointed hour," Gunnar said; "besides, it is not
good to live over long."

Now Gunnar, who was king, for Giuki had departed hence, was well loved
by his people, and in the morning they clamoured about him, beseeching
that he should not leave them.

But he bade them to feast with him. "We may never again drink mead
together," he said, "but no man can escape his fate."

Gunnar's wife spake unto Vinge. "Methinks," she said, "that ill fortune
will come to our kind from this journey."

But Vinge swore many oaths, saying that no evil was intended. "May I be
hanged," he said, "if a sign of treachery is shown against Gunnar and
Hogne in the kingdom of Atle."

There were tears and lamentations when the warrior sons of Giuki went
forth never again to return to the kingdom of their sires, although
great glory would be theirs by reason of valorous deeds and unflinching
courage.

Gunnar's wife embraced her king, and Kostbera embraced Hogne, saying:
"May days of gladness be thine."

"Forget not to make merry," Hogne said, "no matter what befalls us on
our journey."

When they had voyaged over the sea, there were dumb foretellings of
their doom. So swiftly and hard did the oarsmen ply their blades that
rowing pins snapped and half the ship's keel was shorn off upon the
beach. They leapt ashore and feared not. Gunnar and Hogne went inland
towards Atle's stronghold with armour and

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

full war gear and all their men. Two sons of Hogne were with, them, and
valorous Orkning, the brother of Kostbera, who had fame for mighty
deeds.

They rode together through a dark wood, and when they approached the
stronghold of Atle they perceived that the gate was closed against them.
A great army was assembling to receive the guests.

Hogne raised his battleaxe and smote the gate asunder, for he must needs
enter with dignity becoming his rank.

"Thou hast done wrong," Vinge snarled; "'twere more fitting that thou
shouldst wait until I bring the gallows on which ye shall all hang. By
smooth words have I induced ye all to come hither; ere long shall ye die
together."

"Thy boasts affright me not," answered Hogne; "we shrink not from
conflict, if conflict there must be. Yet hast thou wrought us ill, so
take thy reward."

As he spake, Hogne swung his battleaxe and slew Vinge with a single
blow.

Boldly rode the sons of Giuki until they came to the Hall of Atle. There
was a strong army drawn up in line of battle.

King Atle came forth, and spake to the brothers.

"I bid ye welcome," he said, "but unto me must be now given up the great
treasure which Sigurd won when he slew Fafner, and is now mine by right
of Gudrun."

So fell the treasure curse upon them all in that hour of doom.

Gunnar spake. "Thou shalt never possess our riches," he said, "and if
thou dost battle against us, we shall make of thee and thy kin a feast
for the eagle and the wolf."

"Long have I desired," said Atle, "to punish ye

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

for the slaying of Sigurd. That indeed was a shameful doing, for his
equal was found not among men."

Hogne spake boldly: "Long then hast thou brooded over that matter. A
wonder it is that thou didst not sooner set thyself to the task."

Then began the battle, and against one another they cast their spears.

Tidings were borne unto Gudrun of hard fighting, and she hastened forth
in great anger. She cast from her the royal robe, and rushing into the
midst of the fray embraced her brothers and kissed them.

But in vain did she intervene. The time for peace was past, so she armed
herself and fought beside Gunnar and Hogne against the war-men of Atle.

Bravely fought the brothers. The king's three brothers were slain, and
Atle cried:

"Now am I the last of my kin, and by thee was Brynhild slain."

"Thou shalt have thy faring in time," answered Hogne; "the gods have
decreed thy punishment."

Fiercer grew the conflict, for Atle rallied his war-men and urged them
to battle. But he was driven back into his Hall, which soon streamed
with blood. Great were the deeds of the valorous Giukings.

But at length Gunnar and Hogne were pressed hard and overpowered. Then
were they bound in fetters.

Atle was wroth when he perceived that so many of his war-men were cut
down, and he scowled upon Hogne.

"He hath cut down a host of my heroes," he said; "so let his heart be
cut out."

"Do thy will," answered Hogne, "for I fear not. So grievously am I
wounded that I may as well die."

But the king delayed taking vengeance. He desired

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

first to know where the Fafner treasure was concealed, so he had the
brothers cast into separate dungeons.

Gunnar was first brought before him. "Thy life shall be spared," Atle
said, "if thou wilt reveal where the treasure lies hidden."

Gunnar answered him. "Ere I speak," he said, "Hogne's heart must be
brought unto me."

Then did Atle seek to practise deceit with much cunning. He had a thrall
seized, so that his heart might be held up before Gunnar. The man
screamed with anguish ere yet the knife touched him, for he desired not
to miss constant fare and good, nor leave his well-loved swine.

The coward heart was cut out, and it trembled before Gunnar.

"That is not the valorous heart of my brother," he said, "but the heart
of a thrall."

So Hogne had to be slain. He laughed when his enemies fell upon him, and
they marvelled at his valour.

Then was, the hero's heart plucked forth, and when Gunnar saw it he
said:

"That indeed is the heart of great Hogne. See how it still beats without
fear. I wavered while my brother was yet alive, but now can I die well
satisfied, Atle, for thou shalt never know where the treasure lies hid.
Yet thou, O King, shall escape not thy doom, and the Rhine river shall
keep the secret of the gold."

Atle was wroth; his brow darkened and his eyes burned fire.

"Take hence the prisoner," he growled, and as he bade his men so did
they do. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104.md)

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

Gunnar was bound and thrust into a loathsome dungeon which swarmed with
vipers. But Gudrun sent unto him a harp, and he played upon it with his
toes, making such sweet music that all the vipers were charmed into a
magic sleep save one, which gnawed his breast until it reached his heart
to suck his life's blood. Great torture did Gunnar suffer ere he died.

Men have told that the viper which killed the hero was the mother of
Atle, who was a sorceress.

The king boasted before Gudrun, because that he had triumphed over her
brothers.

"Gunnar and Hogne are indeed no more," the queen said, "and unto me is
given a heritage of vengeance."

Atle liked not her speech, so he said: "Let peace be made between us.
Thee shall I give much treasure as atonement for the loss of thy kin."

Gudrun would accept not of blood payment, but she desired that a funeral
feast be held for Gunnar and Hogne.

The king gave ready consent, and then was the dread work of vengeance
begun. Gudrun slew her two sons. Of their skulls she made drinking cups,
and she had their hearts cooked in honey for the king. In his wine she
mixed their blood.

When the feast was over, Atle desired that his sons should be brought
before him.

"Thou hast given me dark sorrow," Gudrun said, "by slaying my brothers.
Now hast thou thy reward. Thou didst eat the hearts of thy sons, and
their blood hast thou drunken in thy wine from these their skull cups.

"Vengeful woman," cried Atle, "a great cruelty thou hast done by slaying
thine own children."

"There shall be still greater cruelty yet," she answered him.

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

"Thou shalt be burned alive for this," Atle cried fiercely.

"Thine own death thou dost foretell," she said, "as well as mine."

Now a son of Hogne was left alive. He was a Niblung. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) With him did Gudrun conspire. When Atle
had drunken deep, and slumbered, his wife went with Hogne's son to his
bedchamber, and she thrust a sword through him.

Atle woke up and cried: "Who hath given me my deathwound?"

Gudrun made known herself, and said she had taken vengeance for her kin.

Atle pleaded that he would have stately burial, and the queen promised
him a great pyre. When he died she set fire to the hall, and all that
were within it were burned. In the darkness the war-men sprang one upon
the other, and many fell fighting ere the end came.

Gudrun made escape, but she desired not to live any more. She hastened
towards the shore and cast herself into the waves, so that her days
might have end.

There are those who tell that she died thus, but others say that the
waves bore her over the sea and cast her upon the beach nigh to the
stronghold of King Jonaker.

A strong warrior was he. When he saw the queen's beauty he desired to
have her for bride, and when she

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

was nourished and comforted the twain were married and they dwelt
happily together.

Gudrun had three sons, and they were named Hamder, Sorle, and Erp. It is
told that when they became full warriors she sent them forth against
King Jormunrek to avenge the death of Svanhild. But Erp, it was deemed,
was unwilling to go forth, so his brothers slew him.

Then Hamder and Sorle set forth. Their mother charmed their bodies
against steel, and when they reached Jormunrek, Hamder cut off his hands
and Sorle smote off his feet.

"If Erp were here," one said to the other, "he would have taken the
king's head."

Many strong and well-skilled warriors fought against the sons of Gudrun,
but without avail, for they could not wound them.

Then in the midst of the fray appeared a wise old man who had but one
eye. He was Odin, but they knew it not. He counselled that the warriors
should cast stones against the twain, who were protected by spells. As
he advised, so was it done. Many stones were flung at Hamder and Sorle,
and they were speedily slain.

So endeth the northern tale of the Volsungs and the Giukings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[350:1](tml36.htm#fr_104.md) A similar legend
regarding a secret is current in the Highlands. Neil Munro gives a
spirited version in his picturesque tale "The Secret of the Heather Ale"
in *The Lost Pibroch*.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[352:1](tml36.htm#fr_105.md) The Giukings were
originally the Nibelungs (Hniflungs) who possessed the hoard guarded by
Andvari (Alberich). That is why Hogne's son is called a "Niblung". The
reference is a survival from one of the older versions of the legend. In
the next chapter the Nibelungs are dwarfs (elves) and the Giukings are
the Burgundians. How myth and history commingled in endless variations
is illustrated by the Dietrich stories. Similarly, myths which had a
common and remote origin, and developed separately in various districts,
were also fused by wandering minstrels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII. Siegfried and the Nibelungs](tml37.md)
