[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml41)  [Next](tml43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

### CHAPTER XXXVII

# Dietrich of Bern

Hildebrand's Pupil--Alberich the Dwarf--Grim and Hilde--The Magic
Sword--Conflict in the Cavern--Giant and Hag are slain--Great
Sigenot--Dietrich taken Prisoner--In the Dragon's Lair--Hildebrand put
to Shame--Giant overcome--Heime's Challenge--Wieland's son
Witege--Fierce Combat --Dietrich in Peril--Peace Terms.

DIETRICH was the son of great Dietmar, King of Bern, whose brother was
the fierce King Ermenrich. He was but seven years old when there came to
his father's Court the battle hero, Hildebrand, far famed for valorous
deeds. Unto that great warrior was given the care of the young prince,
so that he might gain manly wisdom and skill in feats of arms. Fast
friends they became ere long, and faithful were they one to another in
after years, until death did thrust them apart.

It chanced that when the lad grew strong, and had desire for daring
adventure, a giant and a giantess, whose names were Grim and Hilde,
ravaged the land with fire, and did slaughter many goodly subjects.
Dietmar raised a mighty army and went out against them, but he could
discover not the hiding place of the monsters, who ever came forth
unawares to work their evil designs.

Now Dietrich had great desire to combat with the giant and giantess, for
he was brave as he was strong, and he sought most of all to win a
warrior's renown.

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> With Hildebrand he
hunted one fair morning in a deep forest. They came to a green and open
space, when suddenly a dwarf started up and ran to escape them. The lad
gave speedy chase, and soon he had the little man in his power. His name
was Alberich, and he had fame as a cunning robber and a wonder smith.
Dietrich desired to slay him, but the dwarf cried out:

"Kill me not, O Prince of Bern, and thou shalt have for thyself the
great sword which I forged for Grim and Hilde. It is called Naglering,
nor is its equal to be found in the world. I shall also guide thee unto
a cavern where much treasure lies hidden."

Dietrich promised to spare the life of the dwarf if his promise were
fulfilled, and Alberich said: "Thou must needs combat with Grim, who
hath the strength of twelve men, and also with Hilde, who is even more
to be feared, ere thou canst possess thyself of the treasure."

Binding vows were then taken by Alberich, who promised to return at
eventide with the wondrous sword. As the dwarf promised so did he do. He
met Dietrich and Hildebrand close to a great mountain cliff, and
delivered up the shining sword, Naglering. Proud was the lad of that
wondrous weapon, which brought him, as it befell, great fame in after
years.

The dwarf then vanished, and Hildebrand and Dietrich went towards the
cliff. Ere long they found the secret door and opened it. The sunlight
streamed within, and they beheld, lying beside a fire, gaunt Grim and
Hilde, who both at once sprang up angrily and desired vengeful combat.
The giant sought for his Naglering, but found it not. Cunningly indeed
had the robber dwarf taken it from him.

The giant then seized a burning log and leapt at Dietrich. Fast and
ferocious were his blows, and the

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

lad would full surely have been slain but for the sword he wielded.

Hilde sprang at Hildebrand and wrestled with him. Long and fierce was
the struggle, because the warrior had great strength, but the giantess
held him tightly round the neck, until, gasping for breath, Hildebrand
fell to the ground. So was he completely overcome, and the end of his
days seemed to be very nigh.

In vain the old warrior called upon Dietrich, who waged desperate
conflict with the giant. But at length the lad prevailed. Leaping aside
to escape a mighty blow, he smote Grim with Naglering and cut off his
head. So perished the ferocious giant, who had laid desolate a great
part of the kingdom of Dietmar.

Hildebrand was meanwhile in sore distress. Hilde began to bind him, so
that he might be put to death by torture, but Dietrich smote her so
great a blow that he clave her body in twain. But she relaxed not
thereat her ferocious embrace of the swooning warrior. Such was her
power that she united her severed parts before the lad's eyes, and
caused herself to be made whole again. So Dietrich smote her the second
time right through the middle, and yet again she was joined together as
before.

Hildebrand cried faintly: "Leap thou between the Hag's severed body when
thou dost strike next, and turn thine eyes from her."

As the warrior bade, so did Dietrich do. He cut Hilde in twain, and
immediately separated her body with his own, nor did he look round.

That was the end of Hilde. <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114) No
longer could she work her evil will. So she cried:

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

"If Grim had fought with Dietrich as well as I have fought with
Hildebrand, we should ne'er have been overcome.

Then life went from her, and Hildebrand was set free. The old warrior
embraced the prince, praising his valour and skill, and the glory of
battle gleamed in the eyes of Dietrich.

Great was the treasure which was concealed in the cavern. Dietrich took
for himself a wondrous shining helmet. It was named Hildegrim, after the
giant and the giantess, and it gave more than a mortal's strength to the
hero who wore it.

The prince put the helmet on his head. He triumphed in the power it gave
him. Then with Hildebrand he returned unto his sire, King Dietmar, who
rejoiced greatly because of the valorous deeds of his son, and he made
him a full knight before all the people.

There lived among the mountains to the west a great giant whose name was
Sigenot, and he vowed to be avenged upon Dietrich because that he slew
Grim, his uncle, and Hilde, his aunt, and possessed himself of their
treasure, and especially the helmet Hildegrim. One day Dietrich rode
forth alone to hunt in the deep forest, and in the midst of it he found
Sigenot lying fast asleep. Proud was the lad of his strength, and
overconfident withal, and he desired greatly to combat with the giant.
So he dismounted and went fearlessly towards him and kicked his body.
Sigenot leapt up in anger.

"At last thou art come," he cried. "Long have I waited for thee, Prince
of Bern, so that I might take vengeance for the slaying of my kinsman
Grim.

The giant seized his great spear, and Dietrich drew his sword Naglering.
But unequal was the combat.

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The giant smote
but a single blow with the spearhaft and felled the prince, whom he
speedily bound. Then he bore Dietrich through the forest, and cast him
into a dark, underground cavern, which was a dragon's lair. Snakes crept
about and hissed in the darkness; the prince had need to combat with
them.

Meanwhile Hildebrand went through the forest searching for the prince.
He wondered because he could not hear his huntsman's horn, and when he
found his horse bound to a tree, he feared greatly that Dietrich had
been slain. Great was the grief of Hildebrand. . . .

Suddenly he heard heavy footsteps coming through the trees, and ere long
the great Sigenot confronted him.

"Who art thou, and whom dost thou seek?" the giant bellowed.

"Hildebrand is my name," answered the bold warrior, "and I seek for
Dietrich, Prince of Bern."

The giant thrust his spear at him, but Hildebrand fought fiercely with
his sword. Ere long, despite his valour, the warrior was disarmed, and
Sigenot caught him by the beard, and dragged him through the forest,
bellowing the while:

"Follow me, Longbeard, follow me; now are Grim and Hilde avenged. Soon
shalt thou find thy Prince of Bern."

Now never before had a foeman dared to lay hands upon Hildebrand's
beard, and for that reason he was more wroth with than afraid of the
giant. As the warrior was being thus ignobly dragged to the cave in
which Dietrich lay bound, he saw the sword Naglering lying on the
ground. Nimbly he clutched it ere his captor was aware, and, striking
fiercely, he wounded the giant, who suddenly relaxed his hold so that
the warrior

 

<span id="img_40800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DIETRICH&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;From the statue in the Church of the Franciscans at
Innsbruck&lt;/i&gt;](tn/40800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/40800.jpg)  
DIETRICH  
*From the statue in the Church of the Franciscans at Innsbruck*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

leapt free. Then did fearless Hildebrand smite Sigenot and slay him with
a single blow. So perished the kinsman of Grim when he deemed proudly
that his vengeance was complete.

Deep was the underground cavern in which Dietrich was kept captive. The
prince heard the voice of Hildebrand calling to him, and entreated him
to make haste.

"Many vipers still remain alive," he said, "although not a few have I
slain and devoured."

Hildebrand cast off his clothing, and each garment did he tear in
shreds; then he made a rope which he lowered into the dark,
snake-infested cavern, so that the prince might have release from his
torture and unceasing conflict.

Dietrich seized the rope; but when Hildebrand began to pull him up, it
snapped asunder.

'Twas then that the dwarf Eggerich came nigh, rejoicing because that
Sigenot was slain. He speedily procured a rope ladder, and it was
lowered to Dietrich, who was thus given escape from the dragon's cave
and the hissing snakes that swarmed there.

The prince embraced his rescuer, but Hildebrand did chide him much
because that he had ventured forth in the forest alone.

Then they took leave of the dwarf Eggerich, and returned together unto
Bern. When the people came to know that the giant Sigenot was slain,
they rejoiced greatly, and acclaimed Hildebrand and the fearless son of
Dietmar.

Now there was not in all the kingdom a young warrior who was Dietrich's
equal. His fame went far and wide, and bold knights came riding to Bern
so that they might win his favour with challenge to feats of arms. Those
who were worthy and of high birth did

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

the prince choose to be his followers. In time he had thus command of
many valorous knights. Among these were Witege and Heime, who had great
fierceness and daring, and were so gloomy and cruel of heart that in
peace as in war they were dreaded and shunned. Men they smote and women
they hated and scorned; many young warriors they slew in conflict.
Churls were they both, and how they came to be honoured by Dietrich must
now be told.

Heime came first unto Bern. Dwarfish was he in stature, but his heart
was full of valour, and he had strength beyond his years. He feared not
the prince, despite his mighty fame. Unto him did his sire Studas, who
was a breeder of war steeds amidst the mountains, give a swift grey
horse, which was named Rispa, and the sword Blutgang.

When he rode boldly into the courtyard of the castle at Bern, Heime
challenged Dietrich to single combat. The prince was made angry thereat.
Hastily did he put his armour on and the shining helmet Hildegrim; then
with his spear in one hand, and in the other his great red shield on
which was pictured a golden lion, he charged the bold and low-born
stranger. Terrible was the shock. Heime's shield was pierced through,
but Dietrich's horse stumbled so that he came nigh to being thrown. Both
their spears were broken in twain.

Then did the young warriors, leaping to the ground, cast aside their
spearshafts and draw their shining swords. Fiercely did they combat one
against the other. But Blutgang rang faintly against Naglering. Heime
had skill and valour, but ere long his sword was cloven and shattered so
that he was placed at Dietrich's mercy. But the prince was drawn towards
him by reason of his prowess, and slew him not. He honoured, in generous

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

mood, the surly stranger, and gave him place among his knight followers.

Ere many days passed another young warrior, seeking adventure,
challenged the son of Dietmar to combat. His name was Witege, and he did
hie from Denmark. The prince was moved with wrath against him, for he
grew weary of the conflicts with each bold stranger who sought to put
his skill and valour to test. But in that fierce Dane he met a knight
who was more than his equal.

Now Witege was the son of Wieland, the wonder smith, a cunning and
far-famed worker in iron. Skilful was the lad with bow and arrows, as
was Eigel, his uncle.

He scorned to work at the forge, and desired to seek adventures, so that
he might win renown as a warrior. Of the fame of Dietrich he heard one
day, and he resolved to challenge him to single combat.

Wieland could not prevail upon him to remain at home, so he fashioned
for Witege a suit of shining armour, a great helmet, dragon-mounted, a
spear of much strength, and a white shield on which was painted a hammer
and tongs. Unto the lad he also gave a wonder sword of great sharpness,
named Mimung, which he had aforetime forged by compulsion for a tyrant
king.

Witege then set out to journey towards Bern in the land of the Amelungs.
On his way he met Hildebrand and Heime, who were also riding to
Dietmar's Court with a stranger knight. Witege waited them not, for they
sought to rest awhile.

Soon he drew nigh to a strong castle in which twelve robbers had their
dwelling. These, when they did behold the young knight coming towards
them, spake one to another, saying--"His shining armour shall we take
from him, and his right hand shall we cut off, and then send him
homeward."

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

So they sallied forth against Wieland's strong son. Two rode in front
and bade the lad surrender; but Witege drew the sword Mimung and slew
them right speedily. The others charged against him and waged fierce and
unequal conflict.

'Twas then that Hildebrand and Heime and the strange knight came nigh.
Hildebrand urged his companions to hasten to Witege's aid, but Heime
said: "Help him not; his pride is great; now let his valour be put to
proof."

But the old warrior would suffer not that the robbers should slay the
youthful hero; so he rode forward and the others followed him. Against
the fierce band did they all battle together, save Heime, who looked on,
and ere long seven lay dead on the ground, and the others were making
swift escape.

Witege gave thanks unto Hildebrand, and together they took vows of
knightly fellowship to be ever brotherly and true in after-time.

"Whither goest thou, valorous youth?" asked the elder warrior.

"I ride towards Bern," the son of Wieland made answer, "for it is my
desire to meet with Dietrich in single combat."

Hildebrand cared not to hear speech so bold from that valiant young
hero. Indeed he feared for Dietrich's safety. So when night fell, and
the Dane lay fast asleep, he drew from the lad's scabbard the sword
Mimung and placed in it his own.

At morningtide Witege called upon Dietrich to display his valour. As the
tale has been told, Dietmar's son waxed wroth, because that the Dane was
of lowly birth, being, indeed, but the son of a smith.

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

In vain did Hildebrand warn him of the youth's prowess and skill at
arms.

"The time is at hand," Dietrich said, "when peace must prevail in the
kingdom. I shall allow no churlish stranger to challenge me to conflict.
Heavily shall he pay for his boldness."

"It may be," Hildebrand said, "that thou shalt not prevail against this
valorous youth."

"Him shall I have this day hanged outside the gates of Bern," answered
the prince.

"Ere thou art able to accomplish that," Hildebrand said, "thou hast a
fierce battle to fight. I bid thee success, but not without fear."

Never before did Dietrich meet a doughtier war-man. Strong and rapid
were the blows which Witege gave. He smote the prince heavily on the
head, but the helmet Hildegrim resisted the edge of Hildebrand's sword,
and the Dane cursed his sire Wieland because that his sword was of so
little avail.

"Had I but a sword worthy my strength," he cried, "victory would
speedily be mine."

Dietrich pressed him hard. With both hands he grasped the sword
Naglering, and made daring onslaught with purpose to smite off the head
of Wieland's son. But Hildebrand went between the warrior youths and
called a truce.

"Spare thou his life," he cried to Dietrich, "and thou shalt have still
yet another brave knight amidst thy followers."

"The dog shall die this day," the prince made angry retort; "stand thou
aside, so that his life may have end." The old knight was angry. He drew
from his scabbard the sword which Wieland fashioned, and gave it unto
Witege, saying:

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

"Thine own sword Mimung I return unto thee. Now defend thyself as befits
thy valour."

Glad thereat was the heart of Wieland's son. "Alas," he cried, "that I
did curse my sire! Behold, O Dietrich, the sword Mimung; now have I as
great desire for battle as a thirsty man hath for drink and a hungry dog
for its food."

'Twas then the swords sang loud. Mimung clove armour and shield as they
were but cloth. The son of Wieland indeed struck mighty blows, and in
time he wounded Dietrich, Indeed, five wounds did he give unto the
prince, so that he was forced to call upon Hildebrand to put end to the
fray. But the old warrior was wroth with Dietrich, and did heed him not.

King Dietmar then called upon Wieland's son to cease fighting, and
promised him great gifts and a noble bride; but Witege waxed in battle
fury, and sought for naught else but the death of that arrogant prince.
Blow after blow he gave, until at length he split asunder the helmet
Hildegrim, so that Dietrich's golden hair appeared.

Hildebrand desired not the prince's death. His wrath was melted when he
perceived he was in peril, and he leapt forward and ended the fray. Then
besought he Witege, because of the vows they had taken one with another,
to swear fellowship with Dietrich and become his knight.

As the old warrior desired him, so did Witege do. He sheathed his sword
and took oath of service to the prince, and they became fast friends.
Together they went into the castle and drank wine.

But ill-pleased was Dietrich because that he was not the victor as
aforetime, and he made resolve to go forth to seek further daring
adventure, so that his fame might not be sullied in the land of the
Amelungs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[406:1](tml42.htm#fr_114) When Hercules fought
with the nine-headed Hydra, each head, save one, which could not be
hurt, grew again as fast as it was cut off. Then his nephew assisted him
by searing the wounds with a torch. See *Classic Myth and Legend*, page
103.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII. The Land of Giants](tml43)
