[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tml40)  [Next](tml42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIXO6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Teutonic Myth and Legend*, by Donald A. Mackenzie, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

### CHAPTER XXXVI

# The Nibelungen Tragedy

Kriemhild weds Etzel--Her Desire for Vengeance--The Festival--Invitation
to Gunther and his Knights--Hagen's Bravery--The Doom journey--Dietrich
and Hildebrand--How the Guests were received--Treachery of the
Queen--Scene at Banquet--Its Tragic Ending--Dietrich intervenes--Hall in
Flames--Unconquered Heroes--Gunther and Hagen overcome--Gladness ends in
Grief.

IT fell that thirteen years after Siegfried's death Queen Helche of the
Huns died, and King Etzel <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113), who was
a heathen, sought another bride. Rudiger, the rich margrave, surnamed
"The Good", was sent as envoy to Worms to win Kriemhild; whereat Gunther
was made glad, because Etzel was a mighty monarch, but grim Hagen grew
angry, fearing that the widow of Siegfried would stir up enmity against
them. Kriemhild ceased not to grieve for him whom she had loved, but her
brothers and Queen Ute urged her to be wed to the mighty monarch of the
Huns, and at length she gave her consent. Then sent she to Hagen for the
Nibelung treasure, which she desired to distribute among the Hun
warriors; but he refused to give it up saying: "She shall not give it
unto those who are my foemen."

Kriemhild was made wroth thereat. Yet had she a portion of the treasure
left, and she gave great gifts to the knights who came with Rudiger.

The widowed bride had lost not her great beauty

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

despite her long and deep sorrow, and when she came to the Court of
Etzel, the courtiers vowed that she was even more fair than was Queen
Helche. She kissed the king, and when she was wed she was kissed by
twelve noble knights, among whom was Blœdel, the brother of Etzel, and
the great warrior king, Dietrich of Bern, who had taken refuge at
Etzel's Court when his uncle, Ermenrich, had by treacherous doings
possessed himself of the kingdom of the Amelungs. So it came that
Kriemhild had friendship and service from many strong war-men. Great was
her power. All the treasure that Hagen had left her she gave to the
knights, and at length she said unto herself:

"Now am I made powerful, and can strike against the enemies of
Siegfried, for whom my heart still calleth."

As the days went past, and the years, her desire for vengeance grew
stronger. There was not a Hun knight who would not do her willing
service. Yet none did conceive of her fierce intent.

A son was born to King Etzel, and his name was Ortlieb. Like was he in
countenance to fair Kriemhild, and the king loved her more dearly
because of her child. So at length when she craved of him a boon he said
that he would grant it willingly; and the queen besought him that he
should send envoys to Worms and invite, unto a festival at his Court,
Gunther and all his knights. As she desired, so was it done. Kriemhild
spoke in secret to the envoys and bade them not to leave Hagen behind.

Gunther received the message gladly, nor suspected aught of Kriemhild's
evil desire; but Hagen warned the king in counsel with his knights,
saying: "We dare not go from here unto the Court of Etzel. Our lives ane
in peril, for Kriemhild forgets not who slew her husband Siegfried. . .
. Her memory is long."

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

Thereupon Gunther's brothers taunted Hagen. "Thou knowest thine own
guilt," one said; "therefore thou hast need to protect thyself well.
'Twere better thou didst remain at Worms, while those who fear not
sojourn among the Huns."

Hagen was made wroth. "No man among you feareth less to venture forth
than I do, and with thee shall I go if ye are determined to visit the
Court of Etzel."

So it was arranged that they should set out forthwith, and Hagen spake
after that of their journey as "the death ride".

Queen Ute had great desire that her sons should tarry in the kingdom. "I
have dreamt an evil dream," she said. "Methought that all the birds in
fair Burgundy were slain."

"He who is led by dreams," said Hagen, "is without honour and no hero.
Let us unto the festival of Kriemhild."

Many women wept when they set forth. With Gunther rode a thousand and
sixty knights, and his army did number full nine thousand men. When they
reached the Danube River they found it to be high and running swift.
Hagen sought for the ferryman, who desired not to take them across
unless he were given rich reward. While searching, he saw bathing in a
brook certain water fairies. He went stealthily towards them and
possessed himself of their vestments. They had need, therefore, to make
known to the fierce knight how he and all who were with him would fare
upon their journey. One did promise that they would prosper and win
great honour, but another said: "Twere better to turn back. . . . Ye are
all doomed. Who rideth unto the Court of Etzel rideth to death. Nor
shall one return again unto Worms save the priest."

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

Then Hagen met with the ferryman and slew him for his boldness. He
seized the boat, and, returning unto Gunther, he ferried across the
knights and all their followers. As he crossed with the last company of
men he beheld the priest among them, and remembering the prophecy of the
water fairy, he seized him there and flung him overboard. But, although
the man could not swim, he was driven over the waves and reached the
shore in safety. When Hagen saw that the priest could return unto
Burgundy, he knew that the foretelling of the water fairy was true, and
said unto himself: "These, our warriors, are all dead men."

When they landed, Hagen splintered the boat in pieces. He was resolute
indeed, and made certain that no man should turn back. The Bavarians
came against them to avenge the ferryman's death, but they were beaten
back, and Gunther and his war-men marched forward until they came unto
Bechlaren, where Rudiger the Good gave them generous and hospitable
entertainment and many gifts.

Tidings of their approach were borne unto Kriemhild. "The day of
reckoning is at hand," she said unto herself. "Fain would I now slay the
man who did destroy my happiness. . . . He shall pay dearly because that
he hath made me to sorrow."

Aged Hildebrand spake unto Dietrich of Bern of the coming of the
Burgundians, and counselled that he should ride forth to greet them.
Hagen was a dear war friend to Dietrich aforetime, and there was good
will. betwixt them. So the fierce knight of Burgundy gave his friend
warm greetings.

Dietrich was made glad, yet did he inwardly grieve, when he beheld the
warriors from Worms.

"Know ye not," he said, "that Kriemhild hath

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

ceased not to sorrow for Siegfried? . . . This very day I did hear her
lamenting because that he was dead."

Gunther reasoned that Etzel had bidden them thither with right royal
welcome, and that Kriemhild had also sent warm greetings, but Hagen knew
well that sorrow awaited them.

The Hun king knew not that his queen plotted against his guests, and his
welcome was hearty and frank; but Kriemhild was haughty and cold. She
kissed but her brother Giselher, who had no part in Siegfried's death.
Unto Hagen she spake, saying:

"Hast thou brought hither the hoard of the Nibelungs which thou didst
rob from me?"

Hagen answered: "I have touched it not. It is hidden below the Rhine
waters. There shall it lie until the Day of Judgment."

"So thou hast brought it not," she said coldly. "Many a day have I
grieved for it, and for the noble knight whose possession it was."

"I have brought but my weapons and my armour," said Hagen defiantly.

"I need not gold," Kriemhild sighed; "but I would fain have recompense
for murder and robbery."

Then were the Burgundians, at the queen's desire, asked to lay down
their arms; but Hagen made refusal for himself and the others, saying
that it was the custom of the Burgundians to be fully armed on the first
three days of a festival.

It chanced that soon afterwards Kriemhild urged certain of her knights
to slay Hagen; but they forbore, fearing as they did his dark brows and
quick-flashing eyes.

When night fell the guests were conducted to their dwelling. Grim Hagen
and Volker, the minstrel, fearing the treachery of Kriemhild, sought not
to take rest.

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They clad
themselves in their bright armour. Then they took their swords and
shields and stood outside the door to guard their companions. After a
time Volker took his fiddle, and, sitting upon a stone within the porch,
he played merry airs which gladdened the hearts of those who were
within, and they forgot their anxieties. Then he gave them soothing
music and sweet, so that they were lulled to sleep. Thereafter he took
up his shield again and stood beside Hagen at the door to guard the
Burgundians against Kriemhild's war-men.

In the midst of the night the fierce Huns made stealthy approach; but
when they beheld the knights keeping guard they turned away. Volker
desired to challenge them to combat, but Hagen forbade him, and Volker
cried out to the followers of Kriemhild: "Cowards, would ye venture
hither to slay men in their sleep?" They answered him not. Kriemhild
grieved because that her plan had failed, but she ceased not to plot
against the guests.

A tournament was held in Etzel's courtyard, and Volker slew a Hun
warrior. But for the king, vengeance would have been taken for that
cause. "He hath been slain without intent," Etzel said; "let my guests
go forth unharmed."

Kriemhild then spake to Dietrich of Bern and old Hildebrand, beseeching
their aid to encompass the death of Hagen.

Hildebrand answered: "One man is not sufficient to overcome him." And
Dietrich, answering her, said: "Speak not of this again, O Queen, I pray
thee. These, thy kinsmen, have never done aught against me. 'Twill bring
thee shame if thou dost any hurt to them, because they are now thy
guests. It is not for me to avenge the death of Siegfried."

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

Thereafter did Kriemhild plead with Blœdel, King Etzel's brother, making
him promise of rich reward, and he promised to achieve her purpose. He
went forth to attack Gunther's men with a thousand of his followers.
Dankwart was in command when Blœdel fell upon them without warning, and
fierce was the conflict.

Meanwhile Gunther and Hagen and other knights sat at feast with King
Etzel. Kriemhild caused her son Ortlieb to enter and sit nigh to Hagen,
and the king said: "Lo! here cometh my only son to be among his
kinsmen."

Hagen loved not the lad. "He hath a weak face," he said. "I could never
be a guest at his Court."

Suddenly Dankwart rushed into the feasting hall. He alone of all the
war-men had escaped the sword of Blœdel, whom he slew; his body was red
with the blood of foemen. "Why dost thou tarry thus, brother Hagen?" he
cried; "our men are slaughtered in their dwelling."

"Guard the door," cried Hagen, and seizing his sword be smote off the
head of Prince Ortlieb before his father's eyes. Then he slew the lad's
tutor and cut off the right hand of a minstrel who had borne Kriemhild's
message unto Worms. Volker drew his blade also and made slaughter. In
vain did the three kings, Etzel and Gunther and Dietrich, make endeavour
to subdue the fray. Many Hun knights were slain, for the Burgundians
were seized with battle fury and sought dire vengeance. They cut their
way up and down the hall, and there was none who could stand against
them.

Then did Kriemhild plead with Dietrich of Bern, beseeching his aid, what
time he watched, standing upon a bench, the doughty deeds of his old war
comrade Hagen.

"Save me and King Etzel from this our dire peril," cried the queen.

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

"I can but try," Dietrich answered. "Not for many years have I beheld
such fierce fighting."

Then he uttered forth a great shout, and his voice was like to the blast
of a war horn. Gunther heard him, and called upon his men to pause in
the fray. "Mayhap," he said, "we have slain knights of Dietrich."

"No harm have ye done me or mine," Dietrich said, "but I ask of thee
that I and those with me may have thy permission to go forth in safety."

"Thy wish is granted," answered Gunther.

Then did Dietrich clasp the fainting Queen Kriemhild with one arm and
took King Etzel's with the other. Thus did he leave the hall with six
hundred of his knights. Rudiger went also with five hundred. Neither
sought to take part in the fray.

Thereafter was the conflict waged again with great fury, nor did it
pause until not a Hun was left alive in the hall.

The Burgundians rested awhile; then they threw out the bodies of their
foemen. Kinsmen of the slain mourned greatly.

King Etzel seized his shield and desired them to combat against the
stranger at the head of his men; but Kriemhild warned him that he could
not withstand the blows of fierce Hagen. But his knights had to hold him
back by force, and, seeing this, Hagen taunted the king.

"The darling of Siegfried and her new husband are faint-hearted," he
cried. "Ha, Etzel! Siegfried had thy lady to wife before thee. I slew
him. Why, then, shouldst thou be angry with me?"

Kriemhild heard with anger. "Much gold shall I give, and castles and
land," said the queen, "unto the knight who shall slay Hagen."

Volker shouted defiantly: "Never before beheld I so

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

many timorous knights. Cowards all! ye have taken of the king's
substance and in his hour of trial ye desert him. I cry shame upon ye
all."

Many bold warriors rushed against the knights of Burgundy. Stranger
knights who were there fought also. The nimble Iring of Denmark struck
mighty blows, and in the end he wounded Hagen. Queen Kriemhild praised
him when he returned weary from the fray, and prompted him to return
again. When he renewed the conflict, however, Hagen slew him.

So fell many brave men, and the long summer day ended and darkness fell.
The tumult ceased.

Then the Burgundians besought King Etzel that they should be permitted
to leave the hall and fight in battle, but Kriemhild forbade it.

Her brother Giselher spake to the vengeful queen saying: "I deserve not
death at thy hands. I was ever faithful unto thee. I came hither because
that I did bear thee love and thou didst invite me. Thou must needs now
show mercy unto us."

"Can I show mercy who hath never received it?" she answered him. "The
vile Hagen slew my child, so those who stand by him must suffer with
him. But this I shall promise thee--if Hagen be now delivered up a truce
will be granted forthwith."

Gernot answered: "Never shall thy wish be granted. Rather would we die
than ransom our lives with a single knight."

"Then must we die indeed like to brave men, Giselher said.

"My brother Hagen is not without friends," cried Dankwart; "ye who have
refused quarter shall not receive it. Not at our hands."

In the midst of the night Kriemhild bade her,

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

followers to set fire to the hall. That they did right gladly. The
flames raged furiously, and one of them within cried: "Woe is me! we are
doomed to die. Rather would I have fallen in battle."

Great was the heat, and the knights were tortured with thirst. Then did
Hagen bid one of them to drink the blood of the slain war-men. One who
suffered much knelt beside a corpse and drank the blood. The draught
made him strong again. "Better is it than wine," he said.

The others did likewise, and were all refreshed so that they were able
to endure their sufferings amidst the flames. Burning faggots fell upon
them, but they protected themselves with their shields. Terrible was the
heat. Never again shall heroes suffer as did these that night.

"Stand close to the walls," Hagen commanded; "your armour shall protect
ye; let the blood quench the flaming brands."

When morning broke, the Huns wondered greatly to behold Hagen and Volker
again standing on guard at the hall door.

Fierce attack was again made by the Huns, but they were beaten back. Nor
did the conflict have pause until the last of Etzel's great knights was
slain.

Then did Kriemhild and the king make appeal to Rudiger to aid them, but
he desired not to attack the brave Burgundians.

"Shall I slay those whom I did entertain in my own house?" he exclaimed.
"I forget not past friendship."

Yet was he constrained to fight, and he mourned his lot with the
Burgundians.

"Would that I had a strong shield like thee," Hagen said; "mine own is
hewn and battered sore."

 

<span id="img_40000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE FIGHT ON THE
STAIRS OF ETZEL'S PALACE&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the painting by Schnorr
von Carolsfeld&lt;/i&gt;](tn/40000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/40000.jpg)  
THE FIGHT ON THE STAIRS OF ETZEL'S PALACE  
*From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

Rudiger gave Hagen his own shield ere he fought at Etzel's command with
those whom he loved. Fierce was the conflict and long, and in the end
Gernot and Rudiger slew one another.

Then did Wolfhart, the bold knight of Bern, lead on the followers of
Dietrich to avenge the death of Rudiger. One by one they were cut down
by Gunther's heroes, save Hildebrand, who slew Volker. But Hagen made
vengeful attack and wounded him. The old warrior fled. He hastened unto
Dietrich, and cried: "All our men are slain, and of the Burgundians but
Gunther and Hagen remain alive."

Dietrich was wroth. He sorrowed for his brave knights. No longer could
he withhold from the fray. So he put on his armour and went unto the
Hall. He first bade Gunther and Hagen to surrender; but they defied him.

Dietrich drew his sword and fell upon Hagen, whom he speedily wounded.

"Battle-weary art thou," Dietrich cried; "I shall slay thee not."

As he spake thus he caught Hagen in his arms and overpowered him. So was
the valiant hero taken captive.

Dietrich led him bound before Queen Kriemhild, and her heart rejoiced.
"Now is all my sorrow requited," she said "thee, Dietrich, shall I thank
until my life hath end."

The Prince of Bern said: "Slay him not. He may yet serve thee, and thus
make good the evil he hath done."

Hagen was cast into a dark dungeon, there to await his doom.

Dietrich then fought against Gunther, who. was more

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

fierce than Hagen had been. Indeed he came nigh to slaying Dietrich. But
he was at length borne down, and taken prisoner and bound.

When the King of Burgundy was taken before Kriemhild, she said: "I
welcome thee, O Gunther."

He answered her: "If thy welcome were made with love, I would thank ye,
but I know well that thou dost mock."

Dietrich pleaded with the queen that Gunther and Hagen should be spared,
but his words fell upon ears that heard not.

Kriemhild went unto Hagen and demanded that he should return unto her
the treasure he had stolen.

The knight answered her: "Vows I took not to reveal where the hoard is
hidden so long as my king liveth."

Then did the queen command that her brother should be slain. With her
own white hand she held high by the hair before Hagen the dripping head
of Gunther.

"Now all thy brothers are dead," Hagen cried. "Where the treasure is
concealed is known but to God and myself alone. . . . Thou devil, thou
shalt never possess it!"

So wroth was Kriemhild that she seized a sword and smote off the head of
Hagen.

"Alas," cried King Etzel, "the boldest knight who ever fought in battle
hath fallen by a woman's hand!"

Old Hildebrand, recking not what would happen him, drew his sword and
smote the queen. A loud cry broke from her lips, and ere long Kriemhild
died.

So ended the festival of King Etzel, as gladness must ever end in grief.

What befell thereafter I can tell not. Knights and

 

<span id="img_40200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DEITRICH OVERCOMES
HAGEN&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the painting by Schnorr von
Carolsfeld&lt;/i&gt;](tn/40200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/40200.jpg)  
DEITRICH OVERCOMES HAGEN  
*From the painting by Schnorr von Carolsfeld*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

soldiers, wives and maids, were seen weeping, and heard lamenting for
their friends.

So ends the Nibelungenlied.

.       .       .       .       .       .

Minstrels, singing the sorrowful lay of the death of Siegfried, and the
fall of the Nibelungs, have told that Queen Brunhild and Queen Ute sat
side by side embroidering on tapestry the death of Balder.

Again and again did Brunhild say to the mother of Gunther: "Each time I
picture Balder, his face grows like unto that of Siegfried."

Soon tidings were brought to them of the death of Gunther and all his
men. Brunhild wept not. She went out into the darkness, nor ever
returned again.

When search was made, she was found lying dead in the grave mound of
Siegfried, whom she had loved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[391:1](tml41.htm#fr_113) Attila, "the scourge
of God".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII. Dietrich of Bern](tml42)
