[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020341)  [Next](0020343) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—The Mosaic Law the Fountain of All Ethics, and the Source from Which the Greeks Drew Theirs. <span id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p2"></span>It is then clear also that all the
other virtues, delineated in Moses, supplied the Greeks with the
rudiments of the whole department of morals. I mean valour, and
temperance, and wisdom, and justice, and endurance, and patience, and
decorum, and self-restraint; and in addition to these, piety.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p3"></span>But it is clear to every one that
piety, which teaches to worship and honour, is the highest and oldest
cause; and the law itself exhibits justice, and teaches wisdom, by
abstinence from sensible images, and by inviting to the Maker and Father
of the universe. And from this sentiment, as from a fountain, all
intelligence increases. “For the sacrifices of the wicked are
abomination to the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p3.1"></span>Lord</span>; but the prayers of the
upright are acceptable before Him,” <span
id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335) since “righteousness is more
acceptable before God than sacrifice.” Such also as the following we
find in Isaiah: “To what purpose to me is the multitude of your
sacrifices? saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p4.2"></span>Lord</span>;” and the whole
section. <span id="fr_2336"></span>[2337](#fn_2336) “Break every bond of
wickedness; for this is the sacrifice that is acceptable to the Lord, a
contrite heart that seeks its Maker.” <span
id="fr_2337"></span>[2338](#fn_2337) “Deceitful balances are abomination
before God; but a just balance is acceptable to Him.” <span
id="fr_2338"></span>[2339](#fn_2338) Thence Pythagoras exhorts “not to
step over the balance;” and the profession of heresies is called
deceitful righteousness; and “the tongue of the unjust shall be
destroyed, but the mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom.” <span
id="fr_2339"></span>[2340](#fn_2339) “For they call the wise and prudent
worthless.” <span id="fr_2340"></span>[2341](#fn_2340) But it were
tedious to adduce testimonies respecting these virtues, since the whole
Scripture celebrates them. Since, then, they define manliness to be
knowledge <span id="fr_2341"></span>[2342](#fn_2341) of things
formidable, and not formidable, and what is intermediate; and temperance
to be a state of mind which by choosing and avoiding preserves the
judgments of wisdom; and conjoined with manliness is patience, which is
called endurance, the knowledge of what is bearable and what is
unbearable; and magnanimity is the knowledge which rises superior to
circumstances. With temperance also is conjoined caution, which is
avoidance in accordance with reason. And observance of the commandments,
which is the innoxious keeping of them, is the attainment of a secure
life. And there is no endurance without manliness, nor the exercise of
self-restraint without temperance. And these virtues follow one another;
and with whom are the sequences of the virtues, with him is also
salvation, which is the keeping of the state of well-being. Rightly,
therefore, in treating of these virtues, we shall inquire into them all;
for he that has one virtue gnostically, by reason of their accompanying
each other, has them all. Self-restraint is that quality which does not
overstep what appears in accordance with right reason. He exercises
self-restraint, who curbs the impulses that are contrary to right
reason, or curbs himself so as not to indulge in desires contrary to
right reason. Temperance, too, is not without manliness; since from the
commandments spring both wisdom, which follows God who enjoins, and that
which imitates the divine character, namely righteousness; in virtue of
which, in the exercise of self-restraint, we address ourselves in purity
to piety and the course of conduct thence resulting, in conformity with
God; being assimilated to the Lord as far as is possible for us beings
mortal in nature. And this is being just and holy with wisdom; for the
Divinity needs nothing and suffers nothing; whence it is not, strictly
speaking, capable of self-restraint, for it is never subjected to
perturbation, over which to exercise control; while our nature, being
capable of perturbation, needs self-constraint, by which disciplining
itself to the need of little, it endeavours to approximate in character
to the divine nature. For the good man, standing as the boundary between
an immortal and a mortal nature, has few needs; having wants in
consequence of his body, and his birth itself, but taught by rational
self-control to want few things.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p11"></span>What reason is there in the law’s
prohibiting a man from “wearing woman’s clothing “? <span
id="fr_2342"></span>[2343](#fn_2342) Is it not that it would have us to
be manly, and not to be effeminate neither in person and actions, nor in
thought and word? For it would have the man, that devotes himself to the
truth, to be masculine both in acts of endurance and patience, in life,
conduct, word, and discipline by night and by day; even if the necessity
were to occur, of witnessing by the shedding of his blood. Again, it is
said, “If any one who has newly built a house, and has not previously
inhabited it; or cultivated a newly-planted vine, and not yet partaken
of the fruit; or betrothed a virgin, and not yet married her;” <span
id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343) —such the humane law orders to be
relieved from military service: from military reasons in the first
place, lest, bent on <span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-Page_366"></span>their desires, they turn out
sluggish in war; for it is those who are untrammelled by passion that
boldly encounter perils; and from motives of humanity, since, in view of
the uncertainties of war, the law reckoned it not right that one should
not enjoy his own labours, and another should without bestowing pains,
receive what belonged to those who had laboured. The law seems also to
point out manliness of soul, by enacting that he who had planted should
reap the fruit, and he that built should inhabit, and he that had
betrothed should marry: for it is not vain hopes which it provides for
those who labour; according to the gnostic word: “For the hope of a good
man dead or living does not perish,” <span
id="fr_2344"></span>[2345](#fn_2344) says Wisdom; “I love them that love
me; and they who seek me shall find peace,” <span
id="fr_2345"></span>[2346](#fn_2345) and so forth. What then? Did not
the women of the Midianites, by their beauty, seduce from wisdom into
impiety, through licentiousness, the Hebrews when making war against
them? For, having seduced them from a grave mode of life, and by their
beauty ensnared them in wanton delights, they made them insane upon idol
sacrifices and strange women; and overcome by women and by pleasure at
once, they revolted from God, and revolted from the law. And the whole
people was within a little of falling under the power of the enemy
through female stratagem, until, when they were in peril, fear by its
admonitions pulled them back. Then the survivors, valiantly undertaking
the struggle for piety, got the upper hand of their foes. “The
beginning, then, of wisdom is piety, and the knowledge of holy things is
understanding; and to know the law is the characteristic of a good
understanding.” <span id="fr_2346"></span>[2347](#fn_2346) Those, then,
who suppose the law to be productive of agitating fear, are neither good
at understanding the law, nor have they in reality comprehended it; for
“the fear of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p16.2"></span>Lord</span> causes life, but he who
errs shall be afflicted with pangs which knowledge views not.” <span
id="fr_2347"></span>[2348](#fn_2347) Accordingly, Barnabas says
mystically, “May God who rules the universe vouchsafe also to you
wisdom, and understanding, and science, and knowledge of His statutes,
and patience. Be therefore God-taught, seeking what the Lord seeks from
you, that He may find you in the day of judgment lying in wait for these
things.” “Children of love and peace,” he called them gnostically. <span
id="fr_2348"></span>[2349](#fn_2348)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p19"></span>Respecting imparting and
communicating, though much might be said, let it suffice to remark that
the law prohibits a brother from taking usury: designating as a brother
not only him who is born of the same parents, but also one of the same
race and sentiments, and a participator in the same word; deeming it
right not to take usury for money, but with open hands and heart to
bestow on those who need. For God, the author and the dispenser of such
grace, takes as suitable usury the most precious things to be found
among men—mildness, gentleness, magnanimity, reputation, renown. Do you
not regard this command as marked by philanthropy? As also the
following, “To pay the wages of the poor daily,” teaches to discharge
without delay the wages due for service; for, as I think, the alacrity
of the poor with reference to the future is paralyzed when he has
suffered want. Further, it is said, “Let not the creditor enter the
debtor’s house to take the pledge with violence.” But let the former ask
it to be brought out, and let not the latter, if he have it,
hesitate. <span id="fr_2349"></span>[2350](#fn_2349) And in the harvest
the owners are prohibited from appropriating what falls from the
handfuls; as also in reaping \[the law\] enjoins a part to be left
unreaped; signally thereby training those who possess to sharing and to
large-heartedness, by foregoing of their own to those who are in want,
and thus providing means of subsistence for the poor. <span
id="fr_2350"></span>[2351](#fn_2350) You see how the law proclaims at
once the righteousness and goodness of God, who dispenses food to all
ungrudgingly. And in the vintage it prohibited the grape-gatherers from
going back again on what had been left, and from gathering the fallen
grapes; and the same injunctions are given to the olive-gatherers. <span
id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351) Besides, the tithes of the fruits
and of the flocks taught both piety towards the Deity, and not
covetously to grasp everything, but to communicate gifts of kindness to
one’s neighbours. For it was from these, I reckon, and from the
first-fruits that the priests were maintained. We now therefore
understand that we are instructed in piety, and in liberality, and in
justice, and in humanity by the law. For does it not command the land to
be left fallow in the seventh year, and bids the poor fearlessly use the
fruits that grow by divine agency, nature cultivating the ground for
behoof of all and sundry? <span id="fr_2352"></span>[2353](#fn_2352)
How, then, can it be maintained that the law is not humane, and the
teacher of righteousness? Again, in the fiftieth year, it ordered the
same things to be performed as in the seventh; besides restoring to each
one his own land, if from any circumstance he had parted with it in the
meantime; setting bounds to the desires of those who covet possession,
by measuring the period of enjoyment, and choosing that those who have
paid the penalty of protracted penury should not suffer a life-long
punishment. “But alms and acts of faith are royal guards, and blessing
is on <span id="page_367">p. 367</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-Page_367"></span>the head of him who bestows; and he
who pities the poor shall be blessed.” <span
id="fr_2353"></span>[2354](#fn_2353) For he shows love to one like
himself, because of his love to the Creator of the human race. The
above-mentioned particulars have other explanations more natural, both
respecting rest and the recovery of the inheritance; but they are not
discussed at present.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p25"></span>Now love is conceived in many ways,
in the form of meekness, of mildness, of patience, of liberality, of
freedom from envy, of absence of hatred, of forgetfulness of injuries.
In all it is incapable of being divided or distinguished: its nature is
to communicate. Again, it is said, “If you see the beast of your
relatives, or friends, or, in general, of anybody you know, wandering in
the wilderness, take it back and restore it; <span
id="fr_2354"></span>[2355](#fn_2354) and if the owner be far away, keep
it among your own till he return, and restore it.” It teaches a natural
communication, that what is found is to be regarded as a deposit, and
that we are not to bear malice to an enemy. “The command of the Lord
being a fountain of life” truly, “causeth to turn away from the snare of
death.” <span id="fr_2355"></span>[2356](#fn_2355) And what? Does it not
command us “to love strangers not only as friends and relatives, but as
ourselves, both in body and soul?” <span
id="fr_2356"></span>[2357](#fn_2356) Nay more, it honoured the nations,
and bears no grudge <span id="fr_2357"></span>[2358](#fn_2357) against
those who have done ill. Accordingly it is expressly said, “Thou shalt
not abhor an Egyptian, for thou wast a sojourner in Egypt;” <span
id="fr_2358"></span>[2359](#fn_2358) designating by the term Egyptian
either one of that race, or any one in the world. And enemies, although
drawn up before the walls attempting to take the city, are not to be
regarded as enemies till they are by the voice of the herald summoned to
peace. <span id="fr_2359"></span>[2360](#fn_2359)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p32"></span>Further, it forbids intercourse
with a female captive so as to dishonour her. “But allow her,” it says,
“thirty days to mourn according to her wish, and changing her clothes,
associate with her as your lawful wife.” <span
id="fr_2360"></span>[2361](#fn_2360) For it regards it not right that
this should take place either in wantonness or for hire like harlots,
but only for the birth of children. Do you see humanity combined with
continence? The master who has fallen in love with his captive maid it
does not allow to gratify his pleasure, but puts a check on his lust by
specifying an interval of time; and further, it cuts off the captive’s
hair, in order to shame disgraceful love: for if it is reason that
induces him to marry, he will cleave to her even after she has become
disfigured. Then if one, after his lust, does not care to consort any
longer with the captive, it ordains that it shall not be lawful to sell
her, or to have her any longer as a servant, but desires her to be freed
and released from service, lest on the introduction of another wife she
bear any of the intolerable miseries caused through jealousy.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p34"></span>What more? The Lord enjoins to ease
and raise up the beasts of enemies when labouring beneath their burdens;
remotely teaching us not to indulge in joy at our neighbour’s ills, or
exult over our enemies; in order to teach those who are trained in these
things to pray for their enemies. For He does not allow us either to
grieve at our neighbour’s good, or to reap joy at our neighbour’s ill.
And if you find any enemy’s beast straying, you are to pass over the
incentives of difference, and take it back and restore it. For oblivion
of injuries is followed by goodness, and the latter by dissolution of
enmity. From this we are fitted for agreement, and this conducts to
felicity. And should you suppose one habitually hostile, and discover
him to be unreasonably mistaken either through lust or anger, turn him
to goodness. Does the law then which conducts to Christ appear humane
and mild? And does not the same God, good, while characterized by
righteousness from the beginning to the end, employ each kind suitably
in order to salvation? “Be merciful,” says the Lord, “that you may
receive mercy; forgive, that you may be forgiven. As ye do, so shall it
be done to you; as ye give, so shall it be given to you; as ye judge, so
shall ye be judged; as ye show kindness, so shall kindness be shown to
you: with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again.” <span id="fr_2361"></span>[2362](#fn_2361) Furthermore, \[the
law\] prohibits those, who are in servitude for their subsistence, to be
branded with disgrace; and to those, who have been reduced to slavery
through money borrowed, it gives a complete release in the seventh year.
Further, it prohibits suppliants from being given up to punishment. True
above all, then, is that oracle. “As gold and silver are tried in the
furnace, so the Lord chooseth men’s hearts. The merciful man is
long-suffering; and in every one who shows solicitude there is wisdom.
For on a wise man solicitude will fall; and exercising thought, he will
seek life; and he who seeketh God shall find knowledge with
righteousness. And they who have sought Him rightly have found
peace.” <span id="fr_2362"></span>[2363](#fn_2362) And Pythagoras seems
to me, to have derived his mildness towards irrational creatures from
the law. For instance, he interdicted the immediate use of the young in
the flocks of sheep, and goats, and herds of cattle, on the instant of
their <span id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-Page_368"></span>birth; not even on the pretext of
sacrifice allowing it, both on account of the young ones and of the
mothers; training man to gentleness by what is beneath him, by means of
the irrational creatures. “Resign accordingly,” he says, “the young one
to its dam for even the first seven days.” For if nothing takes place
without a cause, and milk comes in a shower to animals in parturition
for the sustenance of the progeny, he that tears that, which has been
brought forth, away from the supply of the milk, dishonours nature. Let
the Greeks, then, feel ashamed, and whoever else inveighs against the
law; since it shows mildness in the case of the irrational creatures,
while they expose the offspring of men; though long ago and
prophetically, the law, in the above-mentioned commandment, threw a
check in the way of their cruelty. For if it prohibits the progeny of
the irrational creatures to be separated from the dam before sucking,
much more in the case of men does it provide beforehand a cure for
cruelty and savageness of disposition; so that even if they despise
nature, they may not despise teaching. For they are permitted to satiate
themselves with kids and lambs, and perhaps there might be some excuse
for separating the progeny from its dam. But what cause is there for the
exposure of a child? For the man who did not desire to beget children
had no right to marry at first; certainly not to have become, through
licentious indulgence, the murderer of his children. Again, the humane
law forbids slaying the offspring and the dam together on the same day.
Thence also the Romans, in the case of a pregnant woman being condemned
to death, do not allow her to undergo punishment till she is delivered.
The law too, expressly prohibits the slaying of such animals as are
pregnant till they have brought forth, remotely restraining the
proneness of man to do wrong to man. Thus also it has extended its
clemency to the irrational creatures; that from the exercise of humanity
in the case of creatures of different species, we might practice among
those of the same species a large abundance of it. Those, too, that kick
the bellies of certain animals before parturition, in order to feast on
flesh mixed with milk, make the womb created for the birth of the
*fœtus* its grave, though the law expressly commands, “But neither shalt
thou seethe a lamb in its mother’s milk.” <span
id="fr_2363"></span>[2364](#fn_2363) For the nourishment of the living
animal, it is meant, may not become sauce for that which has been
deprived of life; and that, which is the cause of life, may not
co-operate in the consumption of the body. And the same law commands
“not to muzzle the ox which treadeth out the corn: for the labourer must
be reckoned worthy of his food.” <span
id="fr_2364"></span>[2365](#fn_2364)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p39"></span>And it prohibits an ox and ass to
be yoked in the plough together; <span
id="fr_2365"></span>[2366](#fn_2365) pointing perhaps to the want of
agreement in the case of the animals; and at the same time teaching not
to wrong any one belonging to another race, and bring him under the
yoke, when there is no other cause to allege than difference of race,
which is no cause at all, being neither wickedness nor the effect of
wickedness. To me the allegory also seems to signify that the husbandry
of the Word is not to be assigned equally to the clean and the unclean,
the believer and the unbeliever; for the ox is clean, but the ass has
been reckoned among the unclean animals. But the benignant Word,
abounding in humanity, teaches that neither is it right to cut down
cultivated trees, or to cut down the grain before the harvest, for
mischiefs sake; nor that cultivated fruit is to be destroyed at
all—either the fruit of the soil or that of the soul: for it does not
permit the enemy’s country to be laid waste.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p41"></span>Further, husbandmen derived
advantage from the law in such things. For it orders newly planted trees
to be nourished three years in succession, and the superfluous growths
to be cut off, to prevent them being loaded and pressed down; and to
prevent their strength being exhausted from want, by the nutriment being
frittered away, enjoins tilling and digging round them, so that \[the
tree\] may not, by sending out suckers, hinder its growth. And it does
not allow imperfect fruit to be plucked from immature trees, but after
three years, in the fourth year; dedicating the first-fruits to God
after the tree has attained maturity.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p42"></span>This type of husbandry may serve as
a mode of instruction, teaching that we must cut the growths of sins,
and the useless weeds of the mind that spring up round the vital fruit,
till the shoot of faith is perfected and becomes strong. <span
id="fr_2366"></span>[2367](#fn_2366) For in the fourth year, since there
is need of time to him that is being solidly catechized, the four
virtues are consecrated to God, the third alone being already joined to
the fourth, <span id="fr_2367"></span>[2368](#fn_2367) the person of the
Lord. And a sacrifice of praise is above holocausts: “for He,” it is
said, “giveth strength to get power.” <span
id="fr_2368"></span>[2369](#fn_2368) And if your affairs are in the
sunshine of prosperity, get and keep strength, and acquire power in
knowledge. For by these instances it is shown that both good things and
gifts are supplied by God; and that we, becoming ministers of the divine
grace, ought to sow the benefits of God, and make those who approach us
noble and <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-Page_369"></span>good; so that, as far as possible,
the temperate man may make others continent, he that is manly may make
them noble, he that is wise may make them intelligent, and the just may
make them just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[365:2335](0020342.htm#fr_2334) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p0.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p1"></span> \[See p. 192, *supra*, and the
note.\]

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[365:2336](0020342.htm#fr_2335) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p4"></span> [Prov. xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2336"></span>[365:2337](0020342.htm#fr_2336) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p5"></span> [Isa. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_2337"></span>[365:2338](0020342.htm#fr_2337) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p6"></span> [Isa. lviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2338"></span>[365:2339](0020342.htm#fr_2338) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p7"></span> [Prov. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2339"></span>[365:2340](0020342.htm#fr_2339) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p8"></span> [Prov. x.
31](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#031)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2340"></span>[365:2341](0020342.htm#fr_2340) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p9"></span> [Prov. xvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>, misquoted, or the text is corrupt;
“The wise in heart shall be called prudent,” A.V.

<span id="fn_2341"></span>[365:2342](0020342.htm#fr_2341) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p10"></span> For the use of knowledge in this
connection, Philo, Sextus Empiricus, and Zeno are quoted.

<span id="fn_2342"></span>[365:2343](0020342.htm#fr_2342) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p12"></span> [Deut. xxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[365:2344](0020342.htm#fr_2343) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p13"></span> “These words are more like Philo
Judæus, i. 740, than those of Moses, [Deut. xx.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p13.1"></span>.”—<span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p13.2"></span>Potter</span>.

<span id="fn_2344"></span>[366:2345](0020342.htm#fr_2344) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p14"></span> [Prov. x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p14.1"></span>, xi. 7.

<span id="fn_2345"></span>[366:2346](0020342.htm#fr_2345) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p15"></span> [Prov. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2346"></span>[366:2347](0020342.htm#fr_2346) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p16"></span> [Prov. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2347"></span>[366:2348](0020342.htm#fr_2347) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p17"></span> [Prov. xix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2348"></span>[366:2349](0020342.htm#fr_2348) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p18"></span> \[See *Epistle of Barnabas*, vol.
p. i. 149, S.\]

<span id="fn_2349"></span>[366:2350](0020342.htm#fr_2349) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p20"></span> [Deut.
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2350"></span>[366:2351](0020342.htm#fr_2350) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p21"></span> [Lev. xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p21.1"></span>, xxiii. 22; [Deut. xxiv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p21.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[366:2352](0020342.htm#fr_2351) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p22"></span> [Lev. xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p22.1"></span>; [Deut.
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p22.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2352"></span>[366:2353](0020342.htm#fr_2352) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p23"></span> [Exod.
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p23.1"></span>; [Lev. xxv.
2-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p23.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2353"></span>[367:2354](0020342.htm#fr_2353) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p24"></span> [Prov. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p24.1"></span>, xi. 26, xiv. 21.

<span id="fn_2354"></span>[367:2355](0020342.htm#fr_2354) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p26"></span> Quoted from Philo, with slight
alterations, giving the sense of [Ex. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p26.1"></span>, [Deut.
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#012),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p26.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2355"></span>[367:2356](0020342.htm#fr_2355) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p27"></span> [Prov. xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2356"></span>[367:2357](0020342.htm#fr_2356) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p28"></span> [Lev.
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#034)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p28.1"></span>; [Deut. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p28.2"></span>, xxiii. 7.

<span id="fn_2357"></span>[367:2358](0020342.htm#fr_2357) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p29.1"></span>μνησιπονηρεῖ</span> (equivalent to
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p29.2"></span>μνησικακεῖ</span> in the passage of
Philo from which Clement is quoting) has been substituted by Sylb. for
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p29.3"></span>μισοπονηρεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_2358"></span>[367:2359](0020342.htm#fr_2358) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p30"></span> [Deut. xxiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2359"></span>[367:2360](0020342.htm#fr_2359) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p31"></span> [Deut. xx.
10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2360"></span>[367:2361](0020342.htm#fr_2360) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p33"></span> [Deut. xxi.
10-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2361"></span>[367:2362](0020342.htm#fr_2361) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p35"></span> [Matt.
v.](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p35.1"></span> vi. vii.; [Luke
vi.](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2362"></span>[367:2363](0020342.htm#fr_2362) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p36"></span> [Prov. xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p36.1"></span>, xiv. 23, xvii. 12.

<span id="fn_2363"></span>[368:2364](0020342.htm#fr_2363) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p37"></span> [Deut. xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p37.1"></span>;

<span id="fn_2364"></span>[368:2365](0020342.htm#fr_2364) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p38"></span> [Deut. xxv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p38.1"></span>; [1 Tim. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p38.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2365"></span>[368:2366](0020342.htm#fr_2365) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p40"></span> [Deut. xxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2366"></span>[368:2367](0020342.htm#fr_2366) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p43"></span> \[See Hermas, *Visions*, note 2,
p. 15, this volume.\]

<span id="fn_2367"></span>[368:2368](0020342.htm#fr_2367) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p44"></span> So Clement seems to designate the
human nature of Christ,—as being a *quartum quid* in addition to the
three persons of the Godhead. \[A strange note: borrowed from ed. Migne.
The incarnation of the second person is a *quartum quid*, of course; but
not, in our author’s view, “an addition to the three persons of the
Godhead.”\]

<span id="fn_2368"></span>[368:2369](0020342.htm#fr_2368) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p45"></span> [Deut. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xviii-p45.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX.—The True Gnostic is an Imitator of God, Especially
in Beneficence.](0020343)
