[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020301)  [Next](0020303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.ix"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Human Knowledge Necessary for the Understanding of the Scriptures.

<span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p1"></span>Some, who think themselves naturally
gifted, do not wish to touch either philosophy or logic; nay more, they
do not wish to learn natural science. They demand bare faith alone, as
if they wished, without bestowing any care on the vine, straightway to
gather clusters from the first. Now the Lord is figuratively described
as the vine, from which, with pains and the art of husbandry, according
to the word, the fruit is to be gathered.

<span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p2"></span>We must lop, dig, bind, and perform the
other operations. The pruning-knife, I should think, and the pick-axe,
and the other agricultural implements, are necessary for the culture of
the vine, so that it may produce eatable fruit. And as in husbandry, so
also in medicine: he has learned to purpose, who has practiced the
various lessons, so as to be able to cultivate and to heal. So also
here, I call him truly learned who brings everything to bear on the
truth; so that, from <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.ix-Page_310"></span>geometry, and music, and grammar, and
philosophy itself, culling what is useful, he guards the faith against
assault. Now, as was said, the athlete is despised who is not furnished
for the contest. For instance, too, we praise the experienced helmsman
who “has seen the cities of many men,” and the physician who has had
large experience; thus also some describe the empiric. <span
id="fr_1893"></span>[1894](#fn_1893) And he who brings everything to
bear on a right life, procuring examples from the Greeks and barbarians,
this man is an experienced searcher after truth, and in reality a man of
much counsel, like the touch-stone (that is, the Lydian), which is
believed to possess the power of distinguishing the spurious from the
genuine gold. And our much-knowing gnostic can distinguish sophistry
from philosophy, the art of decoration from gymnastics, cookery from
physic, and rhetoric from dialectics, and the other sects which are
according to the barbarian philosophy, from the truth itself. And how
necessary is it for him who desires to be partaker of the power of God,
to treat of intellectual subjects by philosophising! And how serviceable
is it to distinguish expressions which are ambiguous, and which in the
Testaments are used synonymously! For the Lord, at the time of His
temptation, skilfully matched the devil by an ambiguous expression. And
I do not yet, in this connection, see how in the world the inventor of
philosophy and dialectics, as some suppose, is seduced through being
deceived by the form of speech which consists in ambiguity. And if the
prophets and apostles knew not the arts by which the exercises of
philosophy are exhibited, yet the mind of the prophetic and instructive
spirit, uttered secretly, because all have not an intelligent ear,
demands skilful modes of teaching in order to clear exposition. For the
prophets and disciples of the Spirit knew infallibly their mind. For
they knew it by faith, in a way which others could not easily, as the
Spirit has said. But it is not possible for those who have not learned
to receive it thus. “Write,” it is said, “the commandments doubly, in
counsel and knowledge, that thou mayest answer the words of truth to
them who send unto thee.” <span id="fr_1894"></span>[1895](#fn_1894)
What, then, is the knowledge of answering? or what that of asking? It is
dialectics. What then? Is not speaking our business, and does not action
proceed from the Word? For if we act not for the Word, we shall act
against reason. But a rational work is accomplished through God. “And
nothing,” it is said, “was made without Him”—the Word of God. <span
id="fr_1895"></span>[1896](#fn_1895)

<span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p6"></span>And did not the Lord make all things by
the Word? Even the beasts work, driven by compelling fear. And do not
those who are called orthodox apply themselves to good works, knowing
not what they do?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1893"></span>[310:1894](0020302.htm#fr_1893) <span
id="vi.iv.i.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p3"></span> The empirics were a class of physicians
who held practice to be the one thing essential.

<span id="fn_1894"></span>[310:1895](0020302.htm#fr_1894) <span
id="vi.iv.i.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p4"></span> [Prov.
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p4.1"></span>.
The Septuagint and Hebrew both differ from the reading here.

<span id="fn_1895"></span>[310:1896](0020302.htm#fr_1895) <span
id="vi.iv.i.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p5"></span> [John. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.i.ix-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.—To Act Well of Greater Consequence Than to Speak
Well.](0020303)
