[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020272)  [Next](0020274) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chap. IX.—On Sleep.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p1"></span>How, in due course, we are to go to
sleep, in remembrance of the precepts of temperance, we must now say.
For after the repast, having given thanks to God for our participation
in our enjoyments, and for the \[happy\] passing of the day, <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476) our talk must be turned to sleep.
Magnificence of bed-clothes, gold-embroidered carpets, and smooth
carpets worked with gold, and long fine robes of purple, and costly
fleecy cloaks, and manufactured rugs of purple, and mantles of thick
pile, and couches softer than sleep, are to be banished.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p3"></span>For, besides the reproach of
voluptuousness, sleeping on downy feathers is injurious, when our bodies
fall down as into a yawning hollow, on account of the softness of the
bedding.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p4"></span>For they are not convenient for
sleepers turning in them, on account of the bed rising into a hill on
either side of the body. Nor are they suitable for the digestion of the
food, but rather for burning it up, and so destroying the nutriment. But
stretching one’s self on even couches, affording a kind of natural
gymnasium for sleep, contributes to the digestion of the food. And those
that can roll on other beds, having this, as it were, for a natural
gymnasium for sleep, digest food more easily, and render themselves
fitter for emergencies. Moreover, silver-footed couches argue great
ostentation; and the ivory on beds, the body having left the soul, <span
id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477) is not permissible for holy men,
being a lazy contrivance for rest.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-Page_258"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p7"></span>We must not occupy our thoughts about
these things, for the use of them is not forbidden to those who possess
them; but solicitude about them is prohibited, for happiness is not to
be found in them. On the other hand, it savours of cynic vanity for a
man to act as Diomede,—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p7.1"></span> “And he stretched himself under a
> wild bull’s hide,” <span id="fr_1478"></span>[1479](#fn_1478) —  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p9"></span>unless circumstances compel.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p10"></span>Ulysses rectified the unevenness of
the nuptial couch with a stone. Such frugality and self-help was
practiced not by private individuals alone, but by the chiefs of the
ancient Greeks. But why speak of these? Jacob slept on the ground, and a
stone served him for a pillow; and then was he counted worthy to behold
the vision—that was above man. And in conformity with reason, the bed
which we use must be simple and frugal, and so constructed that, by
avoiding the extremes \[of too much indulgence and too much endurance\],
it may be comfortable: if it is warm, to protect us; if cold, to warm
us. But let not the couch be elaborate, and let it have smooth feet; for
elaborate turnings form occasionally paths for creeping things which
twine themselves about the incisions of the work, and do not slip off.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p11"></span>Especially is a moderate softness in
the bed suitable for manhood; for sleep ought not to be for the total
enervation of the body, but for its relaxation. Wherefore I say that it
ought not to be allowed to come on us for the sake of indulgence, but in
order to rest from action. We must therefore sleep so as to be easily
awaked. For it is said, “Let your loins be girt about, and your lamps
burning; and ye yourselves like to men that watch for their lord, that
when he returns from the marriage, and comes and knocks, they may
straightway open to him. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord, when
He cometh, shall find watching.” <span
id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) For there is no use of a sleeping
man, as there is not of a dead man. Wherefore we ought often to rise by
night and bless God. <span id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480) For
blessed are they who watch for Him, and so make themselves like the
angels, whom we call “watchers.” But a man asleep is worth nothing, any
more than if he were not alive.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p14"></span>But he who has the light watches,
“and darkness seizes not on him,” <span
id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481) nor sleep, since darkness does not.
He that is illuminated is therefore awake towards God; and such an one
lives. “For what was made in Him was life.” <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482) “Blessed is the man,” says Wisdom,
“who shall hear me, and the man who shall keep my ways, watching at my
doors, daily observing the posts of my entrances.” <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483) “Let us not then sleep, as do
others, but let us watch,” says the Scripture, “and be sober. For they
that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken, are drunken in
the night,” that is, in the darkness of ignorance. “But let us who are
of the day be sober. For ye are all children of the light, and children
of the day; we are not of the night, nor of the darkness.” <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) But whoever of us is most
solicitous for living the true life, and for entertaining noble
sentiments, will keep awake for as long time as possible, reserving to
himself only what in this respect is conducive to his own health; and
that is not very usual.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p19"></span>But devotion to activity begets an
everlasting vigil after toils. Let not food weigh us down, but lighten
us; that we may be injured as little as possible by sleep, as those that
swim with weights hanging to them are weighed down. But, on the other
hand, let temperance raise us as from the abyss beneath to the
enterprises of wakefulness. For the oppression of sleep is like death,
which forces us into insensibility, cutting off the light by the closing
of the eyelids. Let not us, then, who are sons of the true light, close
the door against this light; but turning in on ourselves, illumining the
eyes of the hidden man, and gazing on the truth itself, and receiving
its streams, let us clearly and intelligibly reveal such dreams as are
true.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p20"></span>But the hiccuping of those who are
loaded with wine, and the snortings of those who are stuffed with food,
and the snoring rolled in the bed-clothes, and the rumblings of pained
stomachs, cover over the clear-seeing eye of the soul, by filling the
mind with ten thousand phantasies. And the cause is too much food, which
drags the rational part of man down to a condition of stupidity. For
much sleep brings advantage neither to our bodies nor our souls; nor is
it suitable at all to those processes which have truth for their object,
although agreeable to nature.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p21"></span>Now, just Lot (for I pass over at
present the account of the economy of regeneration <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485) ) would not have been drawn into
that unhallowed intercourse, had he not been intoxicated by his
daughters, and overpowered by sleep. If, therefore, we cut off the
causes of great tendency to sleep, we shall sleep the more soberly. For
those who have the sleepless Word dwelling in <span id="page_259">p.
259</span> <span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-Page_259"></span>them, ought not to
sleep the livelong night; but they ought to rise by night, especially
when the days are coming to an end, and one devote himself to
literature, another begin his art, the women handle the distaff, and all
of us should, so to speak, fight against sleep, accustoming ourselves to
this gently and gradually, so that through wakefulness we may partake of
life for a longer period.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p23"></span>We, then, who assign the best part of
the night to wakefulness, must by no manner of means sleep by day; and
fits of uselessness, and napping and stretching one’s self, and yawning,
are manifestations of frivolous uneasiness of soul. And in addition to
all, we must know this, that the need of sleep is not in the soul. For
it is ceaselessly active. But the body is relieved by being resigned to
rest, the soul whilst not acting through the body, but exercising
intelligence within itself. <span id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486)
Thus also, such dreams as are true, in the view of him who reflects
rightly, are the thoughts of a sober soul, undistracted for the time by
the affections of the body, and counselling with itself in the best
manner. For the soul to cease from activity within itself, were
destruction to it. Wherefore always contemplating God, and by perpetual
converse with Him inoculating the body with wakefulness, it raises man
to equality with angelic grace, and from the practice of wakefulness it
grasps the eternity of life. <span id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[257:1477](0020273.htm#fr_1476) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p2"></span> \[Family prayers, apparently.\]

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[257:1478](0020273.htm#fr_1477) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p5"></span>See p. 258, *infra*. Sleep, he
supposes, frees the soul as really, not so absolutely, as death:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p5.2"></span> “Th’ immortal mind that hath
> forsook  
> Her mansion in this fleshly nook.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p6"></span>*Penseroso*, line 91.\]

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[258:1479](0020273.htm#fr_1478) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p8"></span> *Iliad*, x. 155. \[Note the
Scriptural moderation with which he censures, recognising what is
allowable, and rejecting the “pride that apes humility.”\]

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[258:1480](0020273.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p12"></span> [Luke xii.
35-37](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>. \[Concerning “sleep,” see p. 259,
*infra.*\]

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[258:1481](0020273.htm#fr_1480) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p13"></span> \[Holy men, on waking in the night,
have always used ejaculations, even when unable to rise. [Ps. cxix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#062)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>; [Acts xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p13.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[258:1482](0020273.htm#fr_1481) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p15"></span> [John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[258:1483](0020273.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p16"></span> [John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[258:1484](0020273.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p17"></span> [Prov. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#034)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[258:1485](0020273.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p18"></span> [1 Thess. v.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[258:1486](0020273.htm#fr_1485) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p22"></span> \[Does our author here use the term
“regeneration” with reference to the restitution of all things? ([Matt.
xix. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p22.1"></span>; [Acts iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p22.2"></span>.) He touched upon the subject above,
speaking of one that is *illuminated:* then he begins upon the true
life, and to this he may refer. But it strikes me, that naming Lot, his
place in the dispensations of grace strikes him as needing some comment,
and so he apologizes for passing on.\]

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[259:1487](0020273.htm#fr_1486) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p24"></span> \[See note 7 *supra*, p. 257. Here
the immaterial soul is recognised as wholly independent of bodily
organs, and sleep is expounded as the image of death freeing the mind.\]

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[259:1488](0020273.htm#fr_1487) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ix-p25"></span> \[The psychology of Clement is
noteworthy, but his ethical reflections are pure gold.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.](0020274)
