[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020355)  [Next](0020357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.—On Contempt for Pain, Poverty, and Other External Things.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p1"></span>Fit objects for admiration are the
Stoics, who say that the soul is not affected by the body, either to
vice by disease, or to virtue by health; but both these things, they
say, are indifferent. And indeed Job, through exceeding continence, and
excellence of faith, when from rich he became poor, from being held in
honour dishonoured, from being comely unsightly, and sick from being
healthy, is depicted as a good example, putting the Tempter to shame,
blessing his Creator; bearing what came second, as the first, and most
clearly teaching that it is possible for the gnostic to make an
excellent use of all circumstances. And that ancient achievements are
proposed as images for our correction, the apostle shows, when he says,
“So that my bonds in Christ are become manifest in all the palace, and
to all the rest; and several of the brethren in the Lord, waxing
confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word of God
without fear,” <span id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698) —since
martyrs’ testimonies are examples of conversion gloriously sanctified.
“For what things the Scripture speaks were written for our instruction,
that we, through patience and the consolation of the Scriptures, might
have the hope of consolation.” <span
id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699) When pain is present, the soul
appears to decline from it, and to deem release from present pain a
precious thing. At that moment it slackens from studies, when the other
virtues also are <span id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-Page_413"></span>neglected. And yet we do not say that it
is virtue itself which suffers, for virtue is not affected by disease.
But he who is partaker of both, of virtue and the disease, is afflicted
by the pressure of the latter; and if he who has not yet attained the
habit of self-command be not a high-souled man, he is distraught; and
the inability to endure it is found equivalent to fleeing from it.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p4"></span>The same holds good also in the case of
poverty. For it compels the soul to desist from necessary things, I mean
contemplation and from pure sinlessness, forcing him, who has not wholly
dedicated himself to God in love, to occupy himself about provisions;
as, again, health and abundance of necessaries keep the soul free and
unimpeded, and capable of making a good use of what is at hand. “For,”
says the apostle, “such shall have trouble in the flesh. But I spare
you. For I would have you without anxiety, in order to decorum and
assiduity for the Lord, without distraction.” <span
id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p6"></span>These things, then, are to be abstained
from, not for their own sakes, but for the sake of the body; and care
for the body is exercised for the sake of the soul, to which it has
reference. For on this account it is necessary for the man who lives as
a gnostic to know what is suitable. Since the fact that pleasure is not
a good thing is admitted from the fact that certain pleasures are evil,
by this reason good appears evil, and evil good. And then, if we choose
some pleasures and shun others, it is not every pleasure that is a good
thing.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p7"></span>Similarly, also, the same rule holds
with pains, some of which we endure, and others we shun. But choice and
avoidance are exercised according to knowledge; so that it is not
pleasure that is the good thing, but knowledge by which we shall choose
a pleasure at a certain time, and of a certain kind. Now the martyr
chooses the pleasure that exists in prospect through the present pain.
If pain is conceived as existing in thirst, and pleasure in drinking,
the pain that has preceded becomes the efficient cause of pleasure. But
evil cannot be the efficient cause of good. Neither, then, is the one
thing nor the other evil. Simonides accordingly (as also Aristotle)
writes, “that to be in good health is the best thing, and the second
best thing is to be handsome, and the third best thing is to be rich
without cheating.”

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p8"></span>And Theognis of Megara says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p8.1"></span> “You must, to escape poverty,
> throw  
> Yourself, O Cyrnus down from  
> The steep rocks into the deep sea.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p9"></span>On the other hand, Antiphanes, the comic
poet, says, “Plutus (Wealth), when it has taken hold of those who see
better than others, makes them blind.” Now by the poets he is proclaimed
as blind from his birth:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p9.1"></span> “And brought him forth blind who
> saw not the sun.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p10"></span>Says the Chalcidian Euphorion:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p10.1"></span> “Riches, then, and extravagant
> luxuries,  
> Were for men the worst training for manliness.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p11"></span>Wrote Euripides in *Alexander:*—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p11.1"></span> “And it is said,  
> Penury has attained wisdom through misfortune;  
> But much wealth will capture not  
> Sparta alone, but every city.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p12"></span>“It is not then the only coin that
mortals have, that which is white silver or golden, but virtue too,” as
Sophocles says.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p12.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Some Points in the Beatitudes.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p13"></span>Our holy Saviour applied poverty and
riches, and the like, both to spiritual things and objects of sense. For
when He said, “Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness’
sake,” <span id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701) He clearly taught us
in every circumstance to seek for the martyr who, if poor for
righteousness’ sake, witnesses that the righteousness which he loves is
a good thing; and if he “hunger and thirst for righteousness’ sake,”
testifies that righteousness is the best thing. Likewise he, that weeps
and mourns for righteousness’ sake, testifies to the best law that it is
beautiful. As, then, “those that are persecuted,” so also “those that
hunger and thirst” for righteousness’ sake, are called “blessed” by Him
who approves of the true desire, which not even famine can put a stop
to. And if “they hunger after righteousness itself,” they are blessed.
“And blessed are the poor,” whether “in spirit” or in circumstance”—that
is, if for righteousness’ sake. It is not the poor simply, but those
that have wished to become poor for righteousness’ sake, that He
pronounces blessed—those who have despised the honours of this world in
order to attain “the good;” likewise also those who, through chastity,
have become comely in person and character, and those who are of noble
birth, and honourable, having through righteousness attained to
adoption, and therefore “have received power to become the sons of
God,” <span id="fr_2702"></span>[2703](#fn_2702) and “to tread on
serpents and scorpions,” and to rule over demons and “the host of the
adversary.” <span id="fr_2703"></span>[2704](#fn_2703) And, in fine, the
Lord’s discipline <span id="fr_2704"></span>[2705](#fn_2704) draws the
soul away gladly from the body, even if it wrench itself away in its
removal. “For he that loveth his life shall lose it, and he that loseth
his life shall find it,” <span id="fr_2705"></span>[2706](#fn_2705) if
we only join that which is mortal of us with <span id="page_414">p.
414</span> <span id="vi.iv.iv.v-Page_414"></span>the immortality of God.
It is the will of God \[that we should attain\] the knowledge of God,
which is the communication of immortality. He therefore, who, in
accordance with the word of repentance, knows his life to be sinful will
lose it—losing it from sin, from which it is wrenched; but losing it,
will find it, according to the obedience which lives again to faith, but
dies to sin. This, then, is what it is “to find one’s life,” “to know
one’s self.”

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p19"></span>The conversion, however, which leads to
divine things, the Stoics say, is affected by a change, the soul being
changed to wisdom. And Plato: “On the soul taking a turn to what is
better, and a change from a kind of nocturnal day.” Now the philosophers
also allow the good man an exit from life in accordance with reason, in
the case of one depriving him of active exertion, so that the hope of
action is no longer left him. And the judge who compels us to deny Him
whom we love, I regard as showing who is and who is not the friend of
God. In that case there is not left ground for even examining what one
prefers—the menaces of man or the love of God. And abstinence from
vicious acts is found, somehow, \[to result in\] the diminution and
extinction of vicious propensities, their energy being destroyed by
inaction. And this is the import of “Sell what thou hast, and give to
the poor, and come, follow Me” <span
id="fr_2706"></span>[2707](#fn_2706) —that is, follow what is said by
the Lord. Some say that by what “thou hast” He designated the things in
the soul, of a nature not akin to it, though how these are bestowed on
the poor they are not able to say. For God dispenses to all according to
desert, His distribution being righteous. Despising, therefore, the
possessions which God apportions to thee in thy magnificence, comply
with what is spoken by me; haste to the ascent of the Spirit, being not
only justified by abstinence from what is evil, but in addition also
perfected, by Christlike beneficence. <span
id="fr_2707"></span>[2708](#fn_2707) In this instance He convicted the
man, who boasted that he had fulfilled the injunctions of the law, of
not loving his neighbour; and it is by beneficence that the love which,
according to the gnostic ascending scale, is Lord of the Sabbath,
proclaims itself. <span id="fr_2708"></span>[2709](#fn_2708) We must
then, according to my view, have recourse to the word of salvation
neither from fear of punishment nor promise of a gift, but on account of
the good itself. Such, as do so, stand on the right hand of the
sanctuary; but those who think that by the gift of what is perishable
they shall receive in exchange what belongs to immortality are in the
parable of the two brothers called “hirelings.” And is there not some
light thrown here on the expression “in the likeness and image,” in the
fact that some live according to the likeness of Christ, while those who
stand on the left hand live according to their image? There are then two
things proceeding from the truth, one root lying beneath both,—the
choice being, however, not equal, or rather the difference that is in
the choice not being equal. To choose by way of imitation differs, as
appears to me, from the choice of him who chooses according to
knowledge, as that which is set on fire differs from that which is
illuminated. Israel, then, is the light of the likeness which is
according to the Scripture. But the image is another thing. What means
the parable of Lazarus, by showing the image of the rich and poor? And
what the saying, “No man can serve two masters, God and Mammon?”—the
Lord so terming the love of money. For instance, the covetous, who were
invited, responded not to the invitation to the supper, not because of
their possessing property, but of their inordinate affection to what
they possessed. “The foxes,” then, have holes. He called those evil and
earthly men who are occupied about the wealth which is mined and dug
from the ground, foxes. Thus also, in reference to Herod: “Go, tell that
fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and perform cures to-day and to-morrow,
and the third day I shall be perfected.” <span
id="fr_2709"></span>[2710](#fn_2709) For He applied the name “fowls of
the air” to those who were distinct from the other birds—those really
pure, those that have the power of flying to the knowledge of the
heavenly Word. For not riches only, but also honour, and marriage, and
poverty, have ten thousand cares for him who is unfit for them. <span
id="fr_2710"></span>[2711](#fn_2710) And those cares He indicated in the
parable of the fourfold seed, when He said that “the seed of the word
which fell unto the thorns” and hedges was choked by them, and could not
bring forth fruit. It is therefore necessary to learn how to make use of
every occurrence, so as by a good life, according to knowledge, to be
trained for the state of eternal life. For it said, “I saw the wicked
exalted and towering as the cedars of Lebanon; and I passed,” says the
Scripture, “and, lo, he was not; and I sought him, and his place was not
found. Keep innocence, and look on uprightness: for there is a remnant
to the man of peace.” <span id="fr_2711"></span>[2712](#fn_2711) Such
will he be who believes unfeignedly with his whole heart, and is
tranquil in his whole soul. “For the different people honour me with
their lips, but their heart is far from the Lord.” <span
id="fr_2712"></span>[2713](#fn_2712) “They bless <span id="page_415">p.
415</span> <span id="vi.iv.iv.v-Page_415"></span>with their mouth, but
they curse in their heart.” <span id="fr_2713"></span>[2714](#fn_2713)
“They loved Him with their mouth, and lied to Him with their tongue; but
their heart was not right with Him, and they were not faithful to His
covenant.” Wherefore “let the false lips become speechless, and let the
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p27.2"></span>Lord</span> destroy
the boastful tongue: those who say, We shall magnify our tongue, and our
lips are our own; who is Lord over us? For the affliction of the poor
and the groaning of the needy now will I arise, saith the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p27.3"></span>Lord</span>; I will set
him in safety; I will speak out in his case.” <span
id="fr_2714"></span>[2715](#fn_2714) For it is to the humble that Christ
belongs, who do not exalt themselves against His flock. “Lay not up for
yourselves, therefore, treasures on the earth, where moth and rust
destroy, and thieves break through and steal,” <span
id="fr_2715"></span>[2716](#fn_2715) says the Lord, in reproach
perchance of the covetous, and perchance also of those who are simply
anxious and full of cares, and those too who indulge their bodies. For
amours, and diseases, and evil thoughts “break through” the mind and the
whole man. But our true “treasure” is where what is allied to our mind
is, since it bestows the communicative power of righteousness, showing
that we must assign to the habit of our old conversation what we have
acquired by it, and have recourse to God, beseeching mercy. He is, in
truth, “the bag that waxeth not old,” the provisions of eternal life,
“the treasure that faileth not in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2716"></span>[2717](#fn_2716) “For I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy,” <span id="fr_2717"></span>[2718](#fn_2717) saith the
Lord. And they say those things to those who wish to be poor for
righteousness’ sake. For they have heard in the commandment that “the
broad and wide way leadeth to destruction, and many there are who go in
by it.” <span id="fr_2718"></span>[2719](#fn_2718) It is not of anything
else that the assertion is made, but of profligacy, and love of women,
and love of glory, and ambition, and similar passions. For so He says,
“Fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and whose shall
those things be which thou hast prepared?” <span
id="fr_2719"></span>[2720](#fn_2719) And the commandment is expressed in
these very words, “Take heed, therefore, of covetousness. For a man’s
life does not consist in the abundance of those things which he
possesses. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul?” <span id="fr_2720"></span>[2721](#fn_2720) “Wherefore I say,
Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for your body,
what ye shall put on. For your life is more than meat, and your body
than raiment.” <span id="fr_2721"></span>[2722](#fn_2721) And again,
“For your Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.” “But
seek first the kingdom of heaven, and its righteousness,” for these are
the great things, and the things which are small and appertain to this
life “shall be added to you.” <span id="fr_2722"></span>[2723](#fn_2722)
Does He not plainly then exhort us to follow the gnostic life, and
enjoin us to seek the truth in word and deed? Therefore Christ, who
trains the soul, reckons one rich, not by his gifts, but by his choice.
It is said, therefore, that Zaccheus, or, according to some, Matthew,
the chief of the publicans, on hearing that the Lord had deigned to come
to him, said, “Lord, and if I have taken anything by false accusation, I
restore him fourfold;” on which the Saviour said, “The Son of man, on
coming to-day, has found that which was lost.” <span
id="fr_2723"></span>[2724](#fn_2723) Again, on seeing the rich cast into
the treasury according to their wealth, and the widow two mites, He said
“that the widow had cast in more than they all,” for “they had
contributed of their abundance, but she of her destitution.” And because
He brought all things to bear on the discipline of the soul, He said,
“Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.” <span
id="fr_2724"></span>[2725](#fn_2724) And the meek are those who have
quelled the battle of unbelief in the soul, the battle of wrath, and
lust, and the other forms that are subject to them. And He praises those
meek by choice, not by necessity. For there are with the Lord both
rewards and “many mansions,” corresponding to men’s lives. “Whosoever
shall receive,” says He, “a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall
receive a prophet’s reward; and whosoever shall receive a righteous man
in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man’s reward;
and whoso shall receive one of the least of these my disciples, shall
not lose his reward.” <span id="fr_2725"></span>[2726](#fn_2725) And
again, the differences of virtue according to merit, and the noble
rewards, He indicated by the hours unequal in number; and in addition,
by the equal reward given to each of the labourers—that is, salvation,
which is meant by the penny—He indicated the equality of justice; and
the difference of those called He intimated, by those who worked for
unequal portions of time. They shall work, therefore, in accordance with
the appropriate mansions of which they have been deemed worthy as
rewards, being fellow-workers in the ineffable administration and
service. <span id="fr_2726"></span>[2727](#fn_2726) “Those, then,” says
Plato, “who seem called to a holy life, are those who, freed and
released from those earthly localities as from prisons, have reached the
pure dwelling-place on high.” In clearer terms again he <span
id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-Page_416"></span>expresses the same thing: “Those who by
philosophy have been sufficiently purged from those things, live without
bodies entirely for all time. Although they are enveloped in certain
shapes; in the case of some, of air, and others, of fire.” He adds
further: “And they reach abodes fairer than those, which it is not easy,
nor is there sufficient time now to describe.” Whence with reason,
“blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted;” <span
id="fr_2727"></span>[2728](#fn_2727) for they who have repented of their
former evil life shall attain to “the calling” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p41.2"></span>κλῆσιν</span>), for
this is the meaning of being comforted (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p41.3"></span>παρακληθῆναι</span>). And there are two
styles of penitents. <span id="fr_2728"></span>[2729](#fn_2728) That
which is more common is fear on account of what is done; but the other
which is more special, the shame which the spirit feels in itself
arising from conscience. Whether then, here or elsewhere (for no place
is devoid of the beneficence of God), He again says, “Blessed are the
merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.” And mercy is not, as some of the
philosophers have imagined, pain on account of others’ calamities, but
rather something good, as the prophets say. For it is said, “I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice.” <span id="fr_2729"></span>[2730](#fn_2729)
And He <span id="fr_2730"></span>[2731](#fn_2730) means by the merciful,
not only those who do acts of mercy, but those who wish to do them,
though they be not able; who do as far as purpose is concerned. For
sometimes we wish by the gift of money or by personal effort to do
mercy, as to assist one in want, or help one who is sick, or stand by
one who is in any emergency; and are not able either from poverty, or
disease, or old age (for this also is natural disease), to carry out our
purpose, in reference to the things to which we are impelled, being
unable to conduct them to the end we wished. Those, who have entertained
the wish whose purpose is equal, share in the same honour with those who
have the ability, although others have the advantage in point of
resources. <span id="fr_2731"></span>[2732](#fn_2731) And since there
are two paths of reaching the perfection of salvation, works and
knowledge, He called the “pure in heart blessed, for they shall see
God.” <span id="fr_2732"></span>[2733](#fn_2732) And if we really look
to the truth of the matter, knowledge is the purification of the leading
faculty of the soul, and is a good activity. Some things accordingly are
good in themselves, and others by participation in what is good, as we
say good actions are good. But without things intermediate which hold
the place of material, neither good nor bad actions are constituted,
such I mean as life, and health, and other necessary things or
circumstantials. Pure then as respects corporeal lusts, and pure in
respect of holy thoughts, he means those are, who attain to the
knowledge of God, when the chief faculty of the soul has nothing
spurious to stand in the way of its power. When, therefore, he who
partakes gnostically of this holy quality devotes himself to
contemplation, communing in purity with the divine, he enters more
nearly into the state of impassible identity, so as no longer to have
science and possess knowledge, but to be science and knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p47"></span>“Blessed, then, are the
peacemakers,” <span id="fr_2733"></span>[2734](#fn_2733) who have
subdued and tamed the law which wars against the disposition of the
mind, the menaces of anger, and the baits of lust, and the other
passions which war against the reason; who, having lived in the
knowledge both of good works and true reason, shall be reinstated in
adoption, which is dearer. It follows that the perfect peacemaking is
that which keeps unchanged in all circumstances what is peaceful; calls
Providence holy and good; and has its being in the knowledge of divine
and human affairs, by which it deems the opposites that are in the world
to be the fairest harmony of creation. They also are peacemakers, who
teach those who war against the stratagems of sin to have recourse to
faith and peace. And it is the sum of all virtue, in my opinion, when
the Lord teaches us that for love to God we must gnostically despise
death. “Blessed are they,” says He, “who are persecuted for
righteousness’ sake, for they shall be called the sons of God;” <span
id="fr_2734"></span>[2735](#fn_2734) or, as some of those who transpose
the Gospels <span id="fr_2735"></span>[2736](#fn_2735) say, “Blessed are
they who are persecuted by righteousness, for they shall be perfect.”
And, “Blessed are they who are persecuted for my sake; for they shall
have a place where they shall not be persecuted.” And, “Blessed are ye
when men shall hate you, when they shall separate you, when they shall
cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake;” <span
id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736) if we do not detest our
persecutors, and undergo punishments at their hands, not hating them
under the idea that we have been put to trial more tardily than we
looked for; but knowing this also, that every instance of trial is an
occasion for testifying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[412:2699](0020356.htm#fr_2698) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p2"></span> [Phil.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[412:2700](0020356.htm#fr_2699) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p3"></span> [Rom. xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[413:2701](0020356.htm#fr_2700) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[413:2702](0020356.htm#fr_2701) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p14"></span> [Matt. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2702"></span>[413:2703](0020356.htm#fr_2702) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p15"></span> [John. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2703"></span>[413:2704](0020356.htm#fr_2703) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p16"></span> [Luke x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2704"></span>[413:2705](0020356.htm#fr_2704) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p17"></span> \[Canons Apostolical (so called), li.
liii. But see Elucidation I.\]

<span id="fn_2705"></span>[413:2706](0020356.htm#fr_2705) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p18"></span> \[[Matt. x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p18.1"></span>;
[John xii. 25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p18.2"></span>. S.\]

<span id="fn_2706"></span>[414:2707](0020356.htm#fr_2706) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p20"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2707"></span>[414:2708](0020356.htm#fr_2707) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p21.1"></span>κυριακῆ εὐποιῖᾳ</span>

<span id="fn_2708"></span>[414:2709](0020356.htm#fr_2708) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p22"></span> \[If love, exerting itself in doing
good, overruled the letter of the Sabbatic law, rise to this supremacy
of love, which is, of itself, “the fulfilling of the law.”\]

<span id="fn_2709"></span>[414:2710](0020356.htm#fr_2709) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p23"></span> [Luke xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#032)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2710"></span>[414:2711](0020356.htm#fr_2710) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p24"></span> \[He regards the estate of marriage
and the estate of poverty, as gifts redounding to the benefit of those
who accept them as such, and adapt themselves to the same, as
stewards.\]

<span id="fn_2711"></span>[414:2712](0020356.htm#fr_2711) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p25"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
35-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2712"></span>[414:2713](0020356.htm#fr_2712) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p26"></span> [Isa. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p26.1"></span>
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p26.2"></span>ὁ ἔτερος</span>
inserted).

<span id="fn_2713"></span>[415:2714](0020356.htm#fr_2713) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p27"></span> [Ps. lxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2714"></span>[415:2715](0020356.htm#fr_2714) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p28"></span> [Ps. xii.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2715"></span>[415:2716](0020356.htm#fr_2715) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p29"></span> [Matt. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2716"></span>[415:2717](0020356.htm#fr_2716) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p30"></span> [Luke xii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#033)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2717"></span>[415:2718](0020356.htm#fr_2717) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p31"></span> [Rom. ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2718"></span>[415:2719](0020356.htm#fr_2718) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p32"></span> [Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2719"></span>[415:2720](0020356.htm#fr_2719) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p33"></span> [Luke xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2720"></span>[415:2721](0020356.htm#fr_2720) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p34"></span> [Matt. xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2721"></span>[415:2722](0020356.htm#fr_2721) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p35"></span> [Matt. vi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#031)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p35.1"></span>;
[Luke 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p35.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2722"></span>[415:2723](0020356.htm#fr_2722) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p36"></span> [Matt.
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p36.1"></span>; [Luke
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#031)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p36.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2723"></span>[415:2724](0020356.htm#fr_2723) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p36.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p37"></span> [Luke
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2724"></span>[415:2725](0020356.htm#fr_2724) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p38"></span> [Matt. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2725"></span>[415:2726](0020356.htm#fr_2725) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p39"></span> [Matt.
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2726"></span>[415:2727](0020356.htm#fr_2726) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p40"></span> Translated as completed, and amended
by Heinsius. In the text it is plainly mutilated and corrupt.

<span id="fn_2727"></span>[416:2728](0020356.htm#fr_2727) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p41"></span> [Matt. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2728"></span>[416:2729](0020356.htm#fr_2728) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p41.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p42"></span> \[Clement describes the *attrition* of
the schoolmen (which they say suffices) with the *contrition* exacted by
the Gospel. He knows nothing but the latter, as having promise of the
Comforter.\]

<span id="fn_2729"></span>[416:2730](0020356.htm#fr_2729) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p43"></span> [Hos. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p43.1"></span>;
[Matt. ix. 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p43.2"></span>, xii. 7.

<span id="fn_2730"></span>[416:2731](0020356.htm#fr_2730) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p43.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p44"></span> \[[Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p44.1"></span>.
S.\]

<span id="fn_2731"></span>[416:2732](0020356.htm#fr_2731) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p45"></span> \[A cheering comment on the widow’s
mites, and the apostolic principle of [2 Cor. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p45.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_2732"></span>[416:2733](0020356.htm#fr_2732) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p46"></span> \[[Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p46.1"></span>.
S.\]

<span id="fn_2733"></span>[416:2734](0020356.htm#fr_2733) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p48"></span> \[[Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p48.1"></span>.
S\].

<span id="fn_2734"></span>[416:2735](0020356.htm#fr_2734) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p49"></span> [Matt. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2735"></span>[416:2736](0020356.htm#fr_2735) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p50"></span> \[Note that thus in the second century
there were those (scholiasts) who interlined and transposed the Gospels,
in <span class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p50.1"></span>mss</span>.\]

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[416:2737](0020356.htm#fr_2736) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.v-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p51"></span> [Luke vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#022)<span id="vi.iv.iv.v-p51.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.—The Blessedness of the Martyr.](0020357)
