[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020361)  [Next](0020363) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Basilides’ Idea of Martyrdom Refuted.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p1"></span>Basilides, in the twenty-third book of
the *Exegetics*, respecting those that are punished by martyrdom,
expresses himself in the following language: “For I say this, Whosoever
fall under the afflictions mentioned, in consequence of unconsciously
transgressing in other matters, are brought to this good end by the
kindness of Him who brings them, but accused on other grounds; so that
they may not suffer as condemned for what are owned to be iniquities,
nor reproached as the adulterer or the murderer, but because they are
Christians; which will console them, so that they do not appear to
suffer. And if one who has not sinned at all incur suffering—a rare
case—yet even he will not suffer aught through the machinations of
power, but will suffer as the child which seems not to have sinned would
suffer.” Then further on he adds: “As, then, the child which has not
sinned before, or committed actual sin in itself, but has that which
committed sin, when subjected to <span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-Page_424"></span>suffering, gets good, reaping the
advantage of many difficulties; so also, although a perfect man may not
have sinned in act, while he endures afflictions, he suffers similarly
with the child. Having within him the sinful principle, but not
embracing the opportunity of committing sin, he does not sin; so that he
is not to be reckoned as not having sinned. For as he who wishes to
commit adultery is an adulterer, although he does not succeed in
committing adultery; and he that wishes to commit murder is a murderer,
although he is unable to kill; so also, if I see the man without sin,
whom I specify, suffering, though he have done nothing bad, I should
call him bad, on account of his wishing to sin. For I will affirm
anything rather than call Providence evil.” Then, in continuation, he
says expressly concerning the Lord, as concerning man: “If then, passing
from all these observations, you were to proceed to put me to shame by
saying, perchance impersonating certain parties, This man has then
sinned; for this man has suffered;—if you permit, I will say, He has not
sinned; but was like a child suffering. If you were to insist more
urgently, I would say, That the man you name is man, but that God is
righteous: “For no one is pure,” as one said, ‘from pollution.’” <span
id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796) But the hypothesis of
Basilides <span id="fr_2797"></span>[2798](#fn_2797) says that the soul,
having sinned before in another life, endures punishment in this—the
elect soul with honour by martyrdom, the other purged by appropriate
punishment. How can this be true, when the confessing and suffering
punishment or not depends on ourselves? For in the case of the man who
shall deny, Providence, as held by Basilides, is done away with. I will
ask him, then, in the case of a confessor who has been arrested, whether
he will confess and be punished in virtue of Providence or not? For in
the case of denying he will not be punished. But if, for the sake of
escaping and evading the necessity of punishing such an one, he shall
say that the destruction of those who shall deny is of Providence, he
will be a martyr against his will. And how any more is it the case, that
there is laid up in heaven the very glorious recompense to him who has
witnessed, for his witnessing? If Providence did not permit the sinner
to get the length of sinning, it is unjust in both cases; both in not
rescuing the man who is dragged to punishment for righteousness’ sake,
and in having rescued him who wished to do wrong, he having done it as
far as volition was concerned, but \[Providence\] having prevented the
deed, and unjustly favoured the sinner. And how impious, in deifying the
devil, and in daring to call the Lord a sinful man! For the devil
tempting us, knowing what we are, but not knowing if we will hold out,
but wishing to dislodge us from the faith, attempts also to bring us
into subjection to himself. Which is all that is allowed to him, partly
from the necessity of saving us, who have taken occasion from the
commandment, from ourselves; partly for the confusion of him who has
tempted and failed; for the confirmation of the members of the Church,
and the conscience of those who admire the constancy \[displayed\]. But
if martyrdom be retribution by way of punishment, then also faith and
doctrine, on account of which martyrdom comes, are co-operators in
punishment—than which, what other absurdity could be greater? But with
reference to these dogmas, whether the soul is changed to another body,
also of the devil, at the proper time mention will be made. But at
present, to what has been already said, let us add the following: Where
any more is faith in the retribution of sins committed before martyrdom
takes place? And where is love to God, which is persecuted and endures
for the truth? And where is the praise of him who has confessed, or the
censure of him who has denied? And for what use is right conduct, the
mortification of the lusts, and the hating of no creature? But if, as
Basilides himself says, we suppose one part of the declared will of God
to be the loving of all things because all things bear a relation to the
whole, and another “not to lust after anything,” and a third “not to
hate anything,” by the will of God these also will be punishments, which
it were impious to think. For neither did the Lord suffer by the will of
the Father, nor are those who are persecuted persecuted by the will of
God; since either of two things is the case: either persecution in
consequence of the will of God is a good thing, or those who decree and
afflict are guiltless. But nothing is without the will of the Lord of
the universe. It remains to say that such things happen without the
prevention of God; for this alone saves both the providence and the
goodness of God. We must not therefore think that He actively produces
afflictions (far be it that we should think this!); but we must be
persuaded that He does not prevent those that cause them, but overrules
for good the crimes of His enemies: “I will therefore,” He says,
“destroy the wall, and it shall be for treading under foot.” <span
id="fr_2798"></span>[2799](#fn_2798) Providence being a disciplinary
art; <span id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799) in the case of others
for each individual’s sins, and in the case of the Lord and His apostles
for ours. To this <span id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-Page_425"></span>point says the divine apostle: “For
this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye abstain from
fornication: that each one of you should know how to possess his vessel
in sanctification and honour; not in the lust of concupiscence, as the
Gentiles who know not the Lord: that none of you should overreach or
take advantage of his brother in any matter; because the Lord is the
avenger in respect of all such, as we also told you before, and
testified. For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but to holiness.
Wherefore he that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath also
given His Holy Spirit to you.” <span
id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800) Wherefore the Lord was not
prohibited from this sanctification of ours. If, then, one of them were
to say, in reply, that the martyr is punished for sins committed before
this embodying, and that he will again reap the fruit of his conduct in
this life, for that such are the arrangements of the \[divine
administration\], we shall ask him if the retribution takes place by
Providence. For if it be not of the divine administration, the economy
of expiations is gone, and their hypothesis falls to the ground; but if
expiations are by Providence, punishments are by Providence too. But
Providence, although it begins, so to speak, to move with the Ruler, yet
is implanted in substances along with their origin by the God of the
universe. Such being the case, they must confess either that punishment
is not just, and those who condemn and persecute the martyrs do right,
or that persecutions even are wrought by the will of God. Labour and
fear are not, then, as they say, incident to affairs as rust to iron,
but come upon the soul through its own will. And on these points there
is much to say, which will be reserved for future consideration, taking
them up in due course.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[424:2797](0020362.htm#fr_2796) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p2"></span> [Job. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2797"></span>[424:2798](0020362.htm#fr_2797) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p3"></span> \[This exposition of Basilides is
noteworthy. It is very doubtful, whether, even in poetry, the Platonic
idea of pre-existence should be encouraged by Christians, as, e.g., in
that sublimest of moderns lyrics, Wordsworth’s ode on *Immortality and
Childhood*.\]

<span id="fn_2798"></span>[424:2799](0020362.htm#fr_2798) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p4"></span> [Isa. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#005)<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[424:2800](0020362.htm#fr_2799) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p5"></span> The text has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>παιδευτικῆς τέχνης τῆς τοιάδε</span>, for
which Sylburgius suggests <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p5.2"></span>τοιᾶσδε</span>, as translated above.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[425:2801](0020362.htm#fr_2800) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p6"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
3-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xi-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—Valentinian’s Vagaries About the Abolition of Death
Refuted.](0020363)
