[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020193)  [Next](0020195) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xxiv"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—Concerning the Angels and Giants.

<span id="v.ii.xxiv-p1"></span>What need is there, in speaking to you
who have searched into every department of knowledge, to mention the
poets, or to examine opinions of another kind? Let it suffice to say
thus much. If the poets and philosophers did not acknowledge that there
is one God, and concerning these gods were not of opinion, some that
they are demons, others that they are matter, and others that they once
were men,—there might be some show of reason for our being harassed as
we are, since we employ language which makes a distinction between God
and matter, and the natures of the two. For, as we acknowledge a God,
and a Son his Logos, and a Holy Spirit, united in essence,—the Father,
the Son, the Spirit, because the Son is the Intelligence, Reason, Wisdom
of the Father, and the Spirit an effluence, as light from fire; so also
do we apprehend the existence of other powers, which exercise dominion
about matter, and by means of it, and one in particular, which is
hostile to God: not that anything is really opposed to God, like strife
to friendship, according to Empedocles, and night to day, according to
the appearing and disappearing of the stars (for even if anything *had*
placed itself in opposition to God, it would have ceased to <span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span id="v.ii.xxiv-Page_142"></span>exist,
its structure being destroyed by the power and might of God), but that
to the good that is in God, which belongs of necessity to Him, and
co-exists with Him, as colour with body, without which it has no
existence (not as being part of it, but as an attendant property
co-existing with it, united and blended, just as it is natural for fire
to be yellow and the ether dark blue),—to the good that is in God, I
say, the spirit which is about matter, <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) who was created by God, just as the
other angels were created by Him, and entrusted with the control of
matter and the forms of matter, is opposed. For this is the office of
the angels,—to exercise providence for God over the things created and
ordered by Him; so that God may have the universal and general
providence of the whole, while the particular parts are provided for by
the angels appointed over them. <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786)
Just as with men, who have freedom of choice as to both virtue and vice
(for you would not either honour the good or punish the bad, unless vice
and virtue were in their own power; and some are diligent in the matters
entrusted to them by you, and others faithless), so is it among the
angels. Some, free agents, you will observe, such as they were created
by God, continued in those things for which God had made and over which
He had ordained them; but some outraged both the constitution of their
nature and the government entrusted to them: namely, this ruler of
matter and its various forms, and others of those who were placed about
this first firmament (you know that we say nothing without witnesses,
but state the things which have been declared by the prophets); these
fell into impure love of virgins, and were subjugated by the flesh, and
he became negligent and wicked in the management of the things entrusted
to him. Of these lovers of virgins, therefore, were begotten those who
are called giants. <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) And if
something has been said by the poets, too, about the giants, be not
surprised at this: worldly wisdom and divine differ as much from each
other as truth and plausibility: the one is of heaven and the other of
earth; and indeed, according to the prince of matter,—

> <span id="v.ii.xxiv-p4.2"></span> “We know we oft speak lies that look
> like truths.” <span id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_785"></span>[142:786](0020194.htm#fr_785) <span
id="v.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxiv-p2"></span> \[Comp. cap. xxvii., *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_786"></span>[142:787](0020194.htm#fr_786) <span
id="v.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> \[Kaye, 192. And see cap. x., *supra*,
p. 133. Divine Providence does not exclude the ministry of angels by
divine appointment. *Resurrection*, cap. xviii., *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_787"></span>[142:788](0020194.htm#fr_787) <span
id="v.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> \[The Paris editors caution us against
yielding to this interpretation of [Gen. vi.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>.
It was the Rabbinical interpretation. See Josephus, book i. cap. 3.\]

<span id="fn_788"></span>[142:789](0020194.htm#fr_788) <span
id="v.ii.xxiv-p4.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxiv-p5"></span> Hesiod, *Theog*., 27. \[Traces of the
*Nephilim* are found in all mythologies.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV.—The Poets and Philosophers Have Denied a Divine
Providence.](0020195)
