[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020382)  [Next](0020384) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.v.ix"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Reasons for Veiling the Truth in Symbols.

<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p1"></span>But, as appears, I have, in my eagerness
to establish my point, insensibly gone beyond what is requisite. For
life would fail me to adduce the multitude of those who philosophize in
a symbolical manner. For the sake, then, of memory and brevity, and of
attracting to the truth, such are the Scriptures of the Barbarian
philosophy.

<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p2"></span>For only to those who often approach
them, and have given them a trial by faith and in their whole life, will
they supply the real philosophy and the true theology. They also wish us
to require an interpreter and guide. For so they considered, that,
receiving truth at the hands of those who knew it well, we would be more
earnest and less liable to deception, and those worthy of them would
profit. Besides, all things that shine through a veil show the truth
grander and more imposing; as fruits shining through water, and figures
through veils, which give added reflections to them. For, in addition to
the fact that things unconcealed are perceived in one way, the rays of
light shining round reveal defects. Since, then, we may draw several
meanings, as we do from what is expressed in <span id="page_458">p.
458</span> <span id="vi.iv.v.ix-Page_458"></span>veiled form, such being
the case, the ignorant and unlearned man fails. But the Gnostior
apprehends. Now, then, it is not wished that all things should be
exposed indiscriminately to all and sundry, or the benefits of wisdom
communicated to those who have not even in a dream been purified in
soul, (for it is not allowed to hand to every chance comer what has been
procured with such laborious efforts); nor are the mysteries of the word
to be expounded to the profane.

<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p3"></span>They say, then, that Hipparchus the
Pythagorean, being guilty of writing the tenets of Pythagoras in plain
language, was expelled from the school, and a pillar raised for him as
if he had been dead. Wherefore also in the Barbarian philosophy they
call those dead who have fallen away from the dogmas, and have placed
the mind in subjection to carnal passions. “For what fellowship hath
righteousness and iniquity?” according to the divine apostle. “Or what
communion hath light with darkness? or what concord hath Christ with
Belial? or what portion hath the believer with the unbeliever?” <span
id="fr_3049"></span>[3050](#fn_3049) For the honours of the Olympians
and of mortals lie apart. “Wherefore also go forth from the midst of
them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing;
and I will receive you, and will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters.” <span id="fr_3050"></span>[3051](#fn_3050)

<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p6"></span>It was not only the Pythagoreans and
Plato then, that concealed many things; but the Epicureans too say that
they have things that may not be uttered, and do not allow all to peruse
those writings. The Stoics also say that by the first Zeno things were
written which they do not readily allow disciples to read, without their
first giving proof whether or not they are genuine philosophers. And the
disciples of Aristotle say that some of their treatises are esoteric,
and others common and exoteric. Further, those who instituted the
mysteries, being philosophers, buried their doctrines in myths, so as
not to be obvious to all. Did they then, by veiling human opinions,
prevent the ignorant from handling them; and was it not more beneficial
for the holy and blessed contemplation of realities to be concealed? But
it was not only the tenets of the Barbarian philosophy, or the
Pythagorean myths. But even those myths in Plato (in the *Republic*,
that of Hero the Armenian; and in the *Gorgias*, that of Æacus and
Rhadamanthus; and in the *Phædo*, that of Tartarus; and in the
*Protagoras*, that of Prometheus and Epimetheus; and besides these, that
of the war between the Atlantini and the Athenians in the Atlanticum)
are to be expounded allegorically, not absolutely in all their
expressions, but in those which express the general sense. And these we
shall find indicated by symbols under the veil of allegory. Also the
association of Pythagoras, and the twofold intercourse with the
associates which designates the majority, hearers (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p6.1"></span>ἀκουσματικοί</span>),
and the others that have a genuine attachment to philosophy, disciples
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.ix-p6.2"></span>μαθηματικοί</span>), yet signified that
something was spoken to the multitude, and something concealed from
them. Perchance, too, the twofold species of the Peripatetic
teaching—that called probable, and that called knowable—came very near
the distinction between opinion on the one hand, and glory and truth on
the other.

> <span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p6.3"></span> “To win the flowers of fair renown
> from men,  
> Be not induced to speak aught more than right.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p7"></span>The Ionic muses accordingly expressly
say, “That the majority of people, wise in their own estimation, follow
minstrels and make use of laws, knowing that many are bad, few good; but
that the best pursue glory: for the best make choice of the everlasting
glory of men above all. But the multitude cram themselves like brutes,
measuring happiness by the belly and the pudenda, and the basest things
in us.” And the great Parmenides of Elea is introduced describing thus
the teaching of the two ways:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p7.1"></span> “The one is the dauntless heart of
> convincing truth;  
> The other is in the opinions of men, in whom is no true faith.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3049"></span>[458:3050](0020383.htm#fr_3049) <span
id="vi.iv.v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p4"></span> [2 Cor.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3050"></span>[458:3051](0020383.htm#fr_3050) <span
id="vi.iv.v.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p5"></span> [2 Cor.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018)<span id="vi.iv.v.ix-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.—The Opinion of the Apostles on Veiling the Mysteries
of the Faith.](0020384)
