[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020404)  [Next](0020406) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.—Different Degrees of Knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p1"></span>The Gnostic, then, is impressed with
the closest likeness, that is, with the mind of the Master; which He
being possessed of, commanded and recommended to His disciples and to
the prudent. Comprehending this, as He who taught wished, and receiving
it in its grand sense, he teaches worthily “on the housetops” <span
id="fr_3412"></span>[3413](#fn_3412) those capable of being built to a
lofty height; and begins the doing of what is spoken, in accordance
<span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-Page_507"></span>with the example of life. For He
enjoined what is possible. And, in truth, the kingly man and Christian
ought to be ruler and leader. For we are commanded to be lords over not
only the wild beasts without us, but also over the wild passions within
ourselves.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p3"></span>Through the knowledge, then, as
appears, of a bad and good life is the Gnostic saved, understanding and
executing “more than the scribes and Pharisees.” <span
id="fr_3413"></span>[3414](#fn_3413) “Exert thyself, and prosper, and
reign” writes David, “because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness;
and thy right hand shall guide thee marvellously,” <span
id="fr_3414"></span>[3415](#fn_3414) that is, the Lord. “Who then is the
wise? and he shall understand these things. Prudent? and he shall know
them. For the ways of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p5.2"></span>Lord</span> are right,” <span
id="fr_3415"></span>[3416](#fn_3415) says the prophet, showing that the
Gnostic alone is able to understand and explain the things spoken by the
Spirit obscurely. “And he who understands in that time shall hold his
peace,” <span id="fr_3416"></span>[3417](#fn_3416) says the Scripture,
plainly in the way of declaring them to the unworthy. For the Lord says,
“He that hath ears to hear, let him hear,” <span
id="fr_3417"></span>[3418](#fn_3417) declaring that hearing and
understanding belong not to all. To the point David writes: “Dark water
is in the clouds of the skies. At the gleam before Him the clouds
passed, hail and coals of fire;” <span
id="fr_3418"></span>[3419](#fn_3418) showing that the holy words are
hidden. He intimates that transparent and resplendent to the Gnostics,
like the innocuous hail, they are sent down from God; but that they are
dark to the multitude, like extinguished coals out of the fire, which,
unless kindled and set on fire, will not give forth fire or light. “The
Lord, therefore,” it is said, “gives me the tongue of instruction, so as
to know in season when it is requisite to speak a word;” <span
id="fr_3419"></span>[3420](#fn_3419) not in the way of testimony alone,
but also in the way of question and answer. “And the instruction of the
Lord opens my mouth.” <span id="fr_3420"></span>[3421](#fn_3420) It is
the prerogative of the Gnostic, then, to know how to make use of speech,
and when, and how, and to whom. And already the apostle, by saying,
“After the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ,” <span
id="fr_3421"></span>[3422](#fn_3421) makes the asseveration that the
Hellenic teaching is elementary, and that of Christ perfect, as we have
already intimated before.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p13"></span>“Now the wild olive is inserted into
the fatness of the olive,” <span id="fr_3422"></span>[3423](#fn_3422)
and is indeed of the same species as the cultivated olives. For the
graft uses as soil the tree in which it is engrafted. Now all the plants
sprouted forth simultaneously in consequence of the divine order.
Wherefore also, though the wild olive be wild, it crowns the Olympic
victors. And the elm teaches the vine to be fruitful, by leading it up
to a height. Now we see that wild trees attract more nutriment, because
they cannot ripen. The wild trees, therefore, have less power of
secretion than those that are cultivated. And the cause of their
wildness is the want of the power of secretion. The engrafted olive
accordingly receives more nutriment from its growing in the wild one;
and it gets accustomed, as it were, to secrete the nutriment, becoming
thus assimilated <span id="fr_3423"></span>[3424](#fn_3423) to the
fatness of the cultivated tree.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p16"></span>So also the philosopher, resembling
the wild olive, in having much that is undigested, on account of his
devotion to the search, his propensity to follow, and his eagerness to
seize the fatness of the truth; if he get besides the divine power,
through faith, by being transplanted into the good and mild knowledge,
like the wild olive, engrafted in the truly fair and merciful Word, he
both assimilates the nutriment that is supplied, and becomes a fair and
good olive tree. For engrafting makes worthless shoots noble, and
compels the barren to be fruitful by the art of culture and by gnostic
skill.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p16.1"></span>Different modes of engrafting illustrative of different kinds of conversion.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p17"></span>They say that engrafting is effected
in four modes: one, that in which the graft must be fitted in between
the wood and the bark; resembling the way in which we instruct plain
people belonging to the Gentiles, who receive the word superficially.
Another is, when the wood is cleft, and there is inserted in it the
cultivated branch. And this applies to the case of those who have
studied philosophy; for on cutting through their dogmas, the
acknowledgment of the truth is produced in them. So also in the case of
the Jews, by opening up the Old Testament, the new and noble plant of
the olive is inserted. The third mode of engrafting applies to rustics
and heretics, who are brought by force to the truth. For after smoothing
off both suckers with a sharp pruning-hook, till the pith is laid bare,
but not wounded, they are bound together. And the fourth is that form of
engrafting called budding. For a bud (eye) is cut out of a trunk of a
good sort, a circle being drawn round in the bark along with it, of the
size of the palm. Then the trunk is stripped, to suit the eye, over an
equal circumference. And so the graft is inserted, tied round, and
daubed with clay, the bud being kept uninjured and unstained. This is
the style of gnostic teaching, which is capable of looking into things
themselves. This mode is, in truth, of most <span id="page_508">p.
508</span> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-Page_508"></span>service in the case of
cultivated trees. And “the engrafting into the good olive” mentioned by
the apostle, may be \[engrafting into\] Christ Himself; the uncultivated
and unbelieving nature being transplanted into Christ—that is, in the
case of those who believe in Christ. But it is better \[to understand
it\] of the engrafting <span id="fr_3424"></span>[3425](#fn_3424) of
each one’s faith in the soul itself. For also the Holy Spirit is thus
somehow transplanted by distribution, according to the circumscribed
capacity of each one, but without being circumscribed.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p18.2"></span>Knowledge and love.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p19"></span>Now, discoursing on knowledge, Solomon
speaks thus: “For wisdom is resplendent and fadeless, and is easily
beheld by those who love her. She is beforehand in making herself known
to those who desire her. He that rises early for her shall not toil
wearily. For to think about her is the perfection of good sense. And he
that keeps vigils for her shall quickly be relieved of anxiety. For she
goes about, herself seeking those worthy of her (for knowledge belongs
not to all); and in all ways she benignly shows herself to them.” <span
id="fr_3425"></span>[3426](#fn_3425) Now the paths are the conduct of
life, and the variety that exists in the covenants. Presently he adds:
“And in every thought she meets them,” <span
id="fr_3426"></span>[3427](#fn_3426) being variously contemplated, that
is, by all discipline. Then he subjoins, adducing love, which perfects
by syllogistic reasoning and true propositions, drawing thus a most
convincing and true inference, “For the beginning of her is the truest
desire of instruction,” that is, of knowledge; “prudence is the love of
instruction, and love is the keeping of its laws; and attention to its
laws is the confirmation of immortality; and immortality causes nearness
to God. The desire of wisdom leads, then, to the kingdom.” <span
id="fr_3427"></span>[3428](#fn_3427)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p23"></span>For he teaches, as I think, that true
instruction is desire for knowledge; and the practical exercise of
instruction produces love of knowledge. And love is the keeping of the
commandments which lead to knowledge. And the keeping of them is the
establishment of the commandments, from which immortality results. “And
immortality brings us near to God.”

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p23.1"></span>True knowledge found in the teaching of Christ alone.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p24"></span>If, then, the love of knowledge
produces immortality, and leads the kingly man near to God the King,
knowledge ought to be sought till it is found. Now seeking is an effort
at grasping, and finds the subject by means of certain signs. And
discovery is the end and cessation of inquiry, which has now its object
in its gasp. And this is knowledge. And this discovery, properly so
called, is knowledge, which is the apprehension of the object of search.
And they say that a proof is either the antecedent, or the coincident,
or the consequent. The discovery, then, of what is sought respecting
God, is the teaching through the Son; and the proof of our Saviour being
the very Son of God is the prophecies which preceded His coming,
announcing Him; and the testimonies regarding Him which attended His
birth in the world; in addition, His powers proclaimed and openly shown
after His ascension.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p25"></span>The proof of the truth being with us,
is the fact of the Son of God Himself having taught us. For if in every
inquiry these universals are found, a person and a subject, that which
is truly the truth is shown to be in our hands alone. For the Son of God
is the person of the truth which is exhibited; and the subject is the
power of faith, which prevails over the opposition of every one
whatever, and the assault of the whole world.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p26"></span>But since this is confessedly
established by eternal facts and reasons, and each one who thinks that
there is no Providence has already been seen to deserve punishment and
not contradiction, and is truly an atheist, it is our aim to discover
what doing, and in what manner living, we shall reach the knowledge of
the sovereign God, and how, honouring the Divinity, we may become
authors of our own salvation. Knowing and learning, not from the
Sophists, but from God Himself, what is well-pleasing to Him, we
endeavour to do what is just and holy. Now it is well-pleasing to Him
that we should be saved; and salvation is effected through both
well-doing and knowledge, of both of which the Lord is the teacher.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p27"></span>If, then, according to Plato, it is
only possible to learn the truth either from God or from the progeny of
God, with reason we, selecting testimonies from the divine oracles,
boast of learning the truth by the Son of God, prophesied at first, and
then explained.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p27.1"></span>Philosophy and heresies, aids in discovering the truth.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p28"></span>But the things which co-operate in the
discovery of truth are not to be rejected. Philosophy, accordingly,
which proclaims a Providence, and the recompense of a life of felicity,
and the punishment, on the other hand, of a life of misery, teaches
theology comprehensively; but it does not preserve accuracy and
particular points; for neither respecting the Son of God, nor respecting
the economy of Providence, does it treat similarly with us; for it did
not know the worship of God.

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-Page_509"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p29"></span>Wherefore also the heresies of the
Barbarian philosophy, although they speak of one God, though they sing
the praises of Christ, speak without accuracy, not in accordance with
truth; for they discover another God, and receive Christ not as the
prophecies deliver. But their false dogmas, while they oppose the
conduct that is according to the truth, are against us. For instance,
Paul circumcised Timothy because of the Jews who believed, in order that
those who had received their training from the law might not revolt from
the faith through his breaking such points of the law as were understood
more cam ally, knowing right well that circumcision does not justify;
for he professed that “all things were for all” by conformity,
preserving those of the dogmas that were essential, “that he might gain
all.” <span id="fr_3428"></span>[3429](#fn_3428) And Daniel, under the
king of the Persians, wore “the chain,” <span
id="fr_3429"></span>[3430](#fn_3429) though he despised not the
afflictions of the people.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p32"></span>The liars, then, in reality are not
those who for the sake of the scheme of salvation conform, nor those who
err in minute points, but those who are wrong in essentials, and reject
the Lord, and as far as in them lies deprive the Lord of the true
teaching; who do not quote or deliver the Scriptures in a manner worthy
of God and of the Lord; <span id="fr_3430"></span>[3431](#fn_3430) for
the deposit rendered to God, according to the teaching of the Lord by
His apostles, is the understanding and the practice of the godly
tradition. “And what ye hear in the ear”—that is, in a hidden manner,
and in a mystery (for such things are figuratively said to be spoken in
the ear)—“proclaim,” He says, “on the housetops,” understanding them
sublimely, and delivering them in a lofty strain, and according to the
canon of the truth explaining the Scriptures; for neither prophecy nor
the Saviour Himself announced the divine mysteries simply so as to be
easily apprehended by all and sundry, but express them in parables. The
apostles accordingly say of the Lord, that “He spake all things in
parables, and without a parable spake He nothing unto them;” <span
id="fr_3431"></span>[3432](#fn_3431) and if “all things were made by
Him, and without Him was not anything made that was made,” <span
id="fr_3432"></span>[3433](#fn_3432) consequently also prophecy and the
law were by Him, and were spoken by Him in parables. “But all things are
right,” says the Scripture, <span id="fr_3433"></span>[3434](#fn_3433)
“before those who understand,” that is, those who receive and observe,
according to the ecclesiastical rule, the exposition of the Scriptures
explained by Him; and the ecclesiastical rule is the concord and harmony
of the law and the prophets in the covenant delivered at the coming of
the Lord. Knowledge is then followed by practical wisdom, and practical
wisdom by self-control: for it may be said that practical wisdom is
divine knowledge, and exists in those who are deified; but that
self-control is mortal, and subsists in those who philosophize, and are
not yet wise. But if virtue is divine, so is also the knowledge of it;
while self-control is a sort of imperfect wisdom which aspires after
wisdom, and exerts itself laboriously, and is not contemplative. As
certainly righteousness, being human, is, as being a common thing,
subordinate to holiness, which subsists through the divine
righteousness; <span id="fr_3434"></span>[3435](#fn_3434) for the
righteousness of the perfect man does not rest on civil contracts, or on
the prohibition of law, but flows from his own spontaneous action and
his love to God.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.12"></span>Reasons for the meaning of Scripture being veiled.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p38"></span>For many reasons, then, the Scriptures
hide the sense. First, that we may become inquisitive, and be ever on
the watch for the discovery of the words of salvation. Then it was not
suitable for all to understand, so that they might not receive harm in
consequence of taking in another sense the things declared for salvation
by the Holy Spirit. Wherefore the holy mysteries of the prophecies are
veiled in the parables—preserved for chosen men, selected to knowledge
in consequence of their faith; for the style of the Scriptures is
parabolic. Wherefore also the Lord, who was not of the world, came as
one who was of the world to men. For He was clothed with all virtue; and
it was His aim to lead man, the foster-child of the world, up to the
objects of intellect, and to the most essential truths by knowledge,
from one world to another.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p39"></span>Wherefore also He employed
metaphorical description; for such is the parable,—a narration based on
some subject which is not the principal subject, but similar to the
principal subject, and leading him who understands to what is the true
and principal thing; or, as some say, a mode of speech presenting with
vigour, by means of other circumstances, what is the principal subject.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p40"></span>And now also the whole economy which
prophesied of the Lord appears indeed a parable to those who know not
the truth, when one speaks and the rest hear that the Son of God—of Him
who made the universe—assumed flesh, and was conceived in the virgin’s
womb (as His material body was produced), and subsequently, <span
id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-Page_510"></span>as
was the case, suffered and rose again, being “to the Jews a
stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness,” as the apostle says.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p41"></span>But on the Scriptures being opened up,
and declaring the truth to those who have ears, they proclaim the very
suffering endured by the flesh, which the Lord assumed, to be “the power
and wisdom of God.” And finally, the parabolic style of Scripture being
of the greatest antiquity, as we have shown, abounded most, as was to be
expected, in the prophets, in order that the Holy Spirit might show that
the philosophers among the Greeks, and the wise men among the Barbarians
besides, were ignorant of the future coming of the Lord, and of the
mystic teaching that was to be delivered by Him. Rightly then, prophecy,
in proclaiming the Lord, in order not to seem to some to blaspheme while
speaking what was beyond the ideas of the multitude, embodied its
declarations in expressions capable of leading to other conceptions. Now
all the prophets who foretold the Lord’s coming, and the holy mysteries
accompanying it, were persecuted and killed. As also the Lord Himself,
in explaining the Scriptures to them, and His disciples who preached the
word like Him, and subsequently to His life, used parables. <span
id="fr_3435"></span>[3436](#fn_3435) Whence also Peter, in his
Preaching, speaking of the apostles, says: “But we, unrolling the books
of the prophets which we possess, who name Jesus Christ, partly in
parables, partly in enigmas, partly expressly and in so many words, find
His coming and death, and cross, and all the rest of the tortures which
the Jews inflicted on Him, and His resurrection and assumption to heaven
previous to the capture <span id="fr_3436"></span>[3437](#fn_3436) of
Jerusalem. As it is written, *These things are all that He behoves to
suffer, and what should be after Him.* Recognising them, therefore, we
have believed in God in consequence of what is written respecting Him.”

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p44"></span>And after a little again he draws the
inference that the Scriptures owed their origin to the divine
providence, asserting as follows: “For we know that God enjoined these
things, and we say nothing apart from the Scriptures.”

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p45"></span>Now the Hebrew dialect, like all the
rest, has certain properties, consisting in a mode of speech which
exhibits the national character. Dialect is accordingly defined as a
style of speech produced by the national character. But prophecy is not
marked by those dialects. For in the Hellenic writings, what are called
changes of figures purposely produce onscurations, deduced after the
style of our prophecies. But this is effected through the voluntary
departure from direct speech which takes place in metrical or offhand
diction. A figure, then, is a form of speech transferred from what is
literal to what is not literal, for the sake of the composition, and on
account of a diction useful in speech.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p46"></span>But prophecy does not employ
figurative forms in the expressions for the sake of beauty of diction.
But from the fact that truth appertains not to all, it is veiled in
manifold ways, causing the light to arise only on those who are
initiated into knowledge, who seek the truth through love. The proverb,
according to the Barbarian philosophy, is called a mode of prophecy, and
the parable is so called, and the enigma in addition. Further also, they
are called “wisdom;” and again, as something different from it,
“instruction and words of prudence,” and “turnings of words,” and “true
righteousness;” and again, “teaching to direct judgment,” and “subtlety
to the simple,” which is the result of training, “and perception and
thought,” with which the young catechumen is imbued. <span
id="fr_3437"></span>[3438](#fn_3437) “He who hears these prophets, being
wise, will be wiser. And the intelligent man will acquire rule, and will
understand a parable and a dark saying, the words and enigmas of the
wise.” <span id="fr_3438"></span>[3439](#fn_3438)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p49"></span>And if it was the case that the
Hellenic dialects received their appellation from Hellen, the son of
Zeus, surnamed Deucalion, from the chronology which we have already
exhibited, it is comparatively easy to perceive by how many generations
the dialects that obtained among the Greeks are posterior to the
language of the Hebrews.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p50"></span>But as the work advances, we shall in
each section, noting the figures of speech mentioned above by the
prophet, <span id="fr_3439"></span>[3440](#fn_3439) exhibit the gnostic
mode of life, showing it systematically according to the rule of the
truth.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p52"></span>Did not the Power also, that appeared
to Hermas in the Vision, in the form of the Church, give for
transcription the book which she wished to be made known to the elect?
And this, he says, he transcribed to the letter, without finding how to
complete the syllables. <span id="fr_3440"></span>[3441](#fn_3440) And
this signified that the Scripture is clear to all, when taken according
to the bare reading; and that this is the faith which occupies the place
of the rudiments. Wherefore also the figurative expression is employed,
“reading according to the letter;” while we understand that the gnostic
unfolding of the Scriptures, when faith has already reached an advanced
state, is likened to reading according to the syllables.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p54"></span>Further, Esaias the prophet is ordered
to take “a new book, and write in it” <span
id="fr_3441"></span>[3442](#fn_3441) certain things: <span
id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-Page_511"></span>the
Spirit prophesying that through the exposition of the Scriptures there
would come afterwards the sacred knowledge, which at that period was
still unwritten, because not yet known. For it was spoken from the
beginning to those only who understand. Now that the Saviour has taught
the apostles, the unwritten rendering <span
id="fr_3442"></span>[3443](#fn_3442) of the written \[Scripture\] has
been handed down also to us, inscribed by the power of God on hearts
new, according to the renovation of the book. Thus those of highest
repute among the Greeks, dedicate the fruit of the pomegranate to
Hermes, who they say is speech, on account of its interpretation. For
speech conceals much. Rightly, therefore, Jesus the son of Nave saw
Moses, when taken up \[to heaven\], double,—one Moses with the angels,
and one on the mountains, honoured with burial in their ravines. And
Jesus saw this spectacle below, being elevated by the Spirit, along also
with Caleb. But both do not see similarly. But the one descended with
greater speed, as if the weight he carried was great; while the other,
on descending after him, subsequently related the glory which he beheld,
being able to perceive more than the other as having grown purer; the
narrative, in my opinion, showing that knowledge is not the privilege of
all. Since some look at the body of the Scriptures, the expressions and
the names as to the body of Moses; while others see through to the
thoughts and what it is signified by the names, seeking the Moses that
is with the angels.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p57"></span>Many also of those who called to the
Lord said, “Son of David, have mercy on me.” <span
id="fr_3443"></span>[3444](#fn_3443) A few, too, knew Him as the Son of
God; as Peter, whom also He pronounced blessed, “for flesh and blood
revealed not the truth to him, but His Father in heaven,” <span
id="fr_3444"></span>[3445](#fn_3444) —showing that the Gnostic
recognises the Son of the Omnipotent, not by His flesh conceived in the
womb, but by the Father’s own power. That it is therefore not only to
those who read simply that the acquisition of the truth is so difficult,
but that not even to those whose prerogative the knowledge of the truth
is, is the contemplation of it vouch-safed all at once, the history of
Moses teaches, until, accustomed to gaze, at the Hebrews on the glory of
Moses, and the prophets of Israel on the visions of angels, so we also
become able to look the splendours of truth in the face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3412"></span>[506:3413](0020405.htm#fr_3412) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p2"></span> [Matt. x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p2.1"></span>;
[Luke xii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p2.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3413"></span>[507:3414](0020405.htm#fr_3413) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p4"></span> [Matt. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3414"></span>[507:3415](0020405.htm#fr_3414) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p5"></span> [Ps. xlv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3415"></span>[507:3416](0020405.htm#fr_3415) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p6"></span> [Hos. xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3416"></span>[507:3417](0020405.htm#fr_3416) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p7"></span> [Amos. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#013)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3417"></span>[507:3418](0020405.htm#fr_3417) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p8"></span> [Matt. xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3418"></span>[507:3419](0020405.htm#fr_3418) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p9"></span> [Ps.
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3419"></span>[507:3420](0020405.htm#fr_3419) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p10"></span> [Isa. l.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3420"></span>[507:3421](0020405.htm#fr_3420) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p11"></span> [Isa. l.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3421"></span>[507:3422](0020405.htm#fr_3421) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p12"></span> [Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3422"></span>[507:3423](0020405.htm#fr_3422) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p14"></span> [Rom. xii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3423"></span>[507:3424](0020405.htm#fr_3423) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p15"></span> i.e., the graft is assimilated; so
the Latin translator. But in the text we have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p15.1"></span>συνεξομοιουμένη</span>, dative, agreeing
with fatness, which seems to be a mistake.

<span id="fn_3424"></span>[508:3425](0020405.htm#fr_3424) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p18"></span> Or inoculation (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p18.1"></span>ἐνοφθαλμισμός</span>).

<span id="fn_3425"></span>[508:3426](0020405.htm#fr_3425) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p20"></span> [Wisd. vi.
12-15](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3426"></span>[508:3427](0020405.htm#fr_3426) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p21"></span> [Wisd. ii.
16](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3427"></span>[508:3428](0020405.htm#fr_3427) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p22"></span> [Wisd. vi.
17-20](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3428"></span>[509:3429](0020405.htm#fr_3428) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p30"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p30.1"></span>. \[Note <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p30.2"></span>τὰ κύρια τῶν δογμάτων</span>.\]

<span id="fn_3429"></span>[509:3430](0020405.htm#fr_3429) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p30.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p31"></span> [Dan.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p31.1"></span>. \[Note <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p31.2"></span>τὰ κύρια τῶν δογμάτων</span>.\]

<span id="fn_3430"></span>[509:3431](0020405.htm#fr_3430) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p33"></span> \[The Scriptures the authority; the
canon of interpretation is the harmony of law and Gospel as first opened
by Christ Himself in the walk to Emmaus. [Luke xxiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#031)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p33.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3431"></span>[509:3432](0020405.htm#fr_3431) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p34"></span> [Matt. xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#034)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3432"></span>[509:3433](0020405.htm#fr_3432) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p35"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3433"></span>[509:3434](0020405.htm#fr_3433) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p36"></span> [Prov. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3434"></span>[509:3435](0020405.htm#fr_3434) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37"></span> Heinsius, in a note, remarks that
Plato regarded <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.1"></span>ὁσιότης</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.2"></span>δικαιοσύνη</span> as
identical, while others ascribe the former to the immortals (as also
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.3"></span>θέμις</span>);
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.4"></span>ὁσιότης</span>,
as the greater, comprehends <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.5"></span>δικαιοσύνη</span>. He also amends the
text. Instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.6"></span>κοινόν</span> he reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.7"></span>ὠς κοινόν τι</span>,
supplies <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.8"></span>κατά</span> before <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.9"></span>θείαν
δικαιοσύνην</span>, and changes <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.10"></span>ὺπάρχουσαν</span> into <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p37.11"></span>ὺπαρχούσῃ</span>.

<span id="fn_3435"></span>[510:3436](0020405.htm#fr_3435) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p42.1"></span>μετ᾽ αὐτὸν τὸ ζῇν παρεβάλοντο</span>. The
translation of Hervetus, which we have followed, supposes the reading
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p42.2"></span>αὐτου</span>
instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p42.3"></span>αὐτόν</span>. Others, retaining the
latter, translated <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p42.4"></span>τὸ ζῇν παρεβάλοντο</span> (sacrificed
life). But the former is most to the author’s purpose.

<span id="fn_3436"></span>[510:3437](0020405.htm#fr_3436) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p42.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p43"></span> If we retain the reading of the text,
we must translate “founding,” and understand the reference to be to the
descent of the new Jerusalem. But it seems better to change the reading
as above.

<span id="fn_3437"></span>[510:3438](0020405.htm#fr_3437) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p47"></span> [Prov. i.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3438"></span>[510:3439](0020405.htm#fr_3438) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p48"></span> [Prov.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p48.1"></span>. \[Elucidation IX.\]

<span id="fn_3439"></span>[510:3440](0020405.htm#fr_3439) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p51"></span> i.e., Solomon.

<span id="fn_3440"></span>[510:3441](0020405.htm#fr_3440) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p53"></span> \[This volume, p. 11, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3441"></span>[510:3442](0020405.htm#fr_3441) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p55"></span> [Isa. viii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3442"></span>[511:3443](0020405.htm#fr_3442) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p56"></span> \[In the walk to Emmaus, and by the
Spirit bringing all things to remembrance. [John xiv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p56.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3443"></span>[511:3444](0020405.htm#fr_3443) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p58"></span> [Mark x.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#048)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p58.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3444"></span>[511:3445](0020405.htm#fr_3444) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p59"></span> [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xv-p59.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.—Gnostic Exposition of the Decalogue.](0020406)
