[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020230)  [Next](0020232) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxiii"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—Continuation of the Argument.

<span id="v.iii.xxiii-p1"></span>But the most irrational thing of all is
this: to impose properly sanctioned laws on men, and then to assign to
their souls alone the recompense of their lawful or unlawful deeds. For
if he who receives the laws would also justly receive the recompense of
the transgression of the laws, and if it was man that received the laws,
and not the soul by itself, man must also bear the recompense for the
sins committed, and not the soul by itself, since God has not enjoined
on souls to abstain from things which have no relation to them, such as
adultery, murder, theft, rapine, dishonour to parents, and every desire
in general that tends to the injury and loss of our neighbours. For
neither the command, “Honour thy father and thy mother,” is adapted to
souls alone, since such names are not applicable to them, for souls do
not produce souls, so as to appropriate the appellation of father or
mother, but men produce men; nor could the command, “Thou shalt not
commit adultery,” ever be properly addressed to souls, or even thought
of in such a connection, since the difference of male and female does
not exist in them, nor any aptitude for sexual intercourse, nor appetite
for it; and where there is no appetite, there can be no intercourse; and
where there is no intercourse at all, there can be no legitimate
intercourse, namely marriage; and where there is no lawful intercourse,
neither can there be unlawful desire of, or intercourse with, another
man’s wife, namely adultery. Nor, again, is the prohibition of theft, or
of the desire of having more, applicable to souls, for they do not need
those things, through the need of which, by reason of natural indigence
or want, men are accustomed to steal or to rob, such as gold, or silver,
or an animal, or something else adapted for food, or shelter, or use;
for to an immortal nature everything which is desired by the needy as
useful is useless. But let the fuller discussion of these matters be
left to those who wish to investigate each point more exactly, or to
contend more earnestly with opponents. But, since what has just been
said, and that which concurs with this to guarantee the resurrection,
suffices for us, it would not be seasonable to dwell any longer upon
them; for we have not made it our aim to omit nothing that might be
said, but to point out in a summary manner to those who have assembled
what ought to be thought concerning the resurrection, and to adapt to
the capacity of those present the arguments bearing on this question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV.—Argument for the Resurrection from the Chief End of
Man.](0020232)
