[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020388)  [Next](0020390) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv"></span>

### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p0.2"></span>Elucidations.

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p0.3"></span>I.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p1"></span>(Clement’s Hebrew, p. 446, note 8.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p2.1"></span>On</span> this matter having spoken in a
former Elucidation (see Elucidation VIII. p. 443), I must here translate
a few words from Philo Judæus. He says, “Before Abram was called, such
was his name; but afterward he was named *Abraam*, by the simple
duplication of one letter, which nevertheless enfolds a great
significance. For Abram is expounded to mean *sublime father*, but
*Abraam* means *elect father of sound*.” Philo goes on to give his
personal fancies in explication of this whim. But, with Clement, Philo
was an *expert*, to whom all knowledge was to be credited in his
specialty. This passage, however, confirms the opinion of those who
pronounce Clement destitute of Hebrew, even in its elements. No need to
say that *Abram* means something like what Philo gives us, but *Abraham*
is expounded in the Bible itself ([Genesis
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p2.3"></span>). The text of the LXX, seems to have been
dubious to our author’s mind, and hence he fails back on Philo. But this
of itself appears decisive as to Clement’s Hebrew scholarship.

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p2.4"></span>II.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p3"></span>(The Beetle, cap. iv. p. 449, note 6.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p4"></span>Cicero notes the *scarabæus* on the
tongue, as identifying Apis, <span id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185)
the calf-god of the Egyptians. Now, this passage of our author seems to
me to clear up the Scriptural word *gillulim* in [Deut. xxix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#017)<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p5.1"></span>,
where the English margin reads, literally enough, *dungy-gods*. The word
means, *things rolled about* ([Lev. xxvi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030)<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p5.2"></span>;
[Hab. 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#019)<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p5.3"></span>;
[1 Kings xv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p5.4"></span>); on which compare Leighton (*St. Peter*,
pp. 239, 746, and note). Scripture seems to prove that this story of
Clement’s about the beetle of the Egyptians, was known to the ancient
Hebrews, and was the point in their references to the *gillulim* (see
*Herod.*, book iii. cap. 28., or Rawlinson’s *Trans.*, vol. ii. 353).
The note in Migne *ad loc.* is also well-worthy to be consulted.

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p5.5"></span>III.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p6"></span>(The Tetrad, cap. vi. p. 452, note 4.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p7"></span>It is important to observe that “the
patriarchal dispensation,” as we too carelessly speak, is pluralized by
Clement. He clearly distinguishes the *three* patriarchal dispensations,
as given in Adam, Noah, and Abraham; and then comes the Mosaic. The
editor begs to be pardoned for referring <span id="page_477">p.
477</span> <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-Page_477"></span>to his venerated and
gifted father’s division (sustained by Clement’s authority), which he
used to insist should be further enlarged so as to subdivide the first
and the last, making *seven* complete, and thus honouring the system of
sevens which runs through all Scripture. Thus *Adam* embraces
*Paradise*, and the *first covenant* after the fall; and the *Christian
covenant* embraces a *millennial period*. So that we have (1)
*Paradise*, (2) Adam, (3) Noah (4) Abraham, (5) Moses, (6) <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p7.1"></span>Christ</span> (7) *a
millennial period*, preluding the Judgment and the Everlasting Kingdom.
My venerated and most erudite instructor in theology, the late Dr.
Jarvis, in his *Church of the Redeemed*, expounds a dispensation as
identified by (1) a covenant, original or renewed, (2) a sign or
sacrament, and (3) a closing judgment. (See pp. 4, 5, and elsewhere in
the great work I have named.) Thus (1) the Tree of Life, (2) the
institution of sacrifice, (3) the rainbow, (4) circumcision, (5) the
ark, (6) the baptismal and eucharistic sacraments, and (7) the same
renewed and glorified by the conversion of nations are the symbols. The
covenants and the judgments are easily identified, ending with the
universal Judgment.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p8"></span>Dr. Jarvis died, leaving his work
unfinished; but the *Church of the Redeemed* is a book complete in
itself, embodying the results of a vast erudition, and of a devout
familiarity with Scripture. It begins with Adam, and ends with the
downfall of Jerusalem (the typical judgment), which closed the Mosaic
dispensation. It is written in a pellucid style, and with a fastidious
use of the English language; and it is the noblest introduction to the
understanding of the New Testament, with which I am acquainted. That
such a work should be almost unknown in American literature, of which it
should be a conspicuous ornament, is a sad commentary upon the taste of
the period when it was given to the public. <span
id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186)

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p9.1"></span>IV.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p10"></span>(The Golden Candlestick, cap. vi. p.
452, note 6.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p11"></span>The seven gifts of the Spirit seem to
be prefigured in this symbol, corresponding to the seven (spirits) lamps
before the throne in the vision of St. John (see [Rev. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p11.1"></span>,
iii. 1, iv. 5, and v. 6; also [Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p11.2"></span>,
and [Zech. iii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p11.3"></span>, and iv. 10). The prediction of Isaiah
intimates the anointing of Jesus at his baptism, and the outpouring of
these gifts upon the Christian Church.

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p11.4"></span>V.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p12"></span>(Symbols, cap. vi. p. 453, note 3.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p13"></span>Clement regards the symbols of the
divine law as *symbols* merely, and not *images* in the sense of the
Decalogue. Whatever we may think of this distinction, his argument
destroys the fallacy of the *Trent Catechism*, which pleads the
Levitical symbols in favour of *images* in “the likeness of holy
things,” and which virtually abrogates the second commandment. Images of
God the Father (crowned with the Papal tiara) are everywhere to be seen
in the Latin churches, and countless images of all heavenly things are
everywhere *worshipped* under the fallacy which Clement rejects. Pascal
exposes the distinctions without a difference, by which God’s laws are
evacuated of all force in Jesuit theology; but the hairsplitting
distinctions, about “bowing down to images and *worshipping* them,”
which infect the Trent theology, are equal to the worst of Pascal’s
instances. <span id="fr_3187"></span>[3188](#fn_3187) It is with
profound regret that I insert this testimony; but it seems necessary,
because garblings of patristic authorities, which begin to appear in
America, make an accurate and intelligent study of the *Ante-Nicene
Fathers* a necessity for the American theologian.

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-Page_478"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p14.1"></span>VI.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p15"></span>(Perfection, cap. x. p. 459, note 2.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p16"></span>The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p16.1"></span>τέλειοι</span> of the ancient canons were
rather the *complete* than the *perfect,* as understood by the ancients.
Clement’s *Gnostic* is “complete,” and goes on to moral perfection. Now,
does not St. Paul make a similar distinction between babes in Christ,
and those “*complete* in Him?”(Col. ii. 10.) The <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p16.2"></span>πεπληρωμένοι</span> of
this passage, referring to the “thoroughly furnished” Christian (fully
equipped for his work and warfare), has thrown light on many passages of
the fathers and of the old canons, in my experience; and I merely make
the suggestion for what it may be worth. See Bunsen’s *Church and Home
Book* (*Hippol.*, iii. 82, 83, *et seqq.*) for the rules (1) governing
all Christians, and (2) those called “the faithful,” by way of eminence.
So, in our days, not all *believers* are *communicants*.

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p16.3"></span>VII.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p17"></span>(The Unknown God, cap. xii. p. 464,
note 1.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p18"></span>Must we retain “too superstitious,”
even in the Revised Version? (Which see *ad loc.*) Bunsen’s rendering of
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p18.1"></span>δεισιδαιμονία</span>, by
*demon-fear*, <span id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188) is not English;
but it suggests the common view of scholars, upon the passage, and leads
me to suppose that the learned and venerable company of revisers could
not agree on any English that would answer. That St. Paul paid the
Athenians a compliment, as *devout in their way*, i.e., God fearing
towards their divinities, will not be denied. Clement seems to have so
understood it, and hence his constant effort to show that we must
recognise, in dealing with Gentiles, whatever of elementary good God has
permitted to exist among them. May we not admit this principle, at least
so far as to believe that Divine Providence led the Athenians to set up
the very inscription which was to prompt Christ’s apostle to an
ingenious interpretation, and to an equally ingenious use of it, so
avoiding a direct conflict with their laws? This they had charged on him
([Acts xvii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p19.1"></span>), as before on Socrates.

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p19.2"></span>VIII.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p20"></span>(Xenocrates and Democritus, cap. xiii.
p. 465, note 3.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p21"></span>My grave and studious reader will
forgive me, here, for a reference to *Stromata* of a widely different
sort. *Dulce est desipere*, etc. One sometimes finds instruction and
relief amid the intense nonsense of “agnostic” and other “philosophies”
of our days, in turning to a healthful intellect which “answers fools
according to their folly.” I confess myself an occasional reader of the
vastly entertaining and suggestive *Noctes* of Christopher North, which
may be excused by the famous example of a Father of the Church, who
delighted in Aristophanes. <span id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189) To
illustrate this passage of Clement, then, let me refer to Professor
Wilson’s intense sympathy with animals. See the real eloquence of his
reference to the dogs of Homer and of Sir Walter Scott. <span
id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190) “The Ettrick Shepherd” somewhere
wondered, whether some dogs are not gifted with souls; and, in the
passage referred to, it is asked, whether the dog of Ulysses could have
been destitute of an immortal spirit. On another occasion, Christopher
breaks out with something like this: “Let me prefer the man who thinks
so, to the miserable atheist whose creed is dust.” He looks upon his dog
“Fro,” and continues (while the noble animal seems listening), “Yes,
better a thousand times, O Fro, to believe that ‘my faithful dog shall
bear me company,’ than that the soul of a Newton perishes at death,”
etc. How often have I regaled myself with the wholesome tonic of such
dog loving sport, after turning with disgust from some God hating and
mandestroying argument of “modern science,” falsely so called.

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-Page_479"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p23.1"></span>IX.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p24"></span>(Plato’s Prophecy, cap. xiv. p. 470,
note 2.)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p25"></span>My references at this point are worthy
of being enlarged upon. I subjoin the following as additional. On this
sublime passage, Jones of Nayland remarks, <span
id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191) “The greatest moral philosopher of
the Greeks declared, with a kind of prescience, that, if a man
*perfectly just* were to come upon earth, he would be impoverished and
scourged, and bound as a criminal; and, when he had suffered all manner
of indignities, would be put to the shameful death of (suspension or)
crucifixion.” “Several of the Fathers,” he adds, “have taken notice of
this extraordinary passage in Plato, looking upon it as a prediction of
the sufferings of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p26.1"></span>Just One</span>, Jesus Christ.” He refers
us to Grotius (*De Veritate*, iv. sec. 12) and to Meric Casaubon (*On
Credulity*, p. 135). The passage from Plato (*Rep*., ii. 5) impressed
the mind of Cicero. (See his *Rep*., iii. 17.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[476:3186](0020389.htm#fr_3185) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p5"></span> *De Nat. Deor*., ed. Delphin., vol.
xiv. p. 852.

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[477:3187](0020389.htm#fr_3186) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p9"></span> Boston, 1850.

<span id="fn_3187"></span>[477:3188](0020389.htm#fr_3187) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p14"></span> In the *Provincial Letters, passim*.

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[478:3189](0020389.htm#fr_3188) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p19"></span> *Hippol*., vol. iii. p. 200.

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[478:3190](0020389.htm#fr_3189) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p22"></span> Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[478:3191](0020389.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p23"></span> Vol. iv. pp. 104-107.

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[479:3192](0020389.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xv-p26"></span> Works, vol. iv. p. 205.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](0020390)
