[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020414)  [Next](0020416) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.—The Holy Soul a More Excellent Temple Than Any Edifice Built by Man.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p1"></span>For is it not the case that rightly and
truly we do not circumscribe in any place that which cannot be
circumscribed; nor do we shut up in temples made with hands that which
contains all things? What work of builders, and stonecutters, and
mechanical art can be holy? Superior to these are not they who think
that the air, and the enclosing space, or rather the whole world and the
universe, are meet for the excellency of God?

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p2"></span>It were indeed ridiculous, as the
philosophers themselves say, for man, the plaything <span
id="fr_3544"></span>[3545](#fn_3544) of God, to make God, and for God to
be the plaything <span id="fr_3545"></span>[3546](#fn_3545) of art;
since what is made is similar and the same to that of which it is made,
as that which is made of ivory is ivory, and that which is made of gold
golden. Now the images and temples constructed by mechanics are made of
inert matter; so that they too are inert, and material, and profane; and
if you perfect the art, they partake of mechanical coarseness. Works of
art cannot then be sacred and divine.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p5"></span>And what can be localized, there being
nothing that is not localized? Since all things are in a place. And that
which is localized having been formerly not localized, is localized by
something. If, then, God is localized by men, He was once not localized,
and did not exist at all. For the non-existent is what is not localized;
since whatever does not exist is not localized. And what exists cannot
be localized by what does not exist; nor by another entity. For it is
also an entity. It follows that it must be by itself. And how shall
anything generate itself? Or how shall that which exists place itself as
to being? Whether, being formerly not localized, has it localized
itself? But it was not in existence; since what exists not is not
localized. And its localization being supposed, how can it afterwards
make itself what it previously was?

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p6"></span>But how can He, to whom the things that
are belong, need anything? But were God possessed of a human form, He
would need, equally with man, food, and shelter, and house, and the
attendant incidents. Those who are like in form and affections will
require similar sustenance. And if sacred (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-p6.1"></span>το ἱερόν</span>) has a twofold application,
designating both God Himself and the structure raised to His
honour, <span id="fr_3546"></span>[3547](#fn_3546) how shall we not with
propriety call the Church holy, through knowledge, made for the honour
of God, sacred (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-p7.2"></span>ἱερόν</span>) to God, of great value, and
not constructed by mechanical art, nor embellished by the hand of an
impostor, but by the will of God fashioned into a temple? For it is not
now the place, but the assemblage of the elect, <span
id="fr_3547"></span>[3548](#fn_3547) that I call the Church. This temple
is better for the reception of the greatness of the dignity of God. For
the living creature which is of high value, is made sacred by that which
is worth all, or rather which has no equivalent, in virtue of the
exceeding sanctity of the latter. Now this is the Gnostic, who is of
great value, who is honoured by God, in whom God is enshrined, that is,
the knowledge respecting God is consecrated. Here, too, we shall find
the divine likeness and the holy image in the righteous soul, when it is
blessed in being purified and performing blessed deeds. Here also we
shall find that which is localized, and that which is being
localized,—the former in the case of those who are already Gnostics, and
the latter in the case of those <span id="page_531">p. 531</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-Page_531"></span>capable of becoming so, although not
yet worthy of receiving the knowledge of God. For every being destined
to believe is already faithful in the sight of God, and set up for His
honour, an image, endowed with virtue, dedicated to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3544"></span>[530:3545](0020415.htm#fr_3544) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p3"></span> A Platonic phrase: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p3.1"></span>παίγνιον Θεοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_3545"></span>[530:3546](0020415.htm#fr_3545) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p4"></span> So Sylburgius, who, instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p4.1"></span>παιδιᾶς τέχνης</span>
of the text, reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-p4.2"></span>παιδιὰν τέχνης</span>.

<span id="fn_3546"></span>[530:3547](0020415.htm#fr_3546) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p7"></span> God Himself is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p7.1"></span>ὶερός</span>, and
everything dedicated to Him.

<span id="fn_3547"></span>[530:3548](0020415.htm#fr_3547) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p8"></span> Montacutius suggests <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p8.1"></span>ἐκκλήτων</span>, from
its connection with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.v-p8.2"></span>Εκκλησία</span>, instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.v-p8.3"></span>ἐκλεκτῶν</span>.
\[Notes 3 and 5, p. 290, *supra*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.—Prayers and Praise from a Pure Mind, Ceaselessly
Offered, Far Better Than Sacrifices.](0020416)
