[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020068)  [Next](0020070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiii"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.—Vindication of Christian Women.

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p1"></span>Therefore I have been desirous to
prove from the things which are esteemed honourable among you, that our
institutions are marked by sober-mindedness, but that yours are in close
affinity with madness. <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) You who
say that we talk nonsense among women and boys, among maidens and old
women, and scoff at us for not being with you, hear what silliness
prevails among the Greeks. For their works of art are devoted to
worthless objects, while they are held in higher estimation by you than
even your gods; and you behave yourselves unbecomingly in what relates
to woman. For Lysippus cast a statue of Praxilla, whose poems contain
nothing useful, and Menestratus one of Learchis, and Selanion one of
Sappho the courtezan, and Naucydes one of Erinna the Lesbian, and
Boiscus one of Myrtis, and Cephisodotus one of Myro of Byzantium, and
Gomphus one of Praxigoris, and Amphistratus one of Clito. And what shall
I say about Anyta, Telesilla, and Mystis? Of the first Euthycrates and
Cephisodotus made a statue, and of the second Niceratus, and of the
third Aristodotus; Euthycrates made one of Mnesiarchis the Ephesian,
Selanion one of Corinna, and Euthycrates one of Thalarchis the Argive.
My object in referring to these women is, that you may not regard as
something strange what <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="iii.ii.xxxiii-Page_79"></span>you find among us, and that, comparing
the statues which are before your eyes, you may not treat the women with
scorn who among us pursue philosophy. This Sappho is a lewd, love-sick
female, and sings her own wantonness; <span
id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) but all our women are chaste, and the
maidens at their distaffs sing of divine things <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) more nobly than that damsel of yours.
Wherefore be ashamed, you who are professed disciples of women yet scoff
at those of the sex who hold our doctrine, as well as at the solemn
assemblies they frequent. <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) What a
noble infant did Glaucippé present to you, who brought forth a prodigy,
as is shown by her statue cast by Niceratus, the son of Euctemon the
Athenian! But, if Glaucippé brought forth an elephant, was that a reason
why she should enjoy public honours? Praxiteles and Herodotus made for
you Phryné the courtezan, and Euthycrates cast a brazen statue of
Panteuchis, who was pregnant by a whoremonger; and Dinomenes, because
Besantis queen of the Pæonians gave birth to a black infant, took pains
to preserve her memory by his art. I condemn Pythagoras too, who made a
figure of Europa on the bull; and you also, who honour the accuser of
Zeus on account of his artistic skill. And I ridicule the skill of
Myron, who made a heifer and upon it a Victory because by carrying off
the daughter of Agenor it had borne away the prize for adultery and
lewdness. The Olynthian Herodotus made statues of Glycera the courtezan
and Argeia the harper. Bryaxis made a statue of Pasiphaë; and, by having
a memorial of her lewdness, it seems to have been almost your desire
that the women of the present time should be like her. <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) A certain Melanippë was a wise woman,
and for that reason Lysistratus made her statue. But, forsooth, you will
not believe that among us there are wise women!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_503"></span>[78:504](0020069.htm#fr_503) <span
id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p2"></span> \[See note 2, next page.\]

<span id="fn_504"></span>[79:505](0020069.htm#fr_504) <span
id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p3"></span> \[St. Chrysostom speaks of the
heathen as <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>ὁι
ταῖς σατανικαῖς ῷδαῖς κατασηπόμενοι</span>. *In Psalmum*, cxvii. tom. v.
p. 533. *Ed*. Migne.\]

<span id="fn_505"></span>[79:506](0020069.htm#fr_505) <span
id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p4"></span> \[Such as the *Magnificat* of the
Virgin, the Twenty-third Psalm, or the Christian *Hymn for Eventide*,
which they learned in the Christian schools (cap. xxxii. p. 78). Cold is
the heart of any mother’s son that does not warm over such a chapter as
this on the enfranchisement of womanhood by Christ. Observe our author’s
scorn for the heathen “affinity with unreason” (this chapter, *supra*),
and then enjoy this glimpse of the contrast afforded by the Gospel in
its influence upon women. Intensely should we delight in the pictures of
early Christian society, of which the Fathers give us these suggestive
outlines. Rejecting the profane and wanton songs they heard around
them,— “Satanic minstrelsies,” as St. Chryosostom names them,—they
beguiled their toils and soothed their sorrows with “Psalms and hymns
and spiritual songs.” As St. Jerome relates, “You could not go into the
field, but you might hear the ploughman’s hallelujahs, the mower’s
hymns, and the vine-dresser’s chant of the Psalms of David.” See Cave’s
*Primitive Christianity*, p. 132.\]

<span id="fn_506"></span>[79:507](0020069.htm#fr_506) <span
id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p5"></span> \[Such as the *Magnificat* of the
Virgin, the Twenty-third Psalm, or the Christian *Hymn for Eventide*,
which they learned in the Christian schools (cap. xxxii. p. 78). Cold is
the heart of any mother’s son that does not warm over such a chapter as
this on the enfranchisement of womanhood by Christ. Observe our author’s
scorn for the heathen “affinity with unreason” (this chapter, *supra*),
and then enjoy this glimpse of the contrast afforded by the Gospel in
its influence upon women. Intensely should we delight in the pictures of
early Christian society, of which the Fathers give us these suggestive
outlines. Rejecting the profane and wanton songs they heard around
them,—“Satanic minstrelsies,” as St. Chryosostom names them,—they
beguiled their toils and soothed their sorrows with “Psalms and hymns
and spiritual songs.” As St. Jerome relates, “You could not go into the
field, but you might hear the ploughman’s hallelujahs, the mower’s
hymns, and the vine-dresser’s chant of the Psalms of David.” See Cave’s
*Primitive Christianity*, p. 132.\]

<span id="fn_507"></span>[79:508](0020069.htm#fr_507) <span
id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiii-p6"></span> \[St. Paul’s spirit was stirred
within him, beholding the abominable idolatries of the Athenians; and
who can wonder at the loathing of Christians, whose wives and children
could not escape from these shameful spectacles. The growing asceticism
and fanatical views of sexual relations, which were now rising in the
Church, were a morbid but virtuous revolt of faith against these
impurities.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV. Ridicule of the Statues Erected by the
Greeks.](0020070)
