[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020379)  [Next](0020381) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.—The Mystic Meaning of the Tabernacle and Its Furniture.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p1"></span>It were tedious to go over all the
Prophets and the Law, specifying what is spoken in enigmas; for almost
the whole Scripture gives its utterances in this way. It may suffice, I
think, for any one possessed of intelligence, for the proof of the point
in hand, to select a few examples.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p2"></span>Now concealment is evinced in the
reference of the seven circuits around the temple, which are made
mention of among the Hebrews; and the equipment on the robe, indicating
by the various symbols, which had reference to visible objects, the
agreement which from heaven reaches down to earth. And the covering and
the veil were variegated with blue, and purple, and scarlet, and linen.
And so it was suggested that the nature of the elements contained the
revelation of God. For purple is from water, linen from the earth; blue,
being dark, is like the air, as scarlet is like fire.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p3"></span>In the midst of the covering and veil,
where the priests were allowed to enter, was situated the altar of
incense, the symbol of the earth placed in the middle of this universe;
and from it came the fumes of incense. And that place intermediate
between the inner veil, where the high priest alone, on prescribed days,
was permitted to enter, and the external court which surrounded it—free
to all the Hebrews—was, they say, the middlemost point of heaven and
earth. But others say it was the symbol of the intellectual world, and
that of sense. The covering, then, the barrier of popular unbelief, was
stretched in front of the five pillars, keeping back those in the
surrounding space.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p4"></span>So very mystically the five loaves are
broken by the Saviour, and fill the crowd of the listeners. For great is
the crowd that keep to the things of sense, as if they were the only
things in existence. “Cast your eyes round, and see,” says Plato, “that
none of the uninitiated listen.” Such are they who think that nothing
else exists, but what they can hold tight with their hands; but do not
admit as in the department of existence, actions and processes of
generation, and the whole of the unseen. For such are those who keep by
the five senses. But the knowledge of God is a thing inaccessible to the
ears and like organs of this kind of people. Hence the Son is said to be
the Father’s face, being the revealer of the Father’s character to the
five senses by clothing Himself with flesh. “But if we live in the
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.” <span
id="fr_3020"></span>[3021](#fn_3020) “For we walk by faith, not by
sight,” <span id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021) the noble apostle
says. Within the veil, then, is concealed the sacerdotal service; and it
keeps those engaged in it far from those without.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p7"></span>Again, there is the veil of the entrance
into the holy of holies. Four pillars there are, the sign of the sacred
tetrad of the ancient covenants. <span
id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022) Further, the mystic name of four
letters which was affixed to those alone to whom the adytum was
accessible, is called Jave, which is interpreted, “Who is and shall be.”
The name of God, too, among the Greeks contains four letters.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p9"></span>Now the Lord, having come alone into the
intellectual world, enters by His sufferings, introduced into the
knowledge of the Ineffable, ascending above every name which is known by
sound. The lamp, too, was placed to the south of the altar of incense;
and by it were shown the motions of the seven planets, that perform
their revolutions towards the south. For three branches rose on either
side of the lamp, and lights on them; since also the sun, like the lamp,
set in the midst of all the planets, dispenses with a kind of divine
music the light to those above and to those below.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p10"></span>The golden lamp conveys another enigma
as a symbol of Christ, not in respect of form alone, but in his casting
light, “at sundry times and divers manners,” <span
id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023) on those who believe on Him and
hope, and who see by means of the ministry of the First-born. And they
say that the seven eyes of the Lord “are the seven spirits resting on
the rod that springs from the root of Jesse.” <span
id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024)

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p13"></span>North of the altar of incense was
placed a table, on which there was “the exhibition of the loaves;” for
the most nourishing of the winds are those of the north. And thus are
signified certain seats of churches conspiring so as to form one body
and one assemblage. <span id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025)

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p15"></span>And the things recorded of the sacred
ark signify the properties of the world of thought, which is hidden and
closed to the many.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p16"></span>And those golden figures, each of them
with six wings, signify either the two bears, as some will have it, or
rather the two hemispheres. And the name cherubim meant “much
knowledge.” But both together have twelve wings, and by the zodiac and
time, which moves on it, point out <span id="page_453">p. 453</span>
<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-Page_453"></span>the world of sense. It is of them,
I think, that Tragedy, discoursing of Nature, says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p16.1"></span> “Unwearied Time circles full in
> perennial flow,  
> Producing itself. And the twin-bears  
> On the swift wandering motions of their wings,  
> Keep the Atlantean pole.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p17"></span>And Atlas, <span
id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026) the unsuffering pole, may mean the
fixed sphere, or better perhaps, motionless eternity. But I think it
better to regard the ark, so called from the Hebrew word
*Thebotha*, <span id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027) as signifying
something else. It is interpreted, *one instead of one in all places*.
Whether, then, it is the eighth region and the world of thought, or God,
all-embracing, and without shape, and invisible, that is indicated, we
may for the present defer saying. But it signifies the repose which
dwells with the adoring spirits, which are meant by the cherubim.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p20"></span>For He who prohibited the making of a
graven image, would never Himself have made an image in the likeness of
holy things. <span id="fr_3028"></span>[3029](#fn_3028) Nor is there at
all any composite thing, and creature endowed with sensation, of the
sort in heaven. But the face is a symbol of the rational soul, and the
wings are the lofty ministers and energies of powers right and left; and
the voice is delightsome glory in ceaseless contemplation. Let it
suffice that the mystic interpretation has advanced so far.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p22"></span>Now the high priest’s robe is the
symbol of the world of sense. The seven planets are represented by the
five stones and the two carbuncles, for Saturn and the Moon. The former
is southern, and moist, and earthy, and heavy; the latter aerial, whence
she is called by some Artemis, as if Ærotomos (cutting the air); and the
air is cloudy. And cooperating as they did in the production of things
here below, those that by Divine Providence are set over the planets are
rightly represented as placed on the breast and shoulders; and by them
was the work of creation, the first week. And the breast is the seat of
the heart and soul.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p23"></span>Differently, the stones might be the
various phases of salvation; some occupying the upper, some the lower
parts of the entire body saved. The three hundred and sixty bells,
suspended from the robe, is the space of a year, “the acceptable year of
the Lord,” proclaiming and resounding the stupendous manifestation of
the Saviour. Further, the broad gold mitre indicates the regal power of
the Lord, “since the Head of the Church” is the Savour. <span
id="fr_3029"></span>[3030](#fn_3029) The mitre that is on it \[i.e., the
head\] is, then, a sign of most princely rule; and otherwise we have
heard it said, “The Head of Christ is the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.” <span id="fr_3030"></span>[3031](#fn_3030) Moreover,
there was the breastplate, comprising the ephod, which is the symbol of
work, and the oracle (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p25.3"></span>λογίον</span>); and this indicated the Word
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p25.4"></span>λόγος</span>) by
which it was framed, and is the symbol of heaven, made by the
Word, <span id="fr_3031"></span>[3032](#fn_3031) and subjected to
Christ, the Head of all things, inasmuch as it moves in the same way,
and in a like manner. The luminous emerald stones, therefore, in the
ephod, signify the sun and moon, the helpers of nature. The shoulder, I
take it, is the commencement of the hand.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p27"></span>The twelve stones, set in four rows on
the breast, describe for us the circle of the zodiac, in the four
changes of the year. It was otherwise requisite that the law and the
prophets should be placed beneath the Lord’s head, because in both
Testaments mention is made of the righteous. For were we to say that the
apostles were at once prophets and righteous, we should say well, “since
one and the self-same Holy Spirit works in all.” <span
id="fr_3032"></span>[3033](#fn_3032) And as the Lord is above the whole
world, yea, above the world of thought, so the name engraven on the
plate has been regarded to signify, above all rule and authority; and it
was inscribed with reference both to the written commandments and the
manifestation to sense. And it is the name of God that is expressed;
since, as the Son sees the goodness of the Father, God the Saviour
works, being called the first principle of all things, which was imaged
forth from the invisible God first, and before the ages, and which
fashioned all things which came into being after itself. Nay more, the
oracle <span id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033) exhibits the prophecy
which by the Word cries and preaches, and the judgment that is to come;
since it is the same Word which prophesies, and judges, and
discriminates all things.

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p30"></span>And they say that the robe prophesied
the ministry in the flesh, by which He was seen in closer relation to
the world. So the high priest, putting off his consecrated robe (the
universe, and the creation in the universe, were consecrated by Him
assenting that, what was made, was good), washes himself, and puts on
the other tunic—a holy-of-holies one, so to speak—which is to accompany
him into the adytum; exhibiting, as seems to me, the Levite and Gnostic,
as the chief of other priests (those bathed in water, and clothed in
faith alone, and expecting their own individual abode), himself
distinguishing the objects of the intellect from the things of sense,
rising above other priests, <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-Page_454"></span>hasting to the entrance to the world of
ideas, to wash himself from the things here below, not in water, as
formerly one was cleansed on being enrolled in the tribe of Levi. But
purified already by the gnostic Word in his whole heart, and thoroughly
regulated, and having improved that mode of life received from the
priest to the highest pitch, being quite sanctified both in word and
life, and having put on the bright array of glory, and received the
ineffable inheritance of that spiritual and perfect man, “which eye hath
not seen and ear hath not heard, and it hath not entered into the heart
of man;” and having become son and friend, he is now replenished with
insatiable contemplation face to face. For there is nothing like hearing
the Word Himself, who by means of the Scripture inspires fuller
intelligence. For so it is said, “And he shall put off the linen robe,
which he had put on when he entered into the holy place; and shall lay
it aside there, and wash his body in water in the holy place, and put on
his robe.” <span id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034) But in one way, as
I think, the Lord puts off and puts on by descending into the region of
sense; and in another, he who through Him has believed puts off and puts
on, as the apostle intimated, the consecrated stole. Thence, after the
image of the Lord the worthiest were chosen from the sacred tribes to be
high priests, and those elected to the kingly office and to prophecy
were anointed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3020"></span>[452:3021](0020380.htm#fr_3020) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p5"></span> [Gal. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025)<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[452:3022](0020380.htm#fr_3021) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p6"></span> [2 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[452:3023](0020380.htm#fr_3022) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p8"></span> \[Elucidation III.\]

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[452:3024](0020380.htm#fr_3023) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p11"></span> [Heb. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[452:3025](0020380.htm#fr_3024) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p12"></span> [Rev. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p12.2"></span>;
[Isa. xi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p12.3"></span>. \[Elucidation IV.\]

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[452:3026](0020380.htm#fr_3025) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p14"></span> \[“The communion of saints.”\]

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[453:3027](0020380.htm#fr_3026) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p18.1"></span>Ἅ</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p18.2"></span>τλας</span>, unsuffering.

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[453:3028](0020380.htm#fr_3027) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p19"></span> The Chaldaic <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p19.1"></span>תּיבוּחָא</span>. The
Hebrew is <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p19.2"></span>תּ̤בָה</span>, Sept. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p19.3"></span>κιβωτός</span>, Vulg.
*arca*.

<span id="fn_3028"></span>[453:3029](0020380.htm#fr_3028) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p21"></span> \[Elucidation V.\]

<span id="fn_3029"></span>[453:3030](0020380.htm#fr_3029) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p24"></span> [Eph. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023)<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3030"></span>[453:3031](0020380.htm#fr_3030) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p25"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p25.1"></span>;
[2 Cor. xi. 31](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#031)<span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p25.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3031"></span>[453:3032](0020380.htm#fr_3031) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p25.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p26"></span> And the whole place is very correctly
called the Logeum (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p26.1"></span>λογεῖον</span>), since everything in heaven
has been created and arranged in accordance with right reason (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p26.2"></span>λόγοις</span>) and
proportion (Philo, vol. iii. p. 195, Bohn’s translation).

<span id="fn_3032"></span>[453:3033](0020380.htm#fr_3032) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p28"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[453:3034](0020380.htm#fr_3033) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p29"></span> i.e., the oracular breastplate.

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[454:3035](0020380.htm#fr_3034) <span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.vi-p31"></span> [Lev.
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iv.v.vi-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.—The Egyptian Symbols and Enigmas of Sacred
Things.](0020381)
