[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020080)  [Next](0020082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i"></span> <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_87"></span>

### <span id="iv.i-p0.1"></span>Introductory Note

#### <span id="iv.i-p0.2"></span>to

## <span id="iv.i-p0.3"></span>Theophilus of Antioch.

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span>\[Translated by the Rev. Marcus Dods, A.M.\]

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>\[<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 115–168–181.\] Eusebius praises the
pastoral fidelity of the primitive pastors, in their unwearied labours
to protect their flocks from the heresies with which Satan contrived to
endanger the souls of believers. By exhortations and admonitions, and
then again by *oral discussions* and refutations, contending with the
heretics themselves, they were prompt to ward off the devouring beasts
from the fold of Christ. Such is the praise due to Theophilus, in his
opinion; and he cites especially his lost work against Marcion as “of no
mean character.” <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) He was one of
the earliest commentators upon the Gospels, if not the first; and he
seems to have been the earliest Christian historian of the Church of the
Old Testament. His only remaining work, here presented, seems to have
originated in an “oral discussion,” such as Eusebius instances. But
nobody seems to accord him due praise as the founder of the science of
*Biblical Chronology* among Christians, save that his great successor in
modern times, Abp. Usher, has not forgotten to pay him this tribute in
the *Prolegomena* of his Annals. (*Ed*. Paris, 1673.)

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>Theophilus occupies an interesting position,
after Ignatius, in the succession of faithful men who represented
Barnabas and other prophets and teachers of Antioch, <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) in that ancient seat, from which comes
our name as Christians. I cannot forbear another reference to those
recent authors who have so brilliantly illustrated and depicted the
Antioch of the early Christians; <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522)
because, if we wish to understand Autolycus, we must *feel* the state of
society which at once fascinated him, and disgusted Theophilus. The
Fathers are dry to those only who lack imagination to reproduce their
age, or who fail to study them geographically and chronologically.
Besides this, one should bring to the study of their works, that
sympathy springing from a burning love to Christ, which borrows its
motto, in slightly altered words, from the noble saying of the African
poet: “I am a *Christian*, and nothing which concerns *Christianity* do
I consider foreign to myself.”

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>Theophilus comes down to us only as an
apologist intimately allied in spirit to Justin and Irenæus; and he
should have been placed with Tatian between these two, in our series,
had not the inexorable laws of our compilation brought them into this
volume. I need add no more to what follows from the translator, save
only the expression of a hope that others will enjoy this author as I
do, rating him very highly, even at the side of Athenagoras. He is
severe, yet gentle too, in dealing with his antagonist; and he cannot be
charged with a more sublime contempt for heathenism than St. Paul
betrays in all his writings, abjuring even Plato and Socrates, and
accentuating <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_88"></span>his maxim, “The world by wisdom knew not God.”
For him it was *Christ* to live; and I love Theophilus for this very
fault, if it be such. He was of Antioch; and was content to be, simply
and altogether, nothing but a Christian.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>The following is the original <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>—:

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>Little</span> is known of the personal history of
Theophilus of Antioch. We gather from the following treatise that he was
born a pagan (i. 14), and owed his conversion to Christianity to the
careful study of the Holy Scriptures. Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*, iv. 20)
declares that he was the sixth bishop of Antioch in Syria from the
apostles, the names of his supposed predecessors being Eros, Cornelius,
Hero, Ignatius, and Euodius. We also learn from the same writer, that
Theophilus succeeded to the bishopric of Antioch in the eighth year of
the reign of Marcus Aurelius, that is, in <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p9.2"></span>a.d.</span> 168. He is related to have died either
in <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p9.3"></span>a.d.</span> 181, or in
<span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p9.4"></span>a.d.</span> 188; some
assigning him an episcopate of thirteen, and others of twenty-one,
years.

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>Theophilus is said by Eusebius, Jerome, and
others, to have written several works against the heresies which
prevailed in his day. He himself refers in the following treatise (ii.
30) to another of his compositions. Commentaries on the Gospels,
arranged in the form of a harmony, and on the Book of Proverbs, are also
ascribed to him by Jerome; but the sole remaining specimen of his
writings consists of the three books that follow, addressed to his
friend Autolycus. The occasion which called these forth is somewhat
doubtful. It has been thought that they were written in refutation of a
work which Autolycus had published against Christianity; but the more
probable opinion is, that they were drawn forth by disparaging remarks
made in conversation. The language of the writer (ii. 1) leads to this
conclusion.

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span>In handling his subject, Theophilus goes over
much the same ground as Justin Martyr and the rest of the early
apologists. He is somewhat fond of fanciful interpretations of
Scripture; but he evidently had a profound acquaintance with the
inspired writings, and he powerfully exhibits their immense superiority
in every respect over the heathen poetry and philosophy. The whole
treatise was well fitted to lead on an intelligent pagan to the cordial
acceptance of Christianity.

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>\[I venture to assign to Theophilus a
conjectural date of birth, *circiter* <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 115. <span
id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) \]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_520"></span>[87:521](0020081.htm#fr_520) <span
id="iv.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span> Book iv. cap. 24. Thus he with others met the
“grievous wolves” foretold by St. Paul “night and day with tears,” three
years continually ([Acts xx.
29-31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029)<span id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_521"></span>[87:522](0020081.htm#fr_521) <span
id="iv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span> [Acts xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[87:523](0020081.htm#fr_522) <span
id="iv.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span> Renan, *St. Paul*, cap. 1., Farrar, *Life of
St. Paul*, cap. xvi.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[88:524](0020081.htm#fr_523) <span
id="iv.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span> \[Our chronological arrangement must yield
in minute accuracy to other considerations; and we may borrow an excuse
from our author, who notes the difficulty of microscopic <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>ἀκριβεία</span> in his own
chronological labours (book iii. cap. 29). It was impossible to crowd
Tatian and Theophilus into vol. i. Of this serious, without dividing
Irenæus, and putting part of his works in vol. ii. But, in the case of
contemporaries, this dislocation is trifling, and creates no
confusion.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Theophilus to Autolycus](0020082)
