[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020261)  [Next](0020263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—The Instructor Characterized by the Severity and Benignity of Paternal Affection.

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p1"></span>Having now accomplished those things,
it were a fitting sequel that our instructor Jesus should draw for us
the model of the true life, and train humanity in Christ.

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p2"></span>Nor is the cast and character of the
life He enjoins very formidable; nor is it made altogether easy by
reason of His benignity. He enjoins His commands, and at the same time
gives them such a character that they may be accomplished.

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p3"></span>The view I take is, that He Himself
formed man of the dust, and regenerated him by water; and made him grow
by his Spirit; and trained him by His word to adoption and salvation,
directing him by sacred precepts; in order that, transforming earth-born
man into a holy and heavenly being by His advent, He might fulfil to the
utmost that divine utterance, “Let Us make man in Our own image and
likeness.” <span id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295) And, in truth,
Christ became the perfect realization of what God spake; and the rest of
humanity is conceived as being created merely in His image.

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p5"></span>But let us, O children of the good
Father—nurslings of the good Instructor—fulfil the Father’s will, listen
to the Word, and take on the impress of the truly saving life of our
Saviour; and meditating on the heavenly mode of life according to which
we have been deified, let us anoint ourselves with the perennial
immortal bloom of gladness—that ointment of sweet fragrance—having a
clear example of immortality in the walk and conversation of the Lord;
and following the footsteps of God, to whom alone it belongs to
consider, and whose care it is to see to, the way and manner in which
the life of men may be made more healthy. Besides, He makes preparation
for a self-sufficing mode of life, for simplicity, and for girding up
our loins, and for free and unimpeded readiness of our journey; in order
to the attainment of an eternity of beatitude, teaching each one of us
to be his own storehouse. For He says, “Take no anxious thought for
to-morrow,” <span id="fr_1296"></span>[1297](#fn_1296) meaning that the
man who has devoted himself to Christ ought to be sufficient to himself,
and servant to himself, and moreover lead a life which provides for each
day by itself. For it is not in war, but in peace, that <span
id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span id="vi.iii.i.xii-Page_235"></span>we
are trained. War needs great preparation, and luxury craves profusion;
but peace and love, simple and quiet sisters, require no arms nor
excessive preparation. The Word is their sustenance.

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p7"></span>Our superintendence in instruction and
discipline is the office of the Word, from whom we learn frugality and
humility, and all that pertains to love of truth, love of man, and love
of excellence. And so, in a word, being assimilated to God by a
participation in moral excellence, we must not retrograde into
carelessness and sloth. But labour, and faint not. Thou shalt be what
thou dost not hope, and canst not conjecture. And as there is one mode
of training for philosophers, another for orators, and another for
athletes; so is there a generous disposition, suitable to the choice
that is set upon moral loveliness, resulting from the training of
Christ. And in the case of those who have been trained according to this
influence, their gait in walking, their sitting at table, their food,
their sleep, their going to bed, their regimen, and the rest of their
mode of life, acquire a superior dignity. <span
id="fr_1297"></span>[1298](#fn_1297) For such a training as is pursued
by the Word is not overstrained, but is of the right tension. Thus,
therefore, the Word has been called also the Saviour, seeing He has
found out for men those rational medicines which produce vigour of the
senses and salvation; and devotes Himself to watching for the favourable
moment, reproving evil, exposing the causes of evil affections, and
striking at the roots of irrational lusts, pointing out what we ought to
abstain from, and supplying all the antidotes of salvation to those who
are diseased. For the greatest and most regal work of God is the
salvation of humanity. The sick are vexed at a physician, who gives no
advice bearing on their restoration to health. But how shall we not
acknowledge the highest gratitude to the divine Instructor, who is not
silent, who omits not those threatenings that point towards destruction,
but discloses them, and cuts off the impulses that tend to them; and who
indoctrinates in those counsels which result in the true way of living?
We must confess, therefore, the deepest obligations to Him. For what
else do we say is incumbent on the rational creature—I mean man—than the
contemplation of the Divine? I say, too, that it is requisite to
contemplate human nature, and to live as the truth directs, and to
admire the Instructor and His injunctions, as suitable and harmonious to
each other. According to which image also we ought, conforming ourselves
to the Instructor, and making the word and our deeds agree, to live a
real life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[234:1296](0020262.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="vi.iii.i.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p4"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="vi.iii.i.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[234:1297](0020262.htm#fr_1296) <span
id="vi.iii.i.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p6"></span> [Matt. vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span
id="vi.iii.i.xii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[235:1298](0020262.htm#fr_1297) <span
id="vi.iii.i.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.xii-p8"></span> \[The secondary, civilizing, and
socializing power of the Gospel, must have already produced all this
change from heathen manners, under Clement’s own observation.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—Virtue Rational, Sin Irrational.](0020263)
