[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020191)  [Next](0020193) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xxii"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—Pretended Symbolical Explanations.

<span id="v.ii.xxii-p1"></span>But perhaps these things are poetic
vagary, and there is some natural explanation of them, such as this by
Empedocles:—

> <span id="v.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span> “Let Jove be fire, and Juno source
> of life,  
> With Pluto and Nêstis, who bathes with tears  
> The human founts.”  

<span id="v.ii.xxii-p2"></span>If, then, Zeus is fire, and Hera the
earth, and Aïdoneus the air, and Nê stis water, and these are
elements—fire, water, air—none of them is a god, neither Zeus, nor Hera,
nor Aïdoneus; for from matter separated into parts by God is their
constitution and origin:—

> <span id="v.ii.xxii-p2.1"></span> “Fire, water, earth, and the air’s
> gentle height,  
> And harmony with these.”  

<span id="v.ii.xxii-p3"></span>Here are things which without harmony
cannot abide; which would be brought to ruin by strife: how then can any
one say that they are <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span
id="v.ii.xxii-Page_140"></span>gods? Friendship, according to
Empedocles, has an aptitude to govern, things that are compounded are
governed, and that which is apt to govern has the dominion; so that if
we make the power of the governed and the governing one and the same, we
shall be, unawares to ourselves, putting perishable and fluctuating and
changeable matter on an equality with the uncreated, and eternal, and
ever self-accordant God. Zeus is, according to the Stoics, the fervid
part of nature; Hera is the air (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xxii-p3.1"></span>ἀήρ</span>)—the very name, if it be joined to
itself, signifying this; <span id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781)
Poseidon is what is drunk (water, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xxii-p4.2"></span>πόσις</span>). But these things are by
different persons explained of natural objects in different ways. Some
call Zeus twofold masculine-feminine air; others the season which brings
about mild weather, on which account it was that he alone escaped from
Kronos. But to the Stoics it may be said, If you acknowledge one God,
the supreme and uncreated and eternal One, and as many compound bodies
as there are changes of matter, and say that the Spirit of God, which
pervades matter, obtains according to its variations a diversity of
names, the forms of matter will become the body of God; but when the
elements are destroyed in the conflagration, the names will necessarily
perish along with the forms, the Spirit of God alone remaining. Who,
then, can believe that those bodies, of which the variation according to
matter is allied to corruption, are gods? But to those who say that
Kronos is time, and Rhea the earth, and that she becomes pregnant by
Kronos, and brings forth, whence she is regarded as the mother of all;
and that he begets and devours his offspring; and that the mutilation is
the intercourse of the male with the female, which cuts off the seed and
casts it into the womb, and generates a human being, who has in himself
the sexual desire, which is Aphrodité; and that the madness of Kronos is
the turn of season, which destroys animate and inanimate things; and
that the bonds and Tartarus are time, which is changed by seasons and
disappears;—to such persons we say, If Kronos is time, he changes; if a
season, he turns about; if darkness, or frost, or the moist part of
nature, none of these is abiding; but the Deity is immortal, and
immoveable, and unalterable: so that neither is Kronos nor his image
God. As regards Zeus again: If he is air, born of Kronos, of which the
male part is called Zeus and the female Hera (whence both sister and
wife), he is subject to change; if a season, he turns about: but the
Deity neither changes nor shifts about. But why should I trespass on
your patience by saying more, when you know so well what has been said
by each of those who have resolved these things into nature, or what
various writers have thought concerning nature, or what they say
concerning Athênâ, whom they affirm to be the wisdom (<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.xxii-p4.3"></span>φρόνησις</span>)
pervading all things; and concerning Isis, whom they call the birth of
all time (<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.xxii-p4.4"></span>φύσις
αἰῶνος</span>), from whom all have sprung, and by whom all exist; or
concerning Osiris, on whose murder by Typhon his brother Isis with her
son Orus sought after his limbs, and finding them honoured them with a
sepulchre, which sepulchre is to this day called the tomb of Osiris? For
whilst they wander up and down about the forms of matter, they miss to
find the God who can only be beheld by the reason, while they deify the
elements and their several parts, applying different names to them at
different times: calling the sowing of the corn, for instance, Osiris
(hence they say, that in the mysteries, on the finding of the members of
his body, or the fruits, Isis is thus addressed: We have found, we wish
thee joy), the fruit of the vine Dionysus, the vine itself Semelé, the
heat of the sun the thunderbolt. And yet, in fact, they who refer the
fables to actual gods, do anything rather than add to their divine
character; for they do not perceive, that by the very defence they make
for the gods, they confirm the things which are alleged concerning them.
What have Europa, and the bull, and the swan, and Leda, to do with the
earth and air, that the abominable intercourse of Zeus with them should
be taken for the intercourse of the earth and air? But missing to
discover the greatness of God, and not being able to rise on high with
their reason (for they have no affinity for the heavenly place), they
pine away among the forms of matter, and rooted to the earth, deify the
changes of the elements: just as if any one should put the ship he
sailed in the place of the steersman. But as the ship, although equipped
with everything, is of no use if it have not a steersman, so neither are
the elements, though arranged in perfect order, of any service apart
from the providence of God. For the ship will not sail of itself; and
the elements without their Framer will not move.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_781"></span>[140:782](0020192.htm#fr_781) <span
id="v.ii.xxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxii-p4"></span> Perhaps <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xxii-p4.1"></span>ἡρ (αηρ) α</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.—Opinions of Thales and Plato.](0020193)
