[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020038)  [Next](0020040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.—Ridicule of the Philosophers.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p1"></span>I cannot approve of Heraclitus, who,
being self-taught and arrogant, said, “I have explored myself.” Nor can
I praise him for hiding his poem <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423)
in the temple of Artemis, in order that it might be published afterwards
as a mystery; and those who take an interest in such things say that
Euripides the tragic poet came there and read it, and, gradually
learning it by heart, carefully handed down to posterity this
darkness <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) of Heraclitus. Death,
however, demonstrated the stupidity of this man; for, being attacked by
dropsy, as he had studied the art of medicine as well as philosophy, he
plastered himself with cow-dung, which, as it hardened, contracted the
flesh of his whole body, so that he was pulled in pieces, and thus died.
Then, one cannot listen to Zeno, who declares that at the conflagration
the same man will rise again to perform the same actions as before; for
instance, Anytus and Miletus to accuse, Busiris to murder his guests,
and Hercules to repeat his labours; and in this doctrine of the
conflagration he introduces more wicked than just persons—one Socrates
and a Hercules, and a few more of the same class, but not many, for the
bad will be found far more numerous than the good. And according to him
the Deity will manifestly be the author of evil, dwelling in sewers and
worms, and in the perpetrators of impiety. The eruptions of fire in
Sicily, moreover, confute the empty boasting of Empedocles, in that,
though he was no god, he falsely almost gave himself out for one. I
laugh, too, at the old wife’s talk of Pherecydes, and the doctrine
inherited from him by Pythagoras, and that of Plato, an imitation of
his, though some think otherwise. And who would give his approval to the
cynogamy of Crates, and not rather, repudiating the wild and tumid
speech of those who resemble him, turn to the investigation of what
truly deserves attention? Wherefore be not led away by the solemn
assemblies of philosophers who are no philosophers, who dogmatize one
against the other, though each one vents but the crude fancies of the
moment. They have, moreover, many collisions among themselves; each one
hates the other; they indulge in conflicting opinions, and their
arrogance makes them eager for the highest places. It would better
become them, moreover, not to pay court to kings unbidden, nor to
flatter men at the head of affairs, but to wait till the great ones come
to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_423"></span>[66:424](0020039.htm#fr_423) <span
id="iii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>περὶ φύσεως</span>

<span id="fn_424"></span>[66:425](0020039.htm#fr_424) <span
id="iii.ii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p3"></span> He was called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>δ σκοτεινός</span> for his obscurity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Christians Worship God Alone.](0020040)
