[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020076)  [Next](0020078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.xli"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.xli-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLI.

<span id="iii.ii.xli-p1"></span>But the matter of principal importance
is to endeavour with all accuracy to make it clear that Moses is not
only older than Homer, but than all the writers that were before
him—older than Linus, Philammon, Thamyris, Amphion, Musæus, Orpheus,
Demodocus, Phemius, Sibylla, Epimenides of Crete, who came to Sparta,
Aristæus of Proconnesus, who wrote the Arimaspia, Asbolus the Centaur,
Isatis, Drymon, Euclus the Cyprian, Horus the Samian, and Pronapis the
Athenian. Now, Linus was the teacher of Hercules, but Hercules preceded
the Trojan war by one generation; and this is manifest from his son
Tlepolemus, who served in the army against Troy. And Orpheus lived at
the same time as Hercules; moreover, it is said that all the works
attributed to him were composed by Onomacritus the Athenian, who lived
during the reign of the Pisistratids, about the fiftieth Olympiad.
Musæus was a disciple of Orpheus. Amphion, since he preceded the siege
of Troy by two generations, forbids our collecting further particulars
about him for those who are desirous of information. Demodocus and
Phemius lived at the very time of the Trojan war; for the one resided
with the suitors, and the other with the Phœacians. Thamyris and
Philammon were not much earlier than these. Thus, concerning their
several performances in each kind, and their times and the record of
them, we have written very fully, and, as I think, with all exactness.
But, that we may complete what is still wanting, I will give my
explanation respecting the men who are esteemed wise. Minos, who has
been thought to excel in every kind of wisdom, and mental acuteness, and
legislative capacity, lived in the time of Lynceus, who reigned after
Danaus in the eleventh generation after Inachus. Lycurgus, who was born
long after the taking of Troy, gave laws to the Lacedemonians. Draco is
found to have lived about the thirty-ninth Olympiad, Solon about the
forty-sixth, and Pythagoras about the sixty-second. We have shown that
the Olympiads commenced 407 years after the taking of Troy. These facts
being demonstrated, we shall briefly remark concerning the age of the
seven wise men. The oldest of these, Thales, lived about the fiftieth
Olympiad; and I have already spoken briefly of those who came after him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII. Concluding Statement as to the Author.](0020078)
