[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020213)  [Next](0020215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.vi"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Everything that is Useless or Hurtful is Rejected.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p1"></span>Since, therefore, great difference of
nature obtains in all animals, and the very nourishment which is
accordant with nature is varied to suit each kind of animal, and the
body which is nourished; and as in the nourishment of every animal there
is a threefold cleansing and separation, it follows that whatever is
alien from the nourishment of the animal must be wholly destroyed and
carried off to its natural place, or change into something else, since
it cannot coalesce with it; that the power of the nourishing body must
be suitable to the nature of the animal to be nourished, and accordant
with its powers; and that this, when it has passed <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="v.iii.vi-Page_152"></span>through
the strainers appointed for the purpose, and been thoroughly purified by
the natural means of purification, must become a most genuine addition
to the substance,—the only thing, in fact, which any one calling things
by their right names would call nourishment at all; because it rejects
everything that is foreign and hurtful to the constitution of the animal
nourished and that mass of superfluous food introduced merely for
filling the stomach and gratifying the appetite. This nourishment, no
one can doubt, becomes incorporated with the body that is nourished,
interwoven and blended with all the members and parts of members; but
that which is different and contrary to nature is speedily corrupted if
brought into contact with a stronger power, but easily destroys that
which is overcome by it, and is converted into hurtful humours and
poisonous qualities, because producing nothing akin or friendly to the
body which is to be nourished. And it is a very clear proof of this,
that in many of the animals nourished, pain, or disease, or death
follows from these things, if, owing to a too keen appetite, they take
in mingled with their food something poisonous and contrary to nature;
which, of course, would tend to the utter destruction of the body to be
nourished, since that which is nourished is nourished by substances akin
to it and which accord with its nature, but is destroyed by those of a
contrary kind. If, therefore, according to the different nature of
animals, different kinds of food have been provided suitable to their
nature, and none of that which the animal may have taken, not even an
accidental part of it, admits of being blended with the body which is
nourished, but only that part which has been purified by an entire
digestion, and undergone a complete change for union with a particular
body, and adapted to the parts which are to receive nourishment,—it is
very plain that none of the things contrary to nature can be united with
those bodies for which it is not a suitable and correspondent
nourishment, but either passes off by the bowels before it produces some
other humour, crude and corrupted; or, if it continue for a longer time,
produces suffering or disease hard to cure, destroying at the same time
the natural nourishment, or even the flesh itself which needs
nourishment. But even though it be expelled at length, overcome by
certain medicines, or by better food, or by the natural forces, it is
not got rid of without doing much harm, since it bears no peaceful
aspect towards what is natural, because it cannot coalesce with nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.—The Resurrection-Body Different from the
Present.](0020215)
