[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020234)  [Next](0020236) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i"></span> <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_165"></span>

### <span id="vi.i-p0.1"></span>Introductory Note

#### <span id="vi.i-p0.2"></span>to

## <span id="vi.i-p0.3"></span>CLement of Alexandria

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span>\[<span class="sc"><span
id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>a.d.</span> 153–193–217.\] The second century of
illumination is drawing to a close, as the great name of this Father
comes into view, and introduces us to a new stage of the Church’s
progress. From Britain to the Ganges it had already made its mark. In
all its Oriental identity, we have found it vigorous in Gaul and
penetrating to other regions of the West. From its primitive base on the
Orontes, it has extended itself to the deltas of the Nile; and the
Alexandria of Apollos and of St. Mark has become the earliest seat of
Christian learning. There, already, have the catechetical schools
gathered the finest intellectual trophies of the Cross; and under the
aliment of its library springs up something like a Christian university.
Pantænus, “the Sicilian bee” from the flowery fields of Enna, comes to
frame it by his industry, and store it with the sweets of his eloquence
and wisdom. Clement, who had followed Tatian to the East, tracks
Pantænus to Egypt, and comes with his Attic scholarship to be his pupil
in the school of Christ. After Justin and Irenæus, he is to be reckoned
the founder of Christian literature; and it is noteworthy how sublimely
he begins to treat Paganism as a creed outworn, to be dismissed with
contempt, rather than seriously wrestled with any longer.

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>His merciless exposure of the entire system of
“lords many and gods many,” seems to us, indeed, unnecessarily
offensive. Why not spare us such details? But let us reflect, that, if
such are our Christian instincts of delicacy, we owe it to this great
reformer in no small proportion. For not content to show the Pagans that
the very atmosphere was polluted by their mythologies, so that
Christians, turn which way they would, must encounter pestilence, he
becomes the ethical philosopher of Christians; and while he proceeds to
dictate, even in minute details, the transformations to which the
faithful must subject themselves in order “to escape the pollutions of
the world,” he sketches in outline the reformations which the Gospel
imposes on society, and which nothing but the Gospel has ever enabled
mankind to realize. “For with a celerity unsurpassable, and a
benevolence to which we have ready access,” says Clement, “the Divine
Power hath filled the universe with the seed of salvation.” Socrates and
Plato had talked sublimely four hundred years before; but Lust and
Murder were yet the gods of Greece, and men and women were like what
they worshipped. Clement had been their disciple; but now, as the
disciple of Christ, he was to exert a power over men and manners, of
which they never dreamed.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>Alexandria becomes the brain of Christendom:
its heart was yet beating at Antioch, but the West was still receptive
only, its hands and arms stretched forth towards the sunrise for further
enlightenment. From the East it had obtained the Scriptures and their
authentication, and from the same source was deriving the canons, the
liturgies, and the creed of Christendom. The universal language of
Christians is Greek. To a pagan emperor who had outgrown the ideas of
<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span id="vi.i-Page_166"></span>Nero’s
time, it was no longer Judaism; but it was not less an Oriental
superstition, essentially Greek in its features and its dress. “All the
churches of the West,” <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) says the
historian of Latin Christianity, “were Greek religious colonies. Their
language was Greek, their organization Greek, their writers Greek, their
Scriptures and their ritual were Greek. Through Greek, the
communications of the churches of the West were constantly kept up with
the East. . . . Thus the Church at Rome was but one of a confederation
of Greek religious republics founded by Christianity.” Now this
confederation was the Holy Catholic Church.

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>Every Christian must recognise the career of
Alexander, and the history of his empire, as an immediate precursor of
the Gospel. The patronage of letters by the Ptolemies at Alexandria, the
translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into the dialect of the Hellenes,
the creation of a new terminology in the language of the Greeks, by
which ideas of faith and of truth might find access to the mind of a
heathen world,—these were preliminaries to the preaching of the Gospel
to mankind, and to the composition of the New Testament of our Lord and
Saviour. He Himself had prophetically visited Egypt, and the idols were
now to be removed before his presence. There a powerful Christian school
was to make itself felt for ever in the definitions of orthodoxy; and in
a new sense was that prophecy to be understood, “Out of Egypt have I
called my Son.”

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>The genius of Apollos was revived in his
native city. A succession of doctors was there to arise, like him,
“eloquent men, and mighty in the Scriptures.” Clement tells us of his
masters in Christ, and how, coming to Pantænus, his soul was filled with
a deathless element of divine knowledge. <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) He speaks of the apostolic tradition
as received through his teachers hardly at second-hand. He met in that
school, no doubt, some, at least, who recalled Ignatius and Polycarp;
some, perhaps, who as children had heard St. John when he could only
exhort his congregations to “love one another.” He could afterwards
speak of himself as in the next succession after the apostles.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>He became the successor of Pantænus in the
catechetical school, and had Origen for his pupil, with other eminent
men. He was also ordained a presbyter. He seems to have compiled his
*Stromata* in the reigns of Commodus and Severus. If, at this time, he
was about forty years of age, as seems likely, we must conceive of his
birth at Athens, while Antoninus Pius was emperor, while Polycarp was
yet living, and while Justin and Irenæus were in their prime.

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem, speaks of
Clement, in turn, as his master: “for we acknowledge as fathers those
blessed saints who are gone before us, and *to whom we shall go after a
little time* the truly blest Pantænus, I mean, and the holy Clemens, my
teacher, who was to me so greatly useful and helpful.” St. Cyril of
Alexandria calls him “a man admirably learned and skilful, and one that
searched to the depths all the learning of the Greeks, with an exactness
rarely attained before.” So Theodoret says, “He surpassed all others,
and *was a holy man.*” St. Jerome pronounces him the most learned of all
the ancients; while Eusebius testifies to his theological attainments,
and applauds him as an “incomparable master of Christian philosophy.”
But the rest shall be narrated by our translator, Mr. Wilson.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>The following is the original <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>:—

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>Titus Flavius Clemens</span>, the illustrious
head of the Catechetical School at Alexandria at the close of the second
century, was originally a pagan philosopher. The date of his birth is
unknown. It is also uncertain whether Alexandria or Athens was his
birthplace. <span id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848)

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>On embracing Christianity, he eagerly sought
the instructions of its most eminent teachers; for this purpose
travelling extensively over Greece, Italy, Egypt, Palestine, and other
regions of the East.

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>Only one of these teachers (who, from a
reference in the *Stromata*, all appear to have been <span
id="page_167">p. 167</span> <span id="vi.i-Page_167"></span>alive when
he wrote <span id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) ) can be with certainty
identified, viz., Pantænus, of whom he speaks in terms of profound
reverence, and whom he describes as the greatest of them all. Returning
to Alexandria, he succeeded his master Pantænus in the catechetical
school, probably on the latter departing on his missionary tour to the
East, somewhere about <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.i-p15.1"></span>a.d.</span> 189. <span
id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) He was also made a presbyter of the
Church, either then or somewhat later. <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) He continued to teach with great
distinction till <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.i-p17.1"></span>a.d.</span> 202, when the persecution under
Severus compelled him to retire from Alexandria. In the beginning of the
reign of Caracalla we find him at Jerusalem, even then a great resort of
Christian, and especially clerical, pilgrims. We also hear of him
travelling to Antioch, furnished with a letter of recommendation by
Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem. <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852)
The close of his career is covered with obscurity. He is supposed to
have died about <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.i-p18.2"></span>a.d.</span> 220.

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>Among his pupils were his distinguished
successor in the Alexandrian school, Origen, Alexander bishop of
Jerusalem, and, according to Baronius, Combefisius, and Bull, also
Hippolytus.

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span>The above is positively the sum of what we
know of Clement’s history.

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span>His three great works, *The Exhortation to
the Heathen* (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p21.1"></span>λόγος ὁ
προτρεπτικὸς πρὸς Ἕλληνας</span>), *The Instructor, or Pædagogus* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p21.2"></span>παιδαγωγός</span>), *The
Miscellanies*, or *Stromata* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p21.3"></span>Στρωματεῖς</span>), are among the most valuable
remains of Christian antiquity, and the largest that belong to that
early period.

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span>*The Exhortation*, the object of which is to
win pagans to the Christian faith, contains a complete and withering
exposure of the abominable licentiousness, the gross imposture and
sordidness of paganism. With clearness and cogency of argument, great
earnestness and eloquence, Clement sets forth in contrast the truth as
taught in the inspired Scriptures, the true God, and especially the
personal Christ, the living Word of God, the Saviour of men. It is an
elaborate and masterly work, rich in felicitous classical allusion and
quotation, breathing throughout the spirit of philosophy and of the
Gospel, and abounding in passages of power and beauty.

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span>The *Pædagogus, or Instructor*, is addressed
to those who have been rescued from the darkness and pollutions of
heathenism, and is an exhibition of Christian morals and manners,—a
guide for the formation and development of Christian character, and for
living a Christian life. It consists of three books. It is the grand aim
of the whole work to set before the converts Christ as the only
Instructor, and to expound and enforce His precepts. In the first book
Clement exhibits the person, the function, the means, methods, and ends
of the Instructor, who is the Word and Son of God; and lovingly dwells
on His benignity and philanthropy, His wisdom, faithfulness, and
righteousness.

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span>The second and third books lay down rules for
the regulation of the Christian, in all the relations, circumstances,
and actions of life, entering most minutely into the details of dress,
eating, drinking, bathing, sleeping, etc. The delineation of a life in
all respects agreeable to the Word, a truly Christian life, attempted
here, may, now that the Gospel has transformed social and private life
to the extent it has, appear unnecessary, or a proof of the influence of
ascetic tendencies. But a code of Christian morals and manners (a sort
of “whole duty of man” and manual of good breeding combined) was
eminently needed by those whose habits and characters had been moulded
under the debasing and polluting influences of heathenism; and who were
bound, and were aiming, to shape their lives according to the principles
of the Gospel, in the midst of the all but incredible licentiousness and
luxury by which society around was incurably tainted. The disclosures
which Clement, with solemn sternness, and often with caustic wit, makes
of the <span id="page_168">p. 168</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_168"></span>prevalent voluptuousness and vice, form a very
valuable contribution to our knowledge of that period.

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span>The full title of the *Stromata*, according
to Eusebius and Photius, was <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p25.1"></span>Τίτου Φλαυίου Κλήμεντος τῶν κατὰ τὴν ἀληθῆ
φιλοσοφίαν γνωστικῶν ὑπομνημάτων στρωματεῖς</span> <span
id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) —“Titus Flavius Clement’s
miscellaneous collections of speculative (gnostic) notes bearing upon
the true philosophy.” The aim of the work, in accordance with this
title, is, in opposition to Gnosticism, to furnish the materials for the
construction of a true gnosis, a Christian philosophy, on the basis of
faith, and to lead on to this higher knowledge those who, by the
discipline of the Pædagogus, had been trained for it. The work consisted
originally of eight books. The eighth book is lost; that which appears
under this name has plainly no connection with the rest of the
*Stromata*. Various accounts have been given of the meaning of the
distinctive word in the title (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p26.1"></span>Στρωματεύς</span>); but all agree in regarding it
as indicating the miscellaneous character of its contents. And they are
very miscellaneous. They consist of the speculations of Greek
philosophers, of heretics, and of those who cultivated the true
Christian gnosis, and of quotations from sacred Scripture. The latter he
affirms to be the source from which the higher Christian knowledge is to
be drawn; as it was that from which the germs of truth in Plato and the
Hellenic philosophy were derived. He describes philosophy as a divinely
ordered preparation of the Greeks for faith in Christ, as the law was
for the Hebrews; and shows the necessity and value of literature and
philosophic culture for the attainment of true Christian knowledge, in
opposition to the numerous body among Christians who regarded learning
as useless and dangerous. He proclaims himself an eclectic, believing in
the existence of fragments of truth in all systems, which may be
separated from error; but declaring that the truth can be found in unity
and completeness only in Christ, as it was from Him that all its
scattered germs originally proceeded. The *Stromata* are written
carelessly, and even confusedly; but the work is one of prodigious
learning, and supplies materials of the greatest value for understanding
the various conflicting systems which Christianity had to combat.

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span>It was regarded so much as the author’s great
work, that, on the testimony of Theodoret, Cassiodorus, and others, we
learn that Clement received the appellation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i-p27.1"></span>Στρωματεύς</span> (the Stromatist). In all
probability, the first part of it was given to the world about <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p27.2"></span>a.d.</span> 194. The latest date
to which he brings down his chronology in the first book is the death of
Commodus, which happened in <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.i-p27.3"></span>a.d.</span> 192; from which Eusebius <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) concludes that he wrote this work
during the reign of Severus, who ascended the imperial throne in <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p28.1"></span>a.d.</span> 193, and reigned
till <span class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p28.2"></span>a.d.</span> 211. It
is likely that the whole was composed ere Clement quitted Alexandria in
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p28.3"></span>a.d.</span> 202. The
publication of the *Pædagogus* preceded by a short time that of the
*Stromata;* and the *Cohortatio* was written a short time before the
*Pædagogus*, as is clear from statements made by Clement himself.

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span>So multifarious is the erudition, so
multitudinous are the quotations and the references to authors in all
departments, and of all countries, the most of whose works have
perished, that the works in question could only have been composed near
an extensive library—hardly anywhere but in the vicinity of the famous
library of Alexandria. They are a storehouse of curious ancient lore,—a
museum of the fossil remains of the beauties and monstrosities of the
world of pagan antiquity, during all the epochs and phases of its
history. The three compositions are really parts of one whole. The
central connecting idea is that of the Logos—the Word—the Son of God;
whom in the first work he exhibits drawing men from the superstitions
and corruptions of heathenism to faith; in the second, as training them
by precepts and discipline; and in the last, as conducting them to that
higher knowledge of the things of God, to which those only who devote
themselves assiduously to spiritual, moral, and intellectual culture can
attain. Ever before his eye is the grand form of the living personal
Christ,—the Word, who “was with God, and who was God, but who became
man, and dwelt among us.”

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span id="vi.i-Page_169"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span>Of course there is throughout plenty of false
science, and frivolous and fanciful speculation.

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span>*Who is the rich man that shall be saved?*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.i-p31.1"></span>τίς ὁ σωζόμενος
πλούσιος</span>;) is the title of a practical treatise, in which Clement
shows, in opposition to those who interpreted our Lord’s words to the
young ruler as requiring the renunciation of worldly goods, that the
disposition of the soul is the great essential. Of other numerous works
of Clement, of which only a few stray fragments have been preserved, the
chief are the eight books of *The Hypotyposes*, which consisted of
expositions of all the books of Scripture. Of these we have a few
undoubted fragments. *The Adumbrations*, or *Commentaries on some of the
Catholic Epistles*, and *The Selections from the Prophetic Scriptures*,
are compositions of the same character, as far as we can judge, as *The
Hypotyposes*, and are supposed by some to have formed part of that work.

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span>Other lost works of Clement are:—

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span>The Treatise of Clement, the Stromatist, on
the Prophet Amos.

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span>On Providence.

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span>Treatise on Easter.

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span>On Evil-speaking.

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span>Discussion on Fasting.

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span>Exhortation to Patience; or, To the newly
baptized.

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span>Ecclesiastical Canon; or, Against the
Judaizers.

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span>Different Terms.

<span id="vi.i-p41"></span>The following are the names of treatises
which Clement refers to as written or about to be written by him, but of
which otherwise we have no trace or mention:—*On First Principles; On
Prophecy; On the Allegorical Interpretation of Members and Affections
when ascribed to God; On Angels; On the Devil; On the Origin of the
Universe; On the Unity and Excellence of the Church; On the Offices of
Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and Widows; On the Soul; On the
Resurrection; On Marriage; On Continence; Against Heresies.*

<span id="vi.i-p42"></span>Preserved among Clement’s works is a fragment
called *Epitomes of the Writings of Theodotus, and of the Eastern
Doctrine*, most likely abridged extracts made by Clement for his own
use, and giving considerable insight into Gnosticism.

<span id="vi.i-p43"></span>Clement’s quotations from Scripture are made
from the Septuagint version, often inaccurately from memory, sometimes
from a different text from what we possess, often with verbal
adaptations; and not rarely different texts are blended together. <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855)

<span id="vi.i-p45"></span>The works of Clement present considerable
difficulties to the translator; and one of the chief is the state of the
text, which greatly needs to be expurgated and amended. For this there
are abundant materials, in the copious annotations and disquisitions, by
various hands, collected together in Migne’s edition; where, however,
corruptions the most obvious have been allowed to remain in the text.

<span id="vi.i-p46"></span>The publishers are indebted to Dr. <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p46.1"></span>W. L. Alexander</span> for the
poetical translations of the Hymns of Clement.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span id="vi.i-Page_170"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_846"></span>[166:847](0020235.htm#fr_846) <span
id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> Milman, vol. i. pp. 28, 29, condensed. He
fails, however, to observe the immense importance of the facts he
chronicles.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[166:848](0020235.htm#fr_847) <span
id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span> I have felt that Pantænus and his school
require a few words in my elucidations.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[166:849](0020235.htm#fr_848) <span
id="vi.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span> Epiph., *Hær.*, xxxii. 6.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[167:850](0020235.htm#fr_849) <span
id="vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span> *Strom*., lib. i. c. v.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[167:851](0020235.htm#fr_850) <span
id="vi.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span> Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl.*, vi. 6.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[167:852](0020235.htm#fr_851) <span
id="vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span> Hieron., *Lib. de Viris Illustribus*, c. 38;
Ph., *Bibl*., 111.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[167:853](0020235.htm#fr_852) <span
id="vi.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span> \[The reader is already acquainted (Hermas,
p. 12, note 9) with permissive canons, by which bishops might commend to
their brethren, books fit to be read, which they sent, authenticated,
not only by hand and seal, but by a clerical messenger whose duty it was
(in the language of Bingham) “to go on the bishop’s embassies, with his
letters or messages to foreign churches; for in those days, by reason of
the persecutions, a bishop did not so much as send a letter to a foreign
church, but by the hands of one of his clergy. Whence Cyprian calls them
literæclericæ.” *Antiquities*, book iii. cap. ii. 3.\]

<span id="fn_853"></span>[168:854](0020235.htm#fr_853) <span
id="vi.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span> Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl*., vi. 13; Phot.
*Bibl*., 111.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[168:855](0020235.htm#fr_854) <span
id="vi.i-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span> *Hist. Eccl*., vi. 6.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[169:856](0020235.htm#fr_855) <span
id="vi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p44"></span> \[I am glad that our learned translator
makes nothing of the statement of Photius, that one of the works of
Clement (now lost) contained many things unworthy of his orthodoxy and
piety; but it may be well to say here, that Photius himself suggests
that heretics had corrupted some of his writings, and that his genuine
works testify against these very corruptions. Dupin thinks that if
Clement ever wrote such things they much have crept into his works from
fragments of his earlier writings, while he was a mere Platonist, at
most an inquirer into Christianity. But his great repute in the Catholic
Church after his decease, is sufficient to place his character far above
all suspicions of his having ever swerved from the “faith of the
Church.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exhortation to the Heathen](0020236)
