[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020338)  [Next](0020340) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.—On the Different Kinds of Voluntary Actions, and the Sins Thence Proceeding.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p1"></span>What is voluntary is either what is by
desire, or what is by choice, or what is of intention. Closely allied to
each other are these things—sin, mistake, crime. It is sin, for example,
to live luxuriously and licentiously; a misfortune, to wound one’s
friend in ignorance, taking him for an enemy; and crime, to violate
graves or <span id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-Page_362"></span>commit sacrilege. Sinning arises from
being unable to determine what ought to be done, or being unable to do
it; as doubtless one falls into a ditch either through not knowing, or
through inability to leap across through feebleness of body. But
application to the training of ourselves, and subjection to the
commandments, is in our own power; with which if we will have nothing to
do, by abandoning ourselves wholly to lust, we shall sin, nay rather,
wrong our own soul. For the noted Laius says in the tragedy:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p1.1"></span> “None of these things of which you
> admonish me have escaped me;  
> But notwithstanding that I am in my senses, Nature compels me;”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p2"></span>i.e., his abandoning himself to
passion. Medea, too, herself cries on the stage:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p2.1"></span> “And I am aware what evils I am to
> perpetrate,  
> But passion is stronger than my resolutions.” <span
> id="fr_2293"></span>[2294](#fn_2293)  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p4"></span>Further, not even Ajax is silent; but,
when about to kill himself, cries:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p4.1"></span> “No pain gnaws the soul of a free
> man like dishonour.  
> Thus do I suffer; and the deep stain of calamity  
> Ever stirs me from the depths, agitated  
> By the bitter stings of rage.” <span
> id="fr_2294"></span>[2295](#fn_2294)  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p6"></span>Anger made these the subjects of
tragedy, and lust made ten thousand others—Phædra, Anthia, Eriphyle,—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p6.1"></span> “Who took the precious gold for
> her dear husband.”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p7"></span>For another play represents Thrasonides
of the comic drama as saying:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p7.1"></span> “A worthless wench made me her
> slave.”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p8"></span>Mistake is a sin contrary to
calculation; and voluntary sin is crime (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p8.1"></span>ἀδικία</span>); and crime is voluntary
wickedness. Sin, then, is on my part voluntary. Wherefore says the
apostle, “Sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the
law, but under grace.” <span id="fr_2295"></span>[2296](#fn_2295)
Addressing those who have believed, he says, “For by His stripes we were
healed.” <span id="fr_2296"></span>[2297](#fn_2296) Mistake is the
involuntary action of another towards me, while a crime (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p10.2"></span>ἀδικία</span>) alone
is voluntary, whether my act or another’s. These differences of sins are
alluded to by the Psalmist, when he calls those blessed whose iniquities
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p10.3"></span>ἀνομίας</span>)
God hath blotted out, and whose sins (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p10.4"></span>ἁμαρτίας</span>) He hath covered. Others
He does not impute, and the rest He forgives. For it is written,
“Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p10.5"></span>Lord</span> will not impute sin, and in
whose mouth there is no fraud.” <span
id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297) This blessedness came on those who
had been chosen by God through Jesus Christ our Lord. For “love hides
the multitude of sins.” <span id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298) And
they are blotted out by Him “who desireth the repentance rather than the
death of a sinner.” <span id="fr_2299"></span>[2300](#fn_2299) And those
are not reckoned that are not the effect of choice; “for he who has
lusted has already committed adultery,” <span
id="fr_2300"></span>[2301](#fn_2300) it is said. And the illuminating
Word forgives sins: “And in that time, saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p14.2"></span>Lord</span>, they shall seek for the
iniquity of Israel, and it shall not exist; and the sins of Judah, and
they shall not be found.” <span id="fr_2301"></span>[2302](#fn_2301)
“For who is like Me? and who shall stand before My face? <span
id="fr_2302"></span>[2303](#fn_2302) You see the one God declared good,
rendering according to desert, and forgiving sins. John, too, manifestly
teaches the differences of sins, in his larger Epistle, in these words:
“If any man see his brother sin a sin that is not unto death, he shall
ask, and he shall give him life: for these that sin not unto death,” he
says. For “there is a sin unto death: I do not say that one is to pray
for it. All unrighteousness is sin; and there is a sin not unto
death.” <span id="fr_2303"></span>[2304](#fn_2303)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p18"></span>David, too, and Moses before David,
show the knowledge of the three precepts in the following words:
“Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the ungodly;” as the
fishes go down to the depths in darkness; for those which have not
scales, which Moses prohibits touching, feed at the bottom of the sea.
“Nor standeth in the way of sinners,” as those who, while appearing to
fear the Lord, commit sin, like the sow, for when hungry it cries, and
when full knows not its owner. “Nor sitteth in the chair of
pestilences,” as birds ready for prey. And Moses enjoined not to eat the
sow, nor the eagle, nor the hawk, nor the raven, nor any fish without
scales. So far Barnabas. <span id="fr_2304"></span>[2305](#fn_2304) And
I heard one skilled in such matters say that “the counsel of the
ungodly” was the heathen, and “the way of sinners” the Jewish
persuasion, and explain “the chair of pestilence” of heresies. And
another said, with more propriety, that the first blessing was assigned
to those who had not followed wicked sentiments which revolt from God;
the second to those who do not remain in the wide and broad road,
whether they be those who have been brought up in the law, or Gentiles
who have repented. And “the chair of pestilences” will be the theatres
and tribunals, or rather the compliance with wicked and deadly powers,
and complicity with their deeds. “But his delight is in the law of the
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p19.2"></span>Lord</span>.” <span
id="fr_2305"></span>[2306](#fn_2305) Peter in his *Preaching* <span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-Page_363"></span>called the Lord, Law and Logos. The
legislator seems to teach differently the interpretation of the three
forms of sin—understanding by the mute fishes sins of word, for there
are times in which *silence is better than speech, for silence has a
safe recompense;* sins of deed, by the rapacious and carnivorous birds.
The sow delights in dirt and dung; and we ought not to have “a
conscience” that is “defiled.” <span
id="fr_2306"></span>[2307](#fn_2306)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p22"></span>Justly, therefore, the prophet says,
“The ungodly are not so: but as the chaff which the wind driveth away
from the face of the earth. Wherefore the ungodly shall not stand in the
judgment” <span id="fr_2307"></span>[2308](#fn_2307) (being already
condemned, for “he that believeth not is condemned already” <span
id="fr_2308"></span>[2309](#fn_2308) ), “nor sinners in the counsel of
the righteous,” inasmuch as they are already condemned, so as not to be
united to those that have lived without stumbling. “For the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p24.2"></span>Lord</span> knoweth the
way of the righteous; and the way of the ungodly shall perish.” <span
id="fr_2309"></span>[2310](#fn_2309)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p26"></span>Again, the Lord clearly shows sins and
transgressions to be in our own power, by prescribing modes of cure
corresponding to the maladies; showing His wish that we should be
corrected by the shepherds, in Ezekiel; blaming, I am of opinion, some
of them for not keeping the commandments. “That which was enfeebled ye
have not strengthened,” and so forth, down to, “and there was none to
search out or turn away.” <span id="fr_2310"></span>[2311](#fn_2310)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p28"></span>For “great is the joy before the
Father when one sinner is saved,” <span
id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311) saith the Lord. So Abraham was much
to be praised, because “he walked as the Lord spake to him.” Drawing
from this instance, one of the wise men among the Greeks uttered the
maxim, “Follow God.” <span id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312) “The
godly,” says Esaias, “framed wise counsels.” <span
id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313) Now counsel is seeking for the
right way of acting in present circumstances, and good counsel is wisdom
in our counsels. And what? Does not God, after the pardon bestowed on
Cain, suitably not long after introduce Enoch, who had repented? <span
id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314) showing that it is the nature of
repentance to produce pardon; but pardon does not consist in remission,
but in remedy. An instance of the same is the making of the calf by the
people before Aaron. Thence one of the wise men among the Greeks uttered
the maxim, “Pardon is better than punishment;” as also, “Become surety,
and mischief is at hand,” is derived from the utterance of Solomon which
says, “My son, if thou become surety for thy friend, thou wilt give
thine hand to thy enemy; for a man’s own lips are a strong snare to him,
and he is taken in the words of his own mouth.” <span
id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315) And the saying, “Know thyself,” has
been taken rather more mystically from this, “Thou hast seen thy
brother, thou hast seen thy God.” <span
id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316) Thus also, “Thou shalt love the
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p34.1"></span>Lord</span> thy God
with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself;” for it is said, “On
these commandments the law and the prophets hang and are
suspended.” <span id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317) With these also
agree the following: “These things have I spoken to you, that My joy
might be fulfilled: and this is My commandment, That ye love one
another, as I have loved you.” <span
id="fr_2318"></span>[2319](#fn_2318) “For the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p36.2"></span>Lord</span> is merciful and pitiful; and
gracious <span id="fr_2319"></span>[2320](#fn_2319) is the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p37.3"></span>Lord</span> to
all.” <span id="fr_2320"></span>[2321](#fn_2320) “Know thyself” is more
clearly and often expressed by Moses, when he enjoins, “Take heed to
thyself.” <span id="fr_2321"></span>[2322](#fn_2321) “By alms then, and
acts of faith, sins are purged.” <span
id="fr_2322"></span>[2323](#fn_2322) “And by the fear of the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p40.2"></span>Lord</span> each one
departs from evil.” <span id="fr_2323"></span>[2324](#fn_2323) “And the
fear of the Lord is instruction and wisdom.” <span
id="fr_2324"></span>[2325](#fn_2324)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2293"></span>[362:2294](0020339.htm#fr_2293) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p2.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p3"></span> Eurip., *Medea*, 1078.

<span id="fn_2294"></span>[362:2295](0020339.htm#fr_2294) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p4.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p5"></span> These lines, which are not found in
the Ajax of Sophocles, have been amended by various hands. Instead of
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p5.1"></span>συμφοροὺσα</span>, we have ventured to read
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p5.2"></span>συμφορᾶς</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p5.3"></span>κηλὶς συμφορᾶς</span> being a Sophoclean
phrase, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p5.4"></span>συμφοροῦσα</span> being unsuitable.

<span id="fn_2295"></span>[362:2296](0020339.htm#fr_2295) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p9"></span> [Rom.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2296"></span>[362:2297](0020339.htm#fr_2296) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p10"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[362:2298](0020339.htm#fr_2297) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p10.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p11"></span> [Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p11.1"></span>; [Rom.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[362:2299](0020339.htm#fr_2298) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p12"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2299"></span>[362:2300](0020339.htm#fr_2299) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p13"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2300"></span>[362:2301](0020339.htm#fr_2300) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p14"></span> [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2301"></span>[362:2302](0020339.htm#fr_2301) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p15"></span> [Jer. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2302"></span>[362:2303](0020339.htm#fr_2302) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p16"></span> [Jer. xlix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2303"></span>[362:2304](0020339.htm#fr_2303) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p17"></span> [1 John
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2304"></span>[362:2305](0020339.htm#fr_2304) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p19"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p19.1"></span>
(quoted from Barnabas, with some additions and omissions). \[See vol. i.
p. 143, this series.\]

<span id="fn_2305"></span>[362:2306](0020339.htm#fr_2305) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p20"></span> [Ps. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2306"></span>[363:2307](0020339.htm#fr_2306) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p21"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2307"></span>[363:2308](0020339.htm#fr_2307) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p23"></span> [Ps.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2308"></span>[363:2309](0020339.htm#fr_2308) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p24"></span> [John iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2309"></span>[363:2310](0020339.htm#fr_2309) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p24.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p25"></span> [Ps.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2310"></span>[363:2311](0020339.htm#fr_2310) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p27"></span> [Ezek. xxxiv.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[363:2312](0020339.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p29"></span> These words are not in Scripture, but
the substance of them is contained in [Luke
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[363:2313](0020339.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p30"></span> One of the precepts of the seven wise
men.

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[363:2314](0020339.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p31"></span> [Isa. xxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p31.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[363:2315](0020339.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p32"></span> Philo explains Enoch’s translation
allegorically, as denoting reformation or repentance.

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[363:2316](0020339.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p33"></span> [Prov.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[363:2317](0020339.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p34"></span> Quoted as if in Scripture, but not
found there. The allusion may be, as is conjectured, to what God said to
Moses respecting him and Aaron, to whom he was to be as God; or to Jacob
saying to Esau, “I have seen thy face as it were the face of God.”

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[363:2318](0020339.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p35"></span> [Luke x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p35.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[363:2319](0020339.htm#fr_2318) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p36"></span> [John
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2319"></span>[363:2320](0020339.htm#fr_2319) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p36.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p37.1"></span>χρηστός</span> instread of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p37.2"></span>χριστός</span> which
is in the text.

<span id="fn_2320"></span>[363:2321](0020339.htm#fr_2320) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p37.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p38"></span> [Ps. cviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p38.1"></span>,
cxi. 4.

<span id="fn_2321"></span>[363:2322](0020339.htm#fr_2321) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p39"></span> [Ex. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p39.1"></span>, xxxiv. 12; [Deut. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p39.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2322"></span>[363:2323](0020339.htm#fr_2322) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p39.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p40"></span> Prob. [Ecclus. iii.
29](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#029)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2323"></span>[363:2324](0020339.htm#fr_2323) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p40.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p41"></span> [Prov. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2324"></span>[363:2325](0020339.htm#fr_2324) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p42"></span> [Ecclus. i.
27](../../../bib/apo/sir001.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xv-p42.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.—How We are to Explain the Passages of Scripture
Which Ascribe to God Human Affections.](0020340)
