[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020177)  [Next](0020179) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.viii"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Absurdities of Polytheism.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p1"></span>As regards, then, the doctrine that there
was from the beginning one God, the Maker of this universe, consider it
in this wise, that you may be acquainted with the argumentative grounds
also of our faith. If there were from the beginning two or more gods,
they were either in one and the same place, or each of them separately
in his own. In one and the same place they could not be. For, if they
are gods, they are not alike; but because they are uncreated they are
unlike: for created things are like their patterns; but the uncreated
are unlike, being neither produced from any one, nor formed after the
pattern of any one. Hand and eye and foot are parts of one body, making
up together one man: is God in this sense one? <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) And indeed Socrates was compounded and
divided into parts, just because he was created and perishable; but God
is uncreated, and, impassible, and indivisible—does not, therefore,
consist of parts. But if, on the contrary, each of them exists
separately, since He that made the world is above the things created,
and about the things He has made and set in order, where can the other
or the rest be? For if the world, being made spherical, is confined
within the circles of heaven, and the Creator of the world is above the
things created, managing that <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719) by
His providential care of these, what place is there for the second god,
or for the other gods? For he is not in the world, because it belongs to
the other; nor about the world, for God the Maker of the world is above
it. But if he is neither in the world nor about the world (for <span
id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span id="v.ii.viii-Page_133"></span>all
that surrounds it is occupied by this one <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720) ), where is he? Is he above the world
and \[the first\] God? In another world, or about another? But if he is
in another or about another, then he is not about us, for he does not
govern the world; nor is his power great, for he exists in a
circumscribed space. But if he is neither in another world (for all
things are filled by the other), nor about another (for all things are
occupied by the other), he clearly does not exist at all, for there is
no place in which he can be. Or what does he do, seeing there is another
to whom the world belongs, and he is above the Maker of the world, and
yet is neither in the world nor about the world? Is there, then, some
other place where he can stand? But God, and what belongs to God, are
above him. And what, too, shall be the place, seeing that the other
fills the regions which are above the world? Perhaps he exerts a
providential care? \[By no means.\] And yet, unless he does so, he has
done nothing. If, then, he neither does anything nor exercises
providential care, and if there is not another place in which he is,
then this Being of whom we speak is the one God from the beginning, and
the sole Maker of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_718"></span>[132:719](0020178.htm#fr_718) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p2"></span> i.e., Do several gods make up one
God?—<span class="sc"><span id="v.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>Otto</span>.
Others read affirmatively, “God is one.”

<span id="fn_719"></span>[132:720](0020178.htm#fr_719) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p3"></span> i.e., the world.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[133:721](0020178.htm#fr_720) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p4"></span> i.e., the Creator, or first God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—The Testimony of the Prophets.](0020179)
