[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020091)  [Next](0020093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.i.ix"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.i.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Immoralities of the Gods.

<span id="iv.ii.i.ix-p1"></span>And, indeed, the names of those whom you
say you worship, are the names of dead men. And these, too, who and what
kind of men were they? Is not Saturn found to be a cannibal, destroying
and devouring his own children? And if you name his son Jupiter, hear
also his deeds and conduct—first, how he was suckled by a goat on Mount
Ida, and having slain it, according to the myths, and flayed it, he made
himself a coat of the hide. And his other deeds,—his incest, and
adultery, and lust,—will be better recounted by Homer and the rest of
the poets. Why should I further speak of his sons? How Hercules burnt
himself; and about the drunk and raging Bacchus; and of Apollo fearing
and fleeing from Achilles, and falling in love with Daphne, and being
unaware of the fate of Hyacinthus; and of Venus wounded, and of <span
id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="iv.ii.i.ix-Page_92"></span>Mars, the
pest of mortals; and of the ichor flowing from the so-called gods. And
these, indeed, are the milder kinds of legends; since the god who is
called Osiris is found to have been torn limb from limb, whose mysteries
are celebrated annually, as if he had perished, and were being found,
and sought for limb by limb. For neither is it known whether he
perished, nor is it shown whether he is found. And why should I speak of
Atys mutilated, or of Adonis wandering in the wood, and wounded by a
boar while hunting; or of Æsculapius struck by a thunderbolt; or of the
fugitive Serapis chased from Sinope to Alexandria; or of the Scythian
Diana, herself, too, a fugitive, and a homicide, and a huntress, and a
passionate lover of Endymion? Now, it is not we who publish these
things, but your own writers and poets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.—Absurdities of Idolatry.](0020093)
