[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020396)  [Next](0020398) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—What True Philosophy Is, and Whence So Called.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p1"></span>As we have long ago pointed out, what
we propose as our subject is not the discipline which obtains in each
sect, but that which is really philosophy, strictly systematic Wisdom,
which furnishes acquaintance with the things which pertain to life. And
we define Wisdom to be certain knowledge, being a sure and irrefragable
apprehension of things divine and human, comprehending the present,
past, and future, which the Lord hath taught us, both by His advent and
by the prophets. And it is irrefragable by reason, inasmuch as it has
been communicated. And so it is wholly true according to \[God’s\]
intention, as being known through means of the Son. And in one aspect
<span id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-Page_493"></span>it is eternal, and in another it
becomes useful in time. Partly it is one and the same, partly many and
indifferent—partly without any movement of passion, partly with
passionate desire—partly perfect, partly incomplete.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p2"></span>This wisdom, then—rectitude of soul
and of reason, and purity of life—is the object of the desire of
philosophy, which is kindly and lovingly disposed towards wisdom, and
does everything to attain it.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p3"></span>Now those are called philosophers,
among us, who love Wisdom, the Creator and Teacher of all things, that
is, the knowledge of the Son of God; and among the Greeks, those who
undertake arguments on virtue. Philosophy, then, consists of such dogmas
found in each sect (I mean those of philosophy) as cannot be impugned,
with a corresponding life, collected into one selection; and these,
stolen from the Barbarian God-given grace, have been adorned by Greek
speech. For some they have borrowed, and others they have misunderstood.
And in the case of others, what they have spoken, in consequence of
being moved, they have not yet perfectly worked out; and others by human
conjecture and reasoning, in which also they stumble. And they think
that they have hit the truth perfectly; but as we understand them, only
partially. They know, then, nothing more than this world. And it is just
like geometry, which treats of measures and magnitudes and forms, by
delineation on plane-surfaces; and just as painting appears to take in
the whole field of view in the scenes represented. But it gives a false
description of the view, according to the rules of the art, employing
the signs that result from the incidents of the lines of vision. By this
means, the higher and lower points in the view, and those between, are
preserved; and some objects seem to appear in the foreground, and others
in the background, and others to appear in some other way, on the smooth
and level surface. So also the philosophers copy the truth, after the
manner of painting. And always in the case of each one of them, their
self-love is the cause of all their mistakes. Wherefore one ought not,
in the desire for the glory that terminates in men, to be animated by
self-love; but loving God, to become really holy with wisdom. If, then,
one treats what is particular as universal, and regards that, which
serves, as the Lord, he misses the truth, not understanding what was
spoken by David by way of confession: “I have eaten earth \[ashes\] like
bread.” <span id="fr_3293"></span>[3294](#fn_3293) Now, self-love and
self-conceit are, in his view, earth and error. But if so, science and
knowledge are derived from instruction. And if there is instruction, you
must seek for the master. Cleanthes claims Zeno, and Metrodorus
Epicurus, and Theophrastus Aristotle, and Plato Socrates. But if I come
to Pythagoras, and Pherecydes, and Thales, and the first wise men, I
come to a stand in my search for their teacher. Should you say the
Egyptians, the Indians, the Babylonians, and the Magi themselves, I will
not stop from asking their teacher. And I lead you up to the first
generation of men; and from that point I begin to investigate Who is
their teacher. No one of men; for they had not yet learned. Nor yet any
of the angels: for in the way that angels, in virtue of being angels,
speak, men do not hear; nor, as we have ears, have they a tongue to
correspond; nor would any one attribute to the angels organs of speech,
lips I mean, and the parts contiguous, throat, and windpipe, and chest,
breath and air to vibrate. And God is far from calling aloud in the
unapproachable sanctity, separated as He is from even the archangels.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p5"></span>And we also have already heard that
angels learned the truth, and their rulers over them; <span
id="fr_3294"></span>[3295](#fn_3294) for they had a beginning. It
remains, then, for us, ascending to seek their teacher. And since the
unoriginated Being is one, the Omnipotent God; one, too, is the
First-begotten, “by whom all things were made, and without whom not one
thing ever was made.” <span id="fr_3295"></span>[3296](#fn_3295) “For
one, in truth, is God, who formed the beginning of all things;” pointing
out “the first-begotten Son,” Peter writes, accurately comprehending the
statement, “In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth.” <span
id="fr_3296"></span>[3297](#fn_3296) And He is called Wisdom by all the
prophets. This is He who is the Teacher of all created beings, the
Fellow-counsellor of God, who foreknew all things; and He from above,
from the first foundation of the world, “in many ways and many
times,” <span id="fr_3297"></span>[3298](#fn_3297) trains and perfects;
whence it is rightly said, “Call no man your teacher on earth.” <span
id="fr_3298"></span>[3299](#fn_3298)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p11"></span>You see whence the true philosophy
has its handles; though the Law be the image and shadow of the truth:
for the Law is the shadow of the truth. But the self-love of the Greeks
proclaims certain men as their teachers. As, then, the whole family runs
back to God the Creator; <span id="fr_3299"></span>[3300](#fn_3299) so
also all the teaching of good things, which justifies, does to the Lord,
and leads and contributes to this.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p13"></span>But if from any creature they
received in any way whatever the seeds of the Truth, they did not
nourish them; but committing them to a barren and rainless soil, they
choked them with <span id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-Page_494"></span>weeds, as the Pharisees revolted from
the Law, by introducing human teachings,—the cause of these being not
the Teacher, but those who choose to disobey. But those of them who
believed the Lord’s advent and the plain teaching of the Scriptures,
attain to the knowledge of the law; as also those addicted to
philosophy, by the teaching of the Lord, are introduced into the
knowledge of the true philosophy: “For the oracles of the Lord are pure
oracles, melted in the fire, tried in the earth, <span
id="fr_3300"></span>[3301](#fn_3300) purified seven times.” <span
id="fr_3301"></span>[3302](#fn_3301) Just as silver often purified, so
is the just man brought to the test, becoming the Lord’s coin and
receiving the royal image. Or, since Solomon also calls the “tongue of
the righteous man gold that has been subjected to fire,” <span
id="fr_3302"></span>[3303](#fn_3302) intimating that the doctrine which
has been proved, and is wise, is to be praised and received, whenever it
is amply tried by the earth: that is, when the gnostic soul is in
manifold ways sanctified, through withdrawal from earthy fires. And the
body in which it dwells is purified, being appropriated to the pureness
of a holy temple. But the first purification which takes place in the
body, the soul being first, is abstinence from evil things, which some
consider perfection, and is, in truth, the perfection of the common
believer—Jew and Greek. But in the case of the Gnostic, after that which
is reckoned perfection in others, his righteousness advances to activity
in well-doing. And in whomsoever the increased force <span
id="fr_3303"></span>[3304](#fn_3303) of righteousness advances to the
doing of good, in his case perfection abides in the fixed habit of
well-doing after the likeness of God. For those who are the seed of
Abraham, and besides servants of God, are “the called;” and the sons of
Jacob are the elect—they who have tripped up the energy of wickedness.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p18"></span>If; then, we assert that Christ
Himself is Wisdom, and that it was His working which showed itself in
the prophets, by which the gnostic tradition may be learned, as He
Himself taught the apostles during His presence; then it follows that
the *gnosis,* which is the knowledge and apprehension of things present,
future, and past, which is sure and reliable, as being imparted and
revealed by the Son of God, is wisdom.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p19"></span>And if, too, the end of the wise man
is contemplation, that of those who are still philosophers aims at it,
but never attains it, unless by the process of learning it receives the
prophetic utterance which has been made known, by which it grasps both
the present, the future, and the past—how they are, were, and shall be.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p20"></span>And the *gnosis* itself is that which
has descended by transmission to a few, having been imparted unwritten
by the apostles. Hence, then, knowledge or wisdom ought to be exercised
up to the eternal and unchangeable habit of contemplation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3293"></span>[493:3294](0020397.htm#fr_3293) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p4"></span> [Ps. cii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p4.1"></span>.
The text reads, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p4.2"></span>γῆν σποδόν</span>. Clement seems to have
read in [Ps. cii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p4.3"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p4.4"></span>γῆν</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p4.5"></span>σποδόν</span>. The reading of the
Septuagint may have crept into the text from the margin. \[Elucidation
V.\]

<span id="fn_3294"></span>[493:3295](0020397.htm#fr_3294) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p6"></span> \[See the interesting passage in
Justin Martyr (and note), vol. i. p. 164, this series.\]

<span id="fn_3295"></span>[493:3296](0020397.htm#fr_3295) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p7"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3296"></span>[493:3297](0020397.htm#fr_3296) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p8"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3297"></span>[493:3298](0020397.htm#fr_3297) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p9"></span> [Heb. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3298"></span>[493:3299](0020397.htm#fr_3298) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p10"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3299"></span>[493:3300](0020397.htm#fr_3299) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p12"></span> [Eph.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3300"></span>[494:3301](0020397.htm#fr_3300) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p14"></span> “Tried in a furnace of earth;”
Jerome, “tried in the fire, seperated from earth.”

<span id="fn_3301"></span>[494:3302](0020397.htm#fr_3301) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p15"></span> [Ps. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3302"></span>[494:3303](0020397.htm#fr_3302) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p16"></span> [Prov. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3303"></span>[494:3304](0020397.htm#fr_3303) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p17"></span> The Latin translator appears to have
read what seems the true reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p17.1"></span>ἐπίτασις</span>, and not, as in the text,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.vii-p17.2"></span>ἐπίστασις</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—Philosophy is Knowledge Given by God.](0020398)
