[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020437)  [Next](0020439) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.viii.viii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.viii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—The Method of Classifying Things and Names.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.viii-p1"></span>In language there are three
things:—Names, which are primarily the symbols of conceptions, and by
consequence also of subjects. Second, there are Conceptions, which are
the likenesses and impressions of the subjects. Whence in all, the
conceptions are the same; in consequence of the same impression being
produced by the subjects in all. But the names are not so, on account of
the difference of languages. And thirdly, the Subject-matters by which
the Conceptions are impressed in us.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.viii-p2"></span>The names are reduced by grammar
into the twenty-four general elements; for the elements must be
determined. For of Particulars there is no scientific knowledge, seeing
they are infinite. But it is the property of science to rest on general
and defined principles. Whence also Particulars are resolved into
Universals. And philosophic research is occupied with Conceptions and
Real subjects. But since of these the Particulars are infinite, some
elements have been found, under which every subject of investigation is
brought; and if it be shown to enter into any one or more of the
elements, we prove it to exist; but if it escape them all, that it does
not exist.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.viii-p3"></span>Of things stated, some are stated
without connection; as, for example, “man” and “runs,” and whatever does
not complete a sentence, which is either true or false. And of things
stated in connection, some point out “essence,” some “quality,” some
“quantity,” some “relation,” some “where,” some “when,” some “position,”
some “possession,” some “action,” some “suffering,” which we call the
elements of material things after the first principles. For these are
capable of being contemplated by reason.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.viii-p4"></span>But immaterial things are capable
of being apprehended by the mind alone, by primary application.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.viii-p5"></span>And of those things that are
classed under the ten Categories, some are predicated by themselves (as
the nine Categories), and others in relation to something.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.viii-p6"></span>And, again, of the things contained
under these ten Categories, some are *Univocal,* as ox and man, as far
as each is an animal. For those are Univocal terms, to both of which
belongs the common name, animal; and the same principle, that is
definition, that is animate essence. And Heteronyms are those which
relate to the same subject under different names, as ascent or descent;
for the way is the same whether upwards or downwards. And the other
species of Heteronyms, as horse and black, are those which have a
different name and definition from each other, and do not possess the
same subject. But they are to be called different, not Heteronyms. And
Polyonyms are those which have the same definition, but a different
name, as, hanger, sword, scimitar. And Paronyms are those which are
named from something different, as “manly” from “manliness.”

<span id="vi.iv.viii.viii-p7"></span>Equivocal terms have the same name,
but not the same definition, as man—both the animal and the picture. Of
Equivocal terms, some receive their Equivocal name fortuitously, as
Ajax, the Locrian, and the Salaminian; and some from intention; and of
these, some from resemblance, as man both the living and the painted;
and some from analogy, as the foot of Mount Ida, and our foot, because
they are beneath; some from action, as the foot of a vessel, by which
the vessel <span id="page_565">p. 565</span> <span
id="vi.iv.viii.viii-Page_565"></span>sails, and our foot, by which we
move. Equivocal terms are designated from the same and to the same; as
the book and scalpel are called surgical, both from the surgeon who uses
them and with reference to the surgical matter itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—On the Different Kinds of Cause.](0020439)
