[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020403)  [Next](0020405) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Degrees of Glory in Heaven.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p1"></span>Such, according to David, “rest in the
holy hill of God,” <span id="fr_3388"></span>[3389](#fn_3388) in the
Church far on high, in which are gathered the philosophers of God, “who
are Israelites indeed, who are pure in heart, in whom there is no
guile;” <span id="fr_3389"></span>[3390](#fn_3389) who do not remain in
the seventh seat, the place of rest, but are promoted, through the
active beneficence of the divine likeness, to the heritage of
beneficence which is the eighth grade; devoting themselves to the pure
vision <span id="fr_3390"></span>[3391](#fn_3390) of insatiable
contemplation.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p5"></span>“And other sheep there are also,”
saith the Lord, “which are not of this fold” <span
id="fr_3391"></span>[3392](#fn_3391) —deemed worthy of another fold and
mansion, in proportion to their faith. “But My sheep hear My
voice,” <span id="fr_3392"></span>[3393](#fn_3392) understanding
gnostically the commandments. And this is to be taken in a magnanimous
and worthy acceptation, along with also the recompense and accompaniment
of works. So that when we hear, “Thy faith hath saved thee,” <span
id="fr_3393"></span>[3394](#fn_3393) we do not understand Him to say
absolutely that those who have believed in any way whatever shall be
saved, unless also works follow. But it was to the Jews alone that He
spoke this utterance, who kept the law and lived blamelessly, who wanted
only faith in the Lord. No one, then, can be a believer and at the same
time be licentious; but though he quit the flesh, he must put off the
passions, so as to be capable of reaching his own mansion.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p9"></span>Now to know is more than to believe,
as to be dignified with the highest honour after being saved is a
greater thing than being saved. Accordingly the believer, through great
discipline, divesting himself of the passions, passes to the mansion
which is better than the former one, viz., to the greatest torment,
taking with him the characteristic of repentance from the sins he has
committed after baptism. He is tortured then still more—not yet or not
quite attaining what he sees others to have acquired. Besides, he is
also ashamed of his transgressions. The greatest torments, indeed, are
assigned to the believer. For God’s righteousness is good, and His
goodness is righteous. And though the punishments cease in the course of
the completion of the expiation and purification of each one, yet those
have very great and permanent grief who <span
id="fr_3394"></span>[3395](#fn_3394) are found worthy of the other fold,
on account of not being along with those that have been glorified
through righteousness.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p11"></span>For instance, Solomon, calling the
Gnostic, wise, speaks thus of those who admire the dignity of his
mansion: “For they shall see the end of the wise, and to what a degree
the Lord has established him.” <span
id="fr_3395"></span>[3396](#fn_3395) And of his glory they will say,
“This was he whom we once held up to derision, and made a byword of
reproach; fools that we were! We thought his life madness, and his end
dishonourable. How is he reckoned among the sons of God, and his
inheritance among the saints?” <span
id="fr_3396"></span>[3397](#fn_3396)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p14"></span>Not only then the believer, but even
the heathen, is judged most righteously. For since God knew in virtue of
His prescience that he would not believe, He nevertheless, in order that
he might receive his own perfection gave him philosophy, but gave it him
previous to faith. And He gave the sun, and the moon, and the stars to
be worshipped; “which God,” the Law says, <span
id="fr_3397"></span>[3398](#fn_3397) made for the nations, that they
might not become altogether atheistical, and so utterly perish. But
they, also in the instance of this commandment, having become devoid of
sense, and addicting themselves to graven images, are judged unless they
repent; some of them because, though able, they would not believe God;
and others because, though willing, they did not take the necessary
pains to become believers. There were also, however, those who, from the
worship of the heavenly bodies, did not return to the Maker of them. For
this was the sway given to the nations to rise up to God, by means of
the worship of the heavenly bodies. But those who would not abide by
those heavenly bodies assigned to them, but fell away from them to
stocks and stones, “were counted,” it is said, “as chaff-dust and as a
drop from a jar,” <span id="fr_3398"></span>[3399](#fn_3398) beyond
salvation, cast away from the body.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p17"></span>As, then, to be simply saved is the
result of <span id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-Page_506"></span>medium <span
id="fr_3399"></span>[3400](#fn_3399) actions, but to be saved rightly
and becomingly <span id="fr_3400"></span>[3401](#fn_3400) is right
action, so also all action of the Gnostic may be called right action;
that of the simple believer, intermediate action, not yet perfected
according to reason, not yet made right according to knowledge; but that
of every heathen again is sinful. For it is not simply doing well, but
doing actions with a certain aim, and acting according to reason, that
the Scriptures exhibit as requisite. <span
id="fr_3401"></span>[3402](#fn_3401)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p21"></span>As, then, lyres ought not to be
touched by those who are destitute of skill in playing the lyre, nor
flutes by those who are unskilled in flute-playing, neither are those to
put their hand to affairs who have not knowledge, and know not how to
use them in the whole <span id="fr_3402"></span>[3403](#fn_3402) of
life.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p23"></span>The struggle for freedom, then, is
waged not alone by the athletes of battles in wars, but also in
banquets, and in bed, and in the tribunals, by those who are anointed by
the word, who are ashamed to become the captives of pleasures.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p24"></span>“I would never part with virtue for
unrighteous gain.” But plainly, unrighteous gain is pleasure and pain,
toil and fear; and, to speak comprehensively, the passions of the soul,
the present of which is delightful, the future vexatious. “For what is
the profit,” it is said, “if you gain the world and lose the
soul?” <span id="fr_3403"></span>[3404](#fn_3403) It is clear, then,
that those who do not perform good actions, do not know what is for
their own advantage. And if so, neither are they capable of praying
aright, so as to receive from God good things; nor, should they receive
them, will they be sensible of the boon; nor, should they enjoy them,
will they enjoy worthily what they know not; both from their want of
knowledge how to use the good things given them, and from their
excessive stupidity, being ignorant of the way to avail themselves of
the divine gifts.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p26"></span>Now stupidity is the cause of
ignorance. And it appears to me that it is the vaunt of a boastful soul,
though of one with a good conscience, to exclaim against what happens
through circumstances:—

> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p26.1"></span> “Therefore let them do what they
> may; <span id="fr_3404"></span>[3405](#fn_3404)  
> For it shall be well with me; and Right  
> Shall be my ally, and I shall not be caught doing evil.”  

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p28"></span>But such a good conscience preserves
sanctity towards God and justice towards men; keeping the soul pure with
grave thoughts, and pure words, and just deeds. By thus receiving the
Lord’s power, the soul studies to be God; regarding nothing bad but
ignorance, and action contrary to right reason. And giving thanks always
for all things to God, by righteous hearing and divine reading, by true
investigation, by holy oblation, by blessed prayer; lauding, hymning,
blessing, praising, such a soul is never at any time separated from
God. <span id="fr_3405"></span>[3406](#fn_3405) Rightly then is it said,
“And they who trust in Him shall understand the truth, and those
faithful in love shall abide by Him.” <span
id="fr_3406"></span>[3407](#fn_3406) You see what statements Wisdom
makes about the Gnostics.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p31"></span>Conformably, therefore, there are
various abodes, according to the worth of those who have believed. <span
id="fr_3407"></span>[3408](#fn_3407) To the point Solomon says, “For
there shall be given to him the choice grace of faith, and a more
pleasant lot in the temple of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3408"></span>[3409](#fn_3408) For the comparative shows that
there are lower parts in the temple of God, which is the whole Church.
And the superlative remains to be conceived, where the Lord is. These
chosen abodes, which are three, are indicated by the numbers in the
Gospel—the thirty, the sixty, the hundred. <span
id="fr_3409"></span>[3410](#fn_3409) And the perfect inheritance belongs
to those who attain to “a perfect man,” according to the image of the
Lord. And the likeness is not, as some imagine, that of the human form;
for this consideration is impious. Nor is the likeness to the first
cause that which consists in virtue. For this utterance is also impious,
being that of those who have imagined that virtue in man and in the
sovereign God is the same. “Thou hast supposed iniquity,” He says, “\[in
imagining\] that I will be like to thee.” <span
id="fr_3410"></span>[3411](#fn_3410) But “it is enough for the disciple
to become as the Master,” <span id="fr_3411"></span>[3412](#fn_3411)
saith the Master. To the likeness of God, then, he that is introduced
into adoption and the friendship of God, to the just inheritance of the
lords and gods is brought; if he be perfected, according to the Gospel,
as the Lord Himself taught.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3388"></span>[505:3389](0020404.htm#fr_3388) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p2"></span> [Ps.
xv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p2.1"></span> i.

<span id="fn_3389"></span>[505:3390](0020404.htm#fr_3389) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p3"></span> [John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p3.1"></span>; [Matt v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p3.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3390"></span>[505:3391](0020404.htm#fr_3390) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p4.1"></span>έποπτεία</span>, the third and highest
grade of initiation of the Eleusinian mysteries (Liddell and Scott’s
*Lexicon*).

<span id="fn_3391"></span>[505:3392](0020404.htm#fr_3391) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p6"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3392"></span>[505:3393](0020404.htm#fr_3392) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p7"></span> [John x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3393"></span>[505:3394](0020404.htm#fr_3393) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p8"></span> [Mark v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p8.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3394"></span>[505:3395](0020404.htm#fr_3394) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p10"></span> The text here has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p10.1"></span>ὄτι</span>, for which
has been substituted (Potter and Sylb.) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p10.2"></span>οί</span>, as above; <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p10.3"></span>τήν</span> after
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p10.4"></span>αὐλῆς</span>
(fold) requires to be omitted also in rendering the sentence as we have
done.

<span id="fn_3395"></span>[505:3396](0020404.htm#fr_3395) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p12"></span> [Wisd. iv.
17](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3396"></span>[505:3397](0020404.htm#fr_3396) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p13"></span> [Wisd. v.
3-5](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3397"></span>[505:3398](0020404.htm#fr_3397) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p15"></span> [Deut. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3398"></span>[505:3399](0020404.htm#fr_3398) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p16"></span> [Isa. xl.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3399"></span>[506:3400](0020404.htm#fr_3399) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p18"></span> The author reckons three kinds of
actions, the first of which is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p18.1"></span>κατόρθωμα</span>, right or perfect
action, which is characteristic of the perfect man and Gnostic alone,
and raises him (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p18.2"></span>εἰς τὴν ἀνωτάτω δόξαν</span>) to the
height of glory. The second is the class of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p18.3"></span>τῶν μέσων</span>, medium, or intermediate
actions, which are done by less perfect believers, and procure a lower
grade of glory. In the third place he reckons sinful actions (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p18.4"></span>ἀμαρτητικάς</span>),
which are done by those who fall away from salvation (Potter).

<span id="fn_3400"></span>[506:3401](0020404.htm#fr_3400) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p18.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p19"></span> \[2 Pet. i. 11.\]

<span id="fn_3401"></span>[506:3402](0020404.htm#fr_3401) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p20"></span> To produce this sense, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p20.1"></span>καθῆκεν</span> of the
text is by Potter changed into <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p20.2"></span>καθῆκειν</span>.

<span id="fn_3402"></span>[506:3403](0020404.htm#fr_3402) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p22"></span> On the authority of one of the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p22.1"></span>ms.</span>, Sylburgius
reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p22.2"></span>ὄλον</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p22.3"></span>λόγον</span> in the
text.

<span id="fn_3403"></span>[506:3404](0020404.htm#fr_3403) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p25"></span> [Matt. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p25.1"></span>; [Mark viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#036)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p25.2"></span>; [Luke ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p25.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3404"></span>[506:3405](0020404.htm#fr_3404) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p27"></span> From the *Acharneis* of
Aristophanes, quoted also by Cicero; with various readings in each.
Heinsius substitutes <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p27.1"></span>παλαμάσθων</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p27.2"></span>παλαμᾶσθαι</span> of
the text.

<span id="fn_3405"></span>[506:3406](0020404.htm#fr_3405) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p29"></span> \[Bunsen, *Hippol*., iii. p. 141.\]

<span id="fn_3406"></span>[506:3407](0020404.htm#fr_3406) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p30"></span> [Wisd. iii.
9](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3407"></span>[506:3408](0020404.htm#fr_3407) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p32"></span> \[[1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p32.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3408"></span>[506:3409](0020404.htm#fr_3408) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p33"></span> [Wisd. iii.
14](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3409"></span>[506:3410](0020404.htm#fr_3409) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p34"></span> [Matt. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3410"></span>[506:3411](0020404.htm#fr_3410) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p35"></span> [Ps. l.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3411"></span>[506:3412](0020404.htm#fr_3411) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p36"></span> [Matt. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xiv-p36.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.—Different Degrees of Knowledge.](0020405)
