[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020265)  [Next](0020267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—On Drinking.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p1"></span>“Use a little wine,” says the apostle
to Timothy, who drank water, “for thy stomach’s sake;” <span
id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) most properly applying its aid as a
strengthening tonic suitable to a sickly body enfeebled with watery
humours; and specifying “a little,” lest the remedy should, on account
of its quantity, unobserved, create the necessity of other treatment.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p3"></span>The natural, temperate, and necessary
beverage, therefore, for the thirsty is water. <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) This was the simple drink of
sobriety, which, flowing from the smitten rock, was supplied by the Lord
to the ancient Hebrews. <span id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) It
was most requisite that in their wanderings they should be
temperate. <span id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p7"></span>Afterwards the sacred vine produced
the prophetic cluster. This was a sign to them, when trained from
wandering to their rest; representing the great cluster the Word,
bruised for us. For the blood of the grape—that is, the Word—desired to
be mixed with water, as His blood is mingled with salvation.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p8"></span>And the blood of the Lord is twofold.
For there is the blood of His flesh, by which we are redeemed from
corruption; and the spiritual, that by which we are anointed. And to
drink the blood of Jesus, is to become partaker of the Lord’s
immortality; the Spirit being the energetic principle of the Word, as
blood is of flesh. <span id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p10"></span>Accordingly, as wine is blended with
water, <span id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360) so is the Spirit with
man. And the one, the mixture of wine and water, nourishes to faith;
while the other, the Spirit, conducts to immortality.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p12"></span>And the mixture of both—of the water
and of the Word—is called Eucharist, renowned and glorious grace; and
they who by faith partake of it are sanctified both in body and soul.
For the divine mixture, man, the Father’s will <span id="page_243">p.
243</span> <span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-Page_243"></span>has mystically
compounded by the Spirit and the Word. For, in truth, the spirit is
joined to the soul, which is inspired by it; and the flesh, by reason of
which the Word became flesh, to the Word.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p13"></span>I therefore admire those who have
adopted an austere life, and who are fond of water, the medicine of
temperance, and flee as far as possible from wine, shunning it as they
would the danger of fire. <span id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361) It
is proper, therefore, that boys and girls should keep as much as
possible away from this medicine. For it is not right to pour into the
burning season of life the hottest of all liquids—wine—adding, as it
were, fire to fire. <span id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362) For hence
wild impulses and burning lusts and fiery habits are kindled; and young
men inflamed from within become prone to the indulgence of vicious
propensities; so that signs of injury appear in their body, the members
of lust coming to maturity sooner than they ought. The breasts and
organs of generation, inflamed with wine, expand and swell in a shameful
way, already exhibiting beforehand the image of fornication; and the
body compels the wound of the soul to inflame, and shameless pulsations
follow abundance, inciting the man of correct behaviour to
transgression; and hence the voluptuousness of youth overpasses the
bounds of modesty. And we must, as far as possible, try to quench the
impulses of youth by removing the Bacchic fuel of the threatened danger;
and by pouring the antidote to the inflammation, so keep down the
burning soul, and keep in the swelling members, and allay the agitation
of lust when it is already in commotion. And in the case of grown-up
people, let those with whom it agrees sometimes partake of dinner,
tasting bread only, and let them abstain wholly from drink; in order
that their superfluous moisture may be absorbed and drunk up by the
eating of dry food. For constant spitting and wiping off perspiration,
and hastening to evacuations, is the sign of excess, from the immoderate
use of liquids supplied in excessive quantity to the body. And if thirst
come on, let the appetite be satisfied with a little water. For it is
not proper that water should be supplied in too great profusion; in
order that the food may not be drowned, but ground down in order to
digestion; and this takes place when the victuals are collected into a
mass, and only a small portion is evacuated.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p16"></span>And, besides, it suits divine studies
not to be heavy with wine. “For unmixed wine is far from compelling a
man to be wise, much less temperate,” according to the comic poet. But
towards evening, about supper-time, wine may be used, when we are no
longer engaged in more serious readings. Then also the air becomes
colder than it is during the day; so that the failing natural warmth
requires to be nourished by the introduction of heat. But even then it
must only be a little wine that is to be used; for we must not go on to
intemperate potations. Those who are already advanced in life may
partake more cheerfully of the draught, to warm by the harmless medicine
of the vine the chill of age, which the decay of time has produced. For
old men’s passions are not, for the most part, stirred to such agitation
as to drive them to the shipwreck of drunkenness. For being moored by
reason and time, as by anchors, they stand with greater ease the storm
of passions which rushes down from intemperance. They also may be
permitted to indulge in pleasantry at feasts. But to them also let the
limit of their potations be the point up to which they keep their reason
unwavering, their memory active, and their body unmoved and unshaken by
wine. People in such a state are called by those who are skilful in
these matters, *acrothorakes*. <span
id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363) It is well, therefore, to leave off
betimes, for fear of tripping.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p18"></span>One Artorius, in his book *On Long
Life* (for so I remember), thinks that drink should be taken only till
the food be moistened, that we may attain to a longer life. It is
fitting, then, that some apply wine by way of physic, for the sake of
health alone, and others for purposes of relaxation and enjoyment. For
first wine makes the man who has drunk it more benignant than before,
more agreeable to his boon companions, kinder to his domestics, and more
pleasant to his friends. But when intoxicated, he becomes violent
instead. For wine being warm, and having sweet juices when duly mixed,
dissolves the foul excrementitious matters by its warmth, and mixes the
acrid and base humours with the agreeable scents.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p19"></span>It has therefore been well said, “A
joy of the soul and heart was wine created from the beginning, when
drunk in moderate sufficiency.” <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364) And it is best to mix the wine with
as much water as possible, and not to have recourse to it as to water,
and so get enervated to drunkenness, and not pour it in as water from
love of wine. For both are works of God; and so the mixture of both, of
water and of wine, conduces together to health, because life consists of
what is necessary and of what is useful. With water, then, which is the
necessary of life, and to be used in abundance, there is also to be
mixed the useful.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p21"></span>By an immoderate quantity of wine the
tongue <span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-Page_244"></span>is impeded; the lips are relaxed; the
eyes roll wildly, the sight, as it were, swimming through the quantity
of moisture; and compelled to deceive, they think that everything is
revolving round them, and cannot count distant objects as single. “And,
in truth, methinks I see two suns,” <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365) said the Theban old man in his
cups. For the sight, being disturbed by the heat of the wine, frequently
fancies the substance of one object to be manifold. And there is no
difference between moving the eye or the object seen. For both have the
same effect on the sight, which, on account of the fluctuation, cannot
accurately obtain a perception of the object. And the feet are carried
from beneath the man as by a flood, and hiccuping and vomiting and
maudlin nonsense follow; “for every intoxicated man,” according to the
tragedy, <span id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366) —

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p23.1"></span> “Is conquered by anger, and
> empty of sense,  
> And likes to pour forth much silly speech;  
> And is wont to hear unwillingly,  
> What evil words he with his will hath said.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p24"></span>And before tragedy, Wisdom cried,
“Much wine drunk abounds in irritation and all manner of
mistakes.” <span id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367) Wherefore most
people say that you ought to relax over your cups, and postpone serious
business till morning. I however think that then especially ought reason
to be introduced to mix in the feast, to act the part of director
(pædagogue) to wine-drinking, lest conviviality imperceptibly degenerate
to drunkenness. For as no sensible man ever thinks it requisite to shut
his eyes before going to sleep, so neither can any one rightly wish
reason to be absent from the festive board, or can well study to lull it
asleep till business is begun. But the Word can never quit those who
belong to Him, not even if we are asleep; for He ought to be invited
even to our sleep. <span id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368) For
perfect wisdom, which is knowledge of things divine and human, which
comprehends all that relates to the oversight of the flock of men,
becomes, in reference to life, art; and so, while we live, is
constantly, with us, always accomplishing its own proper work, the
product of which is a good life.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p27"></span>But the miserable wretches who expel
temperance from conviviality, think excess in drinking to be the
happiest life; and their life is nothing but revel, debauchery, baths,
excess, urinals, idleness, drink. You may see some of them, half-drunk,
staggering, with crowns round their necks like wine jars, vomiting drink
on one another in the name of good fellowship; and others, full of the
effects of their debauch, dirty, pale in the face, livid, and still
above yesterday’s bout pouring another bout to last till next morning.
It is well, my friends, it is well to make our acquaintance with this
picture at the greatest possible distance from it, and to frame
ourselves to what is better, dreading lest we also become a like
spectacle and laughing-stock to others.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p28"></span>It has been appropriately said, “As
the furnace proverb the steel blade in the process of dipping, so wine
proveth the heart of the haughty.” <span
id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369) A debauch is the immoderate use of
wine, intoxication the disorder that results from such use;
crapulousness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p29.2"></span>κραιπάλη</span>) is the discomfort and
nausea that follow a debauch; so called from the head shaking (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p29.3"></span>κάρα πάλλειν</span>).

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p30"></span>Such a life as this (if life it must
be called, which is spent in idleness, in agitation about voluptuous
indulgences, and in the hallucinations of debauchery) the divine Wisdom
looks on with contempt, and commands her children, “Be not a
wine-bibber, nor spend your money in the purchase of flesh; for every
drunkard and fornicator shall come to beggary, and every sluggard shall
be clothed in tatters and rags.” <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) For every one that is not awake to
wisdom, but is steeped in wine, is a sluggard. “And the drunkard,” he
says, “shall be clothed in rags, and be ashamed of his drunkenness in
the presence of onlookers.” <span id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371)
For the wounds of the sinner are the rents of the garment of the flesh,
the holes made by lusts, through which the shame of the soul within is
seen—namely sin, by reason of which it will not be easy to save the
garment, that has been torn away all round, that has rotted away in many
lusts, and has been rent asunder from salvation.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p33"></span>So he adds these most monitory words.
“Who has woes, who has clamour, who has contentions, who has disgusting
babblings, who has unavailing remorse?” <span
id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372) You see, in all his raggedness, the
lover of wine, who despises the Word Himself, and has abandoned and
given himself to drunkenness. You see what threatening Scripture has
pronounced against him. And to its threatening it adds again: “Whose are
red eyes? Those, is it not, who tarry long at their wine, and hunt out
the places where drinking goes on?” Here he shows the lover of drink to
be already dead to the Word, by the mention of the bloodshot eyes,—a
mark which appears on corpses, announcing to him death in the Lord. For
forgetfulness of the things which tend to true life turns the scale
towards destruction. With reason therefore, the Instructor, in His
solicitude for our salvation, forbids us, “Drink not wine to
drunkenness.” Wherefore? you will ask. Because, says He, “thy mouth will
then speak perverse things, and thou liest down as in the heart of the
<span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-Page_245"></span>sea, and as the steersman of a ship in
the midst of huge billows.” Hence, too, poetry comes to our help, and
says:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p34.2"></span> “Let wine which has strength
> equal to fire come to men.  
> Then will it agitate them, as the north or south wind agitates the
> Libyan waves.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p35"></span>And further:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p35.1"></span> “Wine wandering in speech shows
> all secrets.  
> Soul-deceiving wine is the ruin of those who drink it.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p36"></span>And so on.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p37"></span>You see the danger of shipwreck. The
heart is drowned in much drink. The excess of drunkenness is compared to
the danger of the sea, in which when the body has once been sunken like
a ship, it descends to the depths of turpitude, overwhelmed in the
mighty billows of wine; and the helmsman, the human mind, is tossed
about on the surge of drunkenness, which swells aloft; and buried in the
trough of the sea, is blinded by the darkness of the tempest, having
drifted away from the haven of truth, till, dashing on the rocks beneath
the sea, it perishes, driven by itself into voluptuous indulgences.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p38"></span>With reason, therefore, the apostle
enjoins, “Be not drunk with wine, in which there is much excess;” by the
term excess (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p38.1"></span>ἀσωτία</span>) intimating the
inconsistence of drunkenness with salvation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p38.2"></span>τὸ ἄσωστον</span>). For if He made water
wine at the marriage, He did not give permission to get drunk. He gave
life to the watery element of the meaning of the law, filling with His
blood the doer of it who is of Adam, that is, the whole world; supplying
piety with drink from the vine of truth, the mixture of the old law and
of the new word, in order to the fulfilment of the predestined time. The
Scripture, accordingly, has named wine the symbol of the sacred
blood; <span id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373) but reproving the base
tippling with the dregs of wine, it says: “Intemperate is wine, and
insolent is drunkenness.” <span id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374) It
is agreeable, therefore, to right reason, to drink on account of the
cold of winter, till the numbness is dispelled from those who are
subject to feel it; and on other occasions as a medicine for the
intestines. For, as we are to use food to satisfy hunger, so also are we
to use drink to satisfy thirst, taking the most careful precautions
against a slip: “for the introduction of wine is perilous.” And thus
shall our soul be pure, and dry, and luminous; and the soul itself is
wisest and best when dry. And thus, too, is it fit for contemplation,
and is not humid with the exhalations, that rise from wine, forming a
mass like a cloud. We must not therefore trouble ourselves to procure
Chian wine if it is absent, or Ariousian when it is not at hand. For
thirst is a sensation of want, and craves means suitable for supplying
the want, and not sumptuous liquor. Importations of wines from beyond
seas are for an appetite enfeebled by excess, where the soul even before
drunkenness is insane in its desires. For there are the fragrant Thasian
wine, and the pleasant-breathing Lesbian, and a sweet Cretan wine, and
sweet Syracusan wine, and Mendusian, an Egyptian wine, and the insular
Naxian, the “highly perfumed and flavoured,” <span
id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375) another wine of the land of Italy.
These are many names. For the temperate drinker, one wine suffices, the
product of the cultivation of the one God. For why should not the wine
of their own country satisfy men’s desires, unless they were to import
water also, like the foolish Persian kings? The Choaspes, a river of
India so called, was that from which the best water for drinking—the
Choaspian—was got. As wine, when taken, makes people lovers of it, so
does water too. The Holy Spirit, uttering His voice by Amos, pronounces
the rich to be wretched on account of their luxury: <span
id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376) “Those that drink strained wine,
and recline on an ivory couch,” he says; and what else similar he adds
by way of reproach.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p43"></span>Especial regard is to be paid to
decency <span id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377) (as the myth
represents Athene, whoever she was, out of regard to it, giving up the
pleasure of the flute because of the unseemliness of the sight): so that
we are to drink without contortions of the face, not greedily grasping
the cup, nor before drinking making the eyes roll with unseemly motion;
nor from intemperance are we to drain the cup at a draught; nor
besprinkle the chin, nor splash the garments while gulping down all the
liquor at once,—our face all but filling the bowl, and drowned in it.
For the gurgling occasioned by the drink rushing with violence, and by
its being drawn in with a great deal of breath, as if it were being
poured into an earthenware vessel, while the throat makes a noise
through the rapidity of ingurgitation, is a shameful and unseemly
spectacle of intemperance. In addition to this, eagerness in drinking is
a practice injurious to the partaker. Do not haste to mischief, my
friend. Your drink is not being taken from you. It is given you, and
waits you. Be not eager to burst, by draining it down with gaping
throat. Your thirst is satiated, even if you drink slower, observing
decorum, by taking the beverage in small portions, in an orderly way.
For that which intemperance greedily seizes, is not taken away by taking
time.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p45"></span>“Be not mighty,” he says, “at wine;
for wine has overcome many.” <span id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378)
The Scythians, the Celts, the Iberians, and the Thracians, all of them
warlike <span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-Page_246"></span>races, are greatly addicted to
intoxication, and think that it is an honourable, happy pursuit to
engage in. But we, the people of peace, feasting for lawful enjoyment,
not to wantonness, drink sober cups of friendship, that our friendships
may be shown in a way truly appropriate to the name.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p47"></span>In what manner do you think the Lord
drank when He became man for our sakes? As shamelessly as we? Was it not
with decorum and propriety? Was it not deliberately? For rest assured,
He Himself also partook of wine; for He, too, was man. And He blessed
the wine, saying, “Take, drink: this is my blood”—the blood of the
vine. <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379) He figuratively calls
the Word “shed for many, for the remission of sins”—the holy stream of
gladness. And that he who drinks ought to observe moderation, He clearly
showed by what He taught at feasts. For He did not teach affected by
wine. And that it was wine which was the thing blessed, He showed again,
when He said to His disciples, “I will not drink of the fruit of this
vine, till I drink it with you in the kingdom of my Father.” <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380) But that it was wine which was
drunk by the Lord, He tells us again, when He spake concerning Himself,
reproaching the Jews for their hardness of heart: “For the Son of man,”
He says, “came, and they say, Behold a glutton and a wine-bibber, a
friend of publicans.” <span id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381) Let
this be held fast by us against those that are called Encratites.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p51"></span>But women, making a profession,
forsooth, of aiming at the graceful, that their lips may not be rent
apart by stretching them on broad drinking cups, and so widening the
mouth, drinking in an unseemly way out of alabastra quite too narrow: in
the mouth, throw back their heads and bare their necks indecently, as I
think; and distending the throat in swallowing, gulp down the liquor as
if to make bare all they can to their boon companions; and drawing
hiccups like men, or rather like slaves, revel in luxurious riot. For
nothing disgraceful is proper for man, who is endowed with reason; much
less for woman to whom it brings modesty even to reflect of what nature
she is.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p52"></span>“An intoxicated woman is great
wrath,” it is said, as if a drunken woman were the wrath of God. Why?
“Because she will not conceal her shame.” <span
id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382) For a woman is quickly drawn down
to licentiousness, if she only set her choice on pleasures. And we have
not prohibited drinking from alabastra; but we forbid studying to drink
from them alone, as arrogant; counselling women to use with indifference
what comes in the way, and cutting up by the roots the dangerous
appetites that are in them. Let the rush of air, then, which
regurgitates so as to produce hiccup, be emitted silently.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p54"></span>But by no manner of means are women
to be allotted to uncover and exhibit any part of their person, lest
both fall,—the men by being excited to look, they by drawing on
themselves the eyes of the men.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p55"></span>But always must we conduct ourselves
as in the Lord’s presence, lest He say to us, as the apostle in
indignation said to the Corinthians, “When ye come together, this is not
to eat the Lord’s supper.” <span id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p57"></span>To me, the star called by the
mathematicians Acephalus (headless), which is numbered before the
wandering star, his head resting on his breast, seems to be a type of
the gluttonous, the voluptuous, and those that are prone to drunkenness.
For in such <span id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384) the faculty of
reasoning is not situated in the head, but among the intestinal
appetites, enslaved to lust and anger. For just as Elpenor broke his
neck through intoxication, <span id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385) so
the brain, dizzied by drunkenness, falls down from above, with a great
fall to the liver and the heart, that is, to voluptuousness and anger:
as the sons of the poets say Hephæstus was hurled by Zeus from heaven to
earth. <span id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386) “The trouble of
sleeplessness, and bile, and cholic, are with an insatiable man,” it is
said. <span id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p62"></span>Wherefore also Noah’s intoxication
was recorded in writing, that, with the clear and written description of
his transgression before us, we might guard with all our might against
drunkenness. For which cause they who covered the shame <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) of his drunkenness are blessed by
the Lord. The Scripture accordingly, giving a most comprehensive
compend, has expressed all in one word: “To an instructed man
sufficiency is wine, and he will rest in his bed.” <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[242:1356](0020266.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p2"></span> [1 Tim. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[242:1357](0020266.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p4"></span> \[This remarkable chapter seems to
begin with the author’s recollections of Pindar (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>ἄριστον μὲν
ϋδωρ</span>), but to lay down very justly the Scriptural ideas of
temperance and abstinence.\]

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[242:1358](0020266.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p5"></span> [Ex.
xvii.](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>; [Num.
xx.](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[242:1359](0020266.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p6"></span> \[Clement reckons only two classes as
living faithfully with respect to drink, the *abstinent* and the
*totally abstinent.*\]

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[242:1360](0020266.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p9"></span> \[This seems Clement’s exposition of
St. John (vi. 63), and a clear statement as to the Eucharist, which he
pronounces spiritual food.\]

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[242:1361](0020266.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p11"></span> \[A plain reference to the use of
the mixed cup in the Lord’s supper.\]

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[243:1362](0020266.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p14"></span> \[If the *temperate* do well, he
thinks, the *abstinent* do beter; but nobody is temperate who does not
often and habitually abstain.\]

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[243:1363](0020266.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p15"></span> \[A very important principle; for,
if wine be “the milk of age,” the use of it in youth deprives age of any
benefit from its sober use\].

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[243:1364](0020266.htm#fr_1363) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p17"></span> The exact derivation of
*acrothorakes* is matter of doubt. But we have the authority of
Aristotle and Erotian for believing that is was applied to those who
were slightly drunk. Some regard the clause here as an interpolation.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[243:1365](0020266.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p20"></span> [Ecclus. xxxi.
27](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[244:1366](0020266.htm#fr_1365) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p22"></span> Pentheus in Euripides, *Bacch*.,
918.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[244:1367](0020266.htm#fr_1366) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p23"></span> Attributed to Sophocles.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[244:1368](0020266.htm#fr_1367) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p25"></span> [Ecclus. xxxi.
29](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#029)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[244:1369](0020266.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p26"></span> \[A beautiful maxim, and proving the
habit of early Christians to use completory prayers. This the drunkard
is in no state to do.\]

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[244:1370](0020266.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p29"></span> [Ecclus. xxxi.
26](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#026)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[244:1371](0020266.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p31"></span> [Prov. xxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[244:1372](0020266.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p32"></span> [Prov. xxiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[244:1373](0020266.htm#fr_1372) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p34"></span> [Prov.
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#030)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[245:1374](0020266.htm#fr_1373) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p39"></span> \[A passage not to be overlooked.
*Greek*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p39.1"></span>μυστικὸν σύμβολον</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[245:1375](0020266.htm#fr_1374) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p40"></span> [Prov. xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[245:1376](0020266.htm#fr_1375) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p41.1"></span>ἀνθοσμίας</span>. Some suppose the word
to be derived from the name of a town: “The Anthosmian.”

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[245:1377](0020266.htm#fr_1376) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p42"></span> [Amos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[245:1378](0020266.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p44"></span> \[Here Clement satirizes heathen
manners, and quote *Athene*, to shame Christians who imitate them.\]

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[245:1379](0020266.htm#fr_1378) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p46"></span> [Ecclus. xxxi.
25](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[246:1380](0020266.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p48"></span> \[The blood of the vine is Christ’s
blood. According to Clement, then, it remains in the Eucharist
unchanged.\]

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[246:1381](0020266.htm#fr_1380) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p49"></span> [Mark xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p49.1"></span>; [Matt. xxvi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p49.2"></span>. \[This also is a noteworthy use of the
text.\]

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[246:1382](0020266.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p50"></span> [Matt. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[246:1383](0020266.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p53"></span> [Ecclus. xxvi.
8](../../../bib/apo/sir026.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[246:1384](0020266.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p56"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p56.1"></span>. \[Clement has already hinted his
opinion, that this referred to a shameful custom of the Corinthians to
let an *agape* precede the Eucharist; an abuse growing out of our Lord’s
eating of the Passover before he instituted the Eucharist.\]

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[246:1385](0020266.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p58.1"></span>τουτοις</span>, an emendation for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p58.2"></span>τούτῳ</span>.

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[246:1386](0020266.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p58.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p59"></span> *Odyss*., xi. 65.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[246:1387](0020266.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p60"></span> *Iliad*, i. 591.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[246:1388](0020266.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p61"></span> [Ecclus. xxxi.
20](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[246:1389](0020266.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p63"></span> Shem and Japheth.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[246:1390](0020266.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p64"></span> see [Ecclus. xxxi.
19](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.ii-p64.1"></span>, where, however, we have a different
reading.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.—On Costly Vessels.](0020267)
