[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020407)  [Next](0020409) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—The Use of Philosophy to the Gnostic.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p0.2"></span>Greek philosophy the recreation of the Gnostic.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p1"></span>Now our Gnostic always occupies
himself with the things of highest importance. But if at any time he has
leisure and time for relaxation from what is of prime consequence, he
applies himself to Hellenic philosophy in preference to other
recreation, feasting on it as a kind of dessert at supper. <span
id="fr_3494"></span>[3495](#fn_3494) Not that he neglects what is
superior; but that he takes this in addition, as long as proper, for the
reasons I mentioned above. But those who give their mind to the
unnecessary and superfluous points of philosophy, and addict themselves
to wrangling sophisms alone, abandon what is necessary and most
essential, pursuing plainly the shadows of words.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p3"></span>It is well indeed to know all. But
the man whose soul is destitute of the ability to reach to acquaintance
with many subjects of study, will select the principal and better
subjects alone. For real science (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p3.1"></span>ἐπιστήμη</span>, which we affirm the
Gnostic alone possesses) is a sure comprehension (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p3.2"></span>κατάληψις</span>),
leading up through true and sure reasons to the knowledge (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p3.3"></span>γνῶσις</span>) of
the cause. And he, who is acquainted with what is true respecting any
one subject, becomes of course acquainted with what is false respecting
it.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p3.4"></span>Philosophy necessary.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p4"></span>For truly it appears to me to be a
proper point for discussion, Whether we ought to philosophize: for its
terms are consistent.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p5"></span>But if we are not to philosophize,
what then? (For no one can condemn a thing without first knowing it):
the consequence, even in that case, is that we must philosophize. <span
id="fr_3495"></span>[3496](#fn_3495)

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-Page_519"></span>

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p6.1"></span>First of all, idols are to be rejected.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p7"></span>Such, then, being the case, the
Greeks ought by the Law and the Prophets to learn to worship one God
only, the only Sovereign; then to be taught by the apostle, “but to us
an idol is nothing in the world,” <span
id="fr_3496"></span>[3497](#fn_3496) since nothing among created things
can be a likeness of God; and further, to be taught that none of those
images which they worship can be similitudes: for the race of souls is
not in form such as the Greeks fashion their idols. For souls are
invisible; not only those that are rational, but those also of the other
animals. And their bodies never become parts of the souls themselves,
but organs—partly as seats, partly as vehicles—and in other cases
possessions in various ways. But it is not possible to copy accurately
even the likenesses of the organs; since, were it so, one might model
the sun, as it is seen, and take the likeness of the rainbow in colours.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p9"></span>After abandoning idols, then, they
will hear the Scripture, “Unless your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees” <span
id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497) (who justified themselves in the
way of abstinence from what was evil),—so as, along with such perfection
as they evinced, and “the loving of your neighbour,” to be able also to
do good, you shall not “be kingly.” <span
id="fr_3498"></span>[3499](#fn_3498)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p12"></span>For intensification of the
righteousness which is according to the law shows the Gnostic. So one
who is placed in the head, which is that which rules its own body—and
who advances to the summit of faith, which is the knowledge (*gnosis*)
itself, for which all the organs of perception exist—will likewise
obtain the highest inheritance.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p13"></span>The primacy of knowledge the
apostle shows to those capable of reflection, in writing to those Greeks
of Corinth, in the following terms: “But having hope, when your faith is
increased, that we shall be magnified in you according to our rule
abundantly, to preach the Gospel beyond you.” <span
id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499) He does not mean the extension of
his preaching locally: for he says also that in Achaia faith abounded;
and it is related also in the Acts of the Apostles that he preached the
word in Athens. <span id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500) But he
teaches that knowledge (*gnosis*), which is the perfection of faith,
goes beyond catechetical instruction, in accordance with the magnitude
of the Lord’s teaching and the rule of the Church. <span
id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501) Wherefore also he proceeds to add,
“And if I am rude in speech, yet I am not in knowledge.” <span
id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502)

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p17.2"></span>Whence is the knowledge of truth?

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p18"></span>But let those who vaunt on account
of having apprehended the truth tell us from whom they boast of having
heard it. They will not say from God, but will admit that it was from
men. And if so, it is either from themselves that they have learned it
lately, as some of them arrogantly boast, or from others like them. But
human teachers, speaking of God, are not reliable, as men. For he that
is man cannot speak worthily the truth concerning God: the feeble and
mortal \[cannot speak worthily\] of the Unoriginated and
Incorruptible—the work, of the Workman. Then he who is incapable of
speaking what is true respecting himself, is he not much less reliable
in what concerns God? For just as far as man is inferior to God in
power, so much feebler is man’s speech than Him; although he do not
declare God, but only speak about God and the divine word. For human
speech is by nature feeble, and incapable of uttering God. I do not say
His name. For to name it is common, not to philosophers only, but also
to poets. Nor \[do I say\] His essence; for this is impossible, but the
power and the works of God.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p19"></span>Those even who claim God as their
teacher, with difficulty attain to a conception of God, grace aiding
them to the attainment of their modicum of knowledge; accustomed as they
are to contemplate the will \[of God\] by the will, and the Holy Spirit
by the Holy Spirit. “For the Spirit searches the deep things of God. But
the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit.” <span
id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p21"></span>The only wisdom, therefore, is the
God-taught wisdom we possess; on which depend all the sources of wisdom,
which make conjectures at the truth.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p21.1"></span>Intimations of the Teacher’s advent

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p22"></span>Assuredly of the coming of the
Lord, who has taught us, to men, there were a myriad indicators,
heralds, preparers, precursors, from the beginning, from the foundation
of the world, intimating beforehand by deeds and words, prophesying that
He would come, and where, and how, what should be the signs. From afar
certainly Law and Prophecy kept Him in view beforehand. And then the
precursor pointed Him out as present. After whom the heralds point out
by their teaching the virtue of His manifestation.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p22.1"></span>Universal diffusion of the Gospel a contrast to philosophy.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p23"></span>The philosophers, however, chose to
\[teach philosophy\] to the Greeks alone, <span
id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504) and not even to all of them; but
Socrates to Plato, and Plato <span id="page_520">p. 520</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-Page_520"></span>to Xenocrates, Aristotle to
Theophrastus, and Zeno to Cleanthes, who persuaded their own followers
alone.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p25"></span>But the word of our Teacher
remained not in Judea alone, as philosophy did in Greece; but was
diffused over the whole world, over every nation, and village, and town,
bringing already over to the truth whole houses, and each individual of
those who heard it by him himself, and not a few of the philosophers
themselves.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p26"></span>And if any one ruler whatever
prohibit the Greek philosophy, it vanishes forthwith. <span
id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505) But our doctrine on its very first
proclamation was prohibited by kings and tyrants together, as well as
particular rulers and governors, with all their mercenaries, and in
addition by innumerable men, warring against us, and endeavouring as far
as they could to exterminate it. But it flourishes the more. For it dies
not, as human doctrine dies, nor fades as a fragile gift. For no gift of
God is fragile. But it remains unchecked, though prophesied as destined
to be persecuted to the end. Thus Plato writes of poetry: “A poet is a
light and a sacred thing, and cannot write poetry till he be inspired
and lose his senses.” And Democritus similarly: “Whatever things a poet
writes with divine afflatus, and with a sacred spirit, are very
beautiful.” And we know what sort of things poets say. And shall no one
be amazed at the prophets of God Almighty becoming the organs of the
divine voice?

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p28"></span>Having then moulded, as it were, a
statue of the Gnostic, we have now shown who he is; indicating in
outline, as it were, both the greatness and beauty of his character.
What he is as to the study of physical phenomena shall be shown
afterwards, when we begin to treat of the creation of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3494"></span>[518:3495](0020408.htm#fr_3494) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p2"></span> \[The proportion to be observed
between the study of what is secular and that of the Scriptures,
according to Clement.\]

<span id="fn_3495"></span>[518:3496](0020408.htm#fr_3495) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p6"></span> The author’s meaning is, that it is
only by a process of philosophical reasoning that you can decide whether
philosophy is possible, valid, or useful. You must philosophize in order
to decide whether you ought or ought not to philosophize.

<span id="fn_3496"></span>[519:3497](0020408.htm#fr_3496) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p8"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[519:3498](0020408.htm#fr_3497) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p10"></span> [Matt. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p10.1"></span>; [Jas. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3498"></span>[519:3499](0020408.htm#fr_3498) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p11.1"></span>βασιλικοί</span>, [Jas. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p11.2"></span> (royal law).

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[519:3500](0020408.htm#fr_3499) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p14"></span> [2 Cor.
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[519:3501](0020408.htm#fr_3500) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p15"></span> [Acts
xvii.](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[519:3502](0020408.htm#fr_3501) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p16"></span> \[Canon-law referred to as already
recognised. And see [2 Cor. x.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p16.1"></span> (Greek), as to a certain
ecclesiastical rule or canon observed by the apostles. It may refer,
primarily, to ([Gal. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p16.2"></span>) limitations of apostolic work and
jurisdiction. See Bunsen, iii. 217.\]

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[519:3503](0020408.htm#fr_3502) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p17"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[519:3504](0020408.htm#fr_3503) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p20"></span> [1 Cor.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[519:3505](0020408.htm#fr_3504) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p24"></span> Following Hervetus, the Latin
translator, who interpolates into the text here, as seems necessary,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p24.1"></span>οἱ φιλόσοφοι
τοῖς Ἓλλησι</span>.

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[520:3506](0020408.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xviii-p27"></span> \[The imperishable nature of the
Gospel, forcibly contrasted with the evanescence of philosophy.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidations](0020409)
