[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020017)  [Next](0020019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.ix"></span> <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="ii.iii.ix-Page_26"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iii.ix-p0.1"></span>Commandment Ninth.

##### <span id="ii.iii.ix-p0.2"></span>Prayer Must Be Made to God Without Ceasing, and with Unwavering Confidence.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p1"></span>He says to me, “Put away doubting from
you and do not hesitate to ask of the Lord, saying to yourself, ‘How can
I ask of the Lord and receive from Him, seeing I have sinned so much
against Him? ‘Do not thus reason with yourself, but with all your heart
turn to the Lord and ask of Him without doubting, and you will know the
multitude of His tender mercies; that He will never leave you, but
fulfil the request of your soul. For He is not like men, who remember
evils done against them; but He Himself remembers not evils, and has
compassion on His own creature. Cleanse, therefore, your heart from all
the vanities of this world, and from the words already mentioned, and
ask of the Lord and you will receive all, and in none of your requests
will you be denied which you make to the Lord without doubting. But if
you doubt in your heart, you will receive none of your requests. For
those who doubt regarding God are double-souled, and obtain not one of
their requests. <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) But those who
are perfect in faith ask everything, trusting in the Lord; and they
obtain, because they ask nothing doubting, and not being double-souled.
For every double-souled man, even if he repent, will with difficulty be
saved. <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) Cleanse your heart,
therefore, from all doubt, and put on faith, because it is strong, and
trust God that you will obtain from Him all that you ask. And if at any
time, after you have asked of the Lord, you are slower in obtaining your
request \[than you expected\], do not doubt because you have not soon
obtained the request of your soul; for invariably it is on account of
some temptation or some sin of which you are ignorant that you are
slower in obtaining your request. Wherefore do not cease to make the
request of your soul, and you will obtain it. But if you grow weary and
waver in your request, blame yourself, and not Him who does not give to
you. Consider this doubting state of mind, for it is wicked and
senseless, and turns many away entirely from the faith, even though they
be very strong. For this doubting is the daughter of the devil, and acts
exceedingly wickedly to the servants of God. Despise, then, doubting,
and gain the mastery over it in everything; clothing yourself with
faith, which is strong and powerful. For faith promises all things,
perfects all things; but doubt having no thorough faith in itself, fails
in every work which it undertakes. You see, then,” says he, “that, faith
is from above—from the Lord <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) —and
has great power; but doubt is an earthly spirit, coming from the devil,
and has no power. Serve, then, that which has power, namely faith, and
keep away from doubt, which has no power, and you will live to God. And
all will live to God whose minds have been set on these things.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_206"></span>[26:207](0020018.htm#fr_206) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p2"></span> \[[Jas. i.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006)<span id="ii.iii.ix-p2.1"></span>
is here the text of the Shepherd’s comment.\]

<span id="fn_207"></span>[26:208](0020018.htm#fr_207) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p3"></span> *With difficulty be saved.* Will with
difficulty live to God.—*Vat.*

<span id="fn_208"></span>[26:209](0020018.htm#fr_208) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p4"></span> *Lord*. God.—*Vat*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commandment Tenth. Of Grief, and Not Grieving the Spirit of God
Which is in Us.](0020019)
