[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020290)  [Next](0020292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iv"></span> <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iv-Page_297"></span>

### <span id="vi.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Elucidations.

##### <span id="vi.iii.iv-p0.2"></span>I

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p1"></span>(Pædagogue, book II. chap. 3, p. 247.)

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>This</span> fine paragraph is in many ways
interesting. The tourist who has visited the catacombs, is familiar,
among tokens of the first rude art of Christians, with relics of various
articles, realizing this idea of Clement’s, that even our furniture
should be distinctively Christian. In Pompeii, one finds lamps and other
vessels marked by heathenish devices, some of them gross and revolting.
On the contrary, these Christian utensils bear the sacred monograms
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iv-p2.2"></span>ΧΡ, ΑΩ</span>, or
the figure of the fish, conveying to the user, by the letters of the
Greek word for a fish (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iv-p2.3"></span>ΙΧΘΥΣ</span>), the initials of the words
“Jesus Christ, Son of God, The Saviour.” Often we have the anchor, the
palm-branch, or the cross itself. But I never looked at one of those
Christian lamps without imagining its owner, singing, as it was lighted,
the eventide hymn (of which see Elucidation III.), and reciting
probably, therewith, the text, “Let your loins be girded, and your lamps
burning,” etc. For a valuable elucidation of subjects illustrated by
Christian art, see *Testimony of the Catacombs,* by the late Wharton B.
Marriott (London, Hatchards, 1870).

##### <span id="vi.iii.iv-p2.4"></span>II.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p3"></span>(Book iii. Going to Church. p. 290,
*supra*.)

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p4"></span>Frequent references become necessary, at
this point, to the ecclesiastical usages of the early Christians. These
have been largely treated of by the great Anglican divines, whose works
are recognised as part of the standard literature of Christendom; but
the nature of this publication seems to impose on me the duty of
choosing from external sources, rather than from authors who have been
more or less associated with the controversies of our great
“Anglo-Saxon” family. Happily the writings of the late Dr. Bunsen supply
us with all that is requisite of this sort. In that very curious and
characteristic medley, *Hippolytus and His Age,* he has gathered into a
convenient form nearly every point which requires antiquarian
elucidation, under the title of *The Church and Home Book of the Ancient
Christians.* Its contents he professes to have rescued “from the rubbish
in which they were enveloped for centuries, and disencumbered of the
fraud and misunderstanding by which they are defaced.” Now, while by no
means satisfied with this work myself, it affords an interesting
specimen of the conclusions to which an earnest and scholarly mind has
been brought, in the course of original and industrious research. It is
the more interesting, as illustrating a conviction, which he expresses
elsewhere, that, in shaping “the Church of the future,” all Christians
must revert to these records of primitive antiquity, as of practical
interest for our own times. The proverbial faults of its author are
indeed conspicuous in this work, which, though the product of a mere
inquirer, is presented to us with entire self-reliance, as if he were
competent to pronounce upon all questions with something like pontifical
infallibility. It is also greatly mixed up with his personal theories,
which are always interesting, but rarely satisfactory to his readers. In
spite of all this, he has brought together, in a condensed form, what is
undoubtedly the result of patient investigation. It is the rather
useful, because it is the work of a genuine disciple of Niebuhr, who
doubts and questions at every step, and who always suspects a fraud. He
is committed, by his religious persuasions, to no system whatever, with
respect to such matters, and he professes to have produced a manual of
Christian antiquity, entirely scientific; that is to say, wholly
impartial, indifferent as to consequences, and following only the lead
of truth <span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iv-Page_298"></span>and evidence. In my references to Bunsen,
therefore, let it be understood, that, without accepting him as my own
master, I yet wish to respect his opinion and to commend his performance
to the candid investigation of others.

##### <span id="vi.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>III.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p5"></span>The one ancient hymn, not strictly
liturgical, which probably was not new even to Clement, and to which we
have already made reference once or twice, is the following, which we
give from Bunsen. He calls it “The Evening Hymn of the Greek
Christians,” but it was not confined to the Greeks any more than was the
Greek of the Gospels and the Creeds. Its proper name is “The Eventide
Hymn,” or “The Hymn for the Lighting of the Lamps,” and was doubtless
uttered in the family at “candlelight,” as we say a grace before meat.
It is thus rendered:—

##### <span id="vi.iii.iv-p5.1"></span><span class="sc"><span id="vi.iii.iv-p5.2"></span>Hymn</span>.

> <span id="vi.iii.iv-p5.3"></span> Serene light of the Holy Glory  
> Of the Father Everlasting,  
> Jesus Christ:  
> Having come to the setting of the sun,  
> And seeing the evening light,  
> We praise the Father and the Son,  
> And the Holy Spirit of God.  
> It behooveth to praise Thee,  
> At all times with holy songs,  
> Son of God, who hast given life;  
> Therefore the world glorifieth Thee.  

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p6"></span>The modern Italians, at sunset, recite
the *Ave Maria*, which has been imposed upon them by mediæval Rome.
Nothing but the coincidence of the hour reminds us of the ancient hymn
which it has superseded; and a healthy mind, one would think, would note
the contrast. This pure “hymn to Christ as God,” and to the Godhead in
unity, gives place to an act of worship addressed to the creature, more
than to the Creator. One might indeed call this *Ave Maria* the eventide
hymn of modern Italy; but the scatter-brain processes of Dr. Bunsen come
out in the strange reversal of thought, by which he would throw back the
utterly incongruous title of its Italian substitute upon a primitive
hymn to the Trinity,—“the Ave-Maria hymn, *as we might call it* from the
present Italian custom,” etc. The strange confusion of ideas which
constantly characterizes this author, whenever some association, however
remote, strikes his fancy, is well illustrated by this instance. Let it
serve as a caution in following his lead. See *Hippolytus* (vol. iii.
pp. 68, 138, etc.) and also Routh (*Reliquiæ,* vol. iii. pp. 515–520).
Concerning the morning hymn, *Gloria in Excelsis*, which Dr. Bunsen
gives from the Alexandrian <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>ms.</span>, and to which reference is made in
his *Analecta Ante-Nicæna* (iii. 86), see Warren’s *Celtic Liturgy* (p.
197, and index references. *Ed*. Oxford, 1881).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Stromata, or Miscellanies](0020292)
