[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020104)  [Next](0020106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vii"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Fabulous Heathen Genealogies.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vii-p1"></span>Why need I recount the Greek
fables,—of Pluto, king of darkness, of Neptune descending beneath the
sea, and embracing Melanippe and begetting a cannibal son,—or the many
tales your writers have woven into their tragedies concerning the sons
of Jupiter, and whose pedigree they register because they were born men,
and not gods? And the comic poet Aristophanes, in the play called “The
Birds,” having taken upon him to handle the subject of the Creation,
said that in the beginning the world was produced from an egg,
saying: <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) —

> <span id="iv.ii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span> “A windy egg was laid by
> black-winged night  
> At first.”  

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vii-p3"></span>But Satyrus, also giving a history of
the Alexandrine families, beginning from Philopator, who was also named
Ptolemy, gives out that Bacchus was his progenitor; wherefore also
Ptolemy was the founder of this <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558)
family. Satyrus then speaks thus: That Dejanira was born of Bacchus and
Althea, the daughter of Thestius; and from her and Hercules the son of
Jupiter there sprang, as I suppose, Hyllus; and from him Cleodemus, and
from him Aristomachus, and from him Temenus, and from him Ceisus, and
from him Maron, and from him Thestrus, and from him Acous, and from him
Aristomidas, and from him Caranus, and from him Cœnus, and from him
Tyrimmas, and from him Perdiccas, and from him Philip, and from him
Æropus, and from him Alcetas, and from him Amyntas, and from him Bocrus,
and from him Meleager, and from him Arsinoë and from her and Lagus
Ptolemy Soter, and from him and Arsinoe Ptolemy Euergetes, and from him
and Berenicé, daughter of Maga, king of Cyrene, Ptolemy Philopator.
Thus, then, stands the relationship of the Alexandrine kings to Bacchus.
And therefore in the Dionysian tribe there are distinct families: the
Althean from Althea, who was the wife of Dionysus and daughter of
Thestius; the family of Dejanira also, from her who was the daughter of
Dionysus and Althea, and wife of Hercules;—whence, too, the families
have their names: the family of Ariadne, from Ariadne, daughter of Minos
and wife of Dionysus, a dutiful daughter, who had intercourse with
Dionysus in another form; the Thestian, from Thestius, the father of
Althea; the Thoantian, from Thoas, son of Dionysus; the Staphylian, from
Staphylus, son of Dionysus; the Euænian, from Eunous, son of Dionysus;
the Maronian, from Maron, son of Ariadne and Dionysus;—for all these are
sons of Dionysus. And, indeed, many other names were thus originated,
and exist to this day; as the Heraclidæ from Hercules, and the
Apollonidæ from Apollo, and the Poseidonii from Poseidon, and from Zeus
the Dii and Diogenæ.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii.vii-Page_97"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_557"></span>[96:558](0020105.htm#fr_557) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vii-p2"></span> Aristoph., *Av*., 694. A wind-egg
being one produced without impregnation, and coming to nothing.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[96:559](0020105.htm#fr_558) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.vii-p4"></span> The Dionysian family taking its name
from Dionysus or Bacchus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.— Opinions Concerning Providence.](0020106)
