[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020308)  [Next](0020310) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—That the Inventors of Other Arts Were Mostly Barbarians.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p1"></span>And barbarians were inventors not only
of philosophy, but almost of every art. The Egyptians were the first to
introduce astrology among men. Similarly also the Chaldeans. The
Egyptians first showed how to burn lamps, and divided the year into
twelve months, prohibited intercourse with women in the temples, and
enacted that no one should enter the temples <span
id="fr_1975"></span>[1976](#fn_1975) from a woman without bathing.
Again, they were the inventors of geometry. There are some who say that
the Carians invented prognostication by the stars. The Phrygians were
the first who attended to the flight of birds. And the Tuscans,
neighbours of Italy, were adepts at the art of the Haruspex. The
Isaurians and the Arabians invented augury, as the Telmesians divination
by dreams. The Etruscans invented the trumpet, and the Phrygians the
flute. For Olympus and Marsyas were Phrygians. And Cadmus, the inventor
of letters among the Greeks, as Euphorus says, was a Phœnician; whence
also Herodotus writes that they were called Phœnician letters. And they
say that the Phœnicians and the Syrians first invented letters; and that
Apis, an aboriginal inhabitant of Egypt, invented the healing art before
Io came into Egypt. But afterwards they say that Asclepius improved the
art. Atlas the Libyan was the first who built a ship and navigated the
sea. Kelmis and Damnaneus, Idæan Dactyli, first discovered iron in
Cyprus. Another Idæan discovered the tempering of brass; according to
Hesiod, a Scythian. The Thracians first invented what is called a
scimitar (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p2.3"></span>ἅρπη</span>),—it is a curved sword,—and
were the first to use shields on horseback. Similarly also the Illyrians
invented the shield (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p2.4"></span>πέλτη</span>). Besides, they say that the
Tuscans invented the art of moulding clay; and that Itanus (he was a
Samnite) first fashioned the oblong shield (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p2.5"></span>θυρέος</span>). Cadmus the Phœnician
invented stonecutting, and discovered the gold mines on the Pangæan
mountain. Further, another nation, the Cappadocians, first invented the
instrument called the nabla, <span id="fr_1976"></span>[1977](#fn_1976)
and the Assyrians in the same way the dichord. The Carthaginians were
the first that constructed a trireme; and it was built by Bosporus, an
aboriginal. <span id="fr_1977"></span>[1978](#fn_1977) Medea, the
daughter of Æetas, a Colchian, first invented the dyeing of hair.
Besides, the Noropes (they are a Pæonian race, and are now called the
Norici) worked copper, and were the first that purified iron. Amycus the
king of the Bebryci was the first inventor of boxing-gloves. <span
id="fr_1978"></span>[1979](#fn_1978) In music, Olympus the Mysian
practiced the Lydian harmony; and the people called Troglodytes invented
the sambuca, <span id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979) a musical
instrument. It is said that the crooked pipe was invented by Satyrus the
Phrygian; likewise also diatonic harmony by Hyagnis, a Phrygian too; and
notes by Olympus, a Phrygian; as also the Phrygian harmony, and the
half-Phrygian and the half-Lydian, by Marsyas, who belonged to the same
region as those mentioned above. And the Doric was invented by Thamyris
the Thracian. We have heard that the Persians were the first who
fashioned the chariot, and bed, and footstool; and the Sidonians the
first to construct a trireme. The Sicilians, close to Italy, were the
first inventors of the phorminx, which is not much inferior to the lyre.
And they invented castanets. In the <span id="page_318">p. 318</span>
<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-Page_318"></span>time of Semiramis queen of the
Assyrians, <span id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980) they relate that
linen garments were invented. And Hellanicus says that Atossa queen of
the Persians was the first who composed a letter. These things are
reported by Scamo of Mitylene, Theophrastus of Ephesus, Cydippus of
Mantinea, also Antiphanes, Aristodemus, and Aristotle; and besides
these, Philostephanus, and also Strato the Peripatetic, in his books
*Concerning Inventions.* I have added a few details from them, in order
to confirm the inventive and practically useful genius of the
barbarians, by whom the Greeks profited in their studies. And if any one
objects to the barbarous language, Anacharsis says, “All the Greeks
speak Scythian to me.” It was he who was held in admiration by the
Greeks, who said, “My covering is a cloak; my supper, milk and cheese.”
You see that the barbarian philosophy professes deeds, not words. The
apostle thus speaks: “So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue a
word easy to be understood, how shall ye know what is spoken? for ye
shall speak into the air. There are, it may be, so many kind of voices
in the world, and none of them is without signification. Therefore if I
know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a
barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me.” And, “Let
him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that he may
interpret.” <span id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p10"></span>Nay more, it was late before the
teaching and writing of discourses reached Greece. Alcmæon, the son of
Perithus, of Crotona, first composed a treatise on nature. And it is
related that Anaxagoras of Clazomenæ, the son of Hegesibulus, first
published a book in writing. The first to adapt music to poetical
compositions was Terpander of Antissa; and he set the laws of the
Lacedæmonians to music. Lasus of Hermione invented the dithyramb;
Stesichorus of Himera, the hymn; Alcman the Spartan, the choral song;
Anacreon of Teos, love songs; Pindar the Theban, the dance accompanied
with song. Timotheus of Miletus was the first to execute those musical
compositions called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p10.1"></span>νόμοι</span> on the lyre, with dancing.
Moreover, the iambus was invented by Archilochus of Paros, and the
choliambus by Hipponax of Ephesus. Tragedy owed its origin to Thespis
the Athenian, and comedy to Susarion of Icaria. Their dates are handed
down by the grammarians. But it were tedious to specify them accurately:
presently, however, Dionysus, on whose account the Dionysian spectacles
are celebrated, will be shown to be later than Moses. They say that
Antiphon of Rhamnusium, the son of Sophilus, first invented scholastic
discourses and rhetorical figures, and was the first who pled causes for
a fee, and wrote a forensic speech for delivery, <span
id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982) as Diodorus says. And Apollodorus
of Cuma first assumed the name of critic, and was called a grammarian.
Some say it was Eratosthenes of Cyrene who was first so called, since he
published two books which he entitled *Grammatica.*The first who was
called a grammarian, as we now use the term, was Praxiphanes, the son of
Disnysophenes of Mitylene. Zeleucus the Locrian was reported to have
been the first to have framed laws (in writing). Others say that it was
Menos the son of Zeus, in the time of Lynceus. He comes after Danaus, in
the eleventh generation from Inachus and Moses; as we shall show a
little further on. And Lycurgus, who lived many years after the taking
of Troy, legislated for the Lacedæmonians a hundred and fifty years
before the Olympiads. We have spoken before of the age of Solon. Draco
(he was a legislator too) is discovered to have lived about the three
hundred and ninth Olympiad. Antilochus, again, who wrote of the learned
men from the age of Pythagoras to the death of Epicurus, which took
place in the tenth day of the month Gamelion, makes up altogether three
hundred and twelve years. Moreover, some say that Phanothea, the wife of
Icarius, invented the heroic hexameter; others Themis, one of the
Titanides. Didymus, however, in his work *On the Pythagorean
Philosophy*, relates that Theano of Crotona was the first woman who
cultivated philosophy and composed poems. The Hellenic philosophy then,
according to some, apprehended the truth accidentally, dimly, partially;
as others will have it, was set a-going by the devil. Several suppose
that certain powers, descending from heaven, inspired the whole of
philosophy. But if the Hellenic philosophy comprehends not the whole
extent of the truth, and besides is destitute of strength to perform the
commandments of the Lord, yet it prepares the way for the truly royal
teaching; training in some way or other, and moulding the character, and
fitting him who believes in Providence for the reception of the
truth. <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[317:1976](0020309.htm#fr_1975) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p2"></span> \[Elucidation XI. *infra;* also p.
428, *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[317:1977](0020309.htm#fr_1976) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p2.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p3.1"></span>νάβλα</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p3.2"></span>ναυλα</span>, Lat. *nablium;* doubtless the
Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p3.3"></span>נִבֶל</span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p4"></span>(psaltery, A. V.), described by
Josephus as a lyre or harp of twelve strings (in [Ps.
xxxiii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p4.1"></span> it is said ten), and played with the
fingers. Jerome says it was triangular in shape.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[317:1978](0020309.htm#fr_1977) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p5.1"></span>ἀυτὀχθων</span>, Eusebius. The text has
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p5.2"></span>αὐτοσχέδιον</span>, off-hand.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[317:1979](0020309.htm#fr_1978) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p6"></span> Literally, fist-straps, the cæstus of
the boxers.

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[317:1980](0020309.htm#fr_1979) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p7.1"></span>σαμβύκη</span>, a triangular lyre with four
strings.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[318:1981](0020309.htm#fr_1980) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p8"></span> “King of the Egyptians” in the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p8.1"></span>mss</span>. of Clement.
The correction is made from Eusebius, who extracts the passage.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[318:1982](0020309.htm#fr_1981) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[318:1983](0020309.htm#fr_1982) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p11"></span> By one or other of the parties in the
case, it being a practice of advocates in ancient times to compose
speeches which the litigants delivered.

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[318:1984](0020309.htm#fr_1983) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvi-p12"></span> \[Elucidation XII., *infra*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—On the Saying of the Saviour, “All that Came Before
Me Were Thieves and Robbers.”](0020310)
