[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020432)  [Next](0020434) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.—Demonstration Defined.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p1"></span>Similarly, also, all men will admit
that demonstration is discourse, <span
id="fr_3704"></span>[3705](#fn_3704) agreeable to reason, producing
belief in points disputed, from points admitted.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p3"></span>Now, not only demonstration and
belief and knowledge, but foreknowledge also, are used in a twofold
manner. There is that which is scientific and certain, and that which is
merely based on hope.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p4"></span>In strict propriety, then, that is
called demonstration which produces in the souls of learners scientific
belief. The other kind is that which merely leads to opinion. As also,
both he that is really a man, possessing common judgment, and he that is
savage and brutal,—each is a man. Thus also the Comic poet said that
“man is graceful, so long as he is man.” The same holds with ox, horse,
and dog, according to the goodness or badness of the animal. For by
looking to the perfection of the genus, we come to those meanings that
are strictly proper. For instance, we conceive of a physician who is
deficient in no element of the power of healing, and a Gnostic who is
defective in no element of scientific knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p5"></span>Now demonstration differs from
syllogism; inasmuch as the point demonstrated is indicative of one
thing, being one and identical; as we say that to be with child is the
proof of being no longer a virgin. But what is apprehended by syllogism,
though one thing, follows from several; as, for example, not one but
several proofs are adduced of Pytho having betrayed the Byzantines, if
such was the fact. And to draw a conclusion from what is admitted is to
*syllogize;* while to draw a conclusion from what is true is to
*demonstrate*.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p6"></span>So that there is a compound
advantage of demonstration: from its assuming, for the proof of points
in question, true premisses, and from its drawing the conclusion that
follows from them. If the first have no existence, but the second follow
from the first, one has not demonstrated, but syllogized. For, to draw
the proper conclusion from the premisses, is merely to syllogize. But to
have also each of the premisses true, is not merely to have syllogized,
but also to have demonstrated.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p7"></span>And to conclude, as is evident from
the word, is to bring to the conclusion. And in every train of
reasoning, the point sought to be determined is the end, which is also
called the conclusion. But no simple and primary statement is termed a
syllogism, although true; but it is compounded of three such, at the
least,—of two as premisses, and one as conclusion.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p8"></span>Now, either all things require
demonstration, or some of them are self-evident. But if the first, by
demanding the demonstration of each demonstration we shall go on *ad
infinitum;* and so demonstration is subverted. But if the second, those
things which are self-evident will become the starting points \[and
fundamental grounds\] of demonstration.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p9"></span>In point of fact, the philosophers
admit that the first principles of all things are indemonstrable. So
that if there is demonstration at all, there is an absolute necessity
that there be something that is self-evident, which is called primary
and indemonstrable.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p10"></span>Consequently all demonstration is
traced up to indemonstrable faith. <span
id="fr_3705"></span>[3706](#fn_3705)

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p12"></span>It will also turn out that there
are other starting points for demonstrations, after the source which
takes its rise in faith,—the things which appear clearly to sensation
and understanding. For the phenomena of sensation are simple, and
incapable of being decompounded; but those of understanding are simple,
rational, and primary. But those produced from them are compound, but no
less clear and reliable, and having more to do with the reasoning
faculty than the first. For therefore the peculiar native power of
reason, which we all have by nature, deals with agreement and
disagreement. If, then, any argument be found to be of such a kind, as
from points already believed to be capable of producing <span
id="page_560">p. 560</span> <span
id="vi.iv.viii.iii-Page_560"></span>belief in what is not yet believed,
we shall aver that this is the very essence of demonstration.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p13"></span>Now it is affirmed that the nature
of demonstration, as that of belief, is twofold: that which produces in
the souls of the hearers persuasion merely, and that which produces
knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p14"></span>If, then, one begins with the
things which are evident to sensation and understanding, and then draw
the proper conclusion, he truly demonstrates. But if \[he begin\] with
things which are only probable and not primary, that is evident neither
to sense nor understanding, and if he draw the right conclusion, he will
syllogize indeed, but not produce a scientific demonstration; but if
\[he draw\] not the right conclusion, he will not syllogize at all.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p15"></span>Now demonstration differs from
analysis. For each one of the points demonstrated, is demonstrated by
means of points that are demonstrated; those having been previously
demonstrated by others; till we get back to those which are
self-evident, or to those evident to sense and to understanding; which
is called Analysis. But demonstration is, when the point in question
reaches us through all the intermediate steps. The man, then, who
practices demonstration, ought to give great attention to the truth,
while he disregards the terms of the premisses, whether you call them
axioms, or premisses, or assumptions. Similarly, also, special attention
must be paid to what suppositions a conclusion is based on; while he may
be quite careless as to whether one choose to term it a conclusive or
syllogistic proposition.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p16"></span>For I assert that these two things
must be attended to by the man who would demonstrate—to assume true
premisses, and to draw from them the legitimate conclusion, which some
also call “the inference,” as being what is inferred from the premisses.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p17"></span>Now in each proposition respecting
a question there must be different premisses, related, however, to the
proposition laid down; and what is advanced must be reduced to
definition. And this definition must be admitted by all. But when
premisses irrelevant to the proposition to be established are assumed,
it is impossible to arrive at any right result; the entire
proposition—which is also called the question of its nature—being
ignored.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p18"></span>In all questions, then, there is
something which is previously known,—that which being self-evident is
believed without demonstration; which must be made the starting point in
their investigation, and the criterion of apparent results.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3704"></span>[559:3705](0020433.htm#fr_3704) <span
id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p2"></span> It is necessary to read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p2.1"></span>λόγον</span> here,
though not in the text, on account of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p2.2"></span>ἐκπορίζοντα</span> which follows; and as
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p2.3"></span>εὔλογον εἷναι
λόγον</span> occurs afterwards, it seems better to retain <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p2.4"></span>δὔλογον</span> than
to substitute <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p2.5"></span>λόγον</span> for it.

<span id="fn_3705"></span>[559:3706](0020433.htm#fr_3705) <span
id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii.iii-p11"></span> \[We begin, that is, with axioms:
and he ingeniously identifies faith with axiomatic truth. Hence the
faith not esoteric.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—To Prevent Ambiguity, We Must Begin with Clear
Definition.](0020434)
