[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020426)  [Next](0020428) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—The Tradition of the Church Prior to that of the Heresies.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p1"></span>Those, then, that adhere to impious
words, and dictate them to others, inasmuch as they do not make a right
but a perverse use of the divine words, neither themselves enter into
the kingdom of heaven, nor permit those whom they have deluded to attain
the truth. But not having the key of entrance, but a false (and as the
common phrase expresses it), a counterfeit key (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>ἀντικλεῖς</span>),
by which they do not enter in as we enter in, through the tradition of
the Lord, by drawing aside the curtain; but bursting through the
side-door, and digging clandestinely through the wall of the Church, and
stepping over the truth, they constitute themselves the
Mystagogues <span id="fr_3686"></span>[3687](#fn_3686) of the soul of
the impious.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p3"></span>For that the human assemblies which
they held were posterior to the Catholic Church <span
id="fr_3687"></span>[3688](#fn_3687) requires not many words to show.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p5"></span>For the teaching of our Lord at His
advent, beginning with Augustus and Tiberius, was completed in the
middle of the times of Tiberius. <span
id="fr_3688"></span>[3689](#fn_3688)

<span id="page_555">p. 555</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-Page_555"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p8"></span>And that of the apostles, embracing
the ministry of Paul, ends with Nero. It was later, in the times of
Adrian the king, that those who invented the heresies arose; and they
extended to the age of Antoninus the elder, as, for instance, Basilides,
though he claims (as they boast) for his master, Glaucias, the
interpreter of Peter.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p9"></span>Likewise they allege that Valentinus
was a hearer of Theudas. <span id="fr_3689"></span>[3690](#fn_3689) And
he was the pupil of Paul. For Marcion, who arose in the same age with
them, lived as an old man with the younger <span
id="fr_3690"></span>[3691](#fn_3690) \[heretics\]. And after him Simon
heard for a little the preaching of Peter.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p12"></span>Such being the case, it is evident,
from the high antiquity and perfect truth of the Church, that these
later heresies, and those yet subsequent to them in time, were new
inventions falsified \[from the truth\].

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p13"></span>From what has been said, then, it
is my opinion that the true Church, that which is really ancient, is
one, and that in it those who according to God’s purpose are just, are
enrolled. <span id="fr_3691"></span>[3692](#fn_3691) For from the very
reason that God is one, and the Lord one, that which is in the highest
degree honourable is lauded in consequence of its singleness, being an
imitation of the one first principle. In the nature of the One, then, is
associated in a joint heritage the one Church, which they strive to cut
asunder into many sects.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p15"></span>Therefore in substance and idea, in
origin, in pre-eminence, we say that the ancient and Catholic <span
id="fr_3692"></span>[3693](#fn_3692) Church is alone, collecting as it
does into the unity of the one faith—which results from the peculiar
Testaments, or rather the one Testament in different times by the will
of the one God, through one Lord—those already ordained, whom God
predestinated, knowing before the foundation of the world that they
would be righteous.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p17"></span>But the pre-eminence of the Church,
as the principle of union, is, in its oneness, in this surpassing all
things else, and having nothing like or equal to itself. But of this
afterwards.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p18"></span>Of the heresies, some receive their
appellation from a \[person’s\] name, as that which is called after
Valentinus, and that after Marcion, and that after Basilides, although
they boast of adducing the opinion of Matthew \[without truth\]; for as
the teaching, so also the tradition of the apostles was one. Some take
their designation from a place, as the Peratici; some from a nation, as
the \[heresy\] of the Phrygians; some from an action, as that of the
Encratites; and some from peculiar dogmas, as that of the Docetæ, and
that of the Hærmatites; and some from suppositions, and from individuals
they have honoured, as those called Cainists, and the Ophians; and some
from nefarious practices and enormities, as those of the Simonians
called Entychites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3686"></span>[554:3687](0020427.htm#fr_3686) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p2"></span> Those who initiate into the
mysteries.

<span id="fn_3687"></span>[554:3688](0020427.htm#fr_3687) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p4"></span> \[See the quotation from Milman, p.
166, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3688"></span>[554:3689](0020427.htm#fr_3688) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p6.1"></span>Ἡ μὲν γὰρ τοῦ Κυρίου κατὰ τὴν παρουσίαν
διδασκαλία, ἀπὸ Αὐγούστου καὶ Τιβερίου Καίσαρος, ἀρξαμένη, μεσούντων τῶν
Αὐγούστου χρόνων τελειοῦται</span>. In the translation, the change
recommended, on high authority, of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p6.2"></span>Αὐγούστου</span> into <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p6.3"></span>Τιβερίου</span> in
the last clause, is adopted, as on the whole the best way of solving the
unquestionable difficulty here. If we retain <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p6.4"></span>Αὐγούστου</span>, the clause must then
be made parenthetical, and the sense would be: “For the teaching of the
Lord on His advent, beginning with Augustus and Tiberius (in the middle
of the times of Augustus), was completed.” The objection to this (not by
any means conclusive) is, that it does not specify the end of the
period.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p7"></span>The first 15 years of the life of
our Lord were the last 15 of the reign of Augustus; and in the 15th year
of the reign of his successor Tiberius our Lord was baptized. Clement
elsewhere broaches the singular opinion, that our Lord’s ministry lasted
only a year, and, consequently that He died in the year in which He was
baptized. As Augustus reigned, according to one of the chronologies of
Clement, 43, and according to the other 46 years 4 months 1 day, and
Tiberius 22 or 26 years 6 months 19 days, the period of the teacing of
the Gospel specified above began during the reign of Augustus, and ended
during the reign of Tiberius.

<span id="fn_3689"></span>[555:3690](0020427.htm#fr_3689) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p10.1"></span>Θεοδάδι ἀκηκοέναι</span> is the
reading, which eminent authorities (Bentley, Grabe, etc.) have changed
into <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p10.2"></span>Θεοδᾶ</span> (or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p10.3"></span>Θευδᾶ</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p10.4"></span>διακηκοέναι</span>.

<span id="fn_3690"></span>[555:3691](0020427.htm#fr_3690) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p11"></span> Much learning and ingenuity have
been expended on this sentence, which, read as it stands in the text,
appears to state that Marcion was an old man while Baslides and
Valentinus were young men; and that Simon (Magus) was posterior to them
in time. Marcion was certainly not an old man when Valentinus and
Basilides were young men, as they flourished in the first half of the
second century, and he was born about the beginning of it. The
difficulty in regard to Simon is really best got over by supposing the
Clement, speaking of these heresiarchs in ascending order, describes
Marcion as further back in time; which sense <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p11.1"></span>μεθ᾽ ὄν</span> of course will bear,
although it does seem somewhat harsh, as “after” thus means “before.”

<span id="fn_3691"></span>[555:3692](0020427.htm#fr_3691) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p14"></span> \[This chapter illustrates what
the Nicene Fathers understood by their language about the “One Holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church.”\]

<span id="fn_3692"></span>[555:3693](0020427.htm#fr_3692) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvii-p16"></span> \[I restore this important word of
the Greek text, enfeebled by the translator, who renders it by the word
“universal”, which, though not wrong, disguises the force of the
argument.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII—The Distinction Between Clean and Unclean Animals
in the Law Symbolical of the Distinction Between the Church, and Jews,
and Heretics.](0020428)
