[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020398)  [Next](0020400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.—The Gnostic Free of All Perturbations of the Soul.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p1"></span>The Gnostic is such, that he is subject
only to the affections that exist for the maintenance of the body, such
as hunger, thirst, and the like. But in the case of the Saviour, it were
ludicrous \[to suppose\] that the body, as a body, demanded the
necessary aids in order to its duration. For He ate, not for the sake of
the body, which was kept together by a holy energy, but in order that it
might not enter into the minds of those who were with Him to entertain a
different opinion of Him; in like manner as certainly some afterwards
supposed that He appeared in a phantasmal shape (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p1.1"></span>δοκήσει</span>). But He
was entirely impassible (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p1.2"></span>ἀπαθής</span>); inaccessible to any
movement of feeling—either pleasure or pain. While the apostles, having
most gnostically mastered, through the Lord’s teaching, anger and fear,
and lust, were not liable even to such of the movements of feeling, as
seem good, courage, zeal, joy, desire, through a steady condition of
mind, not changing a whit; but ever continuing unvarying in a state of
training after the resurrection of the Lord.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p2"></span>And should it be granted that the
affections specified above, when produced rationally, are good, yet they
are nevertheless inadmissible in the case of the perfect man, who is
incapable of exercising courage: for neither does he meet what inspires
fear, as he regards none of the things that occur in life as to be
dreaded; nor can aught dislodge him from this—the love he has towards
God. Nor does he need cheerfulness of mind; for he does not fall into
pain, being persuaded that all things happen well. Nor is he angry; for
there is nothing to move him to anger, seeing he ever loves God, and is
entirely turned towards Him alone, and therefore hates none of God’s
creatures. No more does he envy; for nothing is wanting to him, that is
requisite to assimilation, in order that he may be excellent and good.
Nor does he consequently love any one with this common affection, but
loves the Creator in the creatures. Nor, consequently, does he fall into
any desire and eagerness; nor does he want, as far as respects his soul,
aught appertaining to others, now that he associates through love with
the Beloved One, to whom he is allied by free choice, and by the habit
which results from training, approaches closer to Him, and is blessed
through the abundance of good things.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p3"></span>So that on these accounts he is
compelled to <span id="page_497">p. 497</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-Page_497"></span>become like his Teacher in
impassibility. For the Word of God is intellectual, according as the
image of mind is seen <span id="fr_3320"></span>[3321](#fn_3320) in man
alone. Thus also the good man is godlike in form and semblance as
respects his soul. And, on the other hand, God is like man. For the
distinctive form of each one is the mind by which we are characterized.
Consequently, also, those who sin against man are unholy and impious.
For it were ridiculous to say that the gnostic and perfect man must not
eradicate anger and courage, inasmuch as without these he will not
struggle against circumstances, or abide what is terrible. But if we
take from him desire, he will be quite overwhelmed by troubles, and
therefore depart from this life very basely. Unless possessed of it, as
some suppose, he will not conceive a desire for what is like the
excellent and the good. If, then, all alliance with what is good is
accompanied with desire, how, it is said, does he remain impassible who
desires what is excellent?

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p5"></span>But these people know not, as appears,
the divinity of love. For love is not desire on the part of him who
loves; but is a relation of affection, restoring the Gnostic to the
unity of the faith,—independent of time and place. But he who by love is
already in the midst of that in which he is destined to be, and has
anticipated hope by knowledge, does not desire anything, having, as far
as possible, the very thing desired. Accordingly, as to be expected, he
continues in the exercise of gnostic love, in the one unvarying state.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p6"></span>Nor will he, therefore, eagerly desire
to be assimilated to what is beautiful, possessing, as he does, beauty
by love. What more need of courage and of desire to him, who has
obtained the affinity to the impassible God which arises from love, and
by love has enrolled himself among the friends of God?

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p7"></span>We must therefore rescue the gnostic
and perfect man from all passion of the soul. For knowledge (*gnosis*)
produces practice, and practice habit or disposition; and such a state
as this produces impassibility, not moderation of passion. And the
complete eradication of desire reaps as its fruit impassibility. But the
Gnostic does not share either in those affections that are commonly
celebrated as good, that is, the good things of the affections which are
allied to the passions: such, I mean, as gladness, which is allied to
pleasure; and dejection, for this is conjoined with pain; and caution,
for it is subject to fear. Nor yet does he share in high spirit, for it
takes its place alongside of wrath; although some say that these are no
longer evil, but already good. For it is impossible that he who has been
once made perfect by love, and feasts eternally and insatiably on the
boundless joy of contemplation, should delight in small and grovelling
things. For what rational cause remains any more to the man who has
gained “the light inaccessible,” <span
id="fr_3321"></span>[3322](#fn_3321) for revering to the good things of
the world? Although not yet true as to time and place, yet by that
gnostic love through which the inheritance and perfect restitution
follow, the giver of the reward makes good by deeds what the Gnostic, by
gnostic choice, had grasped by anticipation through love.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p9"></span>For by going away to the Lord, for the
love he bears Him, though his tabernacle be visible on earth, he does
not withdraw himself from life. For that is not permitted to him. But he
has withdrawn his soul from the passions. For that is granted to him.
And on the other hand he lives, having put to death his lusts, and no
longer makes use of the body, but allows it the use of necessaries, that
he may not give cause for dissolution.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p10"></span>How, then, has he any more need of
fortitude, who is not in the midst of dangers, being not present, but
already wholly with the object of love? And what necessity for
self-restraint to him who has not need of it? For to have such desires,
as require self-restraint in order to their control, is characteristic
of one who is not yet pure, but subject to passion. Now, fortitude is
assumed by reason of fear and cowardice. For it were no longer seemly
that the friend of God, whom “God hath fore-ordained before the
foundation of the world” <span id="fr_3322"></span>[3323](#fn_3322) to
be enrolled in the highest “adoption,” should fall into pleasures or
fears, and be occupied in the repression of the passions. For I venture
to assert, that as he is predestinated through what he shall do, and
what he shall obtain, so also has he predestinated himself by reason of
what he knew and whom he loved; not having the future indistinct, as the
multitude live, conjecturing it, but having grasped by gnostic faith
what is hidden from others. And through love, the future is for him
already present. For he has believed, through prophecy and the advent,
on God who lies not. And what he believes he possesses, and keeps hold
of the promise. And He who hath promised is truth. And through the
trustworthiness of Him who has promised, he has firmly laid hold of the
end of the promise by knowledge. And he, who knows the sure
comprehension of the future which there is in the circumstances, in
which he is placed, by love goes to meet the future. So he, that is
persuaded that he will obtain the things that are really good, will not
pray to obtain what is here, but that he may always cling to the faith
which hits the mark and succeeds. And besides, he will pray that as many
as possible may become like him, to the glory of God, <span
id="page_498">p. 498</span> <span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-Page_498"></span>which
is perfected through knowledge. For he who is made like the Saviour is
also devoted to saving; performing unerringly the commandments as far as
the human nature may admit of the image. And this is to worship God by
deeds and knowledge of the true righteousness. The Lord will not wait
for the voice of this man in prayer. “Ask,” He says, “and I will do it;
think, and I will give.” <span id="fr_3323"></span>[3324](#fn_3323)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p13"></span>For, in fine, it is impossible that
the immutable should assume firmness and consistency in the mutable. But
the ruling faculty being in perpetual change, and therefore unstable,
the force of habit is not maintained. For how can he who is perpetually
changed by external occurrences and accidents, ever possess habit and
disposition, and in a word, grasp of scientific knowledge (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p13.1"></span>ἐπιστήμη</span>)?
Further, also, the philosophers regard the virtues as habits,
dispositions, and sciences. And as knowledge (*gnosis*) is not born with
men, but is acquired, <span id="fr_3324"></span>[3325](#fn_3324) and the
acquiring of it in its elements demands application, and training, and
progress; and then from incessant practice it passes into a habit; so,
when perfected in the mystic habit, it abides, being infallible through
love. For not only has he apprehended the first Cause, and the Cause
produced by it, and is sure about them, possessing firmly firm and
irrefragable and immoveable reasons; but also respecting what is good
and what is evil, and respecting all production, and to speak
comprehensively, respecting all about which the Lord has spoken, he has
learned, from the truth itself, the most exact truth from the foundation
of the world to the end. Not preferring to the truth itself what appears
plausible, or, according to Hellenic reasoning, necessary; but what has
been spoken by the Lord he accepts as clear and evident, though
concealed from others; and he has already received the knowledge of all
things. And the oracles we possess give their utterances respecting what
exists, as it is; and respecting what is future, as it shall be; and
respecting what is past, as it was.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p15"></span>In scientific matters, as being alone
possessed of scientific knowledge, he will hold the preeminence, and
will discourse on the discussion respecting the good, ever intent on
intellectual objects, tracing out his procedure in human affairs from
the archetypes above; as navigators direct the ship according to the
star; prepared to hold himself in readiness for every suitable action;
accustomed to despise all difficulties and dangers when it is necessary
to undergo them; never doing anything precipitate or incongruous either
to himself or the common weal; foreseeing; and inflexible by pleasures
both of waking hours and of dreams. For, accustomed to spare living and
frugality, he is moderate, active, and grave; requiring few necessaries
for life; occupying himself with nothing superfluous. But desiring not
even these things as chief, but by reason of fellowship in life, as
necessary for his sojourn in life, as far as necessary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3320"></span>[497:3321](0020399.htm#fr_3320) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p4"></span> Adopting the various reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p4.1"></span>καθ᾽ ὄ</span>, and the
conjecture <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p4.2"></span>ὁρᾶται</span>, instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p4.3"></span>καθ᾽ ὄν</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p4.4"></span>ὁράσει</span> in
the text, as suggested by Sylburgius.

<span id="fn_3321"></span>[497:3322](0020399.htm#fr_3321) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p8"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3322"></span>[497:3323](0020399.htm#fr_3322) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p11"></span> [Eph.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3323"></span>[498:3324](0020399.htm#fr_3323) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p12"></span> Quoted afterwards, chap. xii., and
book vii. chap. ii.

<span id="fn_3324"></span>[498:3325](0020399.htm#fr_3324) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p14"></span> The text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p14.1"></span>ἐπίμικτος</span>,
which on account of its harshness has been rejected by the authorities
for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.ix-p14.2"></span>ἐπίκτητος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.—The Gnostic Avails Himself of the Help of All Human
Knowledge.](0020400)
