[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020405)  [Next](0020407) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—Gnostic Exposition of the Decalogue.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p1"></span>Let the Decalogue be set forth
cursorily by us as a specimen for gnostic exposition.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>The number “Ten.”

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p2"></span>That ten is a sacred number, it is
superfluous to say now. And if the tables that were written were the
work of God, they will be found to exhibit physical creation. For by the
“finger of God” is understood the power of God, by which the creation of
heaven and earth is accomplished; of both of which the tables will be
understood to be symbols. For the writing and handiwork of God put on
the table is the creation of the world.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p3"></span>And the Decalogue, viewed as an image
of heaven, embraces sun and moon, stars, clouds, light, wind, water,
air, darkness, fire. This is the physical Decalogue of the heaven.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p4"></span>And the representation of the earth
contains men, cattle, reptiles, wild beasts; and of the inhabitants of
the water, fishes and whales; and again, of the winged tribes, those
that are carnivorous, and those that use mild food; and of plants
likewise, both fruit-bearing and barren. This is the physical Decalogue
of the earth.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p5"></span>And the ark which held them <span
id="fr_3445"></span>[3446](#fn_3445) will then be the knowledge of
divine and human things and wisdom. <span
id="fr_3446"></span>[3447](#fn_3446)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p8"></span>And perhaps the two tables themselves
may be the prophecy of the two covenants. They were accordingly
mystically renewed, as ignorance along with sin abounded. The
commandments are written, then, doubly, as appears, for twofold spirits,
the ruling and the subject. “For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh.” <span
id="fr_3447"></span>[3448](#fn_3447)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p10"></span>And there is a ten in man himself:
the five senses, and the power of speech, and that of reproduction; and
the eighth is the spiritual principle communicated at his creation; and
the ninth the ruling faculty of the soul; and tenth, there is the
distinctive characteristic of the Holy Spirit, which comes to him
through faith.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p11"></span>Besides, in addition to these ten
human parts, the law appear to give its injunctions <span
id="fr_3448"></span>[3449](#fn_3448) to sight, and hearing, and smell,
and touch, and taste, and to the organs subservient to these, which are
double—the hands and the feet. For such is the formation of man. And the
soul is introduced, and previous to it the ruling faculty, by which we
reason, not produced in procreation; so that without it there is made up
the number ten, of the faculties by which all the activity of man is
carried out. For in order, straightway on man’s entering existence, his
life begins with sensations. We accordingly assert that rational and
ruling power is the cause of the constitution <span id="page_512">p.
512</span> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-Page_512"></span>of the living
creature; also that this, the irrational part, is animated, and is a
part of it. Now the vital force, in which is comprehended the power of
nutrition and growth, and generally of motion, is assigned to the carnal
spirit, which has great susceptibility of motion, and passes in all
directions through the senses and the rest of the body, and through the
body is the primary subject of sensations. But the power of choice, in
which investigation, and study, and knowledge, reside, belongs to the
ruling faculty. But all the faculties are placed in relation to one—the
ruling faculty: it is through that man lives, and lives in a certain
way.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p13"></span>Through the corporeal spirit, then,
man perceives, desires, rejoices, is angry, is nourished, grows. It is
by it, too, that thoughts and conceptions advance to actions. And when
it masters the desires, the ruling faculty reigns.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p14"></span>The commandment, then, “Thou shalt
not lust,” says, thou shalt not serve the carnal spirit, but shall rule
over it; “For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit,” <span
id="fr_3449"></span>[3450](#fn_3449) and excites to disorderly conduct
against nature; “and the Spirit against the flesh” exercises sway, in
order that the conduct of the man may be according to nature.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p16"></span>Is not man, then, rightly said “to
have been made in the image of God?”—not in the form of his
\[corporeal\] structure; but inasmuch as God creates all things by the
Word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p16.1"></span>λόγῳ</span>), and the man who has become
a Gnostic performs good actions by the faculty of reason (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p16.2"></span>τῷ λογικῷ</span>),
properly therefore the two tables are also said to mean the commandments
that were given to the twofold spirits,—those communicated before the
law to that which was created, and to the ruling faculty; and the
movements of the senses are both copied in the mind, and manifested in
the activity which proceeds from the body. For apprehension results from
both combined. Again, as sensation is related to the world of sense, so
is thought to that of intellect. And actions are twofold—those of
thought, those of act.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p16.3"></span>The First Commandment.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p17"></span>The first commandment of the
Decalogue shows that there is one only Sovereign God; <span
id="fr_3450"></span>[3451](#fn_3450) who led the people from the land of
Egypt through the desert to their fatherland; that they might apprehend
His power, as they were able, by means of the divine works, and withdraw
from the idolatry of created things, putting all their hope in the true
God.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p18.2"></span>The Second Commandment.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p19"></span>The second word <span
id="fr_3451"></span>[3452](#fn_3451) intimated that men ought not to
take and confer the august power of God (which is the name, for this
alone were many even yet capable of learning), and transfer His title to
things created and vain, which human artificers have made, among which
“He that is” is not ranked. For in His uncreated identity, “He that is”
is absolutely alone.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p20.1"></span>The Fourth Commandment.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p21"></span>And the fourth <span
id="fr_3452"></span>[3453](#fn_3452) word is that which intimates that
the world was created by God, and that He gave us the seventh day as a
rest, on account of the trouble that there is in life. For God is
incapable of weariness, and suffering, and want. But we who bear flesh
need rest. The seventh day, therefore, is proclaimed a rest—abstraction
from ills—preparing for the Primal Day, <span
id="fr_3453"></span>[3454](#fn_3453) our true rest; which, in truth, is
the first creation of light, in which all things are viewed and
possessed. From this day the first wisdom and knowledge illuminate us.
For the light of truth—a light true, casting no shadow, is the Spirit of
God indivisibly divided to all, who are sanctified by faith, holding the
place of a luminary, in order to the knowledge of real existences. By
following Him, therefore, through our whole life, we become impassible;
and this is to rest. <span id="fr_3454"></span>[3455](#fn_3454)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p25"></span>Wherefore Solomon also says, that
before heaven, and earth, and all existences, Wisdom had arisen in the
Almighty; the participation of which—that which is by power, I mean, not
that by essence—teaches a man to know by apprehension things divine and
human. Having reached this point, we must mention these things by the
way; since the discourse has turned on the seventh and the eighth. For
the eighth may possibly turn out to be properly the seventh, and the
seventh manifestly the sixth, and the latter properly the Sabbath, and
the seventh a day of work. For the creation of the world was concluded
in six days. For the motion of the sun from solstice to solstice is
completed in six months—in the course of which, at one time the leaves
fall, and at another plants bud and seeds come to maturity. And they say
that the embryo is perfected exactly in the sixth month, that is, in one
hundred and eighty days in addition to the two and a half, as Polybus
the physician relates in his book *On the Eighth Month*, and Aristotle
the philosopher in his book *On Nature*. Hence the Pythagoreans, as I
think, reckon six the perfect number, from the creation of the world,
according to the prophet, and call it Meseuthys <span
id="fr_3455"></span>[3456](#fn_3455) <span id="page_513">p. 513</span>
<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-Page_513"></span>and Marriage, from its being the
middle of the even numbers, that is, of ten and two. For it is
manifestly at an equal distance from both.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p27"></span>And as marriage generates from male
and female, so six is generated from the odd number three, which is
called the masculine number, and the even number two, which is
considered the feminine. For twice three are six.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p28"></span>Such, again, is the number of the
most general motions, according to which all origination takes place—up,
down, to the right, to the left, forward, backward. Rightly, then, they
reckon the number seven motherless and childless, interpreting the
Sabbath, and figuratively expressing the nature of the rest, in which
“they neither marry nor are given in marriage any more.” <span
id="fr_3456"></span>[3457](#fn_3456) For neither by taking from one
number and adding to another of those within ten is seven produced; nor
when added to any number within the ten does it make up any of them.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p30"></span>And they called eight a cube,
counting the fixed sphere along with the seven revolving ones, by which
is produced “the great year,” as a kind of period of recompense of what
has been promised.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p31"></span>Thus the Lord, who ascended the
mountain, the fourth, <span id="fr_3457"></span>[3458](#fn_3457) becomes
the sixth, and is illuminated all round with spiritual light, by laying
bare the power proceeding from Him, as far as those selected to see were
able to behold it, by the Seventh, the Voice, proclaimed to be the Son
of God; in order that they, persuaded respecting Him, might have rest;
while He by His birth, which was indicated by the sixth conspicuously
marked, becoming the eighth, might appear to be God in a body of flesh,
by displaying His power, being numbered indeed as a man, but being
concealed as to who He was. For six is reckoned in the order of numbers,
but the succession of the letters acknowledges the character which is
not written. In this case, in the numbers themselves, each unit is
preserved in its order up to seven and eight. But in the number of the
characters, *Zeta* becomes six and *Eta* seven.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p33"></span>And the character <span
id="fr_3458"></span>[3459](#fn_3458) having somehow slipped into
writing, should we follow it out thus, the seven became six, and the
eight seven.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p35"></span>Wherefore also man is said to have
been made on the sixth day, who became faithful to Him who is the sign
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p35.1"></span>τῷ
ἐπισήμῳ</span> <span id="fr_3459"></span>[3460](#fn_3459) ), so as
straightway to receive the rest of the Lord’s inheritance. Some such
thing also is indicated by the sixth hour in the scheme of salvation, in
which man was perfected. Further, of the eight, the intermediates are
seven; and of the seven, the intervals are shown to be six. For that is
another ground, in which seven glorifies eight, and “the heavens declare
to the heavens the glory of God.” <span
id="fr_3460"></span>[3461](#fn_3460)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p38"></span>The sensible types of these, then,
are the sounds we pronounce. Thus the Lord Himself is called “Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end,” <span
id="fr_3461"></span>[3462](#fn_3461) “by whom all things were made, and
without whom not even one thing was made.” <span
id="fr_3462"></span>[3463](#fn_3462) God’s resting is not, then, as some
conceive, that God ceased from doing. For, being good, if He should ever
cease from doing good, then would He cease from being God, which it is
sacrilege even to say. The resting is, therefore, the ordering that the
order of created things should be preserved inviolate, and that each of
the creatures should cease from the ancient disorder. For the creations
on the different days followed in a most important succession; so that
all things brought into existence might have honour from priority,
created together in thought, but not being of equal worth. Nor was the
creation of each signified by the voice, inasmuch as the creative work
is said to have made them at once. For something must needs have been
named first. Wherefore those things were announced first, from which
came those that were second, all things being originated together from
one essence by one power. For the will of God was one, in one identity.
And how could creation take place in time, seeing time was born along
with things which exist.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p41"></span>And now the whole world of creatures
born alive, and things that grow, revolves in sevens. The first-born
princes of the angels, who have the greatest power, are seven. <span
id="fr_3463"></span>[3464](#fn_3463) The mathematicians also say that
the planets, which perform their course around the earth, are seven; by
which the Chaldeans think that all which concerns mortal life is
effected through sympathy, in consequence of which they also undertake
to tell things respecting the future.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p43"></span>And of the fixed stars, the Pleiades
are seven. And the Bears, by the help of which agriculture and
navigation are carried through, consist of seven stars. And in periods
of seven days the moon undergoes its changes. In the first week she
becomes half moon; in the second, full moon; and in the third, in her
wane, again half moon; and in the fourth she disappears. Further, as
Seleucus the mathematician lays down, she has seven phases. First, from
being invisible she becomes crescent-shaped, then half <span
id="page_514">p. 514</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-Page_514"></span>moon, then gibbous and full; and in
her wane again gibbous, and in like manner half moon and
crescent-shaped.

> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p43.1"></span> “On a seven-stringed lyre we
> shall sing new hymns,”  

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p44"></span>writes a poet of note, teaching us
that the ancient lyre was seven-toned. The organs of the senses situated
on our face are also seven—two eyes, two passages of hearing, two
nostrils, and the seventh the mouth.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p45"></span>And that the changes in the periods
of life take place by sevens, the *Elegies of Solon* teach thus:—

> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p45.1"></span> “The child, while still an
> infant, in seven years,  
> Produces and puts forth its fence of teeth;  
> And when God seven years more completes,  
> He shows of puberty’s approach the signs;  
> And in the third, the beard on growing cheek  
> With down o’erspreads the bloom of changing skin;  
> And in the fourth septenniad, at his best  
> In strength, of manliness he shows the signs;  
> And in the fifth, of marriage, now mature,  
> And of posterity, the man bethinks;  
> Nor does he yet desire vain works to see.  
> The seventh and eighth septenniads see him now  
> In mind and speech mature, till fifty years;  
> And in the ninth he still has vigour left,  
> But strength and body are for virtue great  
> Less than of yore; when, seven years more, God brings  
> To end, then not too soon may he submit to die.”  

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p46"></span>Again, in diseases the seventh day is
that of the crisis; and the fourteenth, in which nature struggles
against the causes of the diseases. And a myriad such instances are
adduced by Hermippus of Berytus, in his book *On the Number Seven*,
regarding it as holy. <span id="fr_3464"></span>[3465](#fn_3464) And the
blessed David delivers clearly to those who know the mystic account of
seven and eight, praising thus: “Our years were exercised like a spider.
The days of our years in them are seventy years; but if in strength,
eighty years. And that will be to reign.” <span
id="fr_3465"></span>[3466](#fn_3465) That, then, we may be taught that
the world was originated, and not suppose that God made it in time,
prophecy adds: “This is the book of the generation: also of the things
in them, when they were created in the day that God made heaven and
earth.” <span id="fr_3466"></span>[3467](#fn_3466) For the expression
“when they were created” intimates an indefinite and dateless
production. But the expression “in the day that God made,” that is, in
and by which God made “all things,” and “without which not even one
thing was made,” points out the activity exerted by the Son. As David
says, “This is the day which the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p49.2"></span>Lord</span> hath made; let us be glad and
rejoice in it;” <span id="fr_3467"></span>[3468](#fn_3467) that is, in
consequence of the knowledge <span id="fr_3468"></span>[3469](#fn_3468)
imparted by Him, let us celebrate the divine festival; for the Word that
throws light on things hidden, and by whom each created thing came into
life and being, is called day.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p52"></span>And, in fine, the Decalogue, by the
letter *Iota,* <span id="fr_3469"></span>[3470](#fn_3469) signifies the
blessed name, presenting Jesus, who is the Word.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p53.1"></span>The Fifth Commandment.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p54"></span>Now the fifth in order is the command
on the honour of father and mother. And it clearly announces God as
Father and Lord. Wherefore also it calls those who know Him sons and
gods. The Creator of the universe is their Lord and Father; and the
mother is not, as some say, the essence from which we sprang, nor, as
others teach, the Church, but the divine knowledge and wisdom, as
Solomon says, when he terms wisdom “the mother of the just,” and says
that it is desirable for its own sake. And the knowledge of all, again,
that is lovely and venerable, proceeds from God through the Son.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p54.1"></span>The Sixth Commandment.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p55"></span>Then follows the command about
murder. Now murder is a sure destruction. He, then, that wishes to
extirpate the true doctrine of God and of immortality, in order to
introduce falsehood, alleging either that the universe is not under
Providence, or that the world is uncreated, or affirming anything
against true doctrine, is most pernicious.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p55.1"></span>The Seventh Commandment.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p56"></span>This is followed by the command
respecting adultery. Now it is adultery, if one, abandoning the
ecclesiastical and true knowledge, and the persuasion respecting God,
accedes to false and incongruous opinion, either by deifying any created
object, or by making an idol of anything that exists not, so as to
overstep, or rather step from, knowledge. And to the Gnostic false
opinion is foreign, as the true belongs to him, and is allied with him.
Wherefore the noble apostle calls one of the kinds of fornication,
idolatry, <span id="fr_3470"></span>[3471](#fn_3470) in following the
prophet, who says: “\[My people\] hath committed fornication with stock
and stone. They have said to the stock, Thou art my father; and to the
stone, Thou hast begotten me.” <span
id="fr_3471"></span>[3472](#fn_3471)

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p58.2"></span>The Eighth Commandment.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p59"></span>And after this is the command
respecting theft. As, then, he that steals what is another’s, doing
great wrong, rightly incurs ills suitable to <span id="page_515">p.
515</span> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-Page_515"></span>his deserts; so also
does he, who arrogates to himself divine works by the art of the
statuary or the painter, and pronounces himself to be the maker of
animals and plants. Likewise those, too, who mimic the true philosophy
are thieves. Whether one be a husbandman or the father of a child, he is
an agent in depositing seeds. But it is God who, ministering the growth
and perfection of all things, brings the things produced to what is in
accordance with their nature. But the most, in common also with the
philosophers, attribute growth and changes to the stars as the primary
cause, robbing the Father of the universe, as far as in them lies, of
His tireless might.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p60"></span>The elements, however, and the
stars—that is, the administrative powers—are ordained for the
accomplishment of what is essential to the administration, and are
influenced and moved by what is commanded to them, in the way in which
the Word of the Lord leads, since it is the nature of the divine power
to work all things secretly. He, accordingly, who alleges that he has
conceived or made anything which pertains to creation, will suffer the
punishment of his impious audacity.

###### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p60.1"></span>The Tenth Commandment. <span id="fr_3472"></span>[3473](#fn_3472)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p62"></span>And the tenth is the command
respecting all lusts. As, then, he who entertains unbecoming desires is
called to account; in the same way he is not allowed to desire things
false, or to suppose that, of created objects, those that are animate
have power of themselves, and that inanimate things can at all save or
hurt. And should one say that an antidote cannot heal or hemlock kill,
he is unwittingly deceived. For none of these operates except one makes
use of the plant and the drug; just as the axe does not without one to
cut with it, or a saw without one sawing with it. And as they do not
work by themselves, but have certain physical qualities which accomplish
their proper work by the exertion of the artisan; so also, by the
universal providence of God, through the medium of secondary causes, the
operative power is propagated in succession to individual objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3445"></span>[511:3446](0020406.htm#fr_3445) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p6"></span> i.e., the Commandments.

<span id="fn_3446"></span>[511:3447](0020406.htm#fr_3446) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p7"></span> For perfect wisdom, which is
knowledge of things divine and human, which comprehends all that relates
to the oversight of the flock of men, becomes, in reference to life, art
(*Instructor*, book ii. chap. ii. p. 244, *supra*).

<span id="fn_3447"></span>[511:3448](0020406.htm#fr_3447) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p9"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3448"></span>[511:3449](0020406.htm#fr_3448) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p12"></span> The text reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p12.1"></span>ἐντολαῖς</span>,
which, however, Hervetus, Heinsius, and Sylburgius, all concur in
changing to the accusative, as above.

<span id="fn_3449"></span>[512:3450](0020406.htm#fr_3449) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p15"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3450"></span>[512:3451](0020406.htm#fr_3450) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p18"></span> [Exod.
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3451"></span>[512:3452](0020406.htm#fr_3451) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p20"></span> i.e., commandment. The Decalogue is
in Hebrew called “the ten words.”

<span id="fn_3452"></span>[512:3453](0020406.htm#fr_3452) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p22"></span> The text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p22.1"></span>τρίτος</span>, but
Sylburgius reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p22.2"></span>τέταρτος</span>, the third being either
omitted, or embraced in what is said of the second. The next mentioned
is the fifth.

<span id="fn_3453"></span>[512:3454](0020406.htm#fr_3453) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p23"></span> i.e., Christ. \[And the first day,
or the Christian Sabbath.\]

<span id="fn_3454"></span>[512:3455](0020406.htm#fr_3454) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p24"></span> \[Barnabas, vol. i. chap. xv. p.
146, this series.\]

<span id="fn_3455"></span>[512:3456](0020406.htm#fr_3455) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p26.1"></span>μεσευθύς</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p26.2"></span>μέσος</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p26.3"></span>εὐθύς</span>,
between the even ones, applied by the Pythagoreans to 6, a half-way
between 2 and 10, the first and the last even numbers of the dinary
scale.

<span id="fn_3456"></span>[513:3457](0020406.htm#fr_3456) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p29"></span> [Luke xx.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#035)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3457"></span>[513:3458](0020406.htm#fr_3457) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p32"></span> i.e., with the three disciples.

<span id="fn_3458"></span>[513:3459](0020406.htm#fr_3458) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p34"></span> The numeral <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p34.1"></span>ϛ´</span> = 6. This
is said to be the *Digamma* in its original place in the alphabet, and
afterwards used in <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p34.2"></span>mss</span>. and old editions as a short
form of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p34.3"></span>στ</span> (Liddell and Scott’s
*Lexicon*).

<span id="fn_3459"></span>[513:3460](0020406.htm#fr_3459) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p36"></span> That is, Christ, who answers to the
numeral six.

<span id="fn_3460"></span>[513:3461](0020406.htm#fr_3460) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p37"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3461"></span>[513:3462](0020406.htm#fr_3461) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p39"></span> [Rev. xxi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3462"></span>[513:3463](0020406.htm#fr_3462) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p40"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3463"></span>[513:3464](0020406.htm#fr_3463) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p42"></span> \[By Rabbinical tradition. But see
Calmet, *Dict. Bib*., p. 78.\]

<span id="fn_3464"></span>[514:3465](0020406.htm#fr_3464) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p47"></span> \[The honour put upon this number in
the Holy Scriptures is obvious to all, and it seems to be wrought into
nature by the author of Scripture. But see [Dan. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p47.1"></span>, the original, and (*Palmoni*) Eng.
margin.\]

<span id="fn_3465"></span>[514:3466](0020406.htm#fr_3465) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p48"></span> [Ps.
90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3466"></span>[514:3467](0020406.htm#fr_3466) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p49"></span> [Gen. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3467"></span>[514:3468](0020406.htm#fr_3467) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p49.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p50"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3468"></span>[514:3469](0020406.htm#fr_3468) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p51"></span> \[[1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p51.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3469"></span>[514:3470](0020406.htm#fr_3469) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p53"></span> The first letter of the name of
Jesus, and used as the sign of ten.

<span id="fn_3470"></span>[514:3471](0020406.htm#fr_3470) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p57"></span> In close conjunction with idolatry,
fornication is mentioned, [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p57.1"></span>, [Gal.
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p57.2"></span> Pet. iv. 3.

<span id="fn_3471"></span>[514:3472](0020406.htm#fr_3471) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p57.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p58"></span> [Jer. ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p58.1"></span>, iii. 9.

<span id="fn_3472"></span>[515:3473](0020406.htm#fr_3472) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvi-p61"></span> \[The ninth is not altogether
omitted, but is supposed to be included in the eighth. False testimony
is theft of another’s credit, or of another’s truth. Migne, *Strom*.,
vi. 361. Elucidation X.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—Philosophy Conveys Only an Imperfect Knowledge of
God.](0020407)
