[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020306)  [Next](0020308) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Succession of Philosophers in Greece.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p1"></span>The Greeks say, that after Orpheus and
Linus, and the most ancient of the poets that appeared among them, the
seven, called wise, were the first that were admired for their wisdom.
Of whom four were of Asia—Thales of Miletus, and Bias of Priene,
Pittacus of Mitylene, and Cleobulus of Lindos; and two of Europe, Solon
the Athenian, and Chilon the Lacedæmonian; and the seventh, some say,
was Periander of Corinth; others, Anacharsis the Scythian; others,
Epimenides the Cretan, whom Paul knew as a Greek prophet, whom he
mentions in the Epistle to Titus, where he speaks thus: “One of
themselves, a prophet of their own, said, *The Cretans are always liars,
evil beasts, slow bellies.* And this witness is true.” <span
id="fr_1951"></span>[1952](#fn_1951) You see how even to the prophets of
the Greeks he attributes something of the truth, and is not
ashamed, <span id="fr_1952"></span>[1953](#fn_1952) when discoursing
<span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-Page_314"></span>for the edification of some and the
shaming of others, to make use of Greek poems. Accordingly to the
Corinthians (for this is not the only instance), while discoursing on
the resurrection of the dead, he makes use of a tragic Iambic line, when
he said, “What advantageth it me if the dead are not raised? Let us eat
and drink, for to-morrow we die. Be not deceived; evil communications
corrupt good manners.” <span id="fr_1953"></span>[1954](#fn_1953) Others
have enumerated Acusilaus the Argive among the seven wise men; and
others, Pherecydes of Syros. And Plato substitutes Myso the Chenian for
Periander, whom he deemed unworthy of wisdom, on account of his having
reigned as a tyrant. That the wise men among the Greeks flourished after
the age of Moses, will, a little after, be shown. But the style of
philosophy among them, as Hebraic and enigmatical, is now to be
considered. They adopted brevity, as suited for exhortation, and most
useful. Even Plato says, that of old this mode was purposely in vogue
among all the Greeks, especially the Lacedæmonians and Cretans, who
enjoyed the best laws.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p5"></span>The expression, “Know thyself,” some
supposed to be Chilon’s. But Chamæleon, in his book *About the Gods*,
ascribes it to Thales; Aristotle to the Pythian. It may be an injunction
to the pursuit of knowledge. For it is not possible to know the parts
without the essence of the whole; and one must study the genesis of the
universe, that thereby we may be able to learn the nature of man. Again,
to Chilon the Lacedæmonian they attribute, “Let nothing be too
much.” <span id="fr_1954"></span>[1955](#fn_1954) Strato, in his book
*Of Inventions*, ascribes the apophthegm to Stratodemus of Tegea.
Didymus assigns it to Solon; as also to Cleobulus the saying, “A middle
course is best.” And the expression, “Come under a pledge, and mischief
is at hand,” Cleomenes says, in his book *Concerning Hesiod*, was
uttered before by Homer in the lines:—

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p6.2"></span> “Wretched pledges, for the
> wretched, to be pledged.” <span id="fr_1955"></span>[1956](#fn_1955)  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p8"></span>The Aristotelians judge it to be
Chilon’s; but Didymus says the advice was that of Thales. Then, next in
order, the saying, “All men are bad,” or, “The most of men are bad” (for
the same apophthegm is expressed in two ways), Sotades the Byzantian
says that it was Bias’s. And the aphorism, “Practice conquers
everything,” <span id="fr_1956"></span>[1957](#fn_1956) they will have
it to be Periander’s; and likewise the advice, “Know the opportunity,”
to have been a saying of Pittacus. Solon made laws for the Athenians,
Pittacus for the Mitylenians. And at a late date, Pythagoras, the pupil
of Pherecydes, first called himself a philosopher. Accordingly, after
the fore-mentioned three men, there were three schools of philosophy,
named after the places where they lived: the Italic from Pythagoras, the
Ionic from Thales, the Eleatic from Xenophanes. Pythagoras was a Samian,
the son of Mnesarchus, as Hippobotus says: according to Aristoxenus, in
his life of Pythagoras and Aristarchus and Theopompus, he was a Tuscan;
and according to Neanthes, a Syrian or a Tyrian. So that Pythagoras was,
according to the most, of barbarian extraction. Thales, too, as Leander
and Herodotus relate, was a Phœnician; as some suppose, a Milesian. He
alone seems to have met the prophets of the Egyptians. But no one is
described as his teacher, nor is any one mentioned as the teacher of
Pherecydes of Syros, who had Pythagoras as his pupil. But the Italic
philosophy, that of Pythagoras, grew old in Metapontum in Italy.
Anaximander of Miletus, the son of Praxiades, succeeded Thales; and was
himself succeeded by Anaximenes of Miletus, the son of Eurustratus;
after whom came Anaxagoras of Clazomenæ, the son of Hegesibulus. <span
id="fr_1957"></span>[1958](#fn_1957) He transferred his school from
Ionia to Athens. He was succeeded by Archelaus, whose pupil Socrates
was.

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p10.1"></span> “From these turned aside, the
> stone-mason;  
> Talker about laws; the enchanter of the Greeks,”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p11"></span>says Timon in his *Satirical Poems*,
on account of his quitting physics for ethics. Antisthenes, after being
a pupil of Socrates, introduced the Cynic philosophy; and Plato withdrew
to the Academy. Aristotle, after studying philosophy under Plato,
withdrew to the Lyceum, and founded the Peripatetic sect. He was
succeeded by Theophrastus, who was succeeded by Strato, and he by Lycon,
then Critolaus, and then Diodorus. Speusippus was the successor of
Plato; his successor was Xenocrates; and the successor of the latter,
Polemo. And the disciples of Polemo were Crates and Crantor, in whom the
old Academy founded by Plato ceased. Arcesilaus was the associate of
Crantor; from whom, down to Hegesilaus, the Middle Academy flourished.
Then Carneades succeeded Hegesilaus, and others came in succession. The
disciple of Crates was Zeno of Citium, the founder of the Stoic sect. He
was succeeded by Cleanthes; and the latter by Chrysippus, and others
after him. Xenophanes of Colophon was the founder of the Eleatic school,
who, Timæus says, lived in the time of Hiero, lord of Sicily, and
Epicharmus the poet; and Apollodorus says that he was born in the
fortieth Olympiad, and reached to the times of Darius and Cyrus.
Parmenides, accordingly, was the disciple of Xenophanes, and Zeno of
him; then came Leucippus, <span id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-Page_315"></span>and then Democritus. Disciples of
Democritus were Protagoras of Abdera, and Metrodorus of Chios, whose
pupil was Diogenes of Smyrna; and his again Anaxarchus, and his Pyrrho,
and his Nausiphanes. Some say that Epicurus was a scholar of his.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p12"></span>Such, in an epitome, is the succession
of the philosophers among the Greeks. The periods of the originators of
their philosophy are now to be specified successively, in order that, by
comparison, we may show that the Hebrew philosophy was older by many
generations. <span id="fr_1958"></span>[1959](#fn_1958)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p14"></span>It has been said of Xenophanes that he
was the founder of the Eleatic philosophy. And Eudemus, in the
*Astrological Histories*, says that Thales foretold the eclipse of the
sun, which took place at the time that the Medians and the Lydians
fought, in the reign of Cyaxares the father of Astyages over the Medes,
and of Alyattus the son of Crœsus over the Lydians. Herodotus in his
first book agrees with him. The date is about the fiftieth Olympiad.
Pythagoras is ascertained to have lived in the days of Polycrates the
tyrant, about the sixty-second Olympiad. Mnesiphilus is described as a
follower of Solon, and was a contemporary of Themistocles. Solon
therefore flourished about the forty-sixth Olympiad. For Heraclitus, the
son of Bauso, persuaded Melancomas the tyrant to abdicate his
sovereignty. He despised the invitation of king Darius to visit the
Persians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[313:1952](0020307.htm#fr_1951) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p2"></span> [Titus
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1952"></span>[313:1953](0020307.htm#fr_1952) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p3"></span> \[Though Canon Farrar minimizes the
Greek scholarship of St. Paul, as is now the fashion, I think Clement
credits him with Greek learning. The apostle’s example seems to have
inspired the philosophical arguments of Clement, as well as his
exuberance of poetical and mythological quotation.\]

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[314:1954](0020307.htm#fr_1953) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[314:1955](0020307.htm#fr_1954) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p6"></span> “Nequid Nimis.” <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p6.1"></span>Μηδὲν ἄγαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[314:1956](0020307.htm#fr_1955) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p6.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p7"></span> *Odyss*., viii. 351.

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[314:1957](0020307.htm#fr_1956) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p9.1"></span>Μελέτη πάντα καθαιρεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_1957"></span>[314:1958](0020307.htm#fr_1957) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p10"></span> Or Eubulus.

<span id="fn_1958"></span>[315:1959](0020307.htm#fr_1958) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xiv-p13"></span> \[Clement’s Attic scholarship never
seduces him from this fidelity to the Scriptures. The argument from
superior antiquity was one which the Greeks were sure to feel when
demonstrated.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.—The Greek Philosophy in Great Part Derived from the
Barbarians.](0020308)
