[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020378)  [Next](0020380) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.v.v"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.—On the Symbols of Pythagoras.

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p1"></span>Now the Pythagorean symbols were
connected with the Barbarian philosophy in the most recondite way. For
instance, the Samian counsels “not to have a swallow in the house;” that
is, not to receive a loquacious, whispering, garrulous man, who cannot
contain what has been communicated to him. “For the swallow, and the
turtle, and the sparrows of the field, know the times of their
entrance,” <span id="fr_3007"></span>[3008](#fn_3007) says the
Scripture; and one ought never to dwell with trifles. And the
turtle-dove murmuring shows the thankless slander of fault-finding, and
is rightly expelled the house.

> <span id="vi.iv.v.v-p2.2"></span> “Don’t mutter against me, sitting by
> one in one place, another in another.” <span
> id="fr_3008"></span>[3009](#fn_3008)  

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p4"></span>The swallow too, which suggests the fable
of Pandion, seeing it is right to detest the incidents reported of it,
some of which we hear Tereus suffered, and some of which he inflicted.
It pursues also the musical grasshoppers, whence he who is a persecutor
of the word ought to be driven away.

> <span id="vi.iv.v.v-p4.1"></span> “By sceptre-bearing Here, whose eye
> surveys Olympus,  
> I have a rusty closet for tongues,”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p5"></span>says Poetry. Æschylus also says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.v-p5.1"></span> “But, I, too, have a key as a guard
> on my tongue.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p6"></span>Again Pythagoras commanded, “When the pot
is lifted off the fire, not to leave its mark in the ashes, but to
scatter them;” and “people on getting up from bed, to shake the
bed-clothes.” For he intimated that it was necessary not only to efface
the mark, but not to leave even a trace of anger; and that on its
ceasing to boil, it was to be composed, and all memory of injury to be
wiped out. “And let not the sun,” says the Scripture, “go down upon your
wrath.” <span id="fr_3009"></span>[3010](#fn_3009) And he that said,
“Thou shall not desire,” <span id="fr_3010"></span>[3011](#fn_3010) took
away all memory of wrong; for wrath is found <span id="page_451">p.
451</span> <span id="vi.iv.v.v-Page_451"></span>to be the impulse of
concupiscence in a mild soul, especially seeking irrational revenge. In
the same way “the bed is ordered to be shaken up,” so that there may be
no recollection of effusion in sleep, <span
id="fr_3011"></span>[3012](#fn_3011) or sleep in the day-time; nor,
besides, of pleasure during the night. And he intimated that the vision
of the dark ought to be dissipated speedily by the light of truth. “Be
angry, and sin not,” says David, teaching us that we ought not to assent
to the impression, and not to follow it up by action, and so confirm
wrath.

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p10"></span>Again, “Don’t sail on land” is a
Pythagorean saw, and shows that taxes and similar contracts, being
troublesome and fluctuating, ought to be declined. Wherefore also the
Word says that the tax-gatherers shall be saved with difficulty. <span
id="fr_3012"></span>[3013](#fn_3012)

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p12"></span>And again, “Don’t wear a ring, nor
engrave on it the images of the gods,” enjoins Pythagoras; as Moses ages
before enacted expressly, that neither a graven, nor molten, nor
moulded, nor painted likeness should be made; so that we may not cleave
to things of sense, but pass to intellectual objects: for familiarity
with the sight disparages the reverence of what is divine; and to
worship that which is immaterial by matter, is to dishonour it by
sense. <span id="fr_3013"></span>[3014](#fn_3013) Wherefore the wisest
of the Egyptian priests decided that the temple of Athene should be
hypæthral, just as the Hebrews constructed the temple without an image.
And some, in worshipping God, make a representation of heaven containing
the stars; and so worship, although Scripture says, “Let Us make man in
Our image and likeness.” <span id="fr_3014"></span>[3015](#fn_3014) I
think it worth while also to adduce the utterance of Eurysus the
Pythagorean, which is as follows, who in his book *On Fortune*, having
said that the “Creator, on making man, took Himself as an exemplar,”
added, “And the body is like the other things, as being made of the same
material, and fashioned by the best workman, who wrought it, taking
Himself as the archetype.” And, in fine, Pythagoras and his followers,
with Plato also, and most of the other philosophers, were best
acquainted with the Lawgiver, as may be concluded from their doctrine.
And by a happy utterance of divination, not without divine help,
concurring in certain prophetic declarations, and, seizing the truth in
portions and aspects, in terms not obscure, and not going beyond the
explanation of the things, they honoured it on as certaining the
appearance of relation with the truth. Whence the Hellenic philosophy is
like the torch of wick which men kindle, artificially stealing the light
from the sun. But on the proclamation of the Word all that holy light
shone forth. Then in houses by night the stolen light is useful; but by
day the fire blazes, and all the night is illuminated by such a sun of
intellectual light.

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p15"></span>Now Pythagoras made an epitome of the
statements on righteousness in Moses, when he said, “Do not step over
the balance;” that is, do not transgress equality in distribution,
honouring justice so.

> <span id="vi.iv.v.v-p15.1"></span> “Which friends to friends for ever,
> binds,  
> To cities, cities—to allies, allies,  
> For equality is what is right for men;  
> But less to greater ever hostile grows,  
> And days of hate begin,”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p16"></span>as is said with poetic grace.

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p17"></span>Wherefore the Lord says, “Take My yoke,
for it is gentle and light.” <span id="fr_3015"></span>[3016](#fn_3015)
And on the disciples, striving for the pre-eminence, He enjoins equality
with simplicity, saying “that they must become as little
children.” <span id="fr_3016"></span>[3017](#fn_3016) Likewise also the
apostle writes, that “no one in Christ is bond or free, or Greek or Jew.
For the creation in Christ Jesus is new, is equality, free of strife—not
grasping—just.” For envy, and jealousy, and bitterness, stand without
the divine choir.

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p20"></span>Thus also those skilled in the mysteries
forbid “to eat the heart;” teaching that we ought not to gnaw and
consume the soul by idleness and by vexation, on account of things which
happen against one’s wishes. Wretched, accordingly, was the man whom
Homer also says, wandering alone, “ate his own heart.” But again, seeing
the Gospel supposes two ways—the apostles, too, similarly with all the
prophets—and seeing they call that one “narrow and confined” which is
circumscribed according to the commandments and prohibitions, and the
opposite one, which leads to perdition, “broad and roomy,” open to
pleasures and wrath, and say, “Blessed is the man who walketh not in the
counsel of the ungodly, and standeth not in the way of sinners.” <span
id="fr_3017"></span>[3018](#fn_3017) Hence also comes the fable of
Prodicus of Ceus about Virtue and Vice. <span
id="fr_3018"></span>[3019](#fn_3018) And Pythagoras shrinks not from
prohibiting to walk on the public thoroughfares, enjoining the necessity
of not following the sentiments of the many, which are crude and
inconsistent. And Aristocritus, in the first book of his *Positions
against Heracliodorus*, mentions a letter to this effect: “Atœeas king
of the Scythians to the people of Byzantium: Do not impair my revenues
in case my mares drink your water;” for the Barbarian indicated
symbolically that he would make war on them. Likewise also the poet
Euphorion introduces Nestor saying,—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.v-p22.1"></span> “We have not yet wet the Achæan
> steeds in Simois.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p23"></span> <span id="page_452">p. 452</span> <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-Page_452"></span>Therefore also the Egyptians place
Sphinxes <span id="fr_3019"></span>[3020](#fn_3019) before their
temples, to signify that the doctrine respecting God is enigmatical and
obscure; perhaps also that we ought both to love and fear the Divine
Being: to love Him as gentle and benign to the pious; to fear Him as
inexorably just to the impious; for the sphinx shows the image of a wild
beast and of a man together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3007"></span>[450:3008](0020379.htm#fr_3007) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p2"></span> [Jer. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3008"></span>[450:3009](0020379.htm#fr_3008) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p2.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p3"></span> *Iliad*, ix. 311.

<span id="fn_3009"></span>[450:3010](0020379.htm#fr_3009) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p7"></span> [Eph. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3010"></span>[450:3011](0020379.htm#fr_3010) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p8"></span> [Ex. xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3011"></span>[451:3012](0020379.htm#fr_3011) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p9"></span> \[[Jude
23](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#023)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p9.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3012"></span>[451:3013](0020379.htm#fr_3012) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p11"></span> It is so said of the rich; [Matt. xix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p11.1"></span>;
[Mark x. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p11.2"></span>; [Luke xviii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#024)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p11.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3013"></span>[451:3014](0020379.htm#fr_3013) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p13"></span> \[Against images. But see *Catechism of
the Council of Trent*, part iii. cap. 2, quæst. xxiv.\]

<span id="fn_3014"></span>[451:3015](0020379.htm#fr_3014) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p14"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3015"></span>[451:3016](0020379.htm#fr_3015) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p18"></span> [Matt.
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3016"></span>[451:3017](0020379.htm#fr_3016) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p19"></span> [Matt. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3017"></span>[451:3018](0020379.htm#fr_3017) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p21"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3018"></span>[451:3019](0020379.htm#fr_3018) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p22"></span> \[See *Pædogogue*, ii. 11, p. 265,
*supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3019"></span>[452:3020](0020379.htm#fr_3019) <span
id="vi.iv.v.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.v-p24"></span> \[Rawlinson, *Herod*., ii. 223.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.—The Mystic Meaning of the Tabernacle and Its
Furniture.](0020380)
