[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020043)  [Next](0020045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—The Demons Sin Among Mankind.

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p1"></span>But men form the material (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>ὑπόθεσις</span>) of
their apostasy. For, having shown them a plan of the position of the
stars, like dice-players, they introduced Fate, a flagrant injustice.
For the judge and the judged are made so by Fate; the murderers and the
murdered, the wealthy and the needy, are the offspring of the same Fate;
and every nativity is regarded as a theatrical entertainment by those
beings of whom Homer says,—

> <span id="iii.ii.viii-p1.2"></span> “Among the gods  
> Rose laughter irrepressible.” <span
> id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441)  

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p3"></span>But must not those who are spectators
of single combats and are partisans on one side or the other, and he who
marries and is a pæderast and an adulterer, who laughs and is angry, who
flees and is wounded, be regarded as mortals? For, by whatever actions
they manifest to men their characters, by these they prompt their
hearers to copy their example. And are not the demons themselves, with
Zeus at their head, subjected to Fate, being overpowered by the same
passions as men? And, besides, how are those beings to be worshipped
among whom there exists such a great contrariety of opinions? For Rhea,
whom the inhabitants of the Phrygian mountains call Cybele, enacted
emasculation on account of Attis, of whom she was enamoured; but
Aphrodité is delighted with conjugal embraces. Artemis is a poisoner;
Apollo heals diseases. And after the decapitation of the Gorgon, the
beloved of Poseidon, whence sprang the horse Pegasus and Chrysaor,
Athené and Asclepios divided between them the drops of blood; and, while
he saved men’s lives by means of them, she, by the same blood, became a
homicide and the instigator of wars. From regard to her reputation, as
it appears to me, the Athenians attributed to the earth the son born of
her connection with Hephæstos, that Athené might not be thought to be
deprived of her virility by Hephæstos, as Atalanta by Meleager. This
limping manufacturer of buckles and earrings, as is likely, deceived the
motherless child and orphan with these girlish ornaments. Poseidon
frequents the seas; Ares delights in wars; Apollo is a player on the
cithara; Dionysus is absolute sovereign of the Thebans; Kronos is a
tyrannicide; Zeus has intercourse with his own daughter, who becomes
pregnant by him. I may instance, too, Eleusis, and the mystic Dragon,
and Orpheus, who says,—

> <span id="iii.ii.viii-p3.1"></span> “Close the gates against the
> profane!”  

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p4"></span>Aïdoneus carries off Koré, and his
deeds have been made into mysteries; Demeter bewails her daughter, and
some persons are deceived by the Athenians. In the precincts of the
temple of the son of Leto is a spot called Omphalos; but Omphalos is the
burial-place of Dionysus. You now I laud, O Daphne!—by conquering the
incontinence of Apollo, you disproved his power of vaticination; for,
not foreseeing what would occur to you, <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) he derived no advantage from his art.
Let the far-shooting god tell me how Zephyrus slew Hyacinthus. Zephyrus
conquered him; and in accordance with the saying of the tragic poet,—

> <span id="iii.ii.viii-p5.1"></span> “A breeze is the most honourable
> chariot of the gods,” <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) —  

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p7"></span>conquered by a slight breeze, Apollo
lost his beloved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_441"></span>[68:442](0020044.htm#fr_441) <span
id="iii.ii.viii-p1.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p2"></span> *Il*., i. 599; *Od.*, viii. 326.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[68:443](0020044.htm#fr_442) <span
id="iii.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p5"></span> On fleeing from Apollo, she became a
bay-tree.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[68:444](0020044.htm#fr_443) <span
id="iii.ii.viii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p6"></span> It is uncertain from whom this line is
quoted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. They Give Rise to Superstitions.](0020045)
