[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020356)  [Next](0020358) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—The Blessedness of the Martyr.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p1"></span>Then he who has lied and shown himself
unfaithful, and revolted to the devil’s army, in what evil do we think
him to be? He belies, therefore, the Lord, or rather he is cheated of
his own hope who believes not God; and he believes not who does not what
He has commanded.

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-Page_417"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p2"></span>And what? Does not he, who denies the
Lord, deny himself? For does he not rob his Master of His authority, who
deprives himself of his relation to Him? He, then, who denies the
Saviour, denies life; for “the light was life.” <span
id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737) He does not term those men of
little faith, but faithless and hypocrites, <span
id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738) who have the name inscribed on
them, but deny that they are really believers. But the faithful is
called both servant and friend. So that if one loves himself, he loves
the Lord, and confesses to salvation that he may save his soul. Though
you die for your neighbour out of love, and regard the Saviour as our
neighbour (for God who saves is said to be nigh in respect to what is
saved); you do so, choosing death on account of life, and suffering for
your own sake rather than his. And is it not for this that he is called
brother? he who, suffering out of love to God, suffered for his own
salvation; while he, on the other hand, who dies for his own salvation,
endures for love to the Lord. For he being life, in what he suffered
wished to suffer that we might live by his suffering.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p5"></span>“Why call ye me Lord, Lord,” He says,
“and do not the things which I say?” <span
id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739) For “the people that loveth with
their lips, but have their heart far away from the Lord,” <span
id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740) is another people, and trust in
another, and have willingly sold themselves to another; but those who
perform the commandments of the Lord, in every action “testify,” by
doing what He wishes, and consistently naming the Lord’s name; and
“testifying” by deed to Him in whom they trust, that they are those “who
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.” “If we live in
the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.” <span
id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741) “He that soweth to his flesh, shall
of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap life everlasting.” <span
id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p10"></span>But to those miserable men, witness to
the Lord by blood seems a most violent death, not knowing that such a
gate of death is the beginning of the true life; and they will
understand neither the honours after death, which belong to those who
have lived holily, nor the punishments of those who have lived
unrighteously and impurely. <span id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743) I
do not say only from our Scriptures (for almost all the commandments
indicate them); but they will not even hear their own discourses. For
the Pythagorean Theano writes, “Life were indeed a feast to the wicked,
who, having done evil, then die; were not the soul immortal, death would
be a godsend.” And Plato in the *Phædo,* “For if death were release from
everything,” and so forth. We are not then to think according to the
*Telephus* of Æschylus, “that a single path leads to Hades.” The ways
are many, and the sins that lead thither. Such deeply erring ones as the
unfaithful are, Aristophanes properly makes the subjects of comedy.
“Come,” he says, “ye men of obscure life, ye that are like the race of
leaves, feeble, wax figures, shadowy tribes, evanescent, fleeting,
ephemeral.” And Epicharmus, “This nature of men is inflated skins.” And
the Saviour has said to us, “The spirit is willing, but the flesh is
weak.” <span id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744) “Because the carnal
mind is enmity against God,” explains the apostle: “for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed, can be. And they that are in
the flesh cannot please God.” And in further explanation continues, that
no one may, like Marcion <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745)
regard the creature as evil. “But if Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness.” And
again: “For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die. For I reckon that
the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared to the
glory which shall be revealed in us. If we suffer with Him, that we also
may be glorified together as joint-heirs of Christ. And we know that all
things work together for good to them that love God, to them that are
called according to the purpose. For whom He did foreknow, He also did
predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be
the first-born among many brethren. And whom He did predestinate, them
He also called; and whom He called, them He also justified; and whom He
justified, them He also glorified.” <span
id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p15"></span>You see that martyrdom for love’s sake
is taught. And should you wish to be a martyr for the recompense of
advantages, you shall hear again. “For we are saved by hope: but hope
that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope
for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait
for it.” <span id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747) “But if we also
suffer for righteousness’ sake,” says Peter, “blessed are we. Be not
afraid of their fear, neither be troubled. But sanctify the Lord God in
your hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to him that asks a
reason of the hope that is in you, but with meekness and fear, having a
good conscience; so that in reference to that for which you are spoken
against, they may be ashamed who calumniate your good conversation in
Christ. For it is better to suffer for well-doing, if the will of God,
than for evil-doing.” But if one should captiously <span
id="page_418">p. 418</span> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-Page_418"></span>say,
And how is it possible for feeble flesh to resist the energies and
spirits of the Powers? <span id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748) well,
let him know this, that, confiding in the Almighty and the Lord, we war
against the principalities of darkness, and against death. “Whilst thou
art yet speaking,” He says, “Lo, here am I.” See the invincible Helper
who shields us. “Think it not strange, therefore, concerning the burning
sent for your trial, as though some strange thing happened to you; But,
as you are partaken in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice; that at the
revelation of His glory ye may rejoice exultant. If ye be reproached in
the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory and of God
resteth on you.” <span id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749) As it is
written, “Because for Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are
accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are
more than conquerors, through Him that loved us.” <span
id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750)

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p19.2"></span> “What you wish to ascertain from
> my mind,  
> You shall not ascertain, not were you to apply  
> Horrid saws from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet,  
> Not were you to load me with chains,”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p20"></span>says a woman acting manfully in the
tragedy. And Antigone, contemning the proclamation of Creon, says
boldly:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p20.1"></span> “It was not Zeus who uttered this
> proclamation.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p21"></span>But it is God that makes proclamation
to us, and He must be believed. “For with the heart man believeth unto
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
Wherefore the Scripture saith, “Whosoever believeth on Him shall not be
put to shame.” <span id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751) Accordingly
Simonides justly writes, “It is said that virtue dwells among all but
inaccessible rocks, but that she speedily traverses a pure place. Nor is
she visible to the eyes of all mortals. He who is not penetrated by
heart-vexing sweat will not scale the summit of manliness.” And Pindar
says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p22.2"></span> “But the anxious thoughts of
> youths, revolving with toils,  
> Will find glory: and in time their deeds  
> Will in resplendent ether splendid shine.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p23"></span>Æschylus, too, having grasped this
thought, says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p23.1"></span> “To him who toils is due,  
> As product of his toil, glory from the gods.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p24"></span>“For great Fates attain great
destinies,” according to Heraclitus:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p24.1"></span> “And what slave is there, who is
> careless of death?”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p25"></span>“For God hath not given us the spirit
of bondage again to fear; but of power, and love, and of a sound mind.
Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, or of me his
prisoner,” he writes to Timothy. <span
id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752) Such shall he be “who cleaves to
that which is good,” according to the apostle, <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753) “who hates evil, having love
unfeigned; for he that loveth another fulfilleth the law.” <span
id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754) If, then, this God, to whom we bear
witness, be as He is, the God of hope, we acknowledge our hope, speeding
on to hope, “saturated with goodness, filled with all knowledge.” <span
id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p30"></span>The Indian sages say to Alexander of
Macedon: “You transport men’s bodies from place to place. But you shall
not force our souls to do what we do not wish. Fire is to men the
greatest torture, this we despise.” Hence Heraclitus preferred one
thing, glory, to all else; and professes “that he allows the crowd to
stuff themselves to satiety like cattle.”

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p30.1"></span> “For on account of the body are
> many toils,  
> For it we have invented a roofed house,  
> And discovered how to dig up silver, and sow the land,  
> And all the rest which we know by names.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p31"></span>To the multitude, then, this vain
labour is desirable. But to us the apostle says, “Now we know this, that
our old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.” <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756) Does not the apostle then plainly
add the following, to show the contempt for faith in the case of the
multitude? “For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as
appointed to death: we are made a spectacle to the world, and to angels,
and to men. Up to this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are
naked, and are beaten, and are feeble, and labour, working with our
hands. Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure; being
defamed, we entreat; we are become as it were the offscourings of the
world.” <span id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757) Such also are the
words of Plato in the *Republic:* <span
id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758) “The just man, though stretched on
the rack, though his eyes are dug out, will be happy.” The Gnostic will
never then have the chief end placed in life, but in being always happy
and blessed, and a kingly friend of God. Although visited with ignominy
and exile, and confiscation, and above all, death, he will never be
wrenched from his freedom, and signal love to God. “The charity which
bears all things, endures all things,” <span
id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759) is assured that Divine Providence
orders all things well. “I exhort you,” therefore it is said, “Be
followers of me.” The first step to salvation <span
id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760) is the instruction accompanied with
fear, in consequence of which we abstain from what is wrong; and the
second is <span id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-Page_419"></span>hope, by reason of which we desire the
best things; but love, as is fitting, perfects, by training now
according to knowledge. For the Greeks, I know not how, attributing
events to unreasoning necessity, own that they yield to them
unwillingly. Accordingly Euripides says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p36.2"></span> “What I declare, receive from me,
> madam:  
> No mortal exists who has not toil;  
> He buries children, and begets others,  
> And he himself dies. And thus mortals are afflicted.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p37"></span>Then he adds:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p37.1"></span> “We must bear those things which
> are inevitable according to nature, and go through them:  
> Not one of the things which are necessary is formidable for
> mortals.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p38"></span>And for those who are aiming at
perfection there is proposed the rational gnosis, the foundation of
which is “the sacred Triad.” “Faith, hope, love; but the greatest of
these is love.” <span id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761) Truly, “all
things are lawful, but all things are not expedient,” says the apostle:
“all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.” <span
id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762) And, “Let no one seek his own
advantage, but also that of his neighbour,” <span
id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763) so as to be able at once to do and
to teach, building and building up. For that “the earth is the Lord’s,
and the fulness thereof,” is admitted; but the conscience of the weak is
supported. “Conscience, I say, not his own, but that of the other; for
why is my liberty judged of by another conscience? For if I by grace am
partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks?
Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.” <span id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764) “For though we
walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; for the weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the demolition of
fortifications, demolishing thoughts, and every high thing which
exalteth itself against the knowledge of Christ.” <span
id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765) Equipped with these weapons, the
Gnostic says: O Lord, give opportunity, and receive demonstration; let
this dread event pass; I contemn dangers for the love I bear to Thee.

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p43.2"></span> “Because alone of human things  
> Virtue receives not a recompense from without,  
> But has itself as the reward of its toils.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p44"></span>“Put on therefore, as the elect of
God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness,
meekness, long-suffering. And above all these, love, which is the bond
of perfection. And let the peace of God reign in your hearts, to which
also ye are called in one body; and be thankful,” <span
id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766) ye who, while still in the body,
like the just men of old, enjoy impassibility and tranquillity of soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[417:2738](0020357.htm#fr_2737) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p3"></span> [John i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[417:2739](0020357.htm#fr_2738) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p4"></span> [Matt. vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#030)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[417:2740](0020357.htm#fr_2739) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p6"></span> [Luke vi.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#046)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[417:2741](0020357.htm#fr_2740) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p7"></span> [Isa. xxix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[417:2742](0020357.htm#fr_2741) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p8"></span> [Gal.
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[417:2743](0020357.htm#fr_2742) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p9"></span> [Gal. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[417:2744](0020357.htm#fr_2743) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p11"></span> \[This is important testimony as to
the primitive understanding of the awards of a future life.\]

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[417:2745](0020357.htm#fr_2744) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p12"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[417:2746](0020357.htm#fr_2745) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p13"></span> \[See book iii., cap iii., *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[417:2747](0020357.htm#fr_2746) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p14"></span> [Rom.
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[417:2748](0020357.htm#fr_2747) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p16"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[418:2749](0020357.htm#fr_2748) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p17"></span> In allusion to [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[418:2750](0020357.htm#fr_2749) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p18"></span> [1 Pet.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[418:2751](0020357.htm#fr_2750) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p19"></span> [Rom.
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[418:2752](0020357.htm#fr_2751) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p22"></span> [Rom.
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[418:2753](0020357.htm#fr_2752) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p26"></span> [2 Tim.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p26.1"></span>; [Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p26.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[418:2754](0020357.htm#fr_2753) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p27"></span> [Rom. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[418:2755](0020357.htm#fr_2754) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p28"></span> [Rom. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[418:2756](0020357.htm#fr_2755) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p29"></span> Instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p29.1"></span>μέγιστοι</span>, read from [Rom.
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p29.2"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p29.3"></span>μεστοί</span>.

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[418:2757](0020357.htm#fr_2756) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p32"></span> [Rom. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[418:2758](0020357.htm#fr_2757) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p33"></span> [1 Cor.
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[418:2759](0020357.htm#fr_2758) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p34"></span> \[ii. 5. Compare Cicero’s *Rep*.,
iii. 17.\]

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[418:2760](0020357.htm#fr_2759) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p35"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[418:2761](0020357.htm#fr_2760) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p36"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p36.1"></span>σώματος read ωτηρίας</span>.

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[419:2762](0020357.htm#fr_2761) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p39"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p39.1"></span>. \[Not without allusion to the grand
Triad, however. p. 101, this volume.\]

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[419:2763](0020357.htm#fr_2762) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p40"></span> [1 Cor. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[419:2764](0020357.htm#fr_2763) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p41"></span> [1 Cor. x.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[419:2765](0020357.htm#fr_2764) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p42"></span> [1 Cor.
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[419:2766](0020357.htm#fr_2765) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p43"></span> [2 Cor.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[419:2767](0020357.htm#fr_2766) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p45"></span> [Col.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vi-p45.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—Women as Well as Men, Slaves as Well as Freemen,
Candidates for the Martyr’s Crown.](0020358)
