[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020329)  [Next](0020331) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.—The Excellence and Utility of Faith.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p1"></span>“Lord, who hath believed our
report?” <span id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) Isaiah says. For
“faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God,” saith the
apostle. “How then shall they call on Him in whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe on Him whom they have not heard?
And how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach
except they be sent? As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of
those that publish glad tidings of good things.” <span
id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) You see how he brings faith by
hearing, and the preaching of the apostles, up to the word of the Lord,
and to the Son of God. We do not yet understand the word of the Lord to
be demonstration.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p4"></span>As, then, playing at ball not only
depends on one throwing the ball skilfully, but it requires besides one
to catch it dexterously, that the game may be gone through according to
the rules for ball; so also is it the case that teaching is reliable
when faith on the part of those who hear, being, so to speak, a sort of
natural art, contributes to the process of learning. So also the earth
co-operates, through its productive power, being fit for the sowing of
the seed. For there is no good of the very best instruction without the
exercise of the receptive faculty on the part of the learner, not even
of prophecy, when there is the absence of docility on the part of those
who hear. For dry twigs, being ready to receive the power of fire, are
kindled with great ease; and the far-famed stone <span
id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213) attracts steel through affinity, as
the amber tear-drop drags to itself twigs, and the lump sets chaff in
motion. And the substances attracted obey them, influenced by a subtle
spirit, not as a cause, but as a concurring cause.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p6"></span>There being then a twofold species of
vice—that characterized by craft and stealth, and that which leads and
drives with violence—the divine Word cries, calling all together;
knowing perfectly well those that will not obey; notwithstanding then
since to obey or not is in our own power, provided we have not the
excuse of ignorance to adduce. He makes a just call, and demands of each
according to his strength. For some are able as well as willing, having
reached this point through practice and being purified; while others, if
they are not yet able, already have the will. Now to will is the act of
the soul, but to do is not without the body. Nor are actions estimated
by their issue alone; but they are judged also according to the element
of free choice in each,—if he chose easily, if he repented of his sins,
if he reflected on his failures and repented (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>μετέγνω</span>), which is (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p6.2"></span>μετὰ ταῦτα ἔγνω</span>)
“afterwards knew.” For repentance is a tardy knowledge, and primitive
innocence is knowledge. Repentance, then, is an effect of faith. For
unless a man believe that to which he was addicted to be sin, he will
not abandon it; and if he do not believe punishment to be impending over
the transgressor, and salvation to be the portion of him who lives
according to the commandments, he will not reform.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p7"></span>Hope, too, is based on faith.
Accordingly the followers of Basilides define faith to be, the assent of
the soul to any of those things, that do not affect the senses through
not being present. And hope is the expectation of the possession of
good. Necessarily, then, is expectation founded on faith. Now he is
faithful who keeps inviolably what is entrusted to him; and we are
entrusted with the utterances respecting God and the divine words, the
commands along with the execution of the injunctions. This is the
faithful servant, who is praised by the Lord. And when it is said, “God
is faithful,” it is intimated that He is worthy to be believed when
declaring aught. Now His Word declares; and “God” Himself is
“faithful.” <span id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) How, then, if to
believe is to suppose, do the philosophers think that what proceeds from
themselves is sure? For the voluntary assent to a preceding
demonstration is not supposition, but it is assent to something sure.
Who is more powerful than God? Now unbelief is the feeble negative
supposition of one opposed to Him: as incredulity is a condition which
admits faith with difficulty. Faith is the voluntary supposition and
anticipation of pre-comprehension. Expectation is an opinion about the
future, and expectation about other things is opinion about uncertainty.
Confidence is a strong judgment about a thing. Wherefore we believe Him
in whom we have confidence unto divine glory and salvation. And we
confide in Him, who is God alone, whom we know, that those things nobly
promised to us, and for this end benevolently created and bestowed by
Him on us, will not fail.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p9"></span>Benevolence is the wishing of good
things to another for his sake. For He needs nothing; and the
beneficence and benignity which flow from the Lord terminate in us,
being divine benevolence, and benevolence resulting in beneficence. And
if to Abraham on his believing it <span id="page_354">p. 354</span>
<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-Page_354"></span>was counted for righteousness;
and if we are the seed of Abraham, then we must also believe through
hearing. For we are Israelites, who are convinced not by signs, but by
hearing. Wherefore it is said, “Rejoice, O barren, that barest not;
break forth and cry, thou that didst not travail with child: for more
are the children of the desolate than of her who hath an husband.” <span
id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) “Thou hast lived for the fence of
the people, thy children were blessed in the tents of their
fathers.” <span id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216) And if the same
mansions are promised by prophecy to us and to the patriarchs, the God
of both the covenants is shown to be one. Accordingly it is added more
clearly, “Thou hast inherited the covenant of Israel,” <span
id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217) speaking to those called from among
the nations, that were once barren, being formerly destitute of this
husband, who is the Word,—desolate formerly,—of the bridegroom. “Now the
just shall live by faith,” <span id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218)
which is according to the covenant and the commandments; since these,
which are two in name and time, given in accordance with the \[divine\]
economy—being in power one—the old and the new, are dispensed through
the Son by one God. As the apostle also says in the Epistle to the
Romans, “For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith,” teaching the one salvation which from prophecy to the Gospel is
perfected by one and the same Lord. “This charge,” he says, “I commit to
thee, son Timothy, according to the prophecies which went before on
thee, that thou by them mightest war the good warfare; holding faith,
and a good conscience; which some having put away concerning faith have
made shipwreck,” <span id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219) because they
defiled by unbelief the conscience that comes from God. Accordingly,
faith may not, any more, with reason, be disparaged in an offhand way,
as simple and vulgar, appertaining to anybody. For, if it were a mere
human habit, as the Greeks supposed, it would have been extinguished.
But if it grow, and there be no place where it is not; then I affirm,
that faith, whether founded in love, or in fear, as its disparagers
assert, is something divine; which is neither rent asunder by other
mundane friendship, nor dissolved by the presence of fear. For love, on
account of its friendly alliance with faith, makes men believers; and
faith, which is the foundation of love, in its turn introduces the doing
of good; since also fear, the pædagogue of the law, is believed to be
fear by those, by whom it is believed. For, if its existence is shown in
its working, it is yet believed when about to do and threatening, and
when not working and present; and being believed to exist, it does not
itself generate faith, but is by faith tested and proved trustworthy.
Such a change, then, from unbelief to faith—and to trust in hope and
fear, is divine. And, in truth, faith is discovered, by us, to be the
first movement towards salvation; after which fear, and hope, and
repentance, advancing in company with temperance and patience, lead us
to love and knowledge. Rightly, therefore, the Apostle Barnabas says,
“From the portion I have received I have done my diligence to send by
little and little to you; that along with your faith you may also have
perfect knowledge. <span id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220) Fear and
patience are then helpers of your faith; and our allies are
long-suffering and temperance. These, then,” he says, “in what respects
the Lord, continuing in purity, there rejoice along with them, wisdom,
understanding, intelligence, knowledge.” The fore-mentioned virtues
being, then, the elements of knowledge; the result is that faith is more
elementary, being as necessary to the Gnostic, <span
id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221) as respiration to him that lives in
this world is to life. And as without the four elements it is not
possible to live, so neither can knowledge be attained without faith. It
is then the support of truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[353:2212](0020330.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p2"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[353:2213](0020330.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p3"></span> [Rom.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[353:2214](0020330.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p5"></span> Loadstone. \[Philosophy of the second
centure. See note in Migne.\]

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[353:2215](0020330.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p8"></span> [1 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>,
x. 13.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[354:2216](0020330.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p10"></span> [Isa. liv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[354:2217](0020330.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p11"></span> Not in Script.

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[354:2218](0020330.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p12"></span> Where?

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[354:2219](0020330.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p13"></span> [Rom. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p13.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[354:2220](0020330.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p14"></span> [1 Tim.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[354:2221](0020330.htm#fr_2220) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p15"></span> \[Clement accepts the Epistle of
Barnabus as an apostolic writing. For this quotation, see vol. i. p.
137, this series.\]

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[354:2222](0020330.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.vi-p16"></span> The man of perfect knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.—The Utility of Fear. Objections Answered.](0020331)
