[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020030)  [Next](0020032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p0.1"></span>Similitude Ninth.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p0.2"></span>The Great Mysteries in the Building of the Militant and Triumphant Church.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p0.3"></span>Chap. I.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p1"></span>After I had written down the commandments
and similitudes of the Shepherd, the angel of repentance, he came to me
and said, “I wish to explain to you what the Holy Spirit <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) that spake with you in the form of the
Church showed you, for that Spirit is the Son of God. For, as you were
somewhat weak in the flesh, it was not explained to you by the angel.
When, however, you were strengthened by the Spirit, and your strength
was increased, so that you were able to see the angel also, then
accordingly was the building of the tower shown you by the Church. In a
noble and solemn manner did you see everything as if shown you by a
virgin; but now you see \[them\] through the same Spirit as if shown by
an angel. You must, however, learn everything from me with greater
accuracy. For I was sent for this purpose by the glorious angel to dwell
in your house, that you might see all things with power, entertaining no
fear, even as it was before.” And he led me away into Arcadia, to a
round hill; <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) and he placed me on
the top of the hill, and showed me a large plain, and round about the
plain twelve mountains, all having different forms. The first was black
as soot; and the second bare, without grass; and the third full of
thorns and thistles; and the fourth with grass half-withered, the upper
parts of the plants green, and the parts about the roots withered; and
some of the grasses, when the sun scorched them, became withered. And
the fifth mountain had green grass, and was ragged. And the sixth
mountain was quite full of clefts, some small and others large; and the
clefts were grassy, but the plants were not very vigorous, but rather,
as it were, decayed. The seventh mountain, again, had cheerful pastures,
and the whole mountain was blooming, and every kind of cattle and birds
were feeding upon that mountain; and the more the cattle and the birds
ate, the more the grass of that mountain flourished. And the eighth
mountain was full of fountains, and every kind of the Lord’s creatures
drank of the fountains of that mountain. But the ninth mountain \[had no
water at all, and was wholly a desert, and had within it deadly
serpents, which destroy men. And the tenth mountain <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) \] had very large trees, and was
completely shaded, and under the shadow of the trees sheep lay resting
and ruminating. And the eleventh mountain was very thickly wooded, and
those trees were productive, being adorned with various sorts of fruits,
so that any one seeing them would desire to eat of their fruits. The
twelfth mountain, again, was wholly white, and its aspect was cheerful,
and the mountain in itself was very beautiful.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p4.1"></span>Chap. II.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p5"></span>And in the middle of the plain he showed
me a large white rock that had arisen out of the plain. And the rock was
more lofty than the mountains, rectangular in shape, so as to be capable
of containing the whole world: and that rock was old, having a gate cut
out of it; and the cutting out of the gate seemed to me as if recently
done. And the gate glittered to such a degree under the sunbeams, that I
marvelled at the splendour of the gate; <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) and round about the gate were standing
twelve virgins. The four who stood at the corners seemed to me more
distinguished than the others—they were all, however, distinguished—and
they were standing at the four parts of the gate; two virgins between
each part. And they were clothed with linen tunics, and gracefully
girded, having their right shoulders exposed, as if about to bear some
burden. Thus they stood ready; for they were exceedingly cheerful and
eager. After I had seen these things, I marvelled in myself, because I
was beholding great and glorious sights. And again I was perplexed about
the virgins, because, although so delicate, they were standing
courageously, as if about to carry the whole heavens. And the Shepherd
said to me “Why are you reasoning in yourself, and perplexing your mind,
and distressing yourself? for the things which you cannot understand, do
not attempt to comprehend, as if you were wise; but ask the Lord, that
you may receive understanding and know them. You cannot see what is
behind you, but you see what is before. Whatever, then, you cannot see,
let alone, and do not torment yourself about it: but what you see, make
yourself master of it, and do not waste your labour about other things;
and I will explain to you everything that I show you. Look therefore, on
the things that remain.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p6.3"></span>Chap. III.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p7"></span>I saw six men come, tall, and
distinguished, and similar in appearance, and they summoned a multitude
of men. And they who came were also tall men, and handsome, and
powerful; and the six men commanded them to build a tower <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) above the rock. And great was the
noise of those men who came to build the tower, as they ran hither and
thither around the gate. And the virgins who stood around the gate told
the men to hasten to build the tower. Now the virgins had spread out
their hands, as if about to receive something from the men. And the six
men commanded stones to ascend out of a certain pit, and to go to the
building of the tower. And there went up ten shining rectangular stones,
not hewn in a quarry. And the six men called the virgins, and bade them
carry all the stones that were intended for the building, and to pass
through the gate, and give them to the men who were about to build the
tower. And the virgins put upon one another the ten first stones which
had ascended from the pit, and carried them together, each stone by
itself.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p8.1"></span>Chap. IV.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p9"></span>And as they stood together around the
gate, those who seemed to be strong carried them, and they stooped down
under the corners of the stone; and the others stooped down under the
sides of the stones. And in this way they carried all the stones. <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) And they carried them through the gate
as they were commanded, and gave them to the men for the tower; and they
took the stones and proceeded with the building. Now the tower was built
upon the great rock, and above the gate. Those ten stones were prepared
as the foundation for the building of the tower. And the rock and gate
were the support of the whole of the tower. And after the ten stones
other twenty \[five\] came up out of the pit, and these were fitted into
the building of the tower, being carried by the virgins as before. And
after these ascended thirty-five. And these in like manner were fitted
into the tower. And after these other forty stones came up; and all
these were cast into the building of the tower, \[and there were four
rows in the foundation of the tower, <span
id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) \] and they ceased ascending from the
pit. And the builders also ceased for a little. And again the six men
commanded the multitude of the crowd to bear stones from the mountains
for the building of the tower. They were accordingly brought from all
the mountains of various colours, and being hewn by the men were given
to the virgins; and the virgins carried them through the gate, and gave
them for the building of the tower. And when the stones of various
colours were placed in the building, they all became white alike, and
lost their different colours. And certain stones were given by the men
for the building, and these did not become shining; but as they were
placed, such also were they found to remain: for they were not given by
the virgins, nor carried through the gate. These stones, therefore, were
not in keeping with the others in the building of the tower. And the six
men, seeing these unsuitable stones in the building, commanded them to
be taken away, and to be carried away down to their own place whence
they had been taken; \[and being removed one by one, they were laid
aside; and\] they say to the men who brought the stones, “Do not ye
bring any stones at all for the building, but lay them down beside the
tower, that the virgins may carry them through the gate, and may give
them for the building. For unless,” they said, “they be carried through
the gate by the hands of the virgins, they cannot change their colours:
do not toil, therefore,” they said, “to no purpose.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p11.1"></span>Chap. V.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p12"></span>And on that day the building was
finished, but the tower was not completed; for additional building was
again about to be added, and there was a cessation in the building. And
the six men commanded the builders all to withdraw a little distance,
and to rest, but enjoined the virgins not to withdraw from the tower;
and it seemed to me that the virgins had been left to guard the tower.
Now after all had withdrawn, and were resting themselves, I said to the
Shepherd, “What is the reason that the building of the tower was not
finished?” “The tower,” he answered, “cannot be finished just yet, until
the Lord of it come and examine the building, in <span id="page_45">p.
45</span> <span id="ii.iv.ix-Page_45"></span>order that, if any of the
stones be found to be decayed, he may change them: for the tower is
built according to his pleasure.” “I would like to know, sir,” I said,
“what is the meaning of the building of this tower, and what the rock
and gate, and the mountains, and the virgins mean, and the stones that
ascended from the pit, and were not hewn, but came as they were to the
building. Why, in the first place, were ten stones placed in the
foundation, then twenty-five, then thirty-five, then forty? and I wish
also to know about the stones that went to the building, and were again
taken out and returned to their own place? On all these points put my
mind at rest, sir, and explain them to me.” “If you are not found to be
curious about trifles,” he replied, “you shall know everything. For
after a few days \[we shall come hither, and you will see the other
things that happen to this tower, and will know accurately all the
similitudes.” After a few days <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351)
\] we came to the place where we sat down. And he said to me, “Let us go
to the tower; for the master of the tower is coming to examine it.” And
we came to the tower, and there was no one at all near it, save the
virgins only. And the Shepherd asked the virgins if perchance the master
of the tower had come; and they replied that he was about to come <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) to examine the building.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p14.1"></span>Chap. VI.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p15"></span>And, behold, after a little I see an
array of many men coming, and in the midst of them one man <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) of so remarkable a size as to overtop
the tower. And the six men who had worked upon the building were with
him, and many other honourable men were around him. And the virgins who
kept the tower ran forward and kissed him, and began to walk near him
around the tower. And that man examined the building carefully, feeling
every stone separately; and holding a rod in his hand, he struck every
stone in the building three times. And when he struck them, some of them
became black as soot, and some appeared as if covered with scabs, and
some cracked, and some mutilated, and some neither white nor black, and
some rough and not in keeping with the other stones, and some having
\[very many\] stains: such were the varieties of decayed stones that
were found in the building. He ordered all these to be taken out of the
tower, and to be laid down beside it, and other stones to be brought and
put in their stead. \[And the builders asked him from what mountain he
wished them to be brought and put in their place. <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) \] And he did not command them to be
brought from the mountains, \[but he bade them be brought from a certain
plain which was near at hand. <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) \]
And the plain was dug up, and shining rectangular stones were found, and
some also of a round shape; and all the stones which were in that plain
were brought, and carried through the gate by the virgins. And the
rectangular stones were hewn, and put in place of those that were taken
away; but the rounded stones were not put into the building, because
they were hard to hew, and appeared to yield slowly to the chisel; they
were deposited, however, beside the tower, as if intended to be hewn and
used in the building, for they were exceedingly brilliant.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p18.1"></span>Chap. VII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p19"></span>The glorious man, the lord of the whole
tower, having accordingly finished these alterations, called to him the
Shepherd, and delivered to him all the stones that were lying beside the
tower, that had been rejected from the building, and said to him,
“Carefully clean all these stones, and put aside such for the building
of the tower as may harmonize with the others; and those that do not,
throw far away from the tower.” \[Having given these orders to the
Shepherd, he departed from the tower <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) \], with all those with whom he had
come. Now the virgins were standing around the tower, keeping it. I said
again to the Shepherd, “Can these stones return to the building of the
tower, after being rejected?” He answered me, and said, “Do you see
these stones?” “I see them, sir,” I replied. “The greater part of these
stones,” he said, “I will hew, and put into the building, and they will
harmonize with the others.” “How, sir,” I said, “can they, after being
cut all round about, fill up the same space?” He answered, “Those that
shall be found small will be thrown into the middle of the building, and
those that are larger will be placed on the outside, and they will hold
them together.” Having spoken these words, he said to me, “Let us go,
and after two days let us come and clean these stones, and cast them
into the building; for all things around the tower must be cleaned, lest
the Master come suddenly <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) and
find the places about the tower dirty, and be displeased, and these
stones be not returned for the building of the tower, and I also shall
seem to be neglectful towards the Master.” And after two days we came to
the tower, and he said to me, “Let us examine all the stones, and
ascertain those which may return to the building.” I said to him, “Sir,
let us examine them!”

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span id="ii.iv.ix-Page_46"></span>

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p21.3"></span>Chap. VIII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p22"></span>And beginning, we first examined the
black stones. And such as they had been taken out of the building, were
they found to remain; and the Shepherd ordered them to be removed out of
the tower, and to be placed apart. Next he examined those that had
scabs; and he took and hewed many of these, and commanded the virgins to
take them up and cast them into the building. And the virgins lifted
them up, and put them in the middle of the building of the tower. And
the rest he ordered to be laid down beside the black ones; for these,
too, were found to be black. He next examined those that had cracks; and
he hewed many of these, and commanded them to be carried by the virgins
to the building: and they were placed on the outside, because they were
found to be sounder than the others; but the rest, on account of the
multitude of the cracks, could not be hewn, and for this reason,
therefore, they were rejected from the building of the tower. He next
examined the chipped stones, and many amongst these were found to be
black, and some to have great cracks. And these also he commanded to be
laid down along with those which had been rejected. But the remainder,
after being cleaned and hewn, he commanded to be placed in the building.
And the virgins took them up, and fitted them into the middle of the
building of the tower, for they were somewhat weak. He next examined
those that were half white and half black, and many of them were found
to be black. And he commanded these also to be taken away along with
those which had been rejected. And the rest were all taken away by the
virgins; for, being white, they were fitted by the virgins themselves
into the building. And they were placed upon the outside, because they
were found to be sound, so as to be able to support those which were
placed in the middle, for no part of them at all was chipped. He next
examined those that were rough and hard; and a few of them were rejected
because they could not be hewn, as they were found exceedingly hard. But
the rest of them were hewn, and carried by the virgins, and fitted into
the middle of the building of the tower; for they were somewhat weak. He
next examined those that had stains; and of these a very few were black,
and were thrown aside with the others; but the greater part were found
to be bright, and these were fitted by the virgins into the building,
but on account of their strength were placed on the outside.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p22.1"></span>Chap. IX.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p23"></span>He next came to examine the white and
rounded stones, and said to me, “What are we to do with these stones?”
“How do I know, sir?” I replied. “Have you no intentions regarding
them?” “Sir,” I answered, “I am not acquainted with this art, neither am
I a stone-cutter, nor can I tell.” “Do you not see,” he said, “that they
are exceedingly round? and if I wish to make them rectangular, a large
portion of them must be cut away; for some of them must of necessity be
put into the building.” “If therefore,” I said, “they must, why do you
torment yourself, and not at once choose for the building those which
you prefer, and fit them into it?” He selected the larger ones among
them, and the shining ones, and hewed them; and the virgins carried and
fitted them into the outside parts of the building. And the rest which
remained over were carried away, and laid down on the plain from which
they were brought. They were not, however, rejected, “because,” he said,
“there remains yet a little addition to be built to the tower. And the
lord of this tower wishes all the stones to be fitted into the building,
because they are exceedingly bright.” And twelve women were called, very
beautiful in form, clothed in black, and with dishevelled hair. And
these women seemed to me to be fierce. But the Shepherd commanded them
to lift the stones that were rejected from the building, and to carry
them away to the mountains from which they had been brought. And they
were merry, and carried away all the stones, and put them in the place
whence they had been taken. Now after all the stones were removed, and
there was no longer a single one lying around the tower, he said, “Let
us go round the tower and see, lest there be any defect in it.” So I
went round the tower along with him. And the Shepherd, seeing that the
tower was beautifully built, rejoiced exceedingly; for the tower was
built in such a way, that, on seeing it, I coveted the building of it,
for it was constructed as if built of one stone, without a single
joining. And the stone seemed as if hewn out of the rock; having to me
the appearance of a monolith.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p23.1"></span>Chap. X.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p24"></span>And as I walked along with him, I was
full of joy, beholding so many excellent things. And the Shepherd said
to me, “Go and bring unslacked lime and fine-baked clay, that I may fill
up the forms of the stones that were taken and thrown into the building;
for everything about the tower must be smooth.” And I did as he
commanded me, and brought it to him. “Assist me,” he said, “and the work
will soon be finished.” He accordingly filled up the forms of the stones
that were returned to the building, and commanded the places around the
tower to be swept and to be cleaned; and the virgins <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span id="ii.iv.ix-Page_47"></span>took brooms
and swept the place, and carried all the dirt out of the tower, and
brought water, and the ground around the tower became cheerful and very
beautiful. Says the Shepherd to me, “Everything has been cleared away;
if the lord of the tower come to inspect it, he can have no fault to
find with us.” Having spoken these words, he wished to depart; but I
laid hold of him by the wallet, and began to adjure him by the Lord that
he would explain what he had showed me. He said to me, “I must rest a
little, and then I shall explain to you everything; wait for me here
until I return.” I said to him, “Sir, what can I do here alone?” “You
are not alone,” he said, “for these virgins are with you.” “Give me in
charge to them, then,” I replied. The Shepherd called them to him, and
said to them, “I entrust him to you until I come,” and went away. And I
was alone with the virgins; and they were rather merry, but were
friendly to me, especially the four more distinguished of them.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p24.1"></span>Chap. XI.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p25"></span>The virgins said to me, “The Shepherd
does not come here to-day.” “What, then,” said I, “am I to do?” They
replied, “Wait for him until he comes; and if he comes he will converse
with you, and if he does not come you will remain here with us until he
does come.” I said to them, “I will wait for him until it is late; and
if he does not arrive, I will go away into the house, and come back
early in the morning.” And they answered and said to me, “You were
entrusted to us; you cannot go away from us.” “Where, then,” I said, “am
I to remain?” “You will sleep with us,” they replied, “as a brother, and
not as a husband: for you are our brother, and for the time to come we
intend to abide with you, for we love you exceedingly!” But I was
ashamed to remain with them. And she who seemed to be the first among
them began to kiss me. \[And the others seeing her kissing me, began
also to kiss me\], and to lead me round the tower, and to play with
me. <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) And I, too, became like a
young man, and began to play with them: for some of them formed a
chorus, and others danced, and others sang; and I, keeping silence,
walked with them around the tower, and was merry with them. And when it
grew late I wished to go into the house; and they would not let me, but
detained me. So I remained with them during the night, and slept beside
the tower. Now the virgins spread their linen tunics on the ground, and
made me lie down in the midst of them; and they did nothing at all but
pray; and I without ceasing prayed with them, and not less than they.
And the virgins rejoiced because I thus prayed. And I remained there
with the virgins until the next day at the second hour. Then the
Shepherd returned, and said to the virgins, “Did you offer him any
insult?” “Ask him,” they said. I said to him, “Sir, I was delighted that
I remained with them.” “On what,” he asked, “did you sup?” “I supped,
sir,” I replied, “on the words of the Lord the whole night.” “Did they
receive you well?” he inquired. “Yes, sir,” I answered. “Now,” he said,
“what do you wish to hear first?” “I wish to hear in the order,” I said,
“in which you showed me from the beginning. I beg of you, sir, that as I
shall ask you, so also you will give me the explanation.” “As you wish,”
he replied, “so also will I explain to you, and will conceal nothing at
all from you.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p26.2"></span>Chap. XII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p27"></span>“First of all, sir,” I said, “explain
this to me: What is the meaning of the rock and the gate?” “This rock,”
he answered, “and this gate are the Son of God.” “How, sir?” I said;
“the rock is old, and the gate is new.” “Listen,” he said, “and
understand, O ignorant man. The Son of God is older than all His
creatures, so that He was a fellow-councillor with the Father in His
work of creation: <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) for this
reason is He old.” “And why is the gate new, sir?” I said. “Because,” he
answered, “He became manifest <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) in
the last days of the dispensation: for this reason the gate was made
new, that they who are to be saved by it might enter into the kingdom of
God. You saw,” he said, “that those stones which came in through the
gate were used for the building of the tower, and that those which did
not come, were again thrown back to their own place?” “I saw, sir,” I
replied. “In like manner,” he continued, “no one shall enter into the
kingdom of God unless he receive His holy name. For if you desire to
enter into a city, and that city is surrounded by a wall, and has but
one gate, can you enter into that city save through the gate which it
has?” “Why, how can it be otherwise, sir?” I said. “If, then, you cannot
enter <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ix-Page_48"></span>into the city except through its gate, so,
in like manner, a man cannot otherwise enter into the kingdom of God
than by the name of His beloved Son. You saw,” he added, “the multitude
who were building the tower?” “I saw them, sir,” I said. “Those,” he
said, “are all glorious angels, and by them accordingly is the Lord
surrounded. And the gate is the Son of God. This is the one entrance to
the Lord. In no other way, then, shall any one enter in to Him except
through His Son. You saw,” he continued, “the six men, and the tall and
glorious man in the midst of them, who walked round the tower, and
rejected the stones from the building?” “I saw him, sir,” I answered.
“The glorious man,” he said, “is the Son of God, and those six glorious
angels are those who support Him on the right hand and on the left. None
of these glorious angels,” he continued, “will enter in unto God apart
from Him. Whosoever does not receive His <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) name, shall not enter into the kingdom
of God.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p30.1"></span>Chap. XIII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p31"></span>“And the tower,” I asked, “what does it
mean?” “This tower,” he replied, “is the Church.” “And these virgins,
who are they?” “They are holy spirits, and men cannot otherwise be found
in the kingdom of God unless these have put their clothing upon them:
for if you receive the name only, and do not receive from them the
clothing, they are of no advantage to you. For these virgins are the
powers of the Son of God. If you bear His name but possess not His
power, it will be in vain that you bear His name. Those stones,” he
continued, “which you saw rejected bore His name, but did not put on the
clothing of the virgins.” “Of what nature is their clothing, sir?” I
asked. “Their very names,” he said, “are their clothing. Every one who
bears the name of the Son of God, ought to bear the names also of these;
for the Son Himself bears the names <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) of these virgins. As many stones,” he
continued, “as you saw \[come into the building of the tower through the
hands <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) \] of these virgins, and
remaining, have been clothed with their strength. For this reason you
see that the tower became of one stone with the rock. So also they who
have believed on the Lord <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364)
through His Son, and are clothed with these spirits, shall become one
spirit, one body, and the colour of their garments shall be one. And the
dwelling of such as bear the names of the virgins is in the tower.”
“Those stones, sir, that were rejected,” I inquired, “on what account
were they rejected? for they passed through the gate, and were placed by
the hands of the virgins in the building of the tower.” “Since you take
an interest in everything,” he replied, “and examine minutely, hear
about the stones that were rejected. These all,” he said, “received the
name of God, and they received also the strength of these virgins.
Having received, then, these spirits, they were made strong, and were
with the servants of God; and theirs was one spirit, and one body, and
one clothing. For they were of the same mind, and wrought righteousness.
After a certain time, however, they were persuaded by the women whom you
saw clothed in black, and having their shoulders exposed and their hair
dishevelled, and beautiful in appearance. Having seen these women, they
desired to have them, and clothed themselves with their strength, and
put off the strength of the virgins. These, accordingly, were rejected
from the house of God, and were given over to these women. But they who
were not deceived by the beauty of these women remained in the house of
God. You have,” he said, “the explanation of those who were rejected.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p34.1"></span>Chap. XIV.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p35"></span>“What, then, sir,” I said, “if these men,
being such as they are, repent and put away their desires after these
women, and return again to the virgins, and walk in their strength and
in their works, shall they not enter into the house of God?” “They shall
enter in,” he said, “if they put away the works of these women, and put
on again the strength of the virgins, and walk in their works. For on
this account was there a cessation in the building, in order that, if
these repent, they may depart into the building of the tower. But if
they do not repent, then others will come in their place, and these at
the end will be cast out. For all these things I gave thanks to the
Lord, because He had pity on all that call upon His name; and sent the
angel of repentance to us who sinned against Him, and renewed our
spirit; and when we were already destroyed, and had no hope of life, He
restored us to newness of life.” “Now, sir,” I continued, “show me why
the tower was not built upon the ground, but upon the rock and upon the
gate.” “Are you still,” he said, “without sense and understanding?” “I
must, sir,” I said, “ask you of all things, because I am wholly unable
to understand them; for all these things are great and glorious, and
difficult for man to understand.” “Listen,” he said: “the name of the
Son of God is great, and cannot be contained, and supports the whole
world. <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) If, then, the whole
creation is supported by the <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ix-Page_49"></span>Son of God, what think ye of those who are
called by Him, and bear the name of the Son of God, and walk in His
commandments? do you see what kind of persons He supports? Those who
bear His name with their whole heart. He Himself, accordingly, became a
foundation <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) to them, and supports
them with joy, because they are not ashamed to bear His name.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p37.3"></span>Chap. XV. <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367)

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p39"></span>“Explain to me, sir,” I said, “the names
of these virgins, and of those women who were clothed in black raiment.”
“Hear,” he said, “the names of the stronger virgins who stood at the
corners. The first is Faith, <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) the
second Continence, the third Power, the fourth Patience. And the others
standing in the midst of these have the following names: Simplicity,
Innocence, Purity, Cheerfulness, Truth, Understanding, Harmony, Love. He
who bears these names and that of the Son of God will be able to enter
into the kingdom of God. Hear, also,” he continued, “the names of the
women who had the black garments; and of these four are stronger than
the rest. The first is Unbelief, the second: Incontinence, the third
Disobedience, the fourth Deceit. And their followers are called Sorrow,
Wickedness, Wantonness, Anger, Falsehood, Folly, Backbiting, Hatred. The
servant of God who bears these names shall see, indeed, the kingdom of
God, but shall not enter into it.” “And the stones, sir,” I said, “which
were taken out of the pit and fitted into the building: what are they?”
“The first,” he said, “the ten, viz., that were placed as a foundation,
are the first generation, and the twenty-five the second generation, of
righteous men; and the thirty-five are the prophets of God and His
ministers; and the forty are the apostles and teachers of the preaching
of the Son of God.” <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) “Why, then,
sir,” I asked, “did the virgins carry these stones also through the
gate, and give them for the building of the tower?” “Because,” he
answered, “these were the first who bore these spirits, and they never
departed from each other, neither the spirits from the men nor the men
from the spirits, but the spirits remained with them until their falling
asleep. And unless they had had these spirits with them, they would not
have been of use for the building of this tower.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p41.3"></span>Chap. XVI.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p42"></span>“Explain to me a little further, sir,” I
said. “What is it that you desire?” he asked. “Why, sir,” I said, “did
these stones ascend out of the pit, and be applied to the building of
the tower, after having borne these spirits?” “They were obliged,” he
answered, “to ascend through water in order that they might be made
alive; for, unless they laid aside the deadness of their life, they
could not in any other way enter into the kingdom of God. Accordingly,
those also who fell asleep received the seal of the Son of God. For,” he
continued, “before a man bears the name of the Son of God <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) he is dead; but when he receives the
seal he lays aside his deadness, and obtains life. The seal, then, is
the water: they descend into the water dead, and they arise alive. And
to them, accordingly, was this seal preached, and they made use of it
that they might enter into the kingdom of God.” “Why, sir,” I asked,
“did the forty stones also ascend with them out of the pit, having
already received the seal?” “Because,” he said, “these apostles and
teachers who preached the name of the Son of God, after falling asleep
in the power and faith of the Son of God, preached it not only to those
who were asleep, but themselves also gave them the seal of the
preaching. Accordingly they descended with them into the water, and
again ascended. \[But these descended alive and rose up again alive;
whereas they who had previously fallen asleep descended dead, but rose
up again alive. <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) \] By these,
then, were they quickened and made to know the name of the Son of God.
For this reason also did they ascend with them, and were fitted along
with them into the building of the tower, and, untouched by the chisel,
were built in along with them. For they slept in righteousness and in
great purity, but only they had not this seal. You have accordingly the
explanation of these also.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p44.1"></span>Chap. XVII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p45"></span>“I understand, sir,” I replied. “Now,
sir,” I continued, “explain to me, with respect to the mountains, why
their forms are various and diverse.” “Listen,” he said: “these
mountains are the twelve tribes, which inhabit the whole world. <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) The Son of God, accordingly, was
preached unto them by the apostles.” “But why are the mountains of
various kinds, some having one form, and others another? Explain that to
me, sir.” “Listen,” he answered: “these twelve tribes that inhabit the
whole world are twelve nations. And they vary in prudence and
understanding. As numerous, then, as are the varieties of the mountains
which you saw, <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ix-Page_50"></span>are also the diversities of mind and
understanding among these nations. And I will explain to you the actions
of each one.” “First, sir,” I said, “explain this: why, when the
mountains are so diverse, their stones, when placed in the building,
became one colour, shining like those also that had ascended out of the
pit.” “Because,” he said, “all the nations that dwell under heaven were
called by hearing and believing upon the name of the Son of God. <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) Having, therefore, received the seal,
they had one understanding and one mind; and their faith became one, and
their love one, and with the name they bore also the spirits of the
virgins. <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) On this account the
building of the tower became of one colour, bright as the sun. But after
they had entered into the same place, and became one body, certain of
these defiled themselves, and were expelled from the race of the
righteous, and became again what they were before, or rather worse.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p48.2"></span>Chap. XVIII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p49"></span>“How, sir,” I said, “did they become
worse, after having known God?” <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375)
“He that does not know God,” he answered, “and practices evil, receives
a certain chastisement for his wickedness; but he that has known God,
ought not any longer to do evil, but to do good. If, accordingly, when
he ought to do good, he do evil, does not he appear to do greater evil
than he who does not know God? For this reason, they who have not known
God and do evil are condemned to death; but they who have known God, and
have seen His mighty works, and still continue in evil, shall be
chastised doubly, and shall die for ever. <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) In this way, then, will the Church of
God be purified. For as you saw the stones rejected from the tower, and
delivered to the evil spirits, and cast out thence, so \[they also shall
be cast out, and <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) \] there shall
be one body of the purified; as the tower also became, as it were, of
one stone after its purification. In like manner also shall it be with
the Church of God, after it has been purified, and has rejected the
wicked, and the hypocrites, and the blasphemers, and the waverers, and
those who commit wickedness of different kinds. After these have been
cast away, the Church of God shall be one body, of one mind, of one
understanding, of one faith, of one love. And then the Son of God will
be exceeding glad, and shall rejoice over them, because He has received
His people pure.” <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) “All these
things, sir,” I said, “are great and glorious.”

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p54"></span>“Moreover, sir,” I said, “explain to me
the power and the actions of each one of the mountains, that every soul,
trusting in the Lord, and hearing it, may glorify His great, and
marvellous, and glorious name.” “Hear,” he said, “the diversity of the
mountains and of the twelve nations.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p54.1"></span>Chap. XIX.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p55"></span>“From the first mountain, which was
black, they that believed are the following: apostates and blasphemers
against the Lord, and betrayers of the servants of God. To these
repentance is not open; but death lies before them, and on this account
also are they black, for their race is a lawless one. And from the
second mountain, which was bare, they who believed are the following:
hypocrites, and teachers of wickedness. And these, accordingly, are like
the former, not having any fruits of righteousness; for as their
mountain was destitute of fruit, so also such men have a name indeed,
but are empty of faith, and there is no fruit of truth in them. They
indeed have repentance in their power, if they repent quickly; but if
they are slow in so doing, they shall die along with the former.” “Why,
sir,” I said, “have these repentance, but the former not? for their
actions are nearly the same.” “On this account,” he said, “have these
repentance, because they did not blaspheme their Lord, nor become
betrayers of the servants of God; but on account of their desire of
possessions they became hypocritical, and each one taught according to
the desires of men that were sinners. But they will suffer a certain
punishment; and repentance is before them, because they were not
blasphemers or traitors.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p55.1"></span>Chap. XX.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p56"></span>“And from the third mountain, which had
thorns and thistles, they who believed are the following. There are some
of them rich, and others immersed in much business. The thistles are the
rich, and the thorns are they who are immersed in much business. Those,
\[accordingly, who are entangled in many various kinds of business, do
not <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) \] cleave to the servants of
God, but wander away, being choked by their business transactions; and
the rich cleave with difficulty to the servants of God, fearing lest
these should ask something of them. Such persons, accordingly, shall
have difficulty in entering the kingdom of God. For as it is
disagreeable to walk among thistles with naked feet, so also it is hard
for such to enter the kingdom of God. <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) But to all these repentance, and that
speedy, is open, in order that what they did not do in former <span
id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span id="ii.iv.ix-Page_51"></span>times they
may make up for in these days, and do some good, and they shall live
unto God. But if they abide in their deeds, they shall be delivered to
those women, who will put them to death.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p58.3"></span>Chap. XXI.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p59"></span>“And from the fourth mountain, which had
much grass, the upper parts of the plants green, and the parts about the
roots withered, and some also scorched by the sun, they who believed are
the following: the doubtful, and they who have the Lord upon their lips,
but have Him not in their heart. On this account their foundations are
withered, and have no strength; and their words alone live, while their
works are dead. Such persons are \[neither alive nor <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) \] dead. They resemble, therefore, the
waverers: for the wavering are neither withered nor green, being neither
living nor dead. For as their blades, on seeing the sun, were withered,
so also the wavering, when they hear of affliction, on account of their
fear, worship idols, and are ashamed of the name of their Lord. <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) Such, then, are neither alive nor
dead. But these also may yet live, if they repent quickly; and if they
do not repent, they are already delivered to the women, who take away
their life.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p61.1"></span>Chap. XXII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p62"></span>“And from the fifth mountain, which had
green grass, and was rugged, they who believed are the following:
believers, indeed, but slow to learn, and obstinate, and pleasing
themselves, wishing to know everything, and knowing nothing at all. On
account of this obstinacy of theirs, understanding departed from them,
and foolish senselessness entered into them. And they praise themselves
as having wisdom, and desire to become teachers, although destitute of
sense. On account, therefore, of this loftiness of mind, many became
vain, exalting themselves: for self-will and empty confidence is a great
demon. Of these, accordingly, many were rejected, but some repented and
believed, and subjected themselves to those that had understanding,
knowing their own foolishness. And to the rest of this class repentance
is open; for they were not wicked, but rather foolish, and without
understanding. If these therefore repent, they will live unto God; but
if they do not repent, they shall have their dwelling with the women who
wrought wickedness among them.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p62.1"></span>Chap. XXIII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p63"></span>“And those from the sixth mountain, which
had clefts large and small, and decayed grass in the clefts, who
believed, were the following: they who occupy the small clefts are those
who bring charges against one another, and by reason of their slanders
have decayed in the faith. Many of them, however, repented; and the rest
also will repent when they hear my commandments, for their slanders are
small, and they will quickly repent. But they who occupy the large
clefts are persistent in their slanders, and vindictive in their anger
against each other. These, therefore, were thrown away from the tower,
and rejected from having a part in its building. Such persons,
accordingly, shall have difficulty in living. If our God and Lord, who
rules over all things, and has power over all His creation, does not
remember evil against those who confess their sins, but is merciful,
does man, who is corruptible and full of sins, remember evil against a
fellow-man, as if he were able to destroy or to save him? <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) I, the angel of repentance, say unto
you, As many of you as are of this way of thinking, lay it aside, and
repent, and the Lord will heal your former sins, if you purify
yourselves from this demon; but if not, you will be delivered over to
him for death.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p64.3"></span>Chap. XXIV.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p65"></span>“And those who believed from the seventh
mountain, on which the grass was green and flourishing, and the whole of
the mountain fertile, and every kind of cattle and the fowls of heaven
were feeding on the grass on this mountain, and the grass on which they
pastured became more abundant, were the following: they were always
simple, and harmless, and blessed, bringing no charges against one
another, but always rejoicing greatly because of the servants of God,
and being clothed with the holy spirit of these virgins, and always
having pity on every man, and giving aid from their own labour to every
man, without reproach and without hesitation. <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) The Lord, therefore, seeing their
simplicity and all their meekness, multiplied them amid the labours of
their hands, and gave them grace in all their doings. And I, the angel
of repentance, say to you who are such, Continue to be such as these,
and your seed will never be blotted out; for the Lord has made trial of
you, and inscribed you in the number of us, and the whole of your seed
will dwell with the Son of God; for ye have received of His Spirit.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p66.3"></span>Chap. XXV.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p67"></span>“And they who believed from the eighth
mountain, where were the many fountains, and where all the creatures of
God drank of the fountains, were the following: apostles, and teachers,
who preached to the whole world, and who taught solemnly and purely the
word of the Lord, and <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ix-Page_52"></span>did not at all fall into evil desires, but
walked always in righteousness and truth, according as they had received
the Holy Spirit. Such persons, therefore, shall enter in with the
angels.” <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385)

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p68.2"></span>Chap. XXVI.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p69"></span>“And they who believed from the ninth
mountain, which was deserted, and had in it creeping things and wild
beasts which destroy men, were the following: they who had the stains as
servants, <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) who discharged their
duty ill, and who plundered widows and orphans of their livelihood, and
gained possessions for themselves from the ministry, which they had
received. <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) If, therefore, they
remain under the dominion of the same desire, they are dead, and there
is no hope of life for them; but if they repent, and finish their
ministry in a holy manner, they shall be able to live. And they who were
covered with scabs are those who have denied their Lord, and have not
returned to Him again; but becoming withered and desert-like, and not
cleaving to the servants of God, but living in solitude, they destroy
their own souls. For as a vine, when left within an enclosure, and
meeting with neglect, is destroyed, and is made desolate by the weeds,
and in time grows wild, and is no longer of any use to its master, so
also are such men as have given themselves up, and become useless to
their Lord, from having contracted savage habits. These men, therefore,
have repentance in their power, unless they are found to have denied
from the heart; but if any one is found to have denied from the heart, I
do not know if he may live. And I say this not for these present days,
in order that any one who has denied may obtain repentance, for it is
impossible for him to be saved who now intends to deny his Lord; but to
those who denied Him long ago, repentance seems to be possible. If,
therefore, any one intends to repent, let him do so quickly, before the
tower is completed; for if not, he will be utterly destroyed by the
women. And the chipped stones are the deceitful and the slanderers; and
the wild beasts which you saw on the ninth mountain, are the same. For
as wild beasts destroy and kill a man by their poison, so also do the
words of such men destroy and ruin a man. These, accordingly, are
mutilated in their faith, on account of the deeds which they have done
in themselves; yet some repented, and were saved. And the rest, who are
of such a character, can be saved if they repent; but if they do not
repent, they will perish with those women, whose strength they have
assumed.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p71.2"></span>Chap. XXVII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p72"></span>“And from the tenth mountain, where were
trees which overshadowed certain sheep, they who believed were the
following: bishops <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) given to
hospitality, who always gladly received into their houses the servants
of God, without dissimulation. And the bishops never failed to protect,
by their service, the widows, and those who were in want, and always
maintained a holy conversation. All these, accordingly, shall be
protected by the Lord for ever. They who do these things are honourable
before God, and their place is already with the angels, if they remain
to the end serving God.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p73.1"></span>Chap. XXVIII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p74"></span>“And from the eleventh mountain, where
were trees full of fruits, adorned with fruits of various kinds, they
who believed were the following: they who suffered for the name of the
Son of God, and who also suffered cheerfully with their whole heart, and
laid down their lives.” “Why, then, sir,” I said, “do all these trees
bear fruit, and some of them fairer than the rest?” “Listen,” he said:
“all who once suffered for the name of the Lord are honourable before
God; and of all these the sins were remitted, because they suffered for
the name of the Son of God. <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) And
why their fruits are of various kinds, and some of them superior,
listen. All,” he continued, “who were brought before the authorities and
were examined, and did not deny, but suffered cheerfully—these are held
in greater honour with God, and of these the fruit is superior; but all
who were cowards, and in doubt, and who reasoned in their hearts whether
they would deny or confess, and yet suffered, of these the fruit is
less, because that suggestion came into their hearts; for that
suggestion—that a servant should deny his Lord—is evil. Have a care,
therefore, ye who are planning such things, lest that suggestion remain
in your hearts, and <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ix-Page_53"></span>ye perish unto God. And ye who suffer for
His name ought to glorify God, because He deemed you worthy to bear His
name, that all your sins might be healed. \[Therefore, rather deem
yourselves happy\], and think that ye have done a great thing, if any of
you suffer on account of God. The Lord bestows upon you life, and ye do
not understand, for your sins were heavy; but if you had not suffered
for the name of the Lord, ye would have died to God on account of your
sins. These things I say to you who are hesitating about denying or
confessing: acknowledge that ye have the Lord, lest, denying Him, ye be
delivered up to prison. If the heathen chastise their slaves, when one
of them denies his master, what, think ye, will your Lord do, who has
authority over all men? Put away these counsels out of your hearts, that
you may live continually unto God.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p75.8"></span>Chap. XXIX.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p76"></span>“And they who believed from the twelfth
mountain, which was white, are the following: they are as infant
children, in whose hearts no evil originates; nor did they know what
wickedness is, but always remained as children. Such accordingly,
without doubt, dwell in the kingdom of God, because they defiled in
nothing the commandments of God; but they remained like children all the
days of their life in the same mind. All of you, then, who shall remain
stedfast, and be as children, <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390)
without doing evil, will be more honoured than all who have been
previously mentioned; for all infants are honourable before God, and are
the first persons with Him. <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391)
Blessed, then, are ye who put away wickedness from yourselves, and put
on innocence. As the first of all will you live unto God.”

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p79"></span>After he had finished the similitudes of
the mountains, I said to him, “Sir, explain to me now about the stones
that were taken out of the plain, and put into the building instead of
the stones that were taken out of the tower; and about the round stones
that were put into the building; and those that still remain round.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p79.1"></span>Chap. XXX.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p80"></span>“Hear,” he answered, “about all these
also. The stones taken out of the plain and put into the building of the
tower instead of those that were rejected, are the roots of this white
mountain. When, therefore, they who believed from the white mountain
were all found guileless, the Lord of the tower commanded those from the
roots of this mountain to be cast into the building of the tower; for he
knew that if these stones were to go to the building of the tower, they
would remain bright, and not one of them become black. <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) But if he had so resolved with respect
to the other mountains, it would have been necessary for him to visit
that tower again, and to cleanse it. Now all these persons were found
white who believed, and who will yet believe, for they are of the same
race. This is a happy race, because it is innocent. Hear now, further,
about these round and shining stones. All these also are from the white
mountain. Hear, moreover, why they were found round: because their
riches had obscured and darkened them a little from the truth, although
they never departed from God; nor did any evil word proceed out of their
mouth, but all justice, virtue, and truth. When the Lord, therefore, saw
the mind of these persons, that they were born good, <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) and could be good, He ordered their
riches to be cut down, not to be taken <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) away for ever, that they might be able
to do some good with what was left them; and they will live unto God,
because they are of a good race. Therefore were they rounded a little by
the chisel, and put in the building of the tower.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p83.2"></span>Chap. XXXI.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p84"></span>“But the other round stones, which had
not yet been adapted to the building of the tower, and had not yet
received the seal, were for this reason put back into their place,
because they are exceedingly round. Now this age must be cut down in
these things, and in the vanities of their riches, and then they will
meet in the kingdom of God; for they must of necessity enter into the
kingdom of God, because the Lord has blessed this innocent race. Of this
race, therefore, no one will perish; for although any of them be tempted
by the most wicked devil, and commit sin, he will quickly return to his
Lord. I deem you happy, I, who am the messenger of repentance, whoever
of you are innocent as children, <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395)
because your part is good, and honourable before God. Moreover, I say to
you all, who have received the seal of the Son of God, be clothed with
simplicity, and be not mindful of offences, nor remain in wickedness.
Lay aside, therefore, the recollection of your offences and
bitternesses, and you will be formed in one spirit. And heal and take
away from you those wicked schisms, that if the Lord of the flocks come,
He may rejoice concerning you. And He will rejoice, if He find all
things sound, and none of you shall perish. But if He find any one of
these sheep strayed, woe to the shepherds! And if the shepherds
themselves have <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ix-Page_54"></span>strayed, what answer will they give Him for
their flocks? <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) Will they
perchance say that they were harassed by their flocks? They will not be
believed, for the thing is incredible that a shepherd could suffer from
his flock; rather will he be punished on account of his falsehood. And I
myself am a shepherd, and I am under a most stringent necessity of
rendering an account of you.

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p86.3"></span>Chap. XXXII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p87"></span>“Heal yourselves, therefore, while the
tower is still building. The Lord dwells in men that love peace, because
He loved peace; but from the contentious and the utterly wicked He is
far distant. Restore to Him, therefore, a spirit sound as ye received
it. For when you have given to a fuller a new garment, and desire to
receive it back entire at the end, if, then, the fuller return you a
torn garment, will you take it from him, and not rather be angry, and
abuse him, saying, ‘I gave you a garment that was entire: why have you
rent it, and made it useless, so that it can be of no use on account of
the rent which you have made in it?’ Would you not say all this to the
fuller about the rent which you found in your garment? If, therefore,
you grieve about your garment, and complain because you have not
received it entire, what do you think the Lord will do to you, who gave
you a sound spirit, which you have rendered altogether useless, so that
it can be of no service to its possessor? for its use began to be
unprofitable, seeing it was corrupted by you. Will not the Lord,
therefore, because of this conduct of yours regarding His Spirit, act in
the same way, and deliver you over to death? Assuredly, I say, he will
do the same to all those whom He shall find retaining a recollection of
offences. <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) Do not trample His
mercy under foot, He says, but rather honour Him, because He is so
patient with your sins, and is not as ye are. Repent, for it is useful
to you.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.ix-p88.3"></span>Chap. XXXIII.

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p89"></span>“All these things which are written
above, I, the Shepherd, the messenger of repentance, have showed and
spoken to the servants of God. <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398)
If therefore ye believe, and listen to my words, and walk in them, and
amend your ways, you shall have it in your power to live: but if you
remain in wickedness, and in the recollection of offences, no sinner of
that class will live unto God. All these words which I had to say have
been spoken unto you.”

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p91"></span>The Shepherd said to me, “Have you asked
me everything?” And I replied, “Yes, sir.” “Why did you not ask me about
the shape of the stones that were put into the building, that I might
explain to you why we filled up the shapes?” And I said, “I forgot,
sir.” “Hear now, then,” he said, “about this also. These are they who
have now heard my commandments, and repented with their whole hearts.
And when the Lord saw that their repentance was good and pure, and that
they were able to remain in it, He ordered their former sins to be
blotted out. <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) For these shapes
were their sins, and they were levelled down, that they might not
appear.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_344"></span>[43:345](0020031.htm#fr_344) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p2"></span> The Spirit.—*Vat*. \[He is called “the
Spirit of Christ” by St. Peter (i. 11); and perhaps this is a key to the
non-dogmatic language of Hermas, if indeed he is here speaking of the
Holy Spirit personally, and not of the Son exclusively. See Simil. v. 6,
[Isa. v. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p2.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_345"></span>[43:346](0020031.htm#fr_345) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p3"></span> To a fruitful hill.—*Pal*. Omitted in
Vat. \[Hermas delights in the picturesque, and introduces Arcadia in
harmony with his pastoral fiction.\]

<span id="fn_346"></span>[43:347](0020031.htm#fr_346) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p4"></span> Omitted in Lips.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[43:348](0020031.htm#fr_347) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p6"></span> \[As of Eden. [Gen. iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p6.1"></span>;
[Rev. xxi. 11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p6.2"></span>. The *Tsohar.*\]

<span id="fn_348"></span>[43:349](0020031.htm#fr_348) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p8"></span> \[Vision iii. 1, 2.\]

<span id="fn_349"></span>[43:350](0020031.htm#fr_349) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p10"></span> All carried the gate.—*Pal*.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[43:351](0020031.htm#fr_350) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p11"></span> Omitted in Lips.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[45:352](0020031.htm#fr_351) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p13"></span> Omitted in Lips.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[45:353](0020031.htm#fr_352) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p14"></span> And they replied that he would forthwith
come.—*Vat*.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[45:354](0020031.htm#fr_353) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p16"></span> [2 Esdras ii.
43](../../../bib/apo/es2002.htm#043)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[45:355](0020031.htm#fr_354) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p17"></span> Omitted in Lips. The text is from Vat.;
slight variations in Pal. And Æth.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[45:356](0020031.htm#fr_355) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p18"></span> Also omitted from Lips. The text is in
all the translations.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[45:357](0020031.htm#fr_356) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p20"></span> Omitted in Lips. The text is in all the
translations.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[45:358](0020031.htm#fr_357) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p21"></span> \[[Mark xiii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#036)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p21.1"></span>;
[Matt. xxiv. 46-51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#046)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p21.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_358"></span>[47:359](0020031.htm#fr_358) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p26"></span> \[This curious chapter, be it
remembered, is but a dream and a similitude. In the pure homes of
Christians, it is almost unintelligible. Amid the abominations of
heathenism, it taught a lesson which afterwards required enforcement by
the canons and stern discipline of the whole Chuirch. The lesson is,
that what “begins in the spirit” may “end in the flesh.” Those who
shunning the horrible inpurities of the pagans abused spiritual
relationships as “brothers and sisters,” were on the verge of a
precipice. “To the pure, all things are pure;” but they who presume on
this great truth to indulge in kissings and like familiarities are
tempting a dangerous downfall. In this vision, Hermas resorted to
“watching and praying;” and the virgins rejoiced because he thus saved
himself. The behaviour of the maidens was what heathen women constantly
practiced, and what Christian women, bred in such habits of life, did,
perhaps, without evil thought, relying on their “sun-clad power of
chastity.” Nothing in this picture is the product of Christianity,
except the *self-mastery* inculcated as the only safeguard even amongst
good women. But see “Elucidation,” at end of this book.\]

<span id="fn_359"></span>[47:360](0020031.htm#fr_359) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p28"></span> \[Hermas confirms the doctrine of St.
John (i. 3); also [Col. 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p28.1"></span>.
Of this Athanasius would approve.\]

<span id="fn_360"></span>[47:361](0020031.htm#fr_360) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p29"></span> \[[1 Pet. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p29.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_361"></span>[48:362](0020031.htm#fr_361) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p30"></span> *His.* God’s.—*Lips*.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[48:363](0020031.htm#fr_362) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p32"></span> \[[Exod.
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#012),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#029)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p32.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_363"></span>[48:364](0020031.htm#fr_363) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p33"></span> Omitted in Lips. The text in Vat. and
Pal. The Æth different in form, but in meaning the same.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[48:365](0020031.htm#fr_364) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p34"></span> *Lord*. God.—*Vat.*

<span id="fn_365"></span>[48:366](0020031.htm#fr_365) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p36"></span> \[[Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p36.1"></span>.
Hermas drips with Scripture like a honeycomb.\]

<span id="fn_366"></span>[49:367](0020031.htm#fr_366) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p37"></span> \[[Isa. xxviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p37.1"></span>;
[1 Cor. iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p37.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_367"></span>[49:368](0020031.htm#fr_367) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p37.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p38"></span>This portion of the Leipzig Codex is much
eaten away, and therefore the text is derived to a considerable extent
from the translations.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[49:369](0020031.htm#fr_368) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p40"></span> \[The tenacity with which Hermas
everywhere exalts the primary importance of Faith, makes it inexcusable
that he should be charged with mere legalizing morality.\]

<span id="fn_369"></span>[49:370](0020031.htm#fr_369) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p41"></span> \[[Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p41.1"></span>;
[Rev xxi. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p41.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_370"></span>[49:371](0020031.htm#fr_370) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p43"></span> *The name of the Son of God.* The name
of God.—*Lips.* \[[1 John 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#012)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p43.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_371"></span>[49:372](0020031.htm#fr_371) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p44"></span> All the translations and Clemens
Alexandrinus (*Strom.*, vi. 6, 46) have this passage. It is omitted in
Lips.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[49:373](0020031.htm#fr_372) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p46"></span> \[[Rev. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p46.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_373"></span>[50:374](0020031.htm#fr_373) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p47"></span> *Name of the Son of God.* Name of
God.—*Lips.* \[[Rom. x. 17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p47.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_374"></span>[50:375](0020031.htm#fr_374) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p48"></span> \[[Rev. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p48.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_375"></span>[50:376](0020031.htm#fr_375) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p50"></span> *God* in Pal.; *Lord* in Vat. and Æth.;
*Christ* in Lips.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[50:377](0020031.htm#fr_376) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p51"></span> \[[Luke
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p51.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_377"></span>[50:378](0020031.htm#fr_377) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p52"></span> Omittted in Vat., Æth., Lips.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[50:379](0020031.htm#fr_378) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p53"></span> \[[Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p53.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_379"></span>[50:380](0020031.htm#fr_379) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p57"></span> Omitted in Lips. The text from Vat.
Substantially the same in the other two. \[[Matt. xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p57.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_380"></span>[50:381](0020031.htm#fr_380) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p58"></span> [Matt.
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#024)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p58.1"></span>.
\[[Mark x. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p58.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_381"></span>[51:382](0020031.htm#fr_381) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p60"></span> Omitted in Lips.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[51:383](0020031.htm#fr_382) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p61"></span> \[The imagery of our Lord’s parables
everywhere apparent. Also, the words of Scripture recur constantly.\]

<span id="fn_383"></span>[51:384](0020031.htm#fr_383) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p64"></span> [Jas. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p64.1"></span>.
\[[Matt. xviii. 33](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#033)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p64.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_384"></span>[51:385](0020031.htm#fr_384) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p66"></span> [Ecclus. xx.
15](../../../bib/apo/sir020.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p66.1"></span>,
xli. 22; [Jas. i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p66.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[52:386](0020031.htm#fr_385) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p68"></span> *Cf.* Donaldson’s *Hist. of Christ.
Lit.*, vol. i. p. 291. \[This beautiful chapter, and its parable of the
fountains of living water, may well be read with that passage of
Leighton which delighted Coleridge: Com. on [1 Pet. i.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p68.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_386"></span>[52:387](0020031.htm#fr_386) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ix-p70.1"></span>διάκονοι</span>. \[*Deacons*, evidently, or
*stewards*. [Acts vi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p70.2"></span>\]

<span id="fn_387"></span>[52:388](0020031.htm#fr_387) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p70.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p71"></span> \[[Ezek. xxxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p71.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_388"></span>[52:389](0020031.htm#fr_388) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p73"></span> *Bishops*. Bishops, that is, presidents
of the churches.—*Vat*. \[This textual peculiarity must have originated
at the period when the Ignatian use of *episcopus* was becoming
naturalized in Rome. It was originally common to all *pastors*, local or
regionary.\]

<span id="fn_389"></span>[52:390](0020031.htm#fr_389) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p75"></span> \[This passage (with Vision iii. 2, and
especially Similitude v. 3) has been pressed into the service of those
who seek to find “super-erogatory merit” in the Fathers. See [1 Cor.
vii. 38](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#038)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p75.1"></span>. But why not begin with the Scriptures which
Hermas doubtless has in mind, such as [Rev.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p75.2"></span>,
“They are worthy”? Does this ascribe to them any merit apart from
(“worthy is the Lamb”) the only meritorious cause of salvation? So also
[Rev. vii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p75.3"></span>, xiv. 4, 5. The primitive Fathers accepted
such truths like innocent children, and loved them. They believed St.
Paul as to degrees of glory ([1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p75.4"></span>),
and our Lord Himself as to the awards ([Matt. xx.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p75.5"></span>) of mercy to fruits of grace: and they are
no more responsible for forced constructions that have been put upon
them by afterthought and subsequent heresy, then our blessed Lord can be
charged with all that has overloaded His precious sayings ([Matt. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p75.6"></span> or
xiv. 18). The principle of deficient works of faith, which is the
corresponding idea of the negative side, appears in St. Paul ([1 Cor.
iii. 13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p75.7"></span>), and has been abused to sustain the whole
system of creature merit, and the monstrous atfterthought of purgatory.
Those, therefore, who read such ideas into “The Ante-Nicene Fathers,” to
diminish their credit, often, unintentionally (1) help the perverters of
truth to claim the Fathers, and (2) give them the like aid in claiming
the Scriptures. See p. 34, *supra*, note 3.\]

<span id="fn_390"></span>[53:391](0020031.htm#fr_390) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p77"></span> [Matt. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[53:392](0020031.htm#fr_391) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p78"></span> \[[Mark ix.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#036)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p78.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_392"></span>[53:393](0020031.htm#fr_392) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p81"></span> Here ends Codex Lipsiensis. The rest of
the text is from common translation corrected by the Palatine and
Æthiopic.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[53:394](0020031.htm#fr_393) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p82"></span> \[*Born good.* Not in the text of
Gebhardt and Harnack (the Greek is wanting); nor do they note any such
text, though the Æthiopic favours it. See p. 42, *supra*, note 2.\]

<span id="fn_394"></span>[53:395](0020031.htm#fr_394) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p83"></span> \[Here again the Latin has the reading
before noted, on the *circumcision* of wealth, p. 15, note 2, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_395"></span>[53:396](0020031.htm#fr_395) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p85"></span> [Matt. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p85.1"></span>,
xix. 14.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[54:397](0020031.htm#fr_396) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p86"></span> \[[Jer. xiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p86.1"></span>;
[Zech. xi. 15-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015)<span
id="ii.iv.ix-p86.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_397"></span>[54:398](0020031.htm#fr_397) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p88"></span> \[[Jas. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p88.1"></span>.
Who can fail to feel the searching spirit of the gospel here? [Matt.
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span id="ii.iv.ix-p88.2"></span>,
vi. 14.\]

<span id="fn_398"></span>[54:399](0020031.htm#fr_398) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p90"></span> *Servants of God.* Servant of the
Lord.—*Æth.*

<span id="fn_399"></span>[54:400](0020031.htm#fr_399) <span
id="ii.iv.ix-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ix-p92"></span> \[Heb. viii 12, x. 17.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Similitude Tenth. Concerning Repentance and
Alms-Giving.](0020032)
