[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020232)  [Next](0020234) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxv"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Argument Continued and Concluded.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p1"></span>Nor again is it the happiness of soul
separated from body: for we are not inquiring about the life or final
cause of either of the parts of which man consists, but of the being who
is composed of both; for such is every man who has a share in this
present existence, and there must be some appropriate end proposed for
this life. But if it is the end of both parts together, and this can be
discovered neither while they are still living in the present state of
existence through the numerous causes already mentioned, nor yet when
the soul is in a state of separation, because the man cannot be said to
exist when the body is dissolved, and indeed entirely scattered abroad,
even though the soul continue by itself—it is absolutely necessary that
the end of a man’s being should appear in some reconstitution of the two
together, and of the same living being. And as this follows of
necessity, there must by all means be a resurrection of the bodies which
are dead, or even entirely dissolved, and the same men must be formed
anew, since the law of nature ordains the end not absolutely, nor as the
end of any men whatsoever, but of the same men who passed through the
previous life; but it is impossible for the same men to be reconstituted
unless the same bodies are restored to the same souls. But that the same
soul should obtain the same body is impossible in any other way, and
possible only by the resurrection; for if this takes place, an end
befitting the nature of men follows also. And we shall make no mistake
in saying, that the final cause of an intelligent life and rational
judgment, is to be occupied uninterruptedly with those objects to which
the natural reason is chiefly and primarily adapted, and to delight
unceasingly in the contemplation of *Him who is*, and of His decrees,
notwithstanding that the majority of men, because they are affected too
passionately and too violently by things below, pass through life
without attaining this object. For the large number of those who fail of
the end that belongs to them does not make void the common lot, since
the examination relates to individuals, and the reward or punishment of
lives ill or well spent is proportioned to the merit of each.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p2"></span>\[This concluding chapter is of itself a
masterpiece, and comforts my own soul unspeakably, as proving that this
life is very precious, if only directed to the end from which we are
created. Blest be Athenagoras for completing what St. Paul began on the
Areopagus, and for giving us “beauty for ashes” out of the gardens of
Plato. Now we find what power there was in the apostle’s word, when he
preached to the Athenians, “Jesus and the resurrection.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA](0020234)
