[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020175)  [Next](0020177) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.vi"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Opinions of the Philosophers as to the One God.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p1"></span>Philolaus, too, when he says that all
things are included in God as in a stronghold, teaches that He is one,
and that He is superior to matter. Lysis and Opsimus <span
id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712) thus define God: the one says that He
is an ineffable number, the other that He is the excess of the greatest
number beyond that which comes nearest to it. So that since ten is the
greatest number according to the Pythagoreans, being the
Tetractys, <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713) and containing all
the arithmetic and harmonic principles, and the Nine stands next to it,
God is a unit—that is, one. For the greatest number exceeds the next
least by one. Then there are Plato and Aristotle—not that I am about to
go through all that the philosophers have said about God, as if I wished
to exhibit a complete summary of their opinions; for I know that, as you
excel all men in intelligence and in the power of your rule, in the same
proportion do you surpass them all in an accurate acquaintance with all
learning, cultivating as you do each several branch with more success
than even those who have devoted themselves exclusively to any one. But,
inasmuch as it is impossible to demonstrate without the citation of
names that we are not alone in confining the notion of God to unity, I
have ventured on an enumeration of opinions. Plato, then, says, “To find
out the Maker and Father of this universe is difficult; and, when found,
it is impossible to declare Him to all,” <span
id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714) conceiving of one uncreated and <span
id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span id="v.ii.vi-Page_132"></span>eternal
God. And if he recognises others as well, such as the sun, moon, and
stars, yet he recognises them as created: “gods, offspring of gods, of
whom I am the Maker, and the Father of works which are indissoluble
apart from my will; but whatever is compounded can be dissolved.” <span
id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) If, therefore, Plato is not an atheist
for conceiving of one uncreated God, the Framer of the universe, neither
are we atheists who acknowledge and firmly hold that He is God who has
framed all things by the Logos, and holds them in being by His Spirit.
Aristotle, again, and his followers, recognising the existence of one
whom they regard as a sort of compound living creature (<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>ζῶον</span>), speak of God
as consisting of soul and body, thinking His body to be the etherial
space and the planetary stars and the sphere of the fixed stars, moving
in circles; but His soul, the reason which presides over the motion of
the body, itself not subject to motion, but becoming the cause of motion
to the other. The Stoics also, although by the appellations they employ
to suit the changes of matter, which they say is permeated by the Spirit
of God, they multiply the Deity in name, yet in reality they consider
God to be one. <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716) For, if God is an
artistic fire advancing methodically to the production of the several
things in the world, embracing in Himself all the seminal principles by
which each thing is produced in accordance with fate, and if His Spirit
pervades the whole world, then God is one according to them, being named
Zeus in respect of the fervid part (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>τὄ ζέον</span>) of matter, and Hera in respect
of the air (<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.vi-p6.2"></span>ὁ
ἀήρ</span>), and called by other names in respect of that particular
part of matter which He pervades.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_712"></span>[131:713](0020176.htm#fr_712) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p2"></span> Common text has <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>ὂψει</span>; we follow the text of Otto.
\[Gesner notes this corruption, and conjectures that it should be the
name of some philosopher.\]

<span id="fn_713"></span>[131:714](0020176.htm#fr_713) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p3"></span> One, two, three, and four together forming
*ten*.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[131:715](0020176.htm#fr_714) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p4"></span> *Timæus*, p. 28, C.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[132:716](0020176.htm#fr_715) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p5"></span> *Timæus,* p. 41, A.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[132:717](0020176.htm#fr_716) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p6"></span> \[We must not wonder at the scant praise
accorded by the Apologists to the truths embedded everywhere in Plato
and other heathen writers. They felt intensely, that “the world, by
wisdom, knew not God; and that it was their own mission to lead men to
the only source of true philosophy.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.—Superiority of the Christian Doctrine Respecting
God.](0020177)
