[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020216)  [Next](0020218) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.ix"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Absurdity of Arguing from Man’s Impotency.

<span id="v.iii.ix-p1"></span>As there are many things of more
importance to the inquiry before us, I beg to be excused from replying
for the present to those who take refuge in the works of men, and even
the constructors of them, who are unable to make anew such of their
works as are broken in pieces, or worn out by time, or otherwise
destroyed, and then from the analogy of potters and carpenters attempt
to show that God neither can will, nor if He willed would be able, to
raise again a body that is dead, or has been dissolved,—not considering
that by such reasoning they offer the grossest insult to God, putting,
as they do, on the same level the capabilities of things which are
altogether different, or rather the natures of those who use them, and
comparing the works of art with those of nature. To bestow any serious
attention on such arguments would be not undeserving of censure, for it
is really foolish to reply to superficial and trifling objections. It is
surely far more probable, yea, most absolutely true, to say that what is
impossible with men is possible with God. And if by this statement of
itself as probable, and by the whole investigation in which we have just
been engaged reason shows it to be possible, it is quite clear that it
is not impossible. No, nor is it such a thing as God could not will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.—It Cannot Be Shown that God Does Not Will a
Resurrection.](0020218)
