[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020032)  [Next](0020034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v"></span> <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="ii.v-Page_56"></span>

### <span id="ii.v-p0.1"></span>Elucidations.

#### <span id="ii.v-p0.2"></span>I.

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>The</span> reader has now had an opportunity of
judging for himself whether the internal evidence favours any other view
of the authorship of *The Shepherd*, than that which I have adopted. Its
apparent design is to meet the rising pestilence of Montanism, and the
perils of a secondary stage of Christianity. This it attempts to do by
an imaginary voice from the first period. Avoiding controversy, Hermas
presents, in the name of his earlier synonyme, a portraiture of the
morals and practical godliness which were recognised as “the way of
holiness” in the apostolic days. In so doing, he falls into
anachronisms, of course, as poets and romancers must. These are
sufficiently numerous to reveal the nature of his production, and to
prove that the author was not the Hermas of the story.

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span>The authorship was a puzzle and a problem
during the earlier discussions of the learned. An anonymous poem
(falsely ascribed to Tertullian, but very ancient) did, indeed, give a
clue to the solution:—

> <span id="ii.v-p2.1"></span> “—deinde Pius, Hermas cui germine
> frater,  
> Angelicus Pastor, quia tradita verba locutus.”  

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span>To say that there was no evidence to sustain
this, is to grant that it doubles the evidence when sufficient support
for it is discovered. This was supplied by the fragment found in Milan,
by the erudite and indefatigable Muratori, about a hundred and fifty
years ago. Its history, with very valuable notes on the fragment itself,
which is given entire, may be found in Routh’s *Reliquiæ*. <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) Or the English reader may consult
Westcott’s very luminous statement of the case. <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) I am sorry that Dr. Donaldson doubts
and objects; but he would not deny that experts, at least his
equals, <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) accept the Muratorian
Canon, which carries with it the historic testimony needed in the case
of Hermas. All difficulties disappear in the light of this evidence.
Hermas was brother of Pius, ninth Bishop of Rome (after Hyginus, *circ*.
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 157), and wrote
his prose idyl under the fiction of his *Pauline* predecessor’s name and
age. This accounts (1) for the existence of the work, (2) for its form
of allegory and prophesying, (3) for its anachronisms, (4) for its great
currency, and (5) for its circulation among the Easterns, which was
greater than it enjoyed in the West; and also (6) for their innocent
mistake in ascribing it to the elder Hermas.

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span>1. The Phrygian enthusiasm, like the
convulsionism of Paris <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) in the
last century, was a phenomenon not to be trifled with; especially when
it began to threaten the West. This work was produced to meet so great
an emergency.

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span>2. “Fire fights fire,” and prophesyings are
best met by prophesyings. These were rare among the Orthodox, but Hermas
undertook to restore those of the apostolic age; and I think this is
what is meant by the *tradita verba* of the old poem, i.e., words
“transmitted or bequeathed traditionally” from the times of Clement.
Irenæus, the contemporary of this Hermas, had received the traditions of
the same age from Polycarp: hence the greater probability of my
conjecture that the brother of Pius compiled many traditional
prophesyings of the first age.

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span>3. Supposing the work to be in fact what it
is represented to be in fiction, we have seen that it abounds with
anachronisms. As now explained, we can account for them: the second
Hermas forgets himself, like other poets, and mixes up his own period
with that which he endeavours to portray.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span id="ii.v-Page_57"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p11"></span>4 and 5. Written in Greek, its circulation in
the West was necessarily limited; but, as the plague of Montanism was
raging in the East, its Greek was a godsend, and enabled the Easterns to
introduce it everywhere as a *useful* book. Origen values it as such;
and, taking it without thought to be the work of the Pauline Hermas,
attributes to it, as a fancy of his own, <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) that kind of inspiration which
pertained to early “prophesyings.” This conjecture once started, “it
satisfied curiosity,” says Westcott, “and supplied the place of more
certain information; but, though it found acceptance, it acquired no new
strength.” <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414)

<span id="ii.v-p15"></span>6. Eusebius and Jerome <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) merely repeat the report as an *on
dit*, and on this slender authority it travelled down. The Pauline
Hermas was credited with it; and the critics, in their researches, find
multiplied traces of the one mistake, as did the traveller whose
circuits became a beaten road under the hoofs of his own horse.

<span id="ii.v-p17"></span>If the reader will now turn back to the
Introductory Note of the Edinburgh editors, he will find that the three
views of which they take any serious notice are harmonized by that we
have reached. (1) The work is unquestionably, on its face, the work of
the Pauline Hermas. (2) But this is attributable to the fact that it is
a fiction, or prose poem. (3) And hence it must be credited to the later
Hermas, whose name and authorship are alone supported by external
testimony, as well as internal evidence.

#### <span id="ii.v-p17.1"></span>II.

<span id="ii.v-p18"></span>(Similitude Ninth, cap. xi. p. 47, note 1.)

<span id="ii.v-p19"></span>Westcott is undoubtedly correct in connecting
this strange passage with one of the least defensible experiments of
early Christian living. Gibbon finds in this experiment nothing but an
opportunity for his scurrility. <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416)
A true philosopher will regard it very differently; and here, once and
for all, we may speak of it somewhat at length. The young believer, a
member, perhaps, of a heathen family, daily mixed up with abominable
manners, forced to meet everywhere, by day, the lascivious *hetæræ* of
the Greeks or those who are painted by Martial among the Latins, had no
refuge but in flying to the desert, or practising the most heroic
self-restraint if he remained with the relations and companions of his
youth. If he went to the bath, it was to see naked women wallowing with
vile men: if he slept upon the housetop, it was to throw down his mat or
rug in a promiscuous stye of men and women. <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) This alike with rich and poor; but the
latter were those among whom the Gospel found its more numerous
recruits, and it was just these who were least able to protect
themselves from pollutions. Their only resource was in that
self-mastery, out of which sprung the Encraty of Tatian and the
Montanism of Tertullian. Angelic purity was supposed to be attainable in
this life; and the experiment was doubtless attended with some success,
among the more resolute in fastings and prayer. Inevitably, however,
what was “begun in the spirit,” ended “in the flesh,” in many instances.
To live as brothers and sisters in the family of Christ, was a daring
experiment; especially in such a social atmosphere, and amid the
domestic habits of the heathen. Scandals ensued. Canonical censures were
made stringent by <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="ii.v-Page_58"></span>the Church; and, while the vices of men and the
peril of persecution multiplied the anchorites of the desert, this
mischief was crushed out, and made impossible for Christians. “The
sun-clad power of chastity,” which Hermas means to depict, was no doubt
gloriously exemplified among holy men and women, in those heroic ages.
The power of the Holy Ghost demonstrated, in many instances, how true it
is, that, “to the pure, all things are pure.” But the Gospel proscribes
everything like presumption and “leading into temptation.” The Church,
in dealing with social evils, often encouraged a recourse to
monasticism, in its pure form; but this also tended to corruption. To
charge Christianity, however, with rash experiments of living which it
never tolerated, is neither just nor philosophical. We have in it an
example of the struggles of individuals out of heathenism,—by no means
an institution of Christianity itself. It was a struggle, which, in its
spirit, demands sympathy and respect. The Gospel has taught us to
nauseate what even a regenerated heathen conceived to be praiseworthy,
until the Christian family had become a developed product of the
Church. <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418)

<span id="ii.v-p23"></span>The Gospel arms its enemies against itself,
by elevating them infinitely above what they would have been without its
influences. Refined by its social atmosphere, but refusing its
sanctifying power, they gloat over the failures and falls of those with
whom their own emancipation was begun. Let us rather admire those whom
she lifted out of an abyss of moral degradation, but whose struggles to
reach the high levels of her precepts were not always successful. Yet
these very struggles were heroic; for all their original habits, and all
their surroundings, were of the sort “which hardens all within, and
petrifies the feeling.”

<span id="ii.v-p24"></span>The American editor has devoted more than his
usual amount of annotation to Hermas, and he affectionately asks the
student not to overlook the notes, in which he has condensed rather than
amplified exposition. It has been a labour of love to contribute
something to a just conception of *The Shepherd*, because the Primitive
Age has often been reproached with its good repute in the early
churches. So little does one generation comprehend another! When
Christians conscientiously rejected the books of the heathen, and had as
yet none of their own, save the Sacred Scriptures, or such scanty
portions of the New Testament as were the treasures of the churches, is
it wonderful that the first effort at Christian allegory was welcomed,
especially in a time of need and perilous temptation?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_409"></span>[56:410](0020033.htm#fr_409) <span
id="ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span> Tom. i. pp. 393–434.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[56:411](0020033.htm#fr_410) <span
id="ii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span> *On the Canon*, p. 235. Ed. 1855.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[56:412](0020033.htm#fr_411) <span
id="ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span> Such as Lightfoot, Westcott, Canon Cook, and
others.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[56:413](0020033.htm#fr_412) <span
id="ii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span> Candidly treated by Guettée, *L’Eglise de
France*, vol. xii. p. 15. See also Parton’s *Voltaire*, vol. i. pp.
260–270.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[57:414](0020033.htm#fr_413) <span
id="ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p12"></span> Comment., book x. sec. 31, as quoted in
Westcott, p. 219.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[57:415](0020033.htm#fr_414) <span
id="ii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p13"></span> I subjoin Westcott’s references: Clem.
Alex., *Stromata*, i. 17, sec. 85; *Ibid*., i. 29, sec. 29; *Ibid.*, ii.
1, sec. 3. Also *Ibid.*, ii. 12, sec. 55; iv. 9. sec. 76; vi. 6, sec.
46. Also Tertull., *Pudicitia*, capp. 10 and 20. These I have verified
in *Ed*. Oehler, pp. 468, 488. I add *De Oratione*, capp. xvi. p. 311.
Let me also add Athanasius, *De Incarnatione*, p. 38; *Contra Hæresim
Arian*., p. 369; *Ibid*., 380. To the testimony of this great Father and
defender of the faith I attach the greatest importance; because his
approval shows that there was nothing in the book, as he had it in its
pure text, to justify the attempts of moderns to disprove its orthodoxy.
Athanasius calls is “a most useful book,” and quotes it again (“although
that book is not in the Canon”) with great respect. *Ed*. Paris, 1572.

<span id="ii.v-p14"></span>Modern theories of inspiration appear to me
untenable, with reference to canonical Scripture; but they precisely
illustrate the sort of inspiration with which these *prophesyings* were
probably first credited. The human element is largely intermixed with
divine suggestions; or you may state the proposition conversely.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[57:416](0020033.htm#fr_415) <span
id="ii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p16"></span> Eusebius, iii. 3, and Hieronym., catal. x.
See Westcott, p. 220.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[57:417](0020033.htm#fr_416) <span
id="ii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p20"></span> Milman’s *Gibbon*, vol. i. p. 550. The
editor’s notes are not over severe, and might be greatly strengthened as
refutations.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[57:418](0020033.htm#fr_417) <span
id="ii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p21"></span> Van Lennep, *Bible-lands*, p. 440.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[58:419](0020033.htm#fr_418) <span
id="ii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p22"></span> See Vision iii. cap. 8, for the relation of
*encraty* to faith, in the view of Hermas; also (cap. 7 and *passim*)
note his uncompromising reproofs of lust, and his beautiful delineations
of chastity. The third canon of the Nicene Synod proscribed the
*syneisactæ*, and also the nineteenth of Ancyra, adopted at Chalcedon
into the Catholic discipline.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: TATIAN](0020034)
