[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020428)  [Next](0020430) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix"></span>

### <span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p0.1"></span>Elucidations

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p0.2"></span>I.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p1"></span>(Deception, cap. ix. p. 538.)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p2"></span>More and more, the casuistry exposed
by Pascal in the *Provincial Letters* <span
id="fr_3700"></span>[3701](#fn_3700) becomes an important subject for
the investigation of Americans. Nobody who has any pretensions to
scholarship can afford to be ignorant of these letters; for they belong
to literature, and not merely to theology. But they belong in a sense to
the past; not that “the Society of Jesus” has ceased to maintain all
that Pascal has exposed, and to practice even worse, but that the Latin
churches have, since the days of Pascal, been formally subjected to a
system of casuistry, in some respects superficially reformed, but in all
other respects radically bad, and corrosive to society. In Pascal’s day
this casuistry could only be charged upon individuals, and upon
societies and communities: the Roman Church everywhere adopted it, but
was not formally committed to it. But in the system of Liguori this
corrupt morality has been made authoritative and *dogmatic;* so that in
all the Latin churches it becomes the base of the confessional. For
moral purposes, it is the Bible of the millions who resort to their
confessors and “directors.” These remarks, however, are here introduced
merely with reference to the morals of Clement with regard to
truth. <span id="fr_3701"></span>[3702](#fn_3701)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p5"></span>I have briefly indicated, in the
footnotes, the points which are to be noted in forming an opinion of our
author’s conceptions of this vital principle. They seem to me conformed
to the Gospel; to the teachings of Him who allows no hair-splittings,
but says, “Let your yea be yea, <span id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xix-Page_557"></span>and your nay, nay.” But, as the text
stood in the Edinburgh translation, it did injustice to Clement in one
passage, which I have modified. It reads, “He (the Gnostic) both thinks
and speaks the truth, unless, at any time, medicinally, as a physician
for the safety of the sick, he may *lie,* or tell an untruth.” To this,
Clement adds significantly, “according to the Sophists.” That is to say,
our author tolerates the Christian who has not got beyond the *Sophists*
with respect to benevolent deceptions. As *killing* is not always
*murder,* so some, even among stern moralists, have maintained that
*deception* by word of mouth is not always *lying.* This is the extent
to which Clement tolerates sophistry, and he goes on to demand the
practice of *truth* in Gospel terms. Now, thank God, the English word
“lie” is always infamous; and there is nothing like it, in this respect,
in other languages. The Sophists themselves did not so understand the
Greek word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p5.1"></span>ψεῦδος</span>), when they apply it to the
benevolent deception of a physician, or to the untruths used
benevolently with the insane. Nothing infamous attaches to the French
word *<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p5.2"></span>mensonge* when used for what
are deemed “innocent deceptions.” With this whole system of sophistry I
have no patience at all; but, in justice to the Sophists, let us not
make them worse than they were. They did not understand that such
deceptions were *lies.* Hence, for “lie,” I have used the word
*deceive,* correcting a needless rendering of the text, and one to which
Clement should not be made to extend even a contemptuous toleration.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p6"></span>In this respect, the holy Jeremy
Taylor and Dr. Johnson go further than Clement, and seem to allow that
benevolent deceptions may be innocent. Sanderson sustains a sterner
morality, and is more generally accepted. Liguori’s system is *verbally*
as strong as the Gospel itself: lying is a mortal sin, and never
justifiable. But, when he comes to the definition of a lie, it is made
so feeble, that the worst liar that ever lived need never resort to it.
He may practice all manner of subterfuge, and even perjury, without
telling a lie. As, e.g., if he points up his sleeve, while he swears
that he did not see the criminal *there,* he tells no lie: it is the
business of the judge and jury to watch his fingers, etc.

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p6.1"></span>II.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p7"></span>(True Gnostic, cap. x. p. 540, note
1.)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p8"></span>This unfortunate word *Gnostic* hides
the force of Clement’s teaching, throughout this work. Here he virtually
expounds it, and we see that it refers even more to the heart than to
the head. It carries with it *the conduct of life* by knowledge; i.e.,
by “the true Light which lighteneth every man that cometh into the
world.” (See p. 607, footnote.)

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p8.2"></span>III.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p9"></span>(The Scriptures, cap. xvi. p. 550,
note 3.)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p10"></span>The Primitive Fathers never dream of
anything as *dogma* which cannot be proved by the Scriptures, save only
that the apostolic traditions, *clearly proved to be such,* must be
referred to in proving what is Holy Scripture. It is not possible to
graft on this principle the slightest argument for any tradition not
indisputably apostolic, so far as the *de fide* is concerned. *Quod
semper* is the touchstone, in their conceptions, of all orthodoxy. No
matter who may teach this or that, *now* or in any post-apostolic age,
their test is Holy Scripture, and the inquiry, Was it *always* so taught
and understood?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3700"></span>[556:3701](0020429.htm#fr_3700) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p3"></span> A good translation of the letters
was published in New York, in 1864, by Hurd & Houghton.

<span id="fn_3701"></span>[556:3702](0020429.htm#fr_3701) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xix-p4"></span> For a good article on St. Alphonsus
de’Liguori, see the *Encyc. Britannica*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII](0020430)
