[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020204)  [Next](0020206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xxxv"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.xxxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.—The Christians Condemn and Detest All Cruelty.

<span id="v.ii.xxxv-p1"></span>What man of sound mind, therefore, will
affirm, while such is our character, that we are murderers? For we
cannot eat human flesh till we have killed some one. The former charge,
therefore, being false, if any one should ask them in regard to the
second, whether they have seen what they assert, not one of them would
be so barefaced as to say that he had. And yet we have slaves, some more
and some fewer, by whom we could not help being seen; but even of these,
not one has been found to invent even such things against us. For when
they know that we cannot endure even to see a man put to death, though
justly; who of them can accuse us of murder or cannibalism? Who does not
reckon among the things of greatest interest the contests of gladiators
and wild beasts, especially those which are given by you? But we,
deeming that to see a man put to death is much the same as killing him,
have abjured such spectacles. <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829)
How, then, when we do not even look on, lest we should contract guilt
and pollution, can we put people to death? And when we say that those
women who use drugs to bring on abortion commit murder, and will have to
give an account to God <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) for the
abortion, on what principle should we commit murder? For it does not
belong to the same person to regard the very fœtus in the womb as a
created being, and therefore an object of God’s care, and when it has
passed into life, to kill it; and not to expose an infant, because those
who expose them are chargeable with child-murder, and on the other hand,
when it has been reared to destroy it. But we are in all things always
alike and the same, submitting ourselves to reason, and not ruling over
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_829"></span>[147:830](0020205.htm#fr_829) <span
id="v.ii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxxv-p2"></span> \[See Tatian, cap xxiii., *supra*, p.
75. But here the language of Gibbon is worthy to be quoted: though the
icy-hearted infidel failed to understand that just such philosophers as
he enjoyed these spectacles, till Christianity taught even such to
profess a refined abhorrence of what the Gospel abolished, with no help
from them. He says, “the first Christian emperor may claim the honour of
the first edict which condemned the art and *amusement* of shedding
human blood; but this benevolent law expressed the wishes of the prince,
without reforming an inveterate abuse which degraded a civilized (?)
nation *below the condition of savage cannibals*. Several hundred,
*perhaps several thousand*, victims were annually slaughtered in the
great cities of the empire.” He tells the story of the heroic
Telemachus, without eulogy; how his death, while struggling to separate
the combatants abolished forever the inhuman sports and sacrifices of
the amphitheatre. This happened under Honorius. Milman’s *Gibbon*, iii.
210.\]

<span id="fn_830"></span>[147:831](0020205.htm#fr_830) <span
id="v.ii.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxxv-p3"></span> \[Let Americans read this, and ask
whether a relapse into heathenism is not threatening our civilization,
in this respect. May I venture to refer to *Moral Reforms* (ed. 1869,
Lippincotts, Philadelphia), a little book of my own, rebuking this
inquity, and tracing the earliest violation of this law of Christian
morals, and of nature itself, to an unhappy Bishop of Rome, rebuked by
Hippolytus. See vol. vi. p. 345, Edinburgh Series of *Ante-Nicene
Fathers.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI.—Bearing of the Doctrine of the Resurrection on the
Practices of the Christians.](0020206)
