[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020347)  [Next](0020349) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv"></span>

### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Elucidations.

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p0.2"></span>I.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p1"></span>(On the Greeks, cap. i. note 3, p.
347.)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>The</span> admirable comments of Stier on
the Greeks, who said to Philip, “*We would see Jesus*,” <span
id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435) seem to me vindicated by the
history of the Gospel, and by the part which the Greeks were called to
take in its propagation. Clement seems to me the man of Providence, who
gives rich significance to “the corn of wheat,” and its multiplication
in Gentile discipleship. And in this I am a convert to Stier’s view,
against my preconceptions. That the Greeks who were at Jerusalem at the
Passover were other than Hellenistic Jews, or Greek proselytes, always
seemed to me improbable; but, more and more, I discover a design in this
narrative, which seems to me thoroughly sustained by the history of the
Gentile churches, which were Greek everywhere originally, and for the
use of which the Septuagint had been prepared in the providence of God.
To say nothing of the New-Testament Scriptures, the whole symbolic and
liturgic system of the early Christians and all the Catholic councils
which were Greek in their topography, language, and legislation, confirm
the sublime thought which Stier has elucidated. “The Pharisees said,
*The world is gone after him;* and there were certain Greeks,” etc. So
the story is introduced. Jesus is told of their desire to see him; and
he answers, “The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified;”
and he goes on to speak of his death as giving life to the world. I feel
grateful to Stier for his bold originality in <span id="page_380">p.
380</span> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-Page_380"></span>treating the
subject; and I trust others will find that it invests the study of the
ante-Nicene Fathers with a fresh interest, and throws back from their
writings a peculiar reflex light on the New-Testament Scriptures
themselves.

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>II.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p4"></span>(See p. 352, note 9.)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>Μόνος ὁ σοφὸς ἐλέυφερος</span>. Stier, in
his comments <span id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436) on St. John
(viii. 32–36), may well be compared with this chapter of Clement’s. The
eighteenth chapter of this book must also be kept in view if we would do
full justice to the true position of Clement, who recognises nothing in
heathen philosophy as true wisdom, save as it flows from God, in Moses,
and through the Hebrew Church. That Greek philosophy, so viewed, did
lead to Christ, and that this great principle is recognised in the
apostolic teachings, seems to me indisputable. This illustrates what has
been noted above in Elucidation I.

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p6.2"></span>III.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p7"></span>(See p. 359.)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p8"></span>Clement notes that the false Gnostics
rejected the Epistles to Timothy, <span
id="fr_2437"></span>[2438](#fn_2437) chiefly because of [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>. Beausobre (*<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p9.2"></span>Histoire du Manichéisme*, tom. ii. p. v.)
doubts as to Basilides, whether he is open to this charge; but Jerome
accuses him expressly of rejecting the pastoral epistles, and that to
the Hebrews. For this, and Neander’s qualifying comment, see Kaye, p.
263. Clement is far from charging Basilides, personally, with an immoral
life, or from lending his sanction to impurity; but a study of the
Gnostic sects, with whom our Alexandrian doctor was forced to contend,
will show that they were introducing, under the pretence of
Christianity, such abominations as made their defeat and absolute
overthrow a matter of life and death for the Church. To let *such
teachers* be confounded with Christians, was to neutralize the very
purpose for which the Church existed. Now, it was in the deadly grapple
with such loathsome errorists, that the idea of “Catholic orthodoxy”
became so precious to the primitive faithful. They were forced to make
even the heathen comprehend the existence of that word-wide
confederation of churches already explained, <span
id="fr_2438"></span>[2439](#fn_2438) and to exhibit their Scriptural
creed and purity of discipline, in the strongest contrast with these
pestilent “armies of the aliens,” who were neither Gnostics nor
Christians indeed, much less Catholic or Orthodox teachers and
believers.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p11"></span>Now, if in dealing with counterfeits
Clement was obliged to meet them on their own grounds, and defeat them
on a plan, at once intelligible to the heathen, and enabling all
believers to “fight the good fight of faith” successfully, we must
concede that he knew better than we can, what was suited to the
Alexandrian schools, their intellect, and their false mysticism. His
works were a great safeguard to those who came after him; though they
led to the false system of exposition by which Origen so greatly
impaired his services to the Church, and perhaps to other evils, which,
in the issue, shook the great patriarchate of Alexandria to its
foundations. It is curious to trace the influence of Clement, through
Tertullian and St. Augustine, upon the systems of the schoolmen, and
again, through them, on the Teutonic reformers. The mysticism of Fénelon
as well, may be traced, more than is generally credited, to the old
Alexandrian school, which was itself the product of some of the most
subtle elements of our nature, sanctified, but not wholly controlled, by
the wisdom that is from above. Compare the interminable controversies of
the period, in the writings of Fénelon and Bossuet; and, for a succinct
history, see *<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>L’Histoire de
l’église de France*, <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p11.2"></span>par l’Abbe
Guettée, tom. xi. p. 156 *et seqq.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[379:2436](0020348.htm#fr_2435) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> *Reden Jesu.* St. [John xii.
23-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[380:2437](0020348.htm#fr_2436) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p6"></span> “Words of Jesus.” Translation (vol.
v. p. 354, ed. Edinburgh, 1856).

<span id="fn_2437"></span>[380:2438](0020348.htm#fr_2437) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p9"></span> *Stromata*, book ii. cap. xi. p.
358, *supra*.

<span id="fn_2438"></span>[380:2439](0020348.htm#fr_2438) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiv-p10"></span> Quotation from Milman, p. 166, this
volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](0020349)
