[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sadh09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

VIII

THE REALISATION OF THE INFINITE

The Upanishads say: "Man becomes true if in this life he can apprehend
God; if not, it is the greatest calamity for him."

But what is the nature of this attainment of God? It is quite evident
that the infinite is not like one object among many, to be definitely
classified and kept among our possessions, to be used as an ally
specially favouring us in our politics, warfare, money-making, or in
social competitions. We cannot put our God in the same list with our
summer-houses, motor-cars, or our credit at the bank, as so many people
seem to want to do.

We must try to understand the true character of the desire that a man
has when his soul longs for his God. Does it consist of his wish to make
an addition, however valuable, to his belongings? Emphatically no! It is
an endlessly wearisome task, this continual adding to our stores. In
fact, when the soul seeks God she seeks her final escape from this
incessant gathering and heaping and never coming to an end. It is not an
additional object the she seeks, but it is the *nityo 'nityānām*, the
permanent in all that is impermanent, the *rasānām rasatamah*, the
highest abiding joy unifying all enjoyments. Therefore when the
Upanishads teach us to realise everything in Brahma, it is not to seek
something extra, not to manufacture something new.

*Know everything that there is in the universe as enveloped by God.*
 <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) *Enjoy whatever is given by him
and harbour not in your mind the greed for wealth which is not your
own.*  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55)

When you know that whatever there is is filled by him and whatever you
have is his gift, then you realise the infinite in the finite, and the
giver in the gifts. Then you know that all the facts of the reality have
their only meaning in the manifestation of the one truth, and all your
possessions have their only significance for you, not in themselves but
in the relation they establish with the infinite.

So it cannot be said that we can find Brahma as we find other objects;
there is no question of searching from him in one thing in preference to
another, in one place instead of somewhere else. We do not have to run
to the grocer's shop for our morning light; we open our eyes and there
it is; so we need only give ourselves up to find that Brahma is
everywhere.

This is the reason why Buddha admonished us to free ourselves from the
confinement of the life of the self. If there were nothing else to take
its place more positively perfect and satisfying, then such admonition
would be absolutely unmeaning. No man can seriously consider the advice,
much less have any enthusiasm for it, of surrendering everything one has
for gaining nothing whatever.

So our daily worship of God is not really the process of gradual
acquisition of him, but the daily process of surrendering ourselves,
removing all obstacles to union and extending our consciousness of him
in devotion and service, in goodness and in love.

The Upanishads say: *Be lost altogether in Brahma like an arrow that has
completely penetrated its target.* Thus to be conscious of being
absolutely enveloped by Brahma is not an act of mere concentration of
mind. It must be the aim of the whole of our life. In all our thoughts
and deeds we must be conscious of the infinite. Let the realisation of
this truth become easier every day of our life, that *none could live or
move if the energy of the all-pervading joy did not fill the sky.*
 <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) In all our actions let us feel
that impetus of the infinite energy and be glad.

It may be said that the infinite is beyond our attainment, so it is for
us as if it were naught. Yes, if the word attainment implies any idea of
possession, then it must be admitted that the infinite is unattainable.
But we must keep in mind that the highest enjoyment of man is not in the
having but in a getting, which is at the same time not getting. Our
physical pleasures leave no margin for the unrealised. They, like the
dead satellite of the earth, have but little atmosphere around them.
When we take food and satisfy our hunger it is a complete act of
possession. So long as the hunger is not satisfied it is a pleasure to
eat. For then our enjoyment of eating touches at every point the
infinite. But, when it attains completion, or in other words, when our
desire for eating reaches the end of the stage of its non-realisation,
it reaches the end of its pleasure. In all our intellectual pleasures
the margin is broader, the limit is far off. In all our deeper love
getting and non-getting run ever parallel. In one of our Vaishnava
lyrics the lover says to his beloved: "I feel as if I have gazed upon
the beauty of thy face from my birth, yet my eyes are hungry still: as
if I have kept thee pressed to my heart for millions of years, yet my
heart is not satisfied."

This makes it clear that it is really the infinite whom we seek in our
pleasures. Our desire for being wealthy is not a desire for a particular
sum of money but it is indefinite, and the most fleeting of our
enjoyments are but the momentary touches of the eternal. The tragedy of
human life consists in our vain attempts to stretch the limits of things
which can never become unlimited,--to reach the infinite by absurdly
adding to the rungs of the ladder of the finite.

It is evident from this that the real desire of our soul is to get
beyond all our possessions. Surrounded by things she can touch and feel,
she cries, "I am weary of getting; ah, where is he who is never to be
got?"

We see everywhere in the history of man that the spirit of renunciation
is the deepest reality of the human soul. When the soul says of
anything, "I do not want it, for I am above it," she gives utterance to
the highest truth that is in her. When a girl's life outgrows her doll,
when she realises that in every respect she is more than her doll is,
then she throws it away. By the very act of possession we know that we
are greater than the things we possess. It is a perfect misery to be
kept bound up with things lesser than ourselves. This it is that
Maitreyī felt when her husband gave her his property on the eve of
leaving home. She asked him, "Would these material things help one to
attain the highest?"--or, in other words, "Are they more than my soul to
me?" When her husband answered, "They will make you rich in worldly
possessions," she said at once, "then what am I to do with these?" It is
only when a man truly realises what his possessions are that he has no
more illusions about them; then he knows his soul is far above these
things and he becomes free from their bondage. Thus man truly realises
his soul by outgrowing his possessions, and man's progress in the path
of eternal life is through a series of renunciations.

That we cannot absolutely possess the infinite being is not a mere
intellectual proposition. It has to be experienced, and this experience
is bliss. The bird, while taking its flight in the sky, experiences at
every beat of its wings that the sky is boundless, that its wings can
never carry it beyond. Therein lies its joy. In the cage the sky is
limited; it may be quite enough for all the purposes of the bird's life,
only it is not more than is necessary. The bird cannot rejoice within
the limits of the necessary. It must feel that what it has is
immeasurably more than it ever can want or comprehend, and then only can
it be glad.

Thus our soul must soar in the infinite, and she must feel every moment
that in the sense of not being able to come to the end of her attainment
is her supreme joy, her final freedom.

Man's abiding happiness is not in getting anything but in giving himself
up to what is greater than himself, to ideas which are larger than his
individual life, the idea of his country, of humanity, of God. They make
it easier for him to part with all that he has, not expecting his life.
His existence is miserable and sordid till he finds some great idea
which can truly claim his all, which can release him from all attachment
to his belongings. Buddha and Jesus, and all our great prophets,
represent such great ideas. They hold before us opportunities for
surrendering our all. When they bring forth their divine alms-bowl we
feel we cannot help giving, and we find that in giving is our truest joy
and liberation, for it is uniting ourselves to that extent with the
infinite.

Man is not complete; he is yet to be. In what he *is* he is small, and
if we could conceive him stopping there for eternity we should have an
idea of the most awful hell that man can imagine. In his *to be* he is
infinite, there is his heaven, his deliverance. His *is* is occupied
every moment with what it can get and have done with; his *to be* is
hungering for something which is more than can be got, which he never
can lose because he never has possessed.

The finite pole of our existence has its place in the world of
necessity. There man goes about searching for food to live, clothing to
get warmth. In this region--the region of nature--it is his function to
get things. The natural man is occupied with enlarging his possessions.

But this act of getting is partial. It is limited to man's necessities.
We can have a thing only to the extent of our requirements, just as a
vessel can contain water only to the extent of its emptiness. Our
relation to food is only in feeding, our relation to a house is only in
habitation. We call it a benefit when a thing is fitted only to some
particular want of ours. Thus to get is always to get partially, and it
never can be otherwise. So this craving for acquisition belongs to our
finite self.

But that side of our existence whose direction is towards the infinite
seeks not wealth, but freedom and joy. There the reign of necessity
ceases, and there our function is not to get but to be. To be what? To
be one with Brahma. For the region of the infinite is the region of
unity. Therefore the Upanishads say: *If man apprehends God he becomes
true.* Here it is becoming, it is not having more. Words do no gather
bulk when you know their meaning; they become true by being one with the
idea.

Though the West has accepted as its teacher him who boldly proclaimed
his oneness with his Father, and who exhorted his followers to be
perfect as God, it has never been reconciled to this idea of our unity
with the infinite being. It condemns, as a piece of blasphemy, any
implication of man's becoming God. This is certainly not the idea that
Christ preached, nor perhaps the idea of the Christian mystics, but this
seems to be the idea that has become popular in the Christian west.

But the highest wisdom in the East holds that it is not the function of
our soul to *gain* God, to utilise him for any special material purpose.
All that we can ever aspire to is to become more and more one with God.
In the region of nature, which is the region of diversity, we grow by
acquisition; in the spiritual world, which is the region of unity, we
grow by losing ourselves, by uniting. Gaining a thing, as we have said,
is by its nature partial, it is limited only to a particular want; but
*being* is complete, it belongs to our wholeness, it springs not from
any necessity but from our affinity with the infinite, which is the
principle of perfection that we have in our soul.

Yes, we must become Brahma. We must not shrink to avow this. Our
existence is meaningless if we never can expect to realise the highest
perfection that there is. If we have an aim and yet can never reach it,
then it is no aim at all.

But can it then be said that there is no difference between Brahma and
our individual soul? Of course the difference is obvious. Call it
illusion or ignorance, or whatever name you may give it, it is there.
You can offer explanations but you cannot explain it away. Even illusion
is true an illusion.

Brahma is Brahma, he is the infinite ideal of perfection. But we are not
what we truly are; we are ever to become true, ever to become Brahma.
There is the eternal play of love in the relation between this being and
the becoming; and in the depth of this mystery is the source of all
truth and beauty that sustains the endless march of creation.

In the music of the rushing stream sounds the joyful assurance, "I shall
become the sea." It is not a vain assumption; it is true humility, for
it is the truth. The river has no other alternative. On both sides of
its banks it has numerous fields and forests, villages and towns; it can
serve them in various ways, cleanse them and feed them, carry their
produce from place to place. But it can have only partial relations with
these, and however long it may linger among them it remains separate; it
never can become a town or a forest.

But it can and does become the sea. The lesser moving water has its
affinity with the great motionless water of the ocean. It moves through
the thousand objects on its onward course, and its motion finds its
finality when it reaches the sea.

The river can become the sea, but she can never make the sea part and
parcel of herself. If, by some chance, she has encircled some broad
sheet of water and pretends that she has made the sea a part of herself,
we at once know that it is not so, that her current is still seeking
rest in the great ocean to which it can never set boundaries.

In the same manner, our soul can only become Brahma as the river can
become the sea. Everything else she touches at one of her points, then
leaves and moves on, but she never can leave Brahma and move beyond him.
Once our soul realises her ultimate object of repose in Brahma, all her
movements acquire a purpose. It is this ocean of infinite rest which
gives significance to endless activities. It is this perfectness of
being that lends to the imperfection of becoming that quality of beauty
which finds its expression in all poetry, drama and art.

There must be a complete idea that animates a poem. Every sentence of
the poem touches that idea. When the reader realises that pervading
idea, as he reads on, then the reading of the poem is full of joy to
him. Then every part of the poem becomes radiantly significant by the
light of the whole. But if the poem goes on interminably, never
expressing the idea of the whole, only throwing off disconnected images,
however beautiful, it becomes wearisome and unprofitable in the extreme.
The progress of our soul is like a perfect poem. It has an infinite idea
which once realised makes all movements full of meaning and joy. But if
we detach its movements from that ultimate idea, if we do not see the
infinite rest and only see the infinite motion, then existence appears
to us a monstrous evil, impetuously rushing towards an unending
aimlessness.

I remember in our childhood we had a teacher who used to make us learn
by heart the whole book of Sanskrit grammer, which is written in
symbols, without explaining their meaning to us. Day after day we went
toiling on, but on towards what, we had not the least notion. So, as
regards our lessons, we were in the position of the pessimist who only
counts the breathless activities of the world, but cannot see the
infinite repose of the perfection whence these activities are gaining
their equilibrium every moment in absolute fitness and harmony. We lose
all joy in thus contemplating existence, because we miss the truth. We
see the gesticulations of the dancer, and we imagine these are directed
by a ruthless tyranny of chance, while we are deaf to the eternal music
which makes every one of these gestures inevitably spontaneous and
beautiful. These motions are ever growing into that music of perfection,
becoming one with it, dedicating to that melody at every step the
multitudinous forms they go on creating.

And this is the truth of our soul, and this is her joy, that she must
ever be growing into Brahma, that all her movements should be modulated
by this ultimate idea, and all her creations should be given as
offerings to the supreme spirit of perfection.

There is a remarkable saying in the Upanishads: *I think not that I know
him well, or that I know him, or even that I know him not.*  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)

By the process of knowledge we can never know the infinite being. But if
he is altogether beyond our reach, then he is absolutely nothing to us.
The truth is that we know him not, yet we know him.

This has been explained in another saying of the Upanishads: *From
Brahma words come back baffled, as well as the mind, but he who knows
him by the joy of him is free from all fears.*  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)

Knowledge is partial, because our intellect is an instrument, it is only
a part of us, it can give us information about things which can be
divided and analysed, and whose properties can be classified part by
part. But Brahma is perfect, and knowledge which is partial can never be
a knowledge of him.

But he can be known by joy, by love. For joy is knowledge in its
completeness, it is knowing by our whole being. Intellect sets us apart
from the things to be known, but love knows its object by fusion. Such
knowledge is immediate and admits no doubt. It is the same as knowing
our own selves, only more so.

Therefore, as the Upanishads say, mind can never know Brahma, words can
never describe him; he can only be known by our soul, by her joy in him,
by her love. Or, in other words, we can only come into relation with him
by union--union of our whole being. We must be one with our Father, we
must be perfect as he is.

But how can that be? There can be no grade in infinite perfection. We
cannot grow more and more into Brahma. He is the absolute one, and there
can be no more or less in him.

Indeed, the realisation of the *paramātman*, the supreme soul, within
our *antarātman*, our inner individual soul, is in a state of absolute
completion. We cannot think of it as non- existent and depending on our
limited powers for its gradual construction. If our relation with the
divine were all a thing of our own making, how should we rely on it as
true, and how should it lend us support?

Yes, we must know that within us we have that where space and time cease
to rule and where the links of evolution are merged in unity. In that
everlasting abode of the *ātaman*, the soul, the revelation of the
*paramātman*, the supreme soul, is already complete. Therefore the
Upanishads say: *He who knows Brahman, the true, the all-conscious, and
the infinite as hidden in the depths of the soul, which is the supreme
sky (the inner sky of consciousness), enjoys all objects of desire in
union with the all-knowing Brahman.*  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)

The union is already accomplished. The *paramātman*, the supreme soul,
has himself chosen this soul of ours as his bride and the marriage has
been completed. The solemn *mantram* has been uttered: *Let thy heart be
even as my heart is.*  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) There is no
room in this marriage for evolution to act the part of the master of
ceremonies. The *eshah*, who cannot otherwise be described than as
*This*, the nameless immediate presence, is ever here in our innermost
being. "This *eshah*, or *This*, is the supreme end of the other this";
 <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) "this *This* is the supreme
treasure of the other this";  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) "this
*This* is the supreme dwelling of the other this";  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) "this *This* is the supreme joy of the
other this."  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) Because the marriage
of supreme love has been accomplished in timeless time. And now goes on
the endless *līlā*, the play of love. He who has been gained in eternity
is now being pursued in time and space, in joys and sorrows, in this
world and in the worlds beyond. When the soul-bride understands this
well, her heart is blissful and at rest. She knows that she, like a
river, has attained the ocean of her fulfilment at one end of her being,
and at the other end she is ever attaining it; at one end it is eternal
rest and completion, at the other it is incessant movement and change.
When she knows both ends as inseparably connected, then she knows the
world as her own household by the right of knowing the master of the
world as her own lord. Then all her services becomes services of love,
all the troubles and tribulations of life come to her as trials
triumphantly borne to prove the strength of her love, smilingly to win
the wager from her lover. But so long as she remains obstinately in the
dark, lifts not her veil, does not recognise her lover, and only knows
the world dissociated from him, she serves as a handmaid here, where by
right she might reign as a queen; she sways in doubt, and weeps in
sorrow and dejection. *She passes from starvation to starvation, from
trouble to trouble, and from fear to fear.*  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

I can never forget that scrap of a song I once heard in the early dawn
in the midst of the din of the crowd that had collected for a festival
the night before: "Ferryman, take me across to the other shore!"

In the bustle of all our work there comes out this cry, "Take me
across." The carter in India sings while driving his cart, "Take me
across." The itinerant grocer deals out his goods to his customers and
sings, "Take me across".

What is the meaning of this cry? We feel we have not reached our goal;
and we know with all our striving and toiling we do not come to the end,
we do not attain our object. Like a child dissatisfied with its dolls,
our heart cries, "Not this, not this." But what is that other? Where is
the further shore?

Is it something else than what we have? Is it somewhere else than where
we are? Is it to take rest from all our works, to be relieved from all
the responsibilities of life?

No, in the very heart of our activities we are seeking for our end. We
are crying for the across, even where we stand. So, while our lips utter
their prayer to be carried away, our busy hands are never idle.

In truth, thou ocean of joy, this shore and the other shore are one and
the same in thee. When I call this my own, the other lies estranged; and
missing the sense of that completeness which is in me, my heart
incessantly cries out for the other. All my this, and that other, are
waiting to be completely reconciled in thy love.

This "I" of mine toils hard, day and night, for a home which it knows as
its own. Alas, there will be no end of its sufferings so long as it is
not able to call this home thine. Till then it will struggle on, and its
heart will ever cry, "Ferryman, lead me across." When this home of mine
is made thine, that very moment is it taken across, even while its old
walls enclose it. This "I" is restless. It is working for a gain which
can never be assimilated with its spirit, which it never can hold and
retain. In its efforts to clasp in its own arms that which is for all,
it hurts others and is hurt in its turn, and cries, "Lead me across".
But as soon as it is able to say, "All my work is thine," everything
remains the same, only it is taken across.

Where can I meet thee unless in this mine home made thine? Where can I
join thee unless in this my work transformed into thy work? If I leave
my home I shall not reach thy home; if I cease my work I can never join
thee in thy work. For thou dwellest in me and I in thee. Thou without me
or I without thee are nothing.

Therefore, in the midst of our home and our work, the prayer rises,
"Lead me across!" For here rolls the sea, and even here lies the other
shore waiting to be reached--yes, here is this everlasting present, not
distant, not anywhere else.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](sadh10.htm#fr_54) Īçhāvāsyamdiam sarvam yat
kincha jagatyānjagat.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](sadh10.htm#fr_55) Tēna tyaktēna bhunjīţhā
mā gŗidhah kasyasviddhanam.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](sadh10.htm#fr_56) Ko hyevānyāt kah prānyāt
yadesha ākāçha ānando na syāt.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](sadh10.htm#fr_57) Nāham manye suvedeti no
na vedeti vedacha.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](sadh10.htm#fr_58) Yato vācho nivartante
aprāpya manasā saha ānandam brahmaņo vidvān na vibheti kutaçchana.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](sadh10.htm#fr_59) Satyam jñānam anantam
brahma yo veda nihitam guhāyām paramo vyoman so'çnute sarvān kāmān saha
brahmaņa vipasçhite.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](sadh10.htm#fr_60) Yadetat hŗidayam mama
tadastu hŗidayan tava.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](sadh10.htm#fr_61) Eshāsya paramā gatih

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](sadh10.htm#fr_62) Eshāsya paramā sampat.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](sadh10.htm#fr_63) Eshāsya paramo lokah

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](sadh10.htm#fr_64) Eshāsya parama ānandah

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](sadh10.htm#fr_65) Daurbhikshāt yāti
daurbhiksham kleçāt kleçam bhayāt bhayam.
