<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn000-0.md) 
[Next](kn000-2.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

## PREFACE TO THE PRESENT EDITION

   WHEN the English translation of the "Book of the Glory of Kings"
appeared in 1922 it received a generous welcome from the gentlemen of
the Press, and the approval of it by the public generally was shown by
the fact that within two months from the day of publication a reprint
was called for. The amusing and interesting character of the book which
piles up fancy tales, fables, legends, folk-lore, dogma, mysticism and
pious remarks on a substratum of historical fact was frankly admitted by
all the reviewers, but a few of them raised the question of the
historicity of the Book of the Glory of Kings. It must be said at once
that we shall never know whether the queen who visited <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> was a pure-blooded <span
class="small">ABYSSINIAN</span> or an Arab queen from <span
class="small">YAMAN</span> or <span class="small">HADRAMAUT</span> or
some other part of the great Arabian peninsula. But the tradition that
some "Queen of the South" *did* visit <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>
is so old and so widespread, that a kernel of historical fact, however
small, must be hidden somewhere in it. It would not surprise me if <span
class="small">SIDNEY SMITH</span> or <span class="small">C. J.
GADD</span> one day published in the great *Corpus* of cuneiform texts
from the tablets in the <span class="small">BRITISH MUSEUM</span> a
Sumerian or Babylonian inscription telling how some great queen from
latter-day <span class="small">INDIA</span> paid a visit to a king of
one of the city states like <span class="small">ETANA</span>, or <span
class="small">MESANNIPADDA</span> or the great <span
class="small">SARGON</span> of <span class="small">AGADE</span>, to be
instructed in the wisdom and civilization of his day. The story of such
a visit would be noised abroad among the nations around by the caravan
men, and the scribes of the day would incorporate it in their historical
romances. It is quite possible that the story of <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> and the Queen of <span
class="small">SHEBA</span> is based upon one which is far older.
Something like this has actually happened with the history of <span
class="small">GILGAMISH</span>,<span
id="page_vii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_vii_note_1.md) a king of <span
class="small">URUK</span>, in the Ethiopic history of the exploits of
<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span class="small">ALEXANDER THE
GREAT</span>. In the latter work the scribe tells us how the Macedonian
king sought for the waters of life, and how he made his way through
inpenetrable forests and arrived at the sea of the waters of death,<span
id="page_viii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_viii_note_1.md) and how he tried to fly
up into heaven,<span id="page_viii_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_viii_note_2.md) &c., all of which is
described in the Epic of <span class="small">GILGAMISH</span>, the
prototype of <span class="small">ALEXANDER</span> to the scribe. The
meeting of <span class="small">GILGAMISH</span> with S<span
class="small">IDURI</span> the "<span class="small">SÂBITU</span>" i.e.
"inn-keeper" or "ale-wife" finds its counterpart in the meeting of <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span> with <span class="small">ḲUNDÂḲÂ</span>
(<span class="small">CANDACE</span>), the queen of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, which country, by the way, <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span> never invaded. <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span> found such favour with <span
class="small">ḲUNDÂḲÂ</span> that she invited him to her private
apartments and shared her bed with him. The beauty of <span
class="small">ḲUNDÂḲÂ</span> overcame <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span> just as the beauty of <span
class="small">MÂḲĔDÂ</span> overcame <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>,
and it is possible that <span class="small">GILGAMISH</span> fell a
victim to the "ale-wife". The object of the Ethiopian scribe, ancient or
modern, was to make a "good story", and he never allowed facts, or
anachronisms, or names of persons or places, or even possibility or
probability to hamper him.

   The next question is, How far are the <span
class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> justified in claiming definite kinship
with the <span class="small">SEMITES</span>? In dealing with this
question the following facts must be considered. There is little doubt
the aboriginal inhabitants of <span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> were
negroes or negroids who came from the valley of the <span
class="small">NILE</span>. At a very early period, which must be called
prehistoric, tribes and peoples who lived on the western side of the
peninsula of <span class="small">ARABIA</span> made their way across the
sea from <span class="small">ASIA</span> into <span
class="small">AFRICA</span> in the south at some place like <span
class="small">BÂB-AL-MANDAB</span> and in the north at some place in the
peninsula of <span class="small">SINAI</span>. In this way the influence
of Asiatic peoples entered <span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>. Later a
section of the <span class="small">HAMITES</span>, whose language was
akin to that of the <span class="small">LIBYANS</span>, <span
class="small">BERBERS</span>, and <span class="small">EGYPTIANS</span>,
brought into <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span> <span
class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> a language which for convenience we may
call "Ethiopic" though its more correct name is "Kushite". The
translators of the Bible into "Ethiopic" identified, quite incorrectly,
<span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> with <span
class="small">KÛSH</span>, the Hebrew name for the country which we now
call <span class="small">NUBIA</span>. Owing to the intermingling of
<span class="small">SEMITES</span> and <span
class="small">HAMITES</span> a Semitic element entered the Hamitic
language at a very early period. The northern part of <span
class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>, that is, the mountainous section of it,
became the principal settlement of the <span
class="small">SEMITES</span>, who are known as the "<span
class="small">AGAW</span>", and from them were probably descended many
of the <span class="small">FALÂSHAS</span> or "Abyssinian Jews".

   In the eleventh or tenth century before <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> a further invasion of <span
class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> by Asiatic <span
class="small">SEMlTES</span> took place, and it was they who taught the
Abyssinians the elements of civilization. The principal tribe of the
invaders was called "<span class="small">ḤABASHA</span>", and they came
from <span class="small">YAMAN</span> in western <span
class="small">SOUTH ARABIA</span>. They gave the name of "<span
class="small">ḤABESH</span>" to this part of <span
class="small">AFRICA</span> in which they settled, and it is from this
that the modern name of "<span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>" is
derived. The immigration of <span class="small">SEMITES</span> from
<span class="small">ASIA</span> went on steadily during the following
centuries, and the newcomers introduced the writing which was current at
that time in <span class="small">ARABIA</span>, and trades, arts and
crafts. Two or three centuries before the Christian era they succeeded
in forming a kingdom, the capital of which was <span
class="small">’AKSÛM</span>. The <span class="small">SEMITES</span> who
settled in Upper, Middle, and Lower <span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>
became merchants and traders, and of such trade and commerce as existed
at that time they were the originators and organizers. The <span
class="small">SEMITES</span> who settled in and about <span
class="small">’AKSÛM</span> were known as the "<span class="small">’AG
‛ÂZIYÂN</span>", i.e. the "free", and the language they spoke is called
"<span class="small">GĔ‛ĔZ</span>", now frequently called "<span
class="small">ETHIOPIC</span>". From this is derived the modern language
of <span class="small">TIGRAY</span> called "<span
class="small">TIGRIÑA</span>". The language of the <span
class="small">SEMITES</span> in Middle and Lower <span
class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> is known as "<span
class="small">’AMÂRIÑÂ</span>" or "<span class="small">AMHARIC</span>"
.The Abyssinians at that period had no literature.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

   Details of the downfall of the Semitic kingdom which had <span
class="small">’AKSÛM</span> for its capital are wanting, but we know
that its successor was ruled by kings who were pagans; among these were
<span class="small">APHILAS</span>, <span class="small">ENDYBIS</span>,
and <span class="small">ALALMIDIS</span> (<span class="small">’ELLA
‛AMÎDÂ</span>), the father of <span class="small">‛EZÂNÂ</span>, the
’Αειζανάς of the <span class="small">GREEKS</span>, who reigned in the
first half of the fourth century of our era. <span
class="small">‛EZÂNÂ</span>, who has been called the "<span
class="small">CONSTANTINE OF ABYSSINIA</span>" was the greatest king of
<span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> known to history , and he adopted
Christianity as the national religion of his country. With the coming of
Christianity Abyssinian literature came into existence.

   From the facts summarized briefly in the preceding paragraphs it is
clear that the <span class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> or <span
class="small">ETHIOPIANS</span>, as the people themselves prefer to be
called, owe more to the <span class="small">SEMITES</span> than to the
<span class="small">HAMITES</span>, or <span
class="small">NEGROES</span>, or <span class="small">EGYPTIANS</span>,
or <span class="small">GREEKS</span>, or any other people with whom they
came in contact in the prehistoric or historic periods. The <span
class="small">SEMITES</span> found them negro savages, and taught them
civilization and culture, and gave them the Holy Scriptures on which
their whole literature is based, and set before their eyes shining
examples of righteous kings, prophets, priests, and holy men. And from
first to last there must have been a very large admixture of Semitic
blood in the <span class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> introduced by
marriage and concubinage.

   The original form of the Legend of the Queen of <span
class="small">SHEBA</span> probably came into being soon after the great
invasion of <span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> by the <span
class="small">SEMITES</span> in the tenth century before <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>. In the opinion of the <span
class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> divine authority was given to it by Our
Lord by His words quoted in the Gospels (Matt. xii. 42; Luke xi. 31),
and they never doubted that <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> was the
father of the son of the Queen of <span class="small">SHEBA</span>. It
followed as a matter of course that the male descendants of this son
were the lawful kings of <span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>, and as
<span class="small">SOLOMON</span> was an ancestor of <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> they were kinsmen of Our Lord, and they
claimed to reign by divine right. This belief was probably shared by
<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> the kings of the Semitic kingdom of
<span class="small">’AKSÛM</span>, which city was at a very early period
regarded as a duplicate of <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span> and was
called the "<span class="small">ZION OF ABYSSINIA</span>". When the
<span class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> adopted Christianity in the
second half of the fourth or the first half of the fifth century they
decided to sever as far as possible their connexion with their pagan
ancestors from <span class="small">ARABIA</span>. The <span
class="small">SEMITES</span> who claimed kinship with the <span
class="small">HEBREWS</span> of <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span>
abandoned <span class="small">MAḤRAM</span> and the other gods of the
<span class="small">MINAEANS</span> and <span
class="small">SABAEANS</span> in favour of <span
class="small">JAHWEH</span>, the god of the <span
class="small">HEBREWS</span>. When the <span
class="small">SEMITES</span> who were Christians had the Holy Scriptures
translated into <span class="small">GĔ‛ĔZ</span> the translators used a
script which, though based on the old writings of the <span
class="small">MINAEANS</span> and <span class="small">SABAEANS</span>,
was different from it in some very important particulars. The old
inscriptions, like Hebrew, Syriac, Arabic, &c., read from right to left,
but the <span class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> decided to read their
texts from left to right, as did the <span
class="small">BABYLONIANS</span> and <span
class="small">ASSYRIANS</span>. This decision was due probably to Greek
influence. The letters of the old Arabian alphabets were entirely
consonantal and vowels were expressed by the semi-vowel letters. Some
genius, name unknown, discovered a way of expressing the vowels in <span
class="small">GĔ‛ĔZ</span> by attaching short lines and minute circles
to the consonants of the Sabaean alphabet and by modifying the forms of
some of the consonants themselves. Thus the <span
class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> turned the old Sabaean alphabet into a
syllabary. Two examples will make this clear.

   The Sabaean letter <span id="img_xi-1"></span> ![](img/xi-1.jpg) = B.
With the circles and lines added to it by the Abyssinians we have: በ =
bă, ብ = bĕ, ቡ = bû, ቤ = bê, ባ = bâ, ቢ = bî, ቦ = bô.

   The Sabaean letter <span id="img_xi-2"></span> ![](img/xi-2.jpg) = D.
With the change of position from perpendicular to horizontal, and the
circles and lines added we have: ደ = dă, ድ = dĕ, ዱ = dû, ዲ = dî, ዳ = dâ,
ዴ = dê, ዶ = dô. <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> Thus the <span
class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> provided for the expression of the "o"
sound, which the <span class="small">ASSYRIANS</span> and <span
class="small">BABYLONIANS</span> failed to do.

   The translators of the Bible into <span class="small">GĔ‛ĔZ</span>
rejected <span class="small">HABESH</span>, the old name of <span
class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>, and in their version definitely gave the
name of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> (<span
class="small">’ÎTĔYÔPĔYÂ</span>) to the region, the capital of which was
<span class="small">’AKSÛM</span>. They read that the "eunuch of great
authority under <span class="small">CANDACE</span> queen of the <span
class="small">ETHIOPIANS</span> 'was called' a man of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>" (Acts viii. 27), and as the country over
which that queen ruled was the <span class="small">KÛSH</span> of the
Old Testament, they rendered that name by "<span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>" (e.g. Psalms lxviii. 32.; lxxxvii. 4).
Strictly speaking <span class="small">KÛSH</span> was <span
class="small">UPPER NUBIA</span>. The name <span
class="small">HABESH</span> was disliked by the indigenous peoples of
the country , and though in the modern Amharic dictionaries <span
class="small">HABASHÂ</span> is still to be found, the present-day
native hates to be called "<span class="small">HABASHIYY</span>", for by
him it is regarded as an abusive epithet. Thus the Abyssinian Christian
gained a new national name, a new script, and a new literature.

   As Christianity spread southwards the idea of the Solomonic ancestry
of the kings of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> in the period
between the sixth and the thirteenth centuries gained ground everywhere.
During this period many kings who were not of the Solomonic line
reigned, and a group of them called the <span class="small">ZÂGUÊ</span>
were masters of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> for about 330 years.
At length there appeared a member of the Solomonic line called <span
class="small">YEKUENÔ ’AMLÂK</span> (1270-85) in <span
class="small">SHOA</span>, and with the help of the great saint <span
class="small">TAKLA HAYMÂNÔT</span> he expelled the <span
class="small">ZÂGUÊ</span> and became "King of the Kings of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>". In return for this help of the saint,
<span class="small">YEKUENÔ ’AMLÂK</span> agreed to give to the Church
one-third of the revenues of his kingdom, and his successors have, on
the whole, followed his example.

   As regards the present edition of the *Queen of Sheba* little need be
said. In the first edition of my translation of the <span
class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> (all vowels short) there were 31
plates containing monochrome photographs, reproductions of <span
id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> coloured illustrations copied from
Ethiopic manuscripts of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth
centuries. The scenes and subjects represented were all of a religious
character, but had no special reference to the Book of the Glory of
Kings, for strangely enough that work is without illustrations. Nothing
in a systematic way of publishing specimens of Ethiopian Art had been
done before <span class="small">LADY MEUX</span> published the coloured
facsimiles of all the illustrations, both vignettes and full pages, from
her two splendid manuscripts of the *Miracles of the Virgin Mary* and
from the *Life of Ḥanna* the mother of the Virgin, and the *Life of
Mabâ‛ Ṣĕyon*. I therefore added the 31 plates of illustrations from the
manuscripts of the great <span class="small">MAḲDALÂ</span> Collection
now in the <span class="small">BRITISH MUSEUM</span>, thinking that they
would give the reader a good idea of the character of Ethiopian art
generally. But it must never be forgotten that the art represented on
the plates is not indigenous, for it is borrowed directly from or is
based upon the paintings which were executed for the kings of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> by <span class="small">FRANCISCO DI
BRANCA-LEONE</span>, a Venetian monk, who is commonly called "the
Frank". He flourished in the reign of <span class="small">ZAR’A
YÂ‛ḲÔB</span> (<span class="small">A.D.</span> 1436-68). This monk came
to <span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> with the view of converting the
people to Christianity, and he is famous as "the Frank" who by the
command of the king, carried on several debates with <span
class="small">ABBÂ GÎYÔRGÎS</span> on the faith. When the king
discovered that he was a painter as well as a monk, he set him to work
at painting pictures of Our Lady and the saints to be hung up in the
churches, and it was he who painted for <span class="small">BA’EDA
MÂRYÂM</span> (<span class="small">A.D.</span> 1468-78) the picture of
the Virgin and the Infant <span class="small">CHRIST</span> which
exasperated the <span class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span>. He represented
the Virgin holding the Child on her left arm as was customary in Europe,
but the <span class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> regarded the left hand as
the "hand of dishonour", and they wanted to destroy the picture. This
the king refused to permit, and it was hung in the <span
class="small">’ATRONSA MÂRYÂM</span>, a church in the town of the same
name in the south of <span class="small">AMḤARÂ</span>, on the <span
id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span class="small">’ABÂY RIVER</span>, and
there it remained until the third year of the reign of <span
class="small">THEOPHILUS</span> (<span class="small">A.D.</span> 1709).
In that year the <span class="small">GALLAS</span> came and wrecked the
church, and killed the priests, and the picture and the coffin
containing the remains of <span class="small">BA’EDA MÂRYÂM</span> were
hurled over a precipice on <span class="small">SUNDAY</span>, <span
class="small">AUGUST</span> 23.

   The Introduction and Translation given in the first edition of the
*Queen of Sheba* are repeated herein practically unaltered. The readings
of two or three passages have been, I hope, improved, and a few
references added. To write the literary history of the <span
class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> I believe to be impossible at present,
owing to the lack of material. We can never expect to find out what was
the original form of the Legend of the Queen of <span
class="small">SHEBA</span>, and it is impossible to assign dates to the
various recensions of it which have been made in Coptic, Arabic, and
Ethiopic. The sources of many of the legends reproduced in the great
work are untraceable at present, and the unauthorized additions made to
it by generations of scribes cannot with certainty be identified. It
would be very interesting to know when the <span class="small">KEBRA
NAGAST</span> (all vowels short) began to be politically important, and
regarded as the source of the invincibility of the <span
class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span>. The success of the British Expedition
under <span class="small">GENERAL NAPIER</span> in 1868 disturbed their
equanimity somewhat, but they comforted themselves by remembering that
it was directed against <span class="small">THEODORE</span>, who was
after all only an impostor. The natives everywhere helped the British
Army because they wished to see the usurper smashed. Had they been
hostile the result of the expedition would have been different. The
battle of <span class="small">ADWA</span> showed how the <span
class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> could deal with an army of European
soldiers, and "unconquered <span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>" is now
the fiery, passionate cry of every patriot of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> from <span class="small">’AKSÛM</span> to
the Equator.

<span class="small"></span>

 48 *Bloomsbury Street  
Bedford Square, W.C.* 1  
  *August* 22, 1932

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_vii">p. vii</span>

<span id="page_vii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_vii_fr_1.md) For his authentic
history see Sidney Smith, *Early History of Assyria*, p. 34.

<span id="footnotes_page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span id="page_viii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_viii_fr_1.md) See the *Epic of
Gilgamish* (British Museum), London, 1929.

<span id="page_viii_note_2"></span>[2](#page_viii_fr_2.md) See the "Legend
of Etana" in Jastrow, *Religion of Babylonia and Assyria*, p. 519f.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION](kn000-2.md)

</div>
