<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn000-1) 
[Next](kn000-3) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

## PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

   This volume contains a complete English translation of the famous
Ethiopian work, The "<span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span>", i.e. the
"Glory of the Kings \[of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>\]". This
work has been held in peculiar honour in <span
class="small">ABYSSINIA</span> for several centuries, and throughout
that country it has been, and still is, venerated by the people as
containing the final proof of their descent from the Hebrew Patriarchs,
and of the kinship of their kings of the Solomonic line with <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, the Son of God. The importance of the book,
both for the kings and the people of <span
class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>, is clearly shown by the letter that King
<span class="small">JOHN</span> of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>
wrote to the late Lord <span class="small">GRANVILLE</span> in August,
1872. The king says: "There is a book called 'Kivera Negust' which
contains the Law of the whole of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>,
and the names of the <span class="small">SHÛMS</span> \[i.e. Chiefs\],
and Churches, and Provinces are in this book. I pray you find out who
has got this book, and send it to me, for in my country my people will
not obey my orders without it." (See *infra*, p. xxxv). The first
summary of the contents of the <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span>
was published by <span class="small">BRUCE</span> as far back as 1813,
but little interest was roused by his somewhat bald précis. And, in
spite of the labours of <span class="small">PRÆTORIUS</span>, <span
class="small">BEZOLD</span>, and <span class="small">HUGUES LE
ROUX</span>, the contents of the work are still practically unknown to
the general reader in England. It is hoped that the translation given in
the following pages will be of use to those who have not the time or
opportunity for perusing the Ethiopic original.

   The <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> is a great storehouse of
legends and traditions, some historical and some of a purely folk-lore
character, derived from the Old Testament and the later Rabbinic
writings, and from Egyptian (both pagan and Christian), Arabian, and
Ethiopian sources. Of the early history of the compilation and its
maker, and of its subsequent editors we know nothing, but the principal
<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> groundwork of its earliest form was
the traditions that were current in <span class="small">SYRIA</span>,
<span class="small">PALESTINE</span>, <span class="small">ARABIA</span>,
and <span class="small">EGYPT</span> during the first four centuries of
the Christian era. Weighing carefully all that has been written by <span
class="small">DILLMANN</span>, <span class="small">TRUMP</span>, <span
class="small">ZOTENBERG</span>, <span class="small">WRIGHT</span>, and
<span class="small">BEZOLD</span>, and taking into account the
probabilities of the matter, it seems to me that we shall not be far
wrong if we assign the composition of the earliest form of the <span
class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> to the sixth century <span
class="small">A.D.</span> Its compiler was probably a Coptic priest, for
the books he used were writings that were accepted by the Coptic Church.
Whether he lived in <span class="small">EGYPT</span>, or in <span
class="small">AKSÛM</span>, or in some other part of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> matters little, but the colophons of the
extant Ethiopic MSS. of the <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span>
suggest that he wrote in Coptic.

   In the succeeding centuries, probably as a result of the widespread
conquests of <span class="small">MUḤAMMAD</span> and his <span
class="small">KHALÎFAHS</span>, the Coptic text was in whole or part
translated into Arabic, and during the process of translation many
additions were made to it, chiefly from Arabic sources. Last of all this
Arabic version was translated into Ethiopic, and proper names underwent
curious transformations in the process. According to the colophons of
the MSS. in the <span class="small">BRITISH MUSEUM</span>, <span
class="small">OXFORD</span>, and <span class="small">PARIS</span>, the
Arabic translation was made from the Coptic in the 409th "year of
mercy", when <span class="small">GABRA MASḲAL</span>, commonly known as
<span class="small">LÂLÎBALÂ</span>, was reigning over <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, i.e. between <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 1314 and 1344. And the same authorities say
that the Ethiopic translation was made subsequently by one <span
class="small">ISAAC</span>, of whom nothing is known save that he was an
enthusiastic Christian visionary and patriot. His knowledge of history
and chronology was defective, and his comparative philology is unusually
peculiar, even for the period in which he lived.

   In the colophons <span class="small">ISAAC</span> says: "I have
toiled much for the glory of the kingdom of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and for the going forth (manifestation ?)
of the heavenly <span class="small">ZION</span>, and for the glory of
the King of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>." These words throw
<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> some light upon <span
class="small">ISAAC'S</span> motive in translating the book, and supply
the reason for his devoted labour. He firmly believed: 1. That the
lawful kings of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> were descended from
<span class="small">SOLOMON</span>, King of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>. 2. That the Tabernacle of the Law of God,
i.e. the Ark of the Covenant, had been brought from <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span> to <span class="small">’AKSÛM</span> by
<span class="small">MENYELEK</span>, <span
class="small">SOLOMON'S</span> firstborn son, according to the <span
class="small">ETHIOPIANS</span>. 3. That the God of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> had transferred His place of abode on earth
from <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span> to <span
class="small">’AKSÛM</span> (<span class="small">AXUM</span>), the
ecclesiastical and political capital of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. The means employed by <span
class="small">MENYELEK</span> for obtaining possession of the Ark of the
Covenant did not disturb <span class="small">ISAAC'S</span> conscience
in the least, nay he gloried in them, for manifestly <span
class="small">MENYELEK</span> was performing the Will of God in removing
the tabernacle of <span class="small">ZION</span> from <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span>. God, according to <span
class="small">ISAAC</span>, was satisfied that the <span
class="small">JEWS</span> were unworthy to be custodians of the Ark
wherein His Presence was, and the Ark wished to depart. <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> had stretched out her hands to God (Psalm
lxviii. 31), and He went to her, with the Ark, to preside over <span
class="small">MENYELEK'S</span> kingdom, which was established in
accordance with the commands that He had given to <span
class="small">MOSES</span> and the prophets and priests of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>.

   It will be remembered that the line of kings founded by <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> continued to reign even after the <span
class="small">ETHIOPIANS</span> became Christians under the teaching of
<span class="small">FRUMENTIUS</span> and <span
class="small">ADESIUS</span>, the slaves of the merchant <span
class="small">MEROPIUS</span>, and that the line continued unbroken
until the tenth century of our era. <span class="small">ISAAC</span>
knew that God then permitted the line to be broken, and allowed the
<span class="small">ZÂGUÊ</span> kings to reign over <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> until the reign of <span
class="small">YĔKÛNÔ ’AMLÂK</span>, who restored the Solomonic line in
1270, and he makes no attempt to justify God's action in this matter, or
to explain it. We learn, however, from the first section of the
colophon, that he wondered why God had neglected to have the Arabic
version of the <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> translated into
the "speech of <span class="small">ABYSSINIA</span>" at an <span
id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> earlier date, and why <span
class="small">’ABU’L-’IZZ</span> and <span
class="small">’ABU’L-FARAJ</span>, who made the Arabic translation from
the Coptic, did not make a rendering into Ethiopic also. In the
explanation which he attempts to give, he reminds us that the Arabic
translation appeared whilst the <span class="small">ZÂGUÊ</span> kings
were still reigning. As the <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> was
written to glorify the Solomonic line of kings, and its editors and
translators regarded the <span class="small">ZÂGUÊ</span> kings not only
as non-<span class="small">ISRAELITES</span>, but as "transgressors of
the Law", the appearance of a translation of it in the vernacular whilst
the <span class="small">ZÂGUÊ</span> were still on the throne would be
followed by the torture and death of its producers, and the destruction
of their work.

   There is extant in Ethiopian literature a legend to the effect that
when God made <span class="small">ADAM</span> He placed in his body a
"Pearl", which He intended should pass from it into the bodies of a
series of holy men, one after the other, until the appointed time when
it should enter the body of <span class="small">ḤANNÂ</span>,<span
id="page_xviii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xviii_note_1) and form the substance
of her daughter the <span class="small">VIRGIN MARY</span>. Now this
"Pearl" passed through the body of <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>,
an ancestor of <span class="small">CHRIST</span>, and <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> and <span class="small">MENYELEK</span>, the
son of <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> by the Queen of <span
class="small">SHEBA</span>, were sons of <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span>, and according to Ethiopian ideas they were
akin to each other. But <span class="small">CHRIST</span> was the Son of
God, and, therefore, being the kinsman of <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, <span class="small">MENYELEK</span> was
divine. And <span class="small">ISAAC</span> the Ethiopian, holding this
view, maintains in the <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> that the
kings of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> who were descended from
<span class="small">MENYELEK</span> were of divine origin, and that
their words and deeds were those of gods.

   Now the idea of the divine origin of kings in <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, the <span class="small">SÛDÂN</span>, and
<span class="small">EGYPT</span>, is very old, and it appears to have
been indigenous. According to a legend given in the <span
class="small">WESTCAR PAPYRUS</span> in <span
class="small">BERLIN</span>, three of the great kings of the Vth dynasty
in <span class="small">EGYPT</span> were the sons of the god <span
class="small">RĀ</span> by <span class="small">RUṬṬEṬ</span>, the wife
of <span class="small">RUṬṬEṬUSER</span>, high priest of <span
class="small">RĀ</span>, and <span id="page_xix">p. xix</span> before
the close of that dynasty every king called himself "son of <span
class="small">RĀ</span>". Many a king of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> states in his inscriptions that he reigned
"in the egg", i.e. before he was born, and we are to understand that the
egg was deposited in his mother by the form of the Sun-god, who was his
father. Some of the sovereigns of the XVIIIth dynasty, certainly those
who were the nominees of the priests of <span class="small">ȦMEN</span>,
were declared to be the actual children of <span
class="small">ȦMEN</span>, and to be of his substance. On the walls of
the famous temple which the architect <span class="small">SENMUT</span>
built for Queen <span class="small">ḤATSHEPSUT</span> in Western <span
class="small">THEBES</span>, there is a series of bas-reliefs in which
the god <span class="small">ȦMEN</span> is seen companying with the
mother of that Queen, and <span class="small">ḤATSHEPSUT</span> regarded
herself as <span class="small">ȦMEN'S</span> daughter. In the temple of
Luxor there are bas-reliefs of a similar character, and the god <span
class="small">ȦMEN</span> is seen occupying the couch of the queen who
became by him the mother of <span class="small">ȦMENḤETEP</span> III.
This king was so thoroughly convinced of his divine origin that he
caused an effigy of himself to be sculptured on the walls of the temple
of <span class="small">SÛLB</span> in the Egyptian <span
class="small">SÛDÂN</span>, together with the figures of the great gods
of <span class="small">EGYPT</span>. In fact he shared the worship of
the people with the gods and goddesses of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>. <span class="small">RAMESES THE GREAT</span>
was held to be the son of the god <span class="small">PTAḤ-TANEN</span>,
and in the inscription on a stele at <span class="small">ABU
SIMBEL</span> this god, in addressing the king, says: "I am thy father.
Thou was begotten by the gods. All thy members are from the gods. I made
myself assume the form of the <span class="small">RAM</span>, the Lord
of Tet-t, my seed stood in thy august mother"

<span id="img_xix"></span> ![](img/xix.jpg)<span
id="page_xix_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xix_note_1)

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

   A thousand years later a story arose in <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> to the effect that <span
class="small">ALEXANDER THE GREAT</span> was the son of the god <span
class="small">ȦMEN</span> of <span class="small">EGYPT</span>, and <span
class="small">ALEXANDER'S</span> councillors promptly took advantage of
it to forward the fortunes of their lord. If, they argued, <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span> is the son of <span
class="small">ȦMEN</span>, he is the lawful king of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>, and the <span class="small">EGYPTIANS</span>
must acknowledge him as their king. But it was necessary for their
purpose that <span class="small">ȦMEN</span> should acknowledge <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span> as his son, and they therefore took him
to the Oasis of <span class="small">SÎWAH</span> in the Libyan Desert,
and presented him to the god <span class="small">ȦMEN</span> of <span
class="small">LIBYA</span>. The god admitted that <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span> was his son, the priesthood of <span
class="small">ȦMEN</span> accepted the declaration of their god, the
<span class="small">EGYPTIANS</span> believed that the holy blood of
<span class="small">ȦMEN</span> flowed in <span
class="small">ALEXANDER'S</span> veins, and as a result he became the
king of the South and the North, and Governor of the Domain of <span
class="small">HORUS</span> without striking a blow. The native novelists
and story-tellers, e.g. the <span class="small">PSEUDO
CALLISTHENES</span>, declared that when <span
class="small">NECTANEBUS</span> II, the last native king of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>, fled from <span class="small">EGYPT</span>
he went to <span class="small">MACEDON</span>, where he established
himself as a magician. Here he became acquainted with Queen <span
class="small">OLYMPIAS</span>, who wished to find out from him if her
husband, <span class="small">PHILIP</span>, intended to put her away. An
intimacy sprang up between <span class="small">NECTANEBUS</span> and
<span class="small">OLYMPIAS</span>, and he appeared to the queen one
night in the form of the god <span class="small">ȦMEN</span> of <span
class="small">LIBYA</span>, arrayed in all the attributes of the god,
and begot <span class="small">ALEXANDER THE GREAT</span>. Tradition
transferred the horns of <span class="small">ȦMEN</span> to <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span>, and ancient Arab writers call <span
class="small">ALEXANDER</span> "<span
class="small">DHU’L-ḲARNÊN</span>", i.e. "provided with two horns", a
title that translates exactly one of the titles of <span
class="small">ȦMEN</span>, "Sepṭ ābui" <span id="img_xx"></span>
![](img/xx.jpg)

   <span class="small">ISAAC</span>, the editor and translator of the
<span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span>, and his fellow countrymen saw
nothing strange in the fact that <span class="small">MÂKĔDÂ</span>, the
virgin queen of <span class="small">SÂBA</span>, gave herself to <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span>, for she believed him to be of divine
origin, and he was to her as a god. Moreover, he was <span
id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> the custodian of the "Heavenly <span
class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle of the Law of God", whence he
obtained daily the renewal of his divinity, and power, and authority.
The Tabernacle of the Law had much in common with the arks or divine
tabernacles of the <span class="small">BABYLONIANS</span> and <span
class="small">EGYPTIANS</span>, which formed the places of abode of
figures of gods or their most characteristic emblems. The ark of <span
class="small">BEL</span>, the great god of <span
class="small">BABYLON</span>, contained a figure of the god, and the
king visited it ceremonially once a year, and sued with tears for
forgiveness, and grasped the hand or hands of the sacred figure. The
chamber in which the figure abode was believed to have been built by the
gods. On high days and holy days the ark was carried by the priests in
procession. In <span class="small">EGYPT</span> the arks of the gods
were kept in chambers specially constructed for the purpose, and the
figures of the gods were seated on thrones inside them. These arks were
placed upon sledges or in boats and were carried by the priests in
procession on great days of festival or on solemn days. We know from the
inscriptions that the ark of <span class="small">ȦMEN</span> was
provided with doors that were kept bolted and sealed. On certain
occasions the king had the right to break these seals and unbolt the
doors, and look upon the face of the god. Thus, after his conquest of
<span class="small">EGYPT</span>, the Nubian king <span
class="small">PIĀNKHI</span> went to visit <span class="small">RĀ</span>
in his sanctuary near <span class="small">HELIOPOLIS</span>. He was
received by the <span class="small">KHERḤEB</span> priest, who prayed
that the fiends might have no power over him. Having arrayed himself in
the sacred seṭeb garment, and been censed and asperged, <span
class="small">PIĀNKHI</span> ascended the steps leading to the ark of
<span class="small">RĀ</span> and stood there alone. He broke the seal,
drew the bolts, threw open the doors and looked upon the face of <span
class="small">RĀ</span>. Having adored the Māṭet and Sektet Boats he
drew together the doors and sealed them with his seal. In this way <span
class="small">PIĀNKHI</span> was recognized by <span
class="small">RĀ</span> as the king of all <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>. It is not clear whether it was a figure of
<span class="small">RĀ</span> or the holy benben stone, the symbol of
the god, which <span class="small">PIĀNKHI</span> <span
id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span> looked upon. Many of the sacred arks of
<span class="small">EGYPT</span> contained no figures of gods, but only
objects symbolic of them; in the temples of Osiris the arks contained
portions of the body of this god.

   The Ark of the Law which <span class="small">MENYELEK</span> covered
and stole from the Temple of <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span> was
probably a copy of that made by <span class="small">MOSES</span>, and to
all intents and purposes it was a rectangular box, made of hard wood
plated with gold, and measuring about four feet long, two feet six
inches wide, and two feet six inches deep. It was provided with a cover
upon which rested the Mercy seat and figures of the Cherubim. In the
<span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> no mention is made of the Mercy
seat and the Cherubim, but we read there that <span
class="small">MOSES</span> made a case in shape like the "belly of a
ship", and in this the Two Tables of the Law were placed. To the <span
class="small">ETHIOPIANS</span> this case symbolized the <span
class="small">VIRGIN MARY</span>; the case made by <span
class="small">MOSES</span> carried the Word in stone, and Mary carried
the Word Incarnate. It cannot be assumed that the Ark stolen by <span
class="small">MENYELEK</span> was carried in a sacred boat like an
Egyptian shrine, even though the "belly of a ship" is mentioned in
connection with it. In several chapters of the <span class="small">KEBRA
NAGAST</span> the "chariot of the Tabernacle of the Law" is mentioned, a
fact which suggests that in later days at least the sacred box was
provided with a carriage or sledge. History is silent as to the place
where the Tabernacle of the Law was finally deposited, but Ethiopian
tradition asserts that it survived all the troubles and disasters that
fell upon the <span class="small">ABYSSINIANS</span> in their wars with
the Muslims, and that it was preserved at <span
class="small">’AKSÛM</span> until comparatively recent times.

   In the short introduction that follows I have given a sketch of the
literary history of the <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span>, with
references to the authorities on the subject, and I have made an
abstract of its contents in narrative form which will, I hope, be
useful. A full discussion of every portion of the work, with extracts
giving the original texts <span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span> of the
authorities used and quoted by <span class="small">ISAAC</span> the
scribe, would fill another volume, and the cost of printing, paper, and
binding is now so great that the idea of producing such a book has been
abandoned. A translation of the Arabic text describing how the Kingdom
of <span class="small">DAVID</span> was transferred from <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span> to <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>
has been added, for this interesting document is practically unknown in
England. The pictures of events described in the Old and New Testaments,
given in this book, are taken from Ethiopic MSS. in the <span
class="small">BRITISH MUSEUM</span>; they show as nothing else can the
religious beliefs and traditions of the <span
class="small">ETHIOPIANS</span>, and at the same time they serve as
examples of the drawings and designs with which they illustrated their
manuscripts. Nearly all of them depict Scriptural events described or
referred to in the <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span>.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<span id="page_xviii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xviii_fr_1) See the
*History of Hannâ*, edited and translated by myself, in *Lady Meux MSS.*
2-5, p. 164.

<span id="footnotes_page_xix">p. xix</span>

<span id="page_xix_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xix_fr_1) *Trans. Soc. Bibl.
Arch.*, vol. vii, plate facing p. 119, ll. 3 and 4 (ed. Naville).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CONTENTS.](kn000-3)

</div>
