<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn016.md) 
[Next](kn018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 17. *Concerning the Glory of* <span class="small">ZION</span>

   And as concerning <span class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle of
the Law of God: at the very beginning, as soon as God had stablished the
heavens, He ordained that it should become the habitation of His glory
upon the earth. And willing this He brought it down to the earth, and
permitted <span class="small">MOSES</span> to make a likeness of it. And
He said unto him, "Make an ark (or, tabernacle) of wood that cannot be
eaten by worms, and overlay it with pure gold. And thou shalt place
therein the Word of the Law, which is the Covenant that I have written
with Mine own fingers, that they may keep My law, the Two Tables of the
Covenant."<span id="page_13_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_13_note_1.md) Now the heavenly and
spiritual \[original\] within it is of divers colours, and the work
thereof is marvellous, and it resembleth jasper, and the sparkling
stone, and the topaz, and the hyacinthine stone (?), and the crystal,
and the light, and it catcheth the eye by force, and it astonisheth the
mind and stupefieth it with wonder; it was made by the mind of God and
not by the hand of the artificer, man, but He Himself created it for the
habitation of His glory. And it is a spiritual thing and is full of
compassion; it is a heavenly thing and is full of light; it is a thing
of freedom and a habitation of the Godhead, Whose habitation is in
heaven, and Whose place of movement is on the earth, and it dwelleth
with men and with the angels, a city of salvation for men, and for the
Holy Spirit a habitation. And within it are a <span
class="small">GOMOR</span> of gold \[containing\] a measure of the manna
which came down from heaven; and the rod of <span
class="small">AARON</span> which sprouted after it had become withered
though no one watered it with water, and one <span id="page_14">p.
14</span> had broken it in two places, and it became three rods being
\[originally only\] one rod.

   And <span class="small">MOSES</span> covered \[the Ark\] with pure
gold, and he made for it poles wherewith to carry it and rings \[in
which to place them\], and they carried it before the people until they
brought it into the land of \[their\] inheritance, which is <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span>, the City of <span
class="small">ZION</span>. And when they were crossing the <span
class="small">JORDAN</span> and the priests were carrying it, the waters
stood upright like a wall until all the people had passed over, and
after all the people had passed over the priests passed over bearing the
Ark, and they set it down in the city of <span
class="small">JUDAH</span>, the land of \[their\] inheritance. And
prophets were appointed over the children of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> in the Tabernacle of Testimony, and the
priests wore the ephod, so that they might minister to the Tabernacle of
Testimony, and the high priests offered up offerings, so that they might
obtain remission of their own sins and of the sins of the people
likewise.

   And God commanded <span class="small">MOSES</span> and <span
class="small">AARON</span> to make holy vessels for the Tabernacle of
Testimony for the furnishing of the Holy of Holies, namely, vessels of
gold, bowls and pots, pitchers and sacred tables, netted cloths and tops
for pillars, lamps and vessels for filling them, torch-holders and
snuffers, tongs, candlesticks, and rings and rods for carrying them,
large bowls and lavers, embroidered curtains and hangings, crowns and
worked vestments, purple cloths and leather work, carpets and draperies,
unguents for anointing priests and kings, hyacinthine and purple
hangings, rugs of double thickness and hangings of silk (?), skins of
kids and red hides of rams, and sardius stones, and rubies, and
sapphires, and emeralds \[and to place them\] in the Tabernacle of
Witness, where dwelleth <span class="small">ZION</span>, the habitation
of His glory. \[And God told them\] to make for it the "belly of a ship"
with the Two Tables, which were written by the fingers of God—<span
class="small">ZION</span> shall rest upon them—And thou shalt make for
it a tabernacle of wood that the worms <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>
cannot eat, whereon <span class="small">ZION</span> shall rest, two
cubits and half a cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and
half a cubit the breadth thereof, and thou shalt cover it with pure
gold, both the outside thereof and the inside thereof. And thou shalt
make the fittings and the cover thereof of fine gold, and there shall be
rings round about it; and thou shalt make in the four sides four holes
for the carrying-poles. And thou shalt make it of wood that the worms
cannot eat, and thou shalt cover it with pure gold, and in this ye shall
carry the Tabernacle of the Law.

   In this wise did God command <span class="small">MOSES</span> on
Mount <span class="small">SINAI</span>, and He showed him the work
thereof, and the construction and the pattern of the Tent, according to
which he was to make it. And it (i.e., <span class="small">ZION</span>)
was revered and had exceedingly great majesty in <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and it was acknowledged by God to be the
habitation of His glory. And He Himself came down on the mountain of His
holiness, and He held converse with His chosen ones, and He opened to
them \[a way of\] salvation, and He delivered them from the hand of
their enemies. And he spake with them from the pillar of cloud, and
commanded them to keep His Law and His commandments, and to walk in the
precepts of God.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_13">p. 13</span>

<span id="page_13_note_1"></span>[1](#page_13_fr_1.md) See Exodus xxv. 10
ff.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. How the Orthodox Fathers and Bishops Agreed](kn018.md)

</div>
