<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn021) 
[Next](kn023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 22. *Concerning* <span class="small">TÂMRÎN</span>*, the Merchant*

   And there was a certain wise man, the leader of a merchant's caravan,
whose name was <span class="small">TÂMRÎN</span>, and he used to load
five hundred and twenty camels, and he possessed about three and seventy
ships.

   Now at that time King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> wished to
build the House of God, and he sent out messages among all the merchants
in the east and in the west, and in the north and in the south, bidding
the merchants come and take gold and silver from him, so that he might
take from them whatsoever was necessary for the work. And certain men
reported to him concerning this rich <span
class="small">ETHIOPIAN</span> merchant, and <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> sent to him a message and told him to bring
whatsoever he wished from the country of <span
class="small">ARABIA</span>, red gold, and black wood that could <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> not be eaten by worms, and sapphires. And that
merchant, whose name was <span class="small">TÂMRÎN</span>, the merchant
of the Queen of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, went to <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King; and <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> took whatsoever he desired from him, and he
gave to the merchant whatsoever he wished for in great abundance. Now
that merchant was a man of great understanding, and he saw and
comprehended the wisdom of <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>, and he
marvelled \[thereat\], and he watched carefully so that he might learn
how the King made answer by his word, and understand his judgment, and
the readiness of his mouth, and the discreetness of his speech, and the
manner of his life, and his sitting down and his rising up, and his
occupations, and his love, and his administration, and his table, and
his law. To those to whom <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> had to give
orders he spake with humility and graciousness, and when they had
committed a fault he admonished them \[gently\]. For he ordered his
house in the wisdom and fear of God, and he smiled graciously on the
fools and set them on the right road, and he dealt gently with the
maidservants. He opened his mouth in parables, and his words were
sweeter than the purest honey; his whole behaviour was admirable, and
his whole aspect pleasant. For wisdom is beloved by men of
understanding, and is rejected by fools.

   And when that merchant had seen all these things he was astonished,
and he marvelled exceedingly. For those who were wont to see <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> held him in complete affection, and he
\[became\] their teacher; and because of his wisdom and excellence those
who had once come to him did not wish to leave him and go away from him.
And the sweetness of his words was like water to the man who is athirst,
and like bread to the hungry man, and like healing to the sick man, and
like apparel to the naked man. And he was like a father to the orphans.
And he judged with righteousness and accepted the person of no man
(i.e., he was <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> impartial). He had glory,
and riches, which God had given unto him, in great abundance, namely,
gold, and silver, and precious stones, and rich apparel, and cattle, and
sheep, and goats innumerable. Now in the days of <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King gold was as common as bronze, and
silver as lead, and bronze and lead and iron were as abundant as the
grass of the fields and the reeds of the desert; and cedarwood was also
abundant. And God had given him glory, and riches, and wisdom, and grace
in such abundance that there was none like unto him among his
predecessors, and among those who came after him there was none like
unto him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. How the Merchant returned to ETHIOPIA](kn023)

</div>
