<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn028.md) 
[Next](kn030.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 29. *Concerning the Three Hundred and Eighteen* \[*Patriarchs*\]

   Now we ordain even as did they. We know well what the Apostles who
were before us spake. We the Three Hundred and Eighteen have maintained
and laid down the orthodox faith, our Lord <span class="small">JESUS
CHRIST</span> being with us. And He hath directed us what we should
teach, and how we should fashion the faith.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

**\[*The Narrative of* <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> *and the Queen
of* <span class="small">SHEBA</span> *continued*\]**

   And King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> sent a message unto the
Queen, saying, "Now that thou hast come here why wilt thou go away
without seeing the administration of the kingdom, and how the meal\[s\]
for the chosen ones of the kingdom are eaten after the manner of the
righteous, and how the people are driven away after the manner of
sinners? From \[the sight of\] it thou wouldst acquire wisdom. Follow me
now and seat thyself in my splendour in the tent, and I will complete
thy instruction, and thou shalt learn the administration of my kingdom;
for thou hast loved wisdom, and she shall dwell with thee until thine
end and for ever." Now a prophecy maketh itself apparent in \[this\]
speech.

   And the Queen sent a second message, saying, "From being a fool, I
have become wise by following thy wisdom, and from being a thing
rejected by the God of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, I have become
a chosen woman because of this faith which is in my heart; and
henceforth I will worship no other god except Him. And as concerning
that which thou sayest, that thou wishest to increase in me wisdom and
honour, I will come according to thy desire." And <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> rejoiced because of this \[message\], and
he arrayed his chosen ones \[in splendid apparel\], and he added a
double supply to his table, and he had all the arrangements concerning
the management of his house carefully ordered, and the house of King
<span class="small">SOLOMON</span> was made ready \[for guests\] daily.
And he made it ready with very great pomp, in joy, and in peace, in
wisdom, and in tenderness, with all humility and lowliness; and then he
ordered the royal table according to the law of the kingdom.

   And the Queen came and passed into a place set apart in splendour and
glory, and she sat down immediately behind him where she could see and
learn and know <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> everything. And she
marvelled exceedingly at what she saw, and at what she heard, and she
praised the God of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> in her heart; and
she was struck with wonder at the splendour of the royal palace which
she saw. For she could see, though no one could see her, even as <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> had arranged in wisdom for her. He had
beautified the place where she was seated, and had spread over it purple
hangings, and laid down carpets, and decorated it with *miskât*
(moschus), and marbles, and precious stones, and he burned aromatic
powders, and sprinkled oil of myrrh and cassia round about, and
scattered frankincense and costly incense in all directions. And when
they brought her into this abode, the odour thereof was very pleasing to
her, and even before she ate the dainty meats therein she was satisfied
with the smell of them. And with wise intent <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> sent to her meats which would make her
thirsty, and drinks that were mingled with vinegar, and fish and dishes
made with pepper. And this he did and he gave them to the Queen to eat.
And the royal meal had come to an end three times and seven times,<span
id="page_33_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_33_note_1.md) and the administrators,
and the counsellors, and the young men and the servants had departed,
and the King rose up and he went to the Queen, and he said unto her—now
they were alone together—"Take thou thine ease here for love's sake
until daybreak." And she said unto him, "Swear to me by thy God, the God
of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, that thou wilt not take me by
force. For if I, who according to the law of men am a maiden, be
seduced, I should travel on my journey \[back\] in sorrow, and
affliction, and tribulation."

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_33">p. 33</span>

<span id="page_33_note_1"></span>[1](#page_33_fr_1.md) i.e., three courses
and seven courses had been consumed.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. Concerning how King SOLOMON swore to the Queen](kn030.md)

</div>
