<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn032) 
[Next](kn034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 33. *How the King of* <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> *travelled*

   And the Queen called <span class="small">TÂMRÎN</span>, the chief of
her caravan men and merchants, and she said unto him, "Get ready for thy
journey and take this young man with thee, for he importuneth me by
night and by day. And thou shalt take him to the King and shalt bring
him back hither in safety, if God, the Lord of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, pleaseth." And she prepared a retinue
suitable to their wealth and honourable condition, and made ready all
the goods that were necessary for the journey, and for presenting as
gifts to the King, and all that would be necessary for ease and comfort
by the way. And she made ready everything for sending him away, and she
gave to the officers who were to accompany him such moneys as they would
need for him and for themselves on the journey. And she commanded them
that they were not to leave him there, but only to take him to the King,
and then to bring him back again to her, when he should assume the
sovereignty over her land.

   Now there was a law in the country of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> that \[only\] a woman should reign, and
that she must be a virgin who had never known man, but the Queen said
\[unto <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>\], "Henceforward a man who is
of thy seed shall reign, and a woman shall nevermore reign; only seed of
thine shall reign and his seed after him from generation to generation.
And this thou shalt <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> inscribe in the
letters of the rolls in the Book of their Prophets in brass, and thou
shalt lay it in the House of God, which shall be built as a memorial and
as a prophecy for the last days. And the people shall not worship the
sun and the magnificence of the heavens, or the mountains and the
forests, or the stones and the trees of the wilderness, or the abysses
and that which is in the waters, or graven images and figures of gold,
or the feathered fowl which fly; and they shall not make use of them in
divining, and they shall not pay adoration unto them. And this law shall
abide for ever. And if there be anyone who shall transgress this law,
thy seed shall judge him for ever. Only give us the fringes of the
covering of the holy heavenly <span class="small">ZION</span>, the
Tabernacle of the Law of God, which we would embrace (or, greet). Peace
be to the strength of thy kingdom and to thy brilliant wisdom, which
God, the Lord of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> our Creator, hath
given unto thee."

   And the Queen took the young man aside and when he was alone with her
she gave him that symbol which <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> had
given her, that is to say, the ring on his finger, so that he might know
his son, and might remember her word and her covenant which she had made
\[with him\], that she would worship God all the days of her life, she
and those who were under her dominion, with all \[the power\] which God
had given her. And then the Queen sent him away in peace.

   And the young man \[and his retinue\] made straight their way and
they journeyed on and came into the country of the neighbourhood of
<span class="small">GÂZÂ</span>. Now this is the <span
class="small">GÂZÂ</span> which <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the
King gave to the Queen of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. And in
the Acts of the Apostles <span class="small">LUKE</span> the Evangelist
wrote, saying, "He was the governor of the whole country of <span
class="small">GÂZÂ</span>, an eunuch of Queen <span
class="small">HENDAKÊ</span>, who had believed on the word of <span
class="small">LUKE</span> the Apostle."<span
id="page_40_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_40_note_1)

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="page_40_note_1"></span>[1](#page_40_fr_1) Acts viii. 27

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 34. How the young man arrived in his mother's country](kn034)

</div>
