<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn045) 
[Next](kn047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 46. *How they made a plan concerning* <span class="small">ZION</span>

   And while <span class="small">AZÂRYÂS</span> was asleep at night the
Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, "Take to thee
four goats, each a yearling—now they shall be for your sins, thyself,
and <span class="small">’ÊLMEYÂS</span>, and <span
class="small">’ABÎS</span>, and <span class="small">MÂKRÎ</span>—and
four pure sheep, yearlings also, and an ox whereon no yoke hath ever
been laid. And thou shalt offer up the ox as a sacrifice on the east
side of her <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> (i.e., <span
class="small">ZION</span>), and the sheep and the goats to the right,
and left thereof, and at the west of it, which is close to its exit. And
your Lord <span class="small">DAVID</span> shall speak to <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King and shall say unto him, 'One thing
I ask from thee, O father, I would offer up a sacrifice to the holy city
<span class="small">JERUSALEM</span>, and to my Lady <span
class="small">ZION</span>, the holy and heavenly Tabernacle of the Law
of God.' And <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> shall say unto him, 'Do
so.' And <span class="small">DAVID</span> shall say unto him, 'Let the
son of the priest offer up sacrifice on my behalf, even as he knoweth';
and he will give thee the command, and thou shalt offer up the
sacrifice. And thou shalt bring forth the Tabernacle of the Law of God
after thou hast offered up the sacrifice, and I will again show thee
what thou shalt do in respect of it as to bringing it out; for this is
from God. For <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> hath provoked God to
wrath, and for this reason He will make the Tabernacle of the Law of God
to depart from him."

   And when <span class="small">AZÂRYÂS</span> awoke from his dream he
rejoiced greatly, and his heart and his mind were clear, and he
remembered everything that the Angel of the Lord had shown him in the
night, and how he had sealed him \[with the sign of the Cross\], and
given him strength and heartened him. And he went to his brethren, and
when they were gathered together he told them everything that the Angel
of God had shown him: how the Tabernacle of the Law of God had been
given to them, and how God had made blind His eye in respect of the
kingdom of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and how its glory had been
given to others, and they themselves were to take away the Tabernacle of
the Law of God, and how the kingdom of <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> was to be seized by them—with the exception
of two "rods", and how it was not to be left to <span
class="small">ÎYÔRBĔ‛ÂM</span> (<span class="small">REHOBOAM</span>) his
son, and how the kingdom of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> was to be
divided. And \[<span class="small">AZÂRYÂS</span> said\], "Rejoice with
me. I rejoice because it hath been shown unto me thus; for the grace of
their priesthood and <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> kingdom shall
depart with us, and it shall be by the Will of God. Thus said he (i.e.,
the Angel) unto me. And now come ye, and let us go and tell <span
class="small">DAVID</span> our Lord so that he may say to his father, 'I
will offer up a sacrifice.'"

   And they went and told \[<span class="small">DAVID</span>, the son of
<span class="small">SOLOMON</span>\] and he rejoiced, and he sent to
<span class="small">YÔ‛AS</span> (<span class="small">BENAIAH</span>),
the son of <span class="small">YÔDÂḤÊ</span>, to come to him, that he
might send him to his father, and he came. And <span
class="small">DAVID</span> sent him to his father <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span>, and he said unto him, "Send me away, for I
will depart to my own country, together with everything that thy
goodness hath given me; and may thy prayers accompany me always
whithersoever I shall go. But now there is one petition which I would
make unto thee, if peradventure I have found grace with thee, and turn
not away thy face from me. For I thy servant am going to depart, and I
wish to offer up a sacrifice of propitiation (or, salvation) for my sins
in this thy holy city of <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span> and of
<span class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle of the Law of God. And
peace \[be\] with thy majesty."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 47. Concerning the offering of AZÂRYÂS (AZARIAH) and the
King](kn047)

</div>
