<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn043) 
[Next](kn045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 44. *How it is not a seemly thing to revile the King*

   Now it is not a seemly thing to revile the king, for he is the
anointed of God. It is neither seemly nor good. If he doeth that which
is good he will not suffer loss in three kingdoms: F<span
class="small">IRST</span>, God shall overthrow for him his enemy, and he
shall not be seized by the hand of his enemy. S<span
class="small">ECONDLY</span>, God shall make him reign with Him and with
His righteousness, and shall make him to sit on His right hand. T<span
class="small">HIRDLY</span>, God shall make him to reign upon earth with
glory and joy, and shall direct his kingdom for him, and shall bring
down the nations under his feet. And if he treateth God lightly, and
doth not do that which is good, and doth not himself walk in the path of
uprightness, God shall work as He pleaseth against him; on earth He will
make his days to be few, and in heaven (*sic*) his place of abode shall
be the habitation of <span class="small">SHEÔL</span> with the Devil.
And on earth he shall enjoy neither health nor gladness \[and he shall
live\] in fear and terror, without peace and with perturbation.

   It is not a good thing for any of those who are under the dominion of
a king to revile him, for retribution belongeth to God. Now the priests
are like the prophets, only better than the prophets, for the mysteries
<span id="page_65">p. 65</span> are given unto them, so that they may
lay hold upon the sun of righteousness, whilst the Seraphim, who were
created out of fire, are only able to lay hold upon the mysteries with
tongs. As for the priests He named them "salt", and moreover, He named
the priests "lamp" and also "light of the world", and also "the sun that
lighteneth the darkness", <span class="small">CHRIST</span>, the Sun of
righteousness, being in their hearts. And a priest, who hath in him
understanding, rebuketh the king concerning that he hath seen; and that
which he hath not seen God will enquire into, and there is none who can
call Him to account. Moreover, the people must not revile the bishops
and the priests, for they are the children of God and the men of His
house, for which reason they must rebuke \[men\] for their sins and
errors. And thou, O priest, if thou seest sin in a well-known man, shalt
not hesitate to rebuke him; let neither sword nor exile make thee
afraid. And hear how angry God was with <span
class="small">ISAIAH</span> because he did not rebuke King <span
class="small">‘ÛZYÂN</span> (<span class="small">UZZIAH</span>). And
hearken also concerning <span class="small">SAMUEL</span> the Prophet,
how he rebuked <span class="small">SAUL</span><span
id="page_65_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_65_note_1) the king, being in no way
afraid of him, and how he rent his kingdom \[from him\] by his word; and
\[hearken also\] how <span class="small">ELIJAH</span> \[rebuked\] <span
class="small">AHAB</span>.<span id="page_65_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_65_note_2) Do thou then fear not,
and rebuke and teach him that transgresseth.

   And <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> from of old reviled their kings
and provoked their prophets to wrath, and in later times they crucified
their Saviour. But believing Christian folk dwell in peace, without
sickness and suffering, without hatred and offence, with our king . .
.<span id="page_65_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_65_note_3) who loveth God and who
removeth not from his heart the thing of righteousness, and faith in the
Churches and in the believers. And his enemies shall be scattered by the
might of the Cross of <span class="small">JESUS CHRIST</span>.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_65">p. 65</span>

<span id="page_65_note_1"></span>[1](#page_65_fr_1) See 1 Samuel, chap.
xv.

<span id="page_65_note_2"></span>[2](#page_65_fr_2) 1 Kings, chap. xvii.

<span id="page_65_note_3"></span>[3](#page_65_fr_3) The name of the
reigning king to be added by the copyist.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 45. How those who were sent away wept and made a plan](kn045)

</div>
