<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn052.md) 
[Next](kn054.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 53. *How the Wagon was given to* <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>

   And they halted by <span class="small">GÂZÂ</span>, the city of the
mother of the king, which <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the king
had given to the Queen of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> when she
came to him. And from there they came in one day to the border of <span
class="small">GĔBĔṢ</span>. (<span class="small">EGYPT</span>), the name
of which is "<span class="small">MESRÎN</span>". And when the sons of
the warriors of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> saw that they had come
in one day a distance of thirteen days' march, and that they were not
tired, or hungry, or thirsty, neither man nor beast, and that they all
\[felt\] that they had eaten and drunk their fill, these sons of the
warriors of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> knew and believed that
this thing was from God. And they said unto their king, "Let us let down
the wagons, for we have come to the water of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. This is the <span
class="small">TAKKAZÎ</span> which floweth down from <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and watereth the Valley of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>"; and they let down their wagons there, and
set up their tents.

   And the sons of the warriors of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>
went and drove away all the people, and they said unto \[<span
class="small">DAVID</span>\] their king, "Shall we tell thee a matter?
Canst thou hold it \[secret\]?" And the King said unto them, "Yes, I can
\[hold it secret\]. And if ye will tell it to me I will never let it go
forth or repeat it to the day of my death." And they said unto him, "The
sun descended from heaven, and was given on <span
class="small">SINAI</span> to <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and it
became the salvation of the race of <span class="small">ADAM</span>,
from <span class="small">MOSES</span> to the seed of <span
class="small">JESSE</span>, and behold, it is with thee by the Will of
God. It is not through us that this hath been done, but by the Will of
God; it is not through us that this <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> hath
been done, but by the Will of Him that fashioned it and made it hath
this happened. We wished, and God hath fulfilled \[our wish\]; we agreed
concerning it, and God made it good; we held converse \[concerning it\],
and God performed; we meditated \[upon it\], and God devised the plan;
we spoke, and God was well pleased; we directed our gaze, and God
directed it rightly; we meditated, and God hath justified. And now God
hath chosen thee, and is well pleased with thy city, to be the servant
of the holy and heavenly <span class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle
of the Law of God; and it shall be to thee a guide for ever, to thee and
thy seed after thee if thou wilt keep His command and perform the Will
of the Lord thy God. For thou wilt not be able to take it back, even if
thou wishest, and thy father cannot seize it, even if he wisheth, for it
goeth of its own free will whithersoever it wisheth, and it cannot be
removed from its seat if it doth not desire it. And behold, it is our
Lady, our Mother and our salvation, our fortress and our place of
refuge, our glory and the haven of our safety, to those who lean upon
it."

   And <span class="small">AZÂRYÂS</span> made a sign to <span
class="small">ÊLMEYÂS</span>, and he said unto him, "Go, beautify, and
dress our Lady, so that our King may see her." And when <span
class="small">AZÂRYÂS</span> had said this, King <span
class="small">DAVID</span> was perturbed and he laid both hands upon his
breast, and he drew breath three times and said, "Hast thou in truth, O
Lord, remembered us in Thy mercy, the castaways, the people whom Thou
hast rejected, so that I may see Thy pure habitation, which is in
heaven, the holy and heavenly <span class="small">ZION</span>? With what
shall we requite the Lord in return for all the good things which He
hath done for us? there being with Him no glory and praise! He hath
crowned us with His grace, so that we may know upon earth His praise and
may all serve Him according to His greatness. For He is the Good One to
His chosen ones, and unto Him belongeth praise for ever."

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

   And King \[<span class="small">DAVID</span>\] rose up and skipped
about like a young sheep and like a kid of the goats that hath sucked
milk in abundance from his mother, even as his grandfather <span
class="small">DAVID</span> rejoiced before the Tabernacle of the Law of
God. He smote the ground with his feet, and rejoiced in his heart, and
uttered cries of joy with his mouth. And what shall I say of the great
joy and gladness that were in the camp of the King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>? One man told his neighbour, and they
smote the ground with their feet like young bulls, and they clapped
their hands together, and marvelled, and stretched out their hands to
heaven, and they cast themselves down with their faces to the ground,
and they gave thanks unto God in their hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 54. How DAVID \[the King of ETHIOPIA\] Prophesied and Saluted
ZION](kn054.md)

</div>
