<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn057) 
[Next](kn059) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 58. *How* <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> *Rose up to Slay them*

   Thus spake King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>. And the King rose
up in wrath and set out to pursue \[the men of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>\]. And when the King, and his nobles, and
his mighty men of war rose up (i.e., had set out), the elders of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and the widows, and the virgins gathered
together in the house of God, and they wept for <span
class="small">ZION</span>, for the Tabernacle of the Law of God had been
taken away <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> from them. Now after <span
class="small">ZADOK</span> had remained \[senseless\] for a season, his
heart returned to him. And then the King commanded that the soldiers
should go forth on the right hand and on the left, on the chance that
some of the \[fugitives\] might turn aside through fear of the theft.
And the King himself rose up and followed the track of the road of the
men of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and he sent out mounted
horsemen, so that they might \[ride on before him and\] find out where
they were, and might return and bring him news \[of them\]. And the
horsemen journeyed on and came to the country of <span
class="small">MESR</span> (<span class="small">EGYPT</span>), where the
men of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> had encamped with their king,
and where they had made peace with <span class="small">ZION</span>, and
they rejoiced. And the soldiers of King <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> questioned the people, and the men of the
country of <span class="small">EGYPT</span> said unto them, "Some days
ago certain men of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> passed here; and
they travelled swiftly in wagons, like the angels, and they were swifter
than the eagles of the heavens." And the King's soldiers said unto them,
"How many days ago is it since they left you?" And the men of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> said unto them, "This day is the ninth day
since they left us." And some of the King's horsemen who returned said
unto King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>, "Nine days have passed
since they left <span class="small">EGYPT</span>. Some of our companions
have gone to seek for them at the Sea of <span
class="small">ERITREA</span>, but we came back that we might report this
to thee. Bethink thyself, O King, I beseech thee. On the second day they
went forth from thee, and they arrived on the third day at the river
<span class="small">TAKKAZÎ</span> \[of\] the land of <span
class="small">MESR</span> (<span class="small">EGYPT</span>). And we
being sent forth by thee from <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span>,
arrived on the day of the Sabbath. And we came back to thee to-day
\[which is\] the fourth day of the week. Consider in thy wisdom the
distance which those men traversed." And the King was wroth and said,
"Seize the five of them, until we find out the truth of their words."

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

   And the King and his soldiers marched quickly, and they came to <span
class="small">GÂZÂ</span>. And the King asked the people, saying, "When
did my son leave you?" And they answered and said unto him, "He left us
three days ago. And having loaded their wagons none of them travelled on
the ground, but in wagons that were suspended in the air; and they were
swifter than the eagles that are in the sky, and all their baggage
travelled with them in wagons above the winds. As for us, we thought
that thou hadst, in thy wisdom, made them to travel in wagons above the
winds." And the King said unto them, "Was <span
class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle of the Law of God, with them?"
And they said unto him, "We did not see anything."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 59. How the King Questioned an Egyptian, the Servant of
PHARAOH](kn059)

</div>
