<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn054) 
[Next](kn056) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 55. *How the People of* <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> *Rejoiced*

   And \[the people of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>\] took
flutes, and blew horns, and \[beat\] drums, and \[played on\] pipes, and
the Brook of <span class="small">EGYPT</span> was moved and astonished
at the noise of their songs and their rejoicings; and with them were
mingled outcries and shouts of gladness. And their idols, which they had
made with their hands and which were in the forms of men, and dogs, and
cats, fell down, and the high towers (pylons or obelisks ?), and also
the <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> figures of birds, \[made\] of gold
and silver, fell down also and were broken in pieces. For <span
class="small">ZION</span> shone like the sun, and at the majesty thereof
they were dismayed. And they arrayed <span class="small">ZION</span> in
her apparel, and they bore the gifts to her before her, and they set her
upon a wagon, and they spread out purple beneath her, and they draped
her with draperies of purple, and they sang songs before her and behind
her.

   Then the wagons rose up (i.e., resumed their journey) as before, and
they set out early in the morning, and the people sang songs to <span
class="small">ZION</span>, and they were all raised up the space of a
cubit, and as the people of the country of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> bade them farewell, they passed before them
like shadows, and the people of the country of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> worshipped them, for they saw <span
class="small">ZION</span> moving in the heavens like the sun, and they
all ran with the wagon of <span class="small">ZION</span>, some in front
of her and some behind her. And they came to the sea <span
class="small">AL-AḤMAR</span>, which is the Sea of <span
class="small">ERITREA</span> (i.e., the <span class="small">RED
SEA</span>), which was divided by the hand of <span
class="small">MOSES</span>, and the children of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> marched in the depths thereof, going up and
down. Now at that time the Tabernacle of the Law of God had not been
given unto <span class="small">MOSES</span>, and therefore the water
only gathered itself together, a wall on the right hand and a wall on
the left, and allowed <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> to pass with
their beasts and their children and their wives. And after they had
crossed the sea God spake to <span class="small">MOSES</span> and gave
him the Tabernacle of the Covenant with the Book of the Law. And when
the holy <span class="small">ZION</span> crossed over with those who
were in attendance on her, and who sang songs to the accompaniment of
harps and flutes, the sea received them and its waves leaped up as do
the high mountains when they are split asunder, and it roared even as a
lion roareth when he is enraged, and it thundered as doth the winter
thunder of <span class="small">DAMASCUS</span> and <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> when the lightning smiteth the clouds, and
the sound thereof mingled with the sounds of the musical instruments.
<span id="page_84">p. 84</span> And the sea worshipped <span
class="small">ZION</span>. And whilst its billows were tossing about
like the mountains their wagons were raised above the waves for a space
of three cubits, and among the sound of the songs the \[noise of the\]
breaking of the waves of the sea was wonderful. The breaking of the
waves of the sea was exceedingly majestic and stupefying, and it was
mighty and strong. And the creatures that were in the sea, those that
could be recognized, and those that were invisible, came forth and
worshipped <span class="small">ZION</span>; and the birds that were on
it flapped their pinions and overshadowed it. And there was joy to the
Sea of <span class="small">ERITREA</span>, and to the people of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, who went forth to the sea and rejoiced
exceedingly, and with a greater joy than did <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> when they came out of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>. And they arrived opposite Mount <span
class="small">SINAI</span>, and dwelt in <span
class="small">ḲÂDÊS</span>, and they remained there whilst the angels
sang praises; and the creatures of the spirit mingled their praises with
\[those\] of the children of earth, with songs, and psalms, and
tambourines joyfully.

   And then they loaded their wagons, and they rose up, and departed,
and journeyed on to the land of <span class="small">MEDYÂM</span>, and
they came to the country of <span class="small">BÊLÔNTÔS</span>, which
is a country of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. And they rejoiced
there, and they encamped there, because they had reached the border of
their country with glory and joy, without tribulation on the road, in a
wagon of the spirit, by the might of heaven and of <span
class="small">MICHAEL</span> the Archangel. And all the provinces of
<span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> rejoiced, for <span
class="small">ZION</span> sent forth a light like that of the sun into
the darkness wheresoever she came.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 56. Of the Return of ZADOK the Priest, and the giving of the
Gift](kn056)

</div>
