<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn062.md) 
[Next](kn064.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 63. *How the Nobles of* <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> *agreed* \[*with the King*\]

   And then the elders of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> made answer
and said unto him, "May thy good pleasure be done, and the good pleasure
of the Lord God! As for us, none of us will transgress thy word, and we
will not inform any other people that <span class="small">ZION</span>
hath been taken away from us." And they established this covenant in the
House of God—the elders of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> with their
King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> unto this day. And <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> lived \[thus\] for eleven years after the
taking away of <span class="small">ZION</span> from him, and then his
heart turned aside from the love of God, and he forgot his wisdom,
through his excessive love of women. And he loved very greatly the
daughter of <span class="small">PHARAOH</span>, the king of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>, whose name was <span
class="small">MÂḲSHÂRÂ</span>, and he brought her into the house which
he had made; and there were figures of the sun, moon, and stars in the
roof thereof, and it was illumined by night as brightly as by day. Its
beams were made of brass, and its roof of silver, and its <span
id="page_101">p. 101</span> panels (?) of lead, and its walls of stone,
red with black, and brown with white \[and\] green; and its floor was of
blocks of sapphire stone and sardius. And he used to go and dwell
therein through his love for his house and his wife <span
class="small">MÂḲSHÂRÂ</span>, the daughter of <span
class="small">PHARAOH</span> the king of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>.

   Now the queen possessed certain idols which her father had given her
to bow down before, and because, when <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>
saw her sacrificing to them and worshipping them, he did not rebuke her
or forsake her, God was wroth with him, and made him to forget his
wisdom. And she multiplied her sacrifices, and her worship, and her
folly, according to the stupidity of the <span
class="small">EGYPTIANS</span>, and all the people of her house
worshipped the idols, and learned the foolish service of idols. And
enjoying the pleasure of their foolish service they worshipped with the
daughter of <span class="small">PHARAOH</span>, and the children of
<span class="small">ISRAEL</span> joined themselves to her, and the
women and their handmaidens joined themselves unto her in the worship
and foolish service of idols. And <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>
himself found pleasure in hearing their foolish service and folly. And
when she saw that he loved her, and hearkened, and held his peace, and
asked many questions about the foolish service of the gods of the <span
class="small">EGYPTIANS</span>, she made herself exceedingly agreeable
to him, and she spoke to him with honeyed words, and with the tender
speech of women, and with the sweet smile that accompanieth the
presentment of an evil deed, and with the turning of the face and the
assumption of a look of good intent, and with the nodding of the head.
With actions of this kind she caused his heart to turn away from his
good intent, and she enticed him to the evil of her work, wishing to
drag him down into the folly of the foolish service of idols through
carelessness. And as the deep sea draweth down into its depths the man
who cannot swim, until the water overwhelmeth him and destroyeth his
life, <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> even so did that woman wish to
submerge <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 64. How the Daughter of PHARAOH Seduced SOLOMON](kn064.md)

</div>
