<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn067.md) 
[Next](kn069.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 68. *Concerning* <span class="small">MARY</span>*, Our Lady of Salvation*

   "And again, there shall be unto thee a sign that the Saviour shall
come from thy seed, and that He shall deliver thee with thy fathers and
thy seed after thee by His coming. Your salvation was created in the
belly of <span class="small">ADAM</span> in the form of a Pearl before
<span class="small">EVE</span>. And when He created <span
class="small">EVE</span> out of the rib He brought her to <span
class="small">ADAM</span>, and said unto them, 'Multiply you from the
belly of <span class="small">ADAM</span>.' The Pearl did not go out into
<span class="small">CAIN</span> or <span class="small">ABEL</span>, but
into the third that went forth from the belly of <span
class="small">ADAM</span>, and it entered into the belly of <span
class="small">SETH</span>. And then passing from him that Pearl went
into those who <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> were the firstborn, and
came to <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>. And it did not go from <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> into his firstborn <span
class="small">ISHMAEL</span>, but it tarried and came into <span
class="small">ISAAC</span> the pure. And it did not go into his
firstborn, the arrogant <span class="small">ESAU</span>, but it went
into <span class="small">JACOB</span> the lowly one. And it did not
enter from him into his firstborn, the erring <span
class="small">REUBEN</span>, but into <span class="small">JUDAH</span>,
the innocent one. And it did not go forth from <span
class="small">JUDAH</span> until four sinners had been born, but it came
to <span class="small">FÂRÊS</span> (<span class="small">PEREZ</span>),
the patient one, And from him this Pearl went to the firstborn until it
came into the belly of <span class="small">JESSE</span>, the father of
thy father. And then it waited until six men of wrath had been born, and
after that it came to the seventh, <span
class="small">DAVID</span>,<span id="page_111_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_111_note_1.md) thy innocent and humble
father; for God hateth the arrogant and proud, and loveth the innocent
and humble. And then it waited in the loins of thy father until five
erring fools had been born, when it came into thy loins because of thy
wisdom and understanding. And then the Pearl waited, and it did not go
forth into thy firstborn. For those good men of his country neither
denied Him nor crucified Him, like <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> thy
people; when they saw Him Who wrought miracles, Who was to be born from
the Pearl, they believed on Him when they heard the report of Him. And
the Pearl did not go forth into thy youngest son <span
class="small">’ADRÂMÎ</span>. For those good men neither crucified Him
nor denied Him when they saw the working of miracles, and wonders by Him
that was to be born from the Pearl, and afterwards they believed in Him
through His disciples.

   "Now the Pearl, which is to be your salvation, went forth from thy
belly and entered into the belly of <span
class="small">‛ÎYÔRBĔ‛ÂM</span> (<span class="small">REHOBOAM</span>)
thy son, because of the wickedness of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>
thy people, who in their denial and in their wickedness crucified Him.
But if He had not been crucified He could not have been your salvation.
For <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> He was crucified without sin, and
He rose \[again\] without corruption. And for the sake of this He went
down to you into <span class="small">SHEÔL</span>, and tore down its
walls, that He might deliver you and bring you out, and show mercy upon
all of you. Ye in whose bellies the Pearl shall be carried shall be
saved with your wives, and none of you shall be destroyed, from your
father <span class="small">ADAM</span> unto him that shall come, thy
kinsman <span class="small">‘ÊYÂḲÊM</span> (<span
class="small">JOACHIM</span>), and from <span class="small">EVE</span>
thy mother, the wife of <span class="small">ADAM</span>, to <span
class="small">NOAH</span> and his wife <span
class="small">TARMÎZÂ</span>, to <span class="small">TÂRÂ</span> (<span
class="small">TERAH</span>) and his wife <span
class="small">’AMÎNYÂ</span>, and to <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>
and his wife <span class="small">SÂRÂ</span> (<span
class="small">SARAH</span>), and to <span class="small">ISAAC</span> and
his wife <span class="small">RĔBḲÂ</span> (<span
class="small">REBECCA</span>), and to <span class="small">JACOB</span>
and his wife <span class="small">LĔYÂ</span> (<span
class="small">LEAH</span>), and to <span class="small">YAHÛDÂ</span> and
his bride <span class="small">TĔ‛EMÂR</span> (<span
class="small">TAMAR</span>), and to thy father and his wife <span
class="small">BÊRSÂBÊḤ</span> (<span class="small">BATHSHEBA</span>),
and to thyself and <span class="small">TARBÂNÂ</span> thy wife, and to
<span class="small">REHOBOAM</span> thy son and his wife <span
class="small">’AMÎSÂ</span>, and to <span class="small">ÎYÔ‛AḲÊM</span>
(<span class="small">JOACHIM</span>) thy kinsman, who is to come, and
his wife <span class="small">ḤANNÂ</span>.

   "None of you who shall have carried the Pearl shall be destroyed, and
whether it be your men or your women, those who shall have carried the
Pearl shall not be destroyed. For the Pearl shall be carried by the men
who shall be righteous, and the women who have carried the Pearl shall
not be destroyed, for they shall become pure through that Pearl, for it
is holy and pure, and by it they shall be made holy and pure; and for
its sake and for the sake of <span class="small">ZION</span> He hath
created the whole world. <span class="small">ZION</span> hath taken up
her abode with thy firstborn and she shall be the salvation of the
people of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> for ever; and the Pearl
shall be carried in the belly of <span class="small">’AYÔRBĔ‛ÂM</span>
(<span class="small">REHOBOAM</span>) thy son, and shall be the saviour
of all the world. And when the appointed time hath come this Pearl shall
be born of thy seed, for it is exceedingly pure, seven times purer than
the sun. And the Redeemer shall come from the seat of His Godhead, and
shall dwell upon her, and shall put on her flesh, and straightway thou
<span id="page_113">p. 113</span> thyself shalt announce to her what my
Lord and thy Lord speaketh to me.

   "I am <span class="small">GABRIEL</span> the Angel, the protector of
those who shall carry the Pearl from the body of <span
class="small">ADAM</span> even to the belly of <span
class="small">ḤANNÂ</span>, so that I may keep from servitude and
pollution you wherein the Pearl shall dwell. And <span
class="small">MICHAEL</span> hath been commanded to direct and keep
<span class="small">ZION</span> wheresoever she goeth, and <span
class="small">URIEL</span> shall direct and keep the wood of the
thicket<span id="page_113_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_113_note_1.md) which shall be the Cross
of the Saviour. And when thy people in their envy have crucified Him,
they shall rush upon His Cross because of the multitude of miracles that
shall take place through it, and they shall be put to shame when they
see its wonders. And in the last times a descendant of thy son <span
class="small">’ADRÂMÎS</span> shall take the wood of the Cross, the
third \[means of\] salvation that shall be sent upon the earth. The
Angel <span class="small">MICHAEL</span> is with <span
class="small">ZION</span>, with <span class="small">DAVID</span> thy
firstborn, who hath taken the throne of <span class="small">DAVID</span>
thy father. And I am with the pure Pearl for him that shall reign for
ever, with <span class="small">REHOBOAM</span> thy second son; and the
Angel <span class="small">URIEL</span> is with thy youngest son <span
class="small">’ADRÂMÎ</span>\[<span class="small">S</span>\]. This have
I told thee, and thou shalt not make thy heart to be sad because of
thine own salvation and that of thy son."

   And when <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> had heard these words,
his strength came \[back\] to him on his bed, and he prostrated himself
before the Angel of God, and said, "I give thanks unto the Lord, my Lord
and thy Lord, O thou radiant being of the spirit, because thou hast made
me to hear a word which filleth me with gladness, and because He doth
not cut off my soul from the inheritance of my father because of my sin,
and because my repentance hath been accepted after mine affliction, and
because He hath regarded my tears, and hath heard my cry of grief, and
hath looked upon my affliction, and hath not let me die in my grief, but
hath made me to <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> rejoice before my soul
shall go forth from my body. Henceforward \[the thought of\] dying shall
not make me sorrowful, and I will love death as I love life.
Henceforward I will drink of the bitter cup of death as if it were
honey, and henceforward I will love the grave as if it were an abode of
costly gems. And when I have descended and have been thrust down deep
into <span class="small">SHEÔL</span>, because of my sins, I shall not
suffer grief, because I have heard the word which hath made me glad. And
when I have gone down into the lowest depth of the deepest deep of <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span>, because of my sins, what will it matter to
me? And if He crush me to powder in His hand and scatter me to the ends
of the earth and to the winds because of my sins, it will not make me
sorrowful, because I have heard the word that hath made me to rejoice,
and God hath not cut my soul off from the inheritance of my fathers. And
my soul shall be with the soul of <span class="small">DAVID</span> my
father, and with the soul of <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, and
<span class="small">ISAAC</span>, and <span class="small">JACOB</span>
my fathers. And the Saviour shall come and shall bring us out from <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span> with all my fathers, and my kinsmen, old and
young. And as for my children, they shall have upon earth three mighty
angels to protect them. I have found the kingdom of the heavens, and the
kingdom of the earth. Who is like unto God, the Merciful, Who showeth
mercy to His handiwork and glorifieth it, Who forgiveth the sins of the
sinners and Who doth not blot out the memorial of the penitent? For His
whole Person is forgiveness, and His whole Person is mercy, and to Him
belongeth praise." Amen.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_111">p. 111</span>

<span id="page_111_note_1"></span>[1](#page_111_fr_1.md) David was the
eighth of Jesse's sons.

<span id="footnotes_page_113">p. 113</span>

<span id="page_113_note_1"></span>[1](#page_113_fr_1.md) Compare Genesis
xxii. 13.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 69. Concerning the Question of SOLOMON](kn069.md)

</div>
