<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn076) 
[Next](kn078) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 77. *Concerning the King of* <span class="small">PERSIA</span>

   And the King of <span class="small">PERSIA</span> is likewise of the
seed of <span class="small">SHEM</span>, and we will inform you
concerning the matters that relate to him. <span
class="small">JUDAH</span> begot two sons, and he brought in <span
class="small">TĔ‛MÂR</span> (<span class="small">TAMAR</span>) for his
eldest son, and he died. And <span class="small">JUDAH</span> sent his
younger son to her that he might raise up seed to his brother by his
brother's wife. And he did that which God hated, and he did not wish to
raise up seed to his brother as his father <span
class="small">JUDAH</span> had commanded him. Now when he lay with <span
class="small">TAMAR</span> he made his seed to go into the ground, so
that it might not germinate in her womb and be called the seed of his
brother, but he wished to raise up seed by his own wife in his own name.
And when God saw his evil act He turned His face away from him and slew
him. And <span class="small">JUDAH</span>, the father-in-law of <span
class="small">TAMAR</span>, brought her back, and set her in the house
of her father, and said unto her <span id="page_134">p. 134</span>
kinsfolk, "Keep carefully this Israelitish woman, and let her not defile
herself with an alien. For I have a little son, and if God will let him
grow up I will give him to her." And whilst <span
class="small">TAMAR</span> was living as a widow in her father's house,
behold, <span class="small">JUDAH</span> her father-in-law came to the
place where his sheepfolds were to shear wool with great satisfaction
and pleasure. And when <span class="small">TAMAR</span> heard that her
father-in-law had come, she cast away from her the apparel of widowhood,
and she put herself in splendid apparel, and she veiled herself after
the manner of a harlot, and she followed him and sat down. And he sent a
message to her, saying, "I wish to company with thee." And she said unto
him, "What wilt thou give me for my hire?" And he said unto her, "I will
send to thee in the morning early a sucking lamb"; and she said unto
him, "Give me a pledge until thou givest me the lamb." And he gave her
\[his\] staff, and ring, and the close-fitting cap that was under his
headdress. And he companied with her, and she took \[the things\] and
departed unto her house. And he sent the lamb unto her early in the
morning. And his servants enquired and said, "Where is the house of the
harlot?" And they said unto him, "There is no harlot in our town"; and
they returned into their city and told him that there was no harlot in
their town. And <span class="small">JUDAH</span> said, "Leave ye \[it\];
the Will of God be done."

   Then <span class="small">TAMAR</span> conceived and they told her
father-in-law that she had conceived. And he went and took the elders of
<span class="small">ISRAEL</span> to the father of <span
class="small">TAMAR</span>, and he said unto him, "Bring to me thy
daughter who hath conceived that we may stone her with stones even as
<span class="small">MOSES</span> commanded, for she hath brought
reproach upon the house of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>." And the
father and kinsfolk of <span class="small">TAMAR</span> told her that
her father-in-law spake thus. And she brought out the ring, and the
staff, and the cap, and gave \[them\] to her father and her kinsfolk,
and she said <span id="page_135">p. 135</span> unto them, "The owner of
these things hath seduced me; let them stone me with him with stones."
And when <span class="small">JUDAH</span> saw his possessions he
recognized \[them\] and he said, "<span class="small">TAMAR</span> is
more righteous than I"; and he left her and came to his house. And <span
class="small">TAMAR</span> brought forth twins, two nations, <span
class="small">FÂRÊS</span> (<span class="small">PEREZ</span>) and <span
class="small">ZÂRÂ</span>. And <span class="small">FÂRS</span> (<span
class="small">PERSIA</span>) was founded in the name of <span
class="small">FÂRÊS</span>, and he ruled over it and his seed after him,
and they were called "<span class="small">FARASÂWÎYÂN</span>" (<span
class="small">PERSIANS</span>). Behold now, it is proved that the King
of <span class="small">PERSIA</span> is of the seed of <span
class="small">SHEM</span>.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 78. Concerning the King of MOAB](kn078)

</div>
