<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn081) 
[Next](kn083) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### 82. *Concerning the going down of* <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> *into* <span class="small">EGYPT</span>

   And we could also inform you that when God had given unto <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> glory and riches, he lacked a son. And
<span class="small">SÂRÂH</span> and <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>
talked together on their bed, and he said unto her, "Thou art barren,"
and she said unto him, "It is not I who am barren but thyself"; and they
continued to discuss the matter and to dispute together about it. And
there came a famine in the land of <span class="small">CANAAN</span>,
and <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> heard that there was some food in
the land of <span class="small">EGYPT</span>, the country of <span
class="small">PHARAOH</span>. And when he had spent all his possessions
in charity to the poor during the days of the famine, without providing
for the morrow, the famine waxed strong in the land of <span
class="small">CANAAN</span>, and he lacked food to eat. And he said, "I
give thanks unto God that what He hath given unto me I have expended on
my servants. But as for thee, my sister <span
class="small">SÂRÂH</span>, come, let us go into the land of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> in order to save ourselves from death by
famine." And she said unto him, "Thy will be done, O my lord, and if
thou die I will die with thee, and if thou live I will live with thee;
it is not for me to gainsay thy word for ever." And then they rose up
and set out on their journey.

   And when they drew nigh \[to <span class="small">EGYPT</span>\] <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> said unto <span class="small">SÂRÂH</span>,
"One thing I must ask of thee, and do thou what I ask of thee"; and
<span class="small">SÂRÂH</span> said, "Speak, my lord." And he said
unto her, "I have heard that the habits of the <span
class="small">EGYPTIANS</span> are lawless, and that they live in
idolatry and fornication. And when they have seen thee they will plot
evil against me, and slay me because of the goodliness of thy beautiful
form; for there is among them no one that can be compared unto thee. And
now, in order that thou mayest save my life, do thou say, if they happen
to ask thee questions about me, 'I am his sister,' so that thou mayest
save my soul from <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> death by the hand of
the strangers." And <span class="small">SÂRÂH</span> said, "Thy will
shall be done. The word which thou tellest me I will speak, and what
thou tellest me to do I will do." And they wept and worshipped God, and
they came into the great city of the King of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>.

   And when the <span class="small">EGYPTIANS</span> saw <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> and <span class="small">SÂRÂH</span> they
marvelled at the beauty of their appearance, for they imagined that they
had been brought forth by the same mother. And they said unto <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, "What is this woman to thee?" And <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> said unto them, "She is my sister." And
they also asked <span class="small">SÂRÂH</span> "What is this man to
thee?" And she said unto them, "He is my brother." Therefore did the
people make a report to <span class="small">PHARAOH</span> that a pair
of goodly form had arrived, one a woman and the other a young man, and
that there was no one like unto them in all the land. And <span
class="small">PHARAOH</span> rejoiced, and he sent a message to <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, saying, "Give me thy sister that I may
betroth her to myself." And <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> pondered
in his mind, saying, "If I keep her back he will kill me and take her";
and he said, "Do so, provided that thou dost make me well content." And
<span class="small">PHARAOH</span> gave him one thousand, silver
*ṭaflâḥet*,<span id="page_142_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_142_note_1) and took <span
class="small">SÂRÂH</span> to make her his wife. And he brought her into
his house, and set her upon his bed and <span
class="small">PHARAOH</span> the King of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> would have companied with her. But the Angel
of the Lord appeared unto him by night carrying a sword of fire, and he
drew nigh unto him, and he lighted up the whole chamber with his fiery
flame, and he wished to slay <span class="small">PHARAOH</span>. And
<span class="small">PHARAOH</span> fled from one wall of the chamber to
the other, and from one corner of the chamber to the other; wheresoever
he went the Angel followed him; and there was no place left whereto he
could flee and hide himself. Then <span class="small">PHARAOH</span>
stretched out his hands and said unto the Angel, "O lord, forgive me
this my sin." And the Angel said unto him, "Why dost thou attack <span
id="page_143">p. 143</span> the wife of \[another\] man?" And <span
class="small">PHARAOH</span> said unto him, "O lord, slay thou not
innocent blood. For he said unto me 'She is my sister,' and therefore I
took her to myself innocently. What shall I do to deliver myself from
thy hands?" And the Angel said unto him, "Give <span
class="small">ABRAHAM'S</span> wife back to him, and give him a gift,
and send him away to his own country." And straightway <span
class="small">PHARAOH</span> called <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>,
and gave unto him his wife <span class="small">SÂRÂH</span>, together
with a handmaiden whose name was <span class="small">’AGÂR</span> (<span
class="small">HAGAR</span>), and he gave unto him gold, and silver, and
costly apparel, and sent him away in peace.

   And <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> and his wife returned to their
country in peace. And <span class="small">SÂRÂH</span> said unto <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, "I know that I am barren. Go thou in to
this my handmaiden whom <span class="small">PHARAOH</span> gave unto me;
peradventure God will give thee seed in her. As for me, my person is
shrunk and withered, and the flower of my body hath dried up." And she
gave <span class="small">’AGÂR</span> unto him. And <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> went in to <span
class="small">’AGÂR</span>, and she conceived by him, and she brought
forth a son and called his name <span class="small">ISHMAEL</span>,
which is, being interpreted, "God hath heard me." And afterwards God
gave <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> seed from his wife <span
class="small">SÂRÂH</span> and he begat <span
class="small">ISAAC</span>. And afterwards <span
class="small">SÂRÂH</span> became jealous of <span
class="small">ISHMAEL</span>, the son of her handmaiden, because he
would reach manhood before her son, and she said, "Peradventure he will
slay my son and inherit his father's house." And <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> offered up offerings to God and said,
"Lord, what shall I do in respect of <span class="small">ISHMAEL</span>,
my son, my firstborn? I wish him to live for me before Thee, but <span
class="small">SÂRÂH</span>, my sister, is jealous because Thou hast
given me seed in her old age." Now <span class="small">ISHMAEL</span>
was fourteen years old before <span class="small">ISAAC</span> was born.
And God said unto <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, "What <span
class="small">SÂRÂH</span> saith is true; cast out the handmaiden with
her son <span class="small">ISHMAEL</span>. Let <span
class="small">ISHMAEL</span> live before Me, and I will make him a great
nation, and he shall beget twelve nations and shall reign over <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> them. And I will establish My covenant with
<span class="small">ISAAC</span> My servant, the son of <span
class="small">SÂRÂH</span>, and in him I will bless all the nations of
the earth, and I will make for him a great kingdom over all the nations
of the earth, and in the heavens also I will make him king."<span
id="page_144_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_144_note_1)

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_142">p. 142</span>

<span id="page_142_note_1"></span>[1](#page_142_fr_1) Pieces of money in
silver.

<span id="footnotes_page_144">p. 144</span>

<span id="page_144_note_1"></span>[1](#page_144_fr_1) Genesis xii ff.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 83. Concerning the King of the ISHMAELITES](kn083)

</div>
