<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn084.md) 
[Next](kn086.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 85. *Concerning the rejoicing of Queen* <span class="small">MÂKĔDÂ</span>

   And <span class="small">DAVID</span> the King came with great pomp
unto his mother's city, and then he saw in the height the heavenly <span
class="small">ZION</span> sending forth light like the sun. And when the
Queen saw this she gave thanks unto the God of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and praised Him. And she bowed low, and
smote her breast, and \[then\] threw up her head and gazed into the
heavens, and thanked her Creator; and she clapped her hands together,
and sent forth shouts of laughter from her mouth, and danced on the
<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> ground with her feet; and she adorned
her whole body with joy and gladness with the fullest will of her inward
mind. And what shall I say of the rejoicing which took place then in the
country of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and of the joy of the
people, both of man and beast, from the least to the greatest, and of
both women and men? And pavilions and tents were placed at the foot of
<span class="small">DABRA MÂKĔDÂ</span> on the flat plain by the side of
good water, and they slaughtered thirty-two thousand stalled oxen and
bulls. And they set <span class="small">ZION</span> upon the fortress of
<span class="small">DABRA MÂKĔDÂ</span>, and made ready for her three
hundred guards who wielded swords to watch over the pavilion of <span
class="small">ZION</span>, together with her own men and her nobles, the
mighty men of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>. And her own guards were
three hundred men who bore swords, and in addition to these her son
<span class="small">DAVID</span> had seven hundred \[guards\]. And they
rejoiced exceedingly with great glory and pleasure \[being arrayed\] in
fine apparel, for the kingdom was directed by her from the Sea of <span
class="small">’ALÊBÂ</span> to the Sea of <span
class="small">’ÔSÊKÂ</span>, and everyone obeyed her command. And she
had exceedingly great honour and riches; none before her ever had the
like, and none after her shall ever have the like. In those days <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> was King in <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span>, and <span class="small">MÂKĔDÂ</span>
was Queen in <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. Unto both of them were
given wisdom, and glory, and riches, and graciousness, and
understanding, and beauty of voice (or, eloquence of speech), and
intelligence. And gold and silver were held as cheaply as brass, and
rich stuffs wherein gold was woven were as common as linen garments, and
the cattle and the horses were innumerable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 86. How Queen MÂKĔDÂ made her son King](kn086.md)

</div>
