<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn079) 
[Next](kn081) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 80. *Concerning the King of the* <span class="small">PHILISTINES</span>

   And behold, the seed of <span class="small">SAMSON</span> reigned
over the <span class="small">PHILISTINES</span>. And <span
class="small">SAMSON</span> was of the seed of <span
class="small">DAN</span>, \[one\] of the twelve sons of <span
class="small">JACOB</span>, and he was the son of a handmaiden of <span
class="small">JACOB</span>; and we will inform you how this <span
class="small">SAMSON</span> came into being. The Angel of the Lord
appeared to the mother of <span class="small">SAMSON</span> and said
unto her, "Keep thyself from all pollution, and company with no man
except thy husband, for he who shall be born of thee shall be a <span
class="small">NAZARITE</span>, holy to the Lord, and he shall be the
deliverer of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> from the hand of the
<span class="small">PHILISTINES</span>." And then she brought forth
<span class="small">SAMSON</span>. And again the Angel appeared unto her
and said unto her, "Thou shalt not let a razor go upon his head, and he
shall neither eat flesh nor \[drink\] wine, and he shall marry no
strange woman but only a woman of his own kin and from the house of his
father." And how God gave him strength ye have heard in the Book of
<span class="small">JUDGES</span>.<span
id="page_137_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_137_note_1) But he transgressed the
commandment of God, and came and married a daughter of the uncircumcised
<span class="small">PHILISTINES</span>. And because of this God was
wroth, and He delivered him into the hands of men of the uncircumcised
<span class="small">PHILISTINES</span>, and they blinded his eyes, and
they made him act the buffoon in the house of their king. And he pulled
the roof down upon them, and slew seven hundred thousand of them, and
during his life he slew seven hundred thousand of them with iron, and
stone, and \[his\] staff, and the jaw-bone of an ass. For their number
was as that of the locusts, until he released <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> from the service of the <span
class="small">PHILISTINES</span>.

   And then <span class="small">DALÎLÂ</span> (<span
class="small">DELILAH</span>) conceived by <span
class="small">SAMSON</span>, and whilst she was with child <span
class="small">SAMSON</span> died with the <span
class="small">PHILISTINES</span>; and <span class="small">DELILAH</span>
brought forth a son and she called <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> his
name "<span class="small">MENAHEM</span>", which is, being interpreted,
"Seed of the strong man". Now <span class="small">DELILAH</span> was the
sister of <span class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span>, the wife of the King of
the <span class="small">PHILISTINES</span>, and when <span
class="small">SAMSON</span> slew the King of the <span
class="small">PHILISTINES</span> in the house with his people and his
household, and he died with him, <span class="small">DELILAH</span> went
to her sister <span class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span>, the Queen of the <span
class="small">PHILISTINES</span>. Now both women were beautiful, and
they had no children, but both had conceived; <span
class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span> had been with child six months by <span
class="small">ḲWÔLÂSÔN</span>, the King of the <span
class="small">PHILISTINES</span>, and <span class="small">DELILAH</span>
had been with child four months by <span class="small">SAMSON</span>;
and the husbands of both were dead. And the two women loved each other
exceedingly. And their love for each other was not like the love of
sisters, but like that of the mother for the child, and of the child for
the mother; even so was their love. And they lived together. And the
dominion over those who were left of the slaughter \[made\] by <span
class="small">SAMSON</span> in the house of the king was in the hands of
<span class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span>, for none of the mighty men of war of
the kingdom of the <span class="small">PHILISTINES</span> were left, and
therefore <span class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span> ruled over those that were
left. And they spake unto her morning and evening, saying, "We have no
other king except thyself, and except that one that shall go forth from
thy belly. If our Lord <span class="small">DÂGÔN</span> will do a favour
unto us that which is in thy belly shall be a son, who shall reverence
our god <span class="small">DÂGÔN</span> and shall reign over us. And if
it be a daughter we will make her to reign over us, so that thy name and
the name of <span class="small">ḲWÔLÂSÔN</span> our lord shall be your
memorial over us."

   And then <span class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span> brought forth a man-child
and all the men of the <span class="small">PHILISTINES</span> rejoiced,
and they did homage to her and sang, saying, "<span
class="small">DÂGÔN</span> and <span class="small">BÊL</span> have
honoured her and loved <span class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span>, and the seed
of <span class="small">ḲWÔLÂSÔN</span> is found again from <span
class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span>." And <span class="small">DELILAH</span>
also bore a son, and the two women brought up the children in great
state and dignity. And when the children were <span id="page_139">p.
139</span> five years old they ate and played together before them, and
the mothers made garments of costly stuff for them, and \[set\] daggers
above their loins, and chains on their necks. And the people seated the
son of <span class="small">MAKSÂBÂ</span> on the throne of his father,
and made him king over the <span class="small">PHILISTINES</span>.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_137">p. 137</span>

<span id="page_137_note_1"></span>[1](#page_137_fr_1) See chapters xv.
xvi.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 81. How the son of SAMSON slew the son of the King of the
PHILISTINES](kn081)

</div>
