<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn092.md) 
[Next](kn094.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 93. *How the Men of* <span class="small">RÔMÊ</span> *destroyed the Faith*

   And after they had waited for three months—now <span
class="small">ZION</span> came into the country of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> at the beginning of the first month in the
language of the <span class="small">HEBREWS</span>, and in Greek <span
class="small">TÂRMÔN</span> and in <span class="small">GĔ’ĔZ</span>
(<span class="small">ETHIOPIC</span>) <span
class="small">MÎYÂZYÂ</span>, on the sixth (or, seventh) day—they wrote
down the Law and the names, and they deposited \[the writing\] for a
memorial for the later days, so that what was right should be done for
the pavilion \[of <span class="small">ZION</span>\] <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> thereby, and so that the glory of the kings
of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> and the glory of the kings of
<span class="small">RÔMÊ</span> might be well known. For the kings of
<span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> and the kings of <span
class="small">RÔMÊ</span> were brethren and held the Christian Faith.
Now first of all they believed in an orthodox manner in the preaching of
the Apostles up to \[the time of\] <span
class="small">CONSTANTINE</span>, and <span class="small">’ĔLÊNÎ</span>
(<span class="small">HELENA</span>) the Queen, who brought forth the
wood of the Cross, and they (i.e., the kings of <span
class="small">RÔMÊ</span>) continued \[to believe for\] one hundred and
thirty years.

   And afterwards, <span class="small">SATAN</span>, who hath been the
enemy of man from of old, rose up, and seduced the people of the country
of <span class="small">RÔMÊ</span>, and they corrupted the Faith of
<span class="small">CHRIST</span>, and they introduced heresy into the
Church of God by the mouth of <span class="small">NESTORIUS</span>. And
<span class="small">NESTORIUS</span>, and <span
class="small">ARIUS</span>, and <span class="small">YABÂSÔ</span> (?)
were those into whose hearts he cast the same jealousy as he had cast
into the heart of <span class="small">CAIN</span> to slay his brother
<span class="small">ABEL</span>. In like manner did their father the
Devil, the enemy of righteousness and the hater of good, cast jealousy,
even as <span class="small">DAVID</span> saith, "They speak violence in
the heights of heaven, and set their mouths in the heavens, and their
tongue waggeth on the earth."<span id="page_164_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_164_note_1.md) And those same men who
know not whence they came, and know not whither they are going, revile
their Creator with their tongues, and blaspheme His glory, while He is
God, the Word of the Lord. He came down from the throne of His Godhead,
and put on the body of <span class="small">ADAM</span>, and He is God
the Word. And in that body He was crucified so that He might redeem
<span class="small">ADAM</span> in his iniquity, and He went up into the
heavens, and sat upon the throne of His Godhead in that body, which He
had taken. And He shall come again in glory to judge the living and the
dead, and shall reward every man according to his work, for ever and
ever. Amen.

   And we believe thus and we adore the Holy Trinity. And those who do
not believe thus are excommunicated <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> by
the Word of God, the King of heaven and earth, both in this world and in
that world which is to come. And we are strong in the Orthodox Faith
which the Fathers the Apostles have delivered unto us, the Faith of the
Church. And thus <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> continued to abide
in her Faith until the coming of our Lord <span class="small">JESUS
CHRIST</span>, to Whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_164">p. 164</span>

<span id="page_164_note_1"></span>[1](#page_164_fr_1.md) Psalm lxxiii. 8,
9.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 94. The first war of the King of ETHIOPIA](kn094.md)

</div>
