<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn097.md) 
[Next](kn099.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

### 98. *Concerning the Rod of* <span class="small">MOSES</span> *and the Rod of* <span class="small">AARON</span>

   And <span class="small">MOSES</span> spake these words unto them, and
they brought a rod into each of the houses of their fathers which they
had chosen for purity, and there were twelve rods. And <span
class="small">MOSES</span> wrote upon their rods the names of their
fathers: on the rod of <span class="small">AARON</span> was written the
name of <span class="small">LEVI</span>, and on the rod of <span
class="small">KARMÎN</span> was written the name of <span
class="small">JUDAH</span>, and on the rod of <span
class="small">ADÔNYÂS</span> was written the name of <span
class="small">REUBEN</span>, and on the rod of every man of all the
houses of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> was written in like manner
the name of his father. And God said unto <span
class="small">MOSES</span>, "Carry \[the rods\] to <span
class="small">ZION</span>, to the Tent of Witness, and shut them up
therein until the morning, and \[then\] take them out before the men and
give unto each of them his rod, according to the houses of their fathers
whose names are written on the rods, and the man on whose rod a mark
shall be found is he whom I have chosen to be priest to Me." And <span
class="small">MOSES</span> told the people these words, and they did
according as God had commanded them. And then, when the morning had
come, <span class="small">MOSES</span> took the rods, and all the elders
of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> and <span
class="small">AARON</span> came. And <span class="small">MOSES</span>
came before them, and he lifted up the rods and brought them before all
the people, and the rod of <span class="small">AARON</span> was found
with the fruit and flower of an almond which emitted a fragrant perfume.
And <span class="small">MOSES</span> said unto them, "Look ye now. This
is the rod which the Lord your God hath chosen, fear ye Him and worship
Him"; and all the people bowed down before God.

   Now this rod is <span class="small">MARY</span>. And the rod which
without water burst into bloom indicateth <span
class="small">MARY</span>, from whom was born, without the seed of man,
the Word of God. And that He saith "I have chosen, I will make manifest
a miracle, and he shall be priest to Me," meaneth that God chose <span
class="small">MARY</span> out of all the congregation of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> even as
<span class="small">DAVID</span> her father prophesied, saying, "The
Lord loveth the gates of <span class="small">ZION</span> more than all
the habitations of <span class="small">JACOB</span>,"<span
id="page_178_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_178_note_1.md) and he further said,
"Marvellous is His speech concerning thee, O city of God."<span
id="page_178_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_178_note_2.md) And when he saith, "more
than all the habitations of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>" and "her
gates" \[he referreth to\] the silence of her mouth, and the purity of
her lips, and the praise which goeth forth from her mouth, like honey
which floweth from her lips, and the purity of her virginity which was
without spot or blemish or impurity before she brought forth; and after
she had brought forth she was pure and holy, and so shall it be, even as
it was, unto all eternity. And in the heavens she goeth about with the
angels a pure thing; and she is the rod of <span
class="small">AARON</span>. She liveth in <span
class="small">ZION</span> with the pot which is filled with manna, and
with the two tables that were written with the Finger of God. And the
heavenly, spiritual <span class="small">ZION</span> is above them, the
<span class="small">ZION</span>, the making and constitution of which
are wonderful, of which God Himself is her Maker and Fashioner for the
habitation of His glory.

   And God spake unto <span class="small">MOSES</span> \[saying\], "Make
a Tabernacle of wood which is indestructible \[by worms and rot\], and
cover it over with plates of fine gold, every part thereof."<span
id="page_178_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_178_note_3.md) And the gold is the
fineness of the Godhead that came down from heaven, for the Godhead
comprehendeth all heaven and earth; and in like manner is plated with
gold the Tabernacle, the abode of the heavenly <span
class="small">ZION</span>. And the Tabernacle is to be interpreted as
<span class="small">MARY</span>, and the wood which is indestructible is
to be interpreted as <span class="small">CHRIST</span> our Redeemer. And
the *Gômôr*,<span id="page_178_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_178_note_4.md) which is the pot of gold
inside the Tabernacle, is to be interpreted as <span
class="small">MARY</span>, and the manna which is in the pot is to be
interpreted as the Body of <span class="small">CHRIST</span> <span
id="page_179">p. 179</span> which came down from heaven, and the Word of
God which is written upon the two tables is to be interpreted as <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, the Son of God. And the spiritual <span
class="small">ZION</span> is to be interpreted as the light of the
Godhead. The spiritual Pearl which is contained in the Tabernacle is
like a brilliant gem of great price, and he who hath acquired it holdeth
it tightly in his hand, grasping it and hiding it in his hand, and
whilst the gem is in his hand its owner goeth into the Tabernacle, and
he is an inmate therein. And he who possesseth the Pearl is interpreted
as the Word of God, <span class="small">CHRIST</span>. And the spiritual
Pearl which is grasped is to be interpreted as <span
class="small">MARY</span>, the Mother of the Light, through whom "<span
class="small">’AKRÂTÔS</span>", the "Unmixed", assumed a body. In her He
made a Temple for Himself of her pure body, and from her was born the
Light of Light, God of God, Who was born of His own free will, and was
not made by the hand of another, but He made a Temple for Himself
through an incomprehensible wisdom which transcendeth the mind of man.

   And on another occasion, when God brought <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> out of <span class="small">EGYPT</span>,
they thirsted for water in <span class="small">KÂDÊS</span>, and they
murmured and wept before <span class="small">MOSES</span>; and <span
class="small">MOSES</span> went to God and made Him to know this. And
God said unto him, "Take thy rod and smite this rock"<span
id="page_179_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_179_note_1.md); and <span
class="small">MOSES</span> smote the rock lengthwise and breadthwise in
the form of the Cross, and water flowed forth, twelve streams. And they
drank their fill of the water, their people and their beasts, and when
they had drunk that rock followed after them. And the rock is to be
interpreted as <span class="small">CHRIST</span>, and the streams of
water as the Apostles, and that which they drank as the teaching of the
Apostles, and the rod is the wood of the Cross. And the rock is stable,
as it saith in the Gospel, "He who buildeth upon a rock shall not be
moved by the demons."<span id="page_179_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_179_note_2.md) And again He saith, "I
am the gate," and <span id="page_180">p. 180</span> again He saith, "I
am the door."<span id="page_180_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_180_note_1.md) And observe ye that when
speaking He distinguished between his disciples even as He did between
those who \[came\] after them, the Bishops and the Christian Community.
"Thou art the rock," He said unto <span class="small">PETER</span>, "and
upon thee I will build the Christian people."<span
id="page_180_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_180_note_2.md) And again He said, "I am
the Shepherd of the sheep,"<span id="page_180_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_180_note_3.md) and He said unto him
thrice, "Feed my sheep."<span id="page_180_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_180_note_4.md) And again He said "I am
the stem of the vine," and unto them He said, "Ye are its branches and
its clusters of fruit."<span id="page_180_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_180_note_5.md)

   And the rod of <span class="small">MOSES</span> by means of which he
performed the miracle is to be interpreted as the wood of the Cross,
whereby He delivered <span class="small">ADAM</span> and his children
from the punishment of devils. And as <span class="small">MOSES</span>
smote the water of the river therewith, and turned it into blood, and
slew their fish, in like manner <span class="small">CHRIST</span> slew
Death with His Cross, and brought them out of <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span>. And as <span class="small">MOSES</span>
smote in the air with his rod, and the whole land of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> became dark for three days and three
nights<span id="page_180_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_180_note_6.md) with a darkness which
could be felt so that \[the <span class="small">EGYPTIANS</span>\] could
not rise from their couches, so also <span class="small">CHRIST</span>,
being crucified upon the Cross, lightened the darkness of the hearts of
men, and rose up from the dead on the third day and third night. And as
the rod of <span class="small">MOSES</span> changed itself and
transformed itself<span id="page_180_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_180_note_7.md) by the Word of God,
being dry yet possessing life, and possessing life yet became a dry
thing, even so <span class="small">CHRIST</span> with the wood of His
Cross made life for the Christian people who believed on Him, and with
the Sign of the Cross made them to drive away devils. For the demons and
the Christians became changed; the spiritual beings became reprobates,
and through transgressing the commandment of their Lord they became
exiled ones by the might of His Cross. And we have become spiritual
<span id="page_181">p. 181</span> beings through receiving His Body and
Blood in the place of those spiritual beings who were exiled, and we
have become beings worthy of praise who have believed in His Cross and
in His holy Resurrection. And as <span class="small">MOSES</span> smote
the mountains by stretching out his hands with his rod, and brought
forth punishments by the command of God, even so <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, by stretching out His hands upon the wood
of the Cross, drove out the demons from men by the might of His Cross.
When God said unto <span class="small">MOSES</span>, "Smite with thy
rod," He meant, "Make the Sign of the Cross of <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>," and when God said unto <span
class="small">MOSES</span>, "Stretch out thy hand,"<span
id="page_181_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_181_note_1.md) He meant that by the
spreading out of His hand <span class="small">CHRIST</span> hath
redeemed us from the servitude of the enemy, and hath given us life by
the stretching out of His hand upon the wood of the Cross.

   And when <span class="small">AMALEK</span> fought with <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, <span class="small">MOSES</span> went up
into the mountain, and <span class="small">AARON</span> was with him;
they went up to pray because <span class="small">AMALEK</span> was
prevailing. And God commanded <span class="small">MOSES</span> and said
unto him, "Stretch out thy hand until <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>
obtaineth the power \[over <span class="small">AMALEK</span>\]."<span
id="page_181_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_181_note_2.md) And it saith in the
<span class="small">TÔRÂH</span> that the hands of <span
class="small">MOSES</span> were held out until the sunset; but the hands
of <span class="small">MOSES</span> became heavy, and being aweary he
dropped his hands that had been stretched out, and then <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> ceased to prevail and their enemies overcame
them. And when <span class="small">MOSES</span> kept his hand up and
stretched out straight, <span class="small">AMALEK</span> was overcome,
and <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> put to flight and vanquished their
enemy <span class="small">AMALEK</span>. And when <span
class="small">AARON</span> and <span class="small">HÔR</span> (<span
class="small">HUR</span>) saw this, they piled up stones on the right
and on the left of <span class="small">MOSES</span>, and they made the
hands of <span class="small">MOSES</span> to rest on the stones which
they had built up, and <span class="small">AARON</span> on his right and
<span class="small">HÔR</span> on his left held <span
class="small">MOSES</span> up with their shoulders, so that his hands
might not drop from their stretched out position.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

   And now I will explain this to you. The war of <span
class="small">AMALEK</span> against <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> is
the war of believers against the demons, and before <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> was crucified the demons conquered the
believers. But when He stretched out His hand on the wood of the Cross
because of the sin of <span class="small">ADAM</span> and his children,
and when He stretched out His hand and His palm was pierced \[with the
nails\], those who were sealed with the Sign of the Cross of <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> conquered them (i.e., the demons). The
stretching out of the hand of <span class="small">MOSES</span>
indicateth the Cross of <span class="small">CHRIST</span>; and that
<span class="small">AARON</span> and <span class="small">HÔR</span>
builded up stones indicateth the wood of the Cross and the nails. And
<span class="small">AARON</span> indicateth the thief on the right, and
<span class="small">HÔR</span> the thief on the left; and <span
class="small">AMALEK</span> indicateth the demons, and the king of <span
class="small">AMALEK</span> indicateth <span class="small">SATAN</span>.
And as concerning that they (the <span class="small">AMALEKITES</span>)
were conquered, this indicateth that we have conquered the demons and
<span class="small">SATAN</span> by the Resurrection of <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> and by His Cross.

   And again when <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> went out of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> they came to bitter water, and they lacked
drink because the water was bitter; and first of all they murmured
because of the bitterness of the water. And God said unto <span
class="small">MOSES</span>, "Lift up thy rod, and cast it into the
water,<span id="page_182_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_182_note_1.md) and sign it with the
Sign of the Cross right and left." Now mark what followeth. Had God said
unto him, "Let it become sweet," then would the water not have become
sweet? But He made manifest that by the Sign of the Cross everything
becometh good, and bitter water becometh sweet, and that by the might of
the Cross of <span class="small">JESUS CHRIST</span> every polluted
thing becometh good and pleasant.

   And here I will declare unto thee yet other matters from the rest of
the Prophets concerning His Crucifixion. <span
class="small">DAVID</span> saith, "They have pierced for me my hands and
My feet"<span id="page_182_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_182_note_2.md); now this referreth
clearly to the nails of His hands and His feet. And again he saith,
<span id="page_183">p. 183</span> "They made me drink vinegar for my
thirst,"<span id="page_183_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_183_note_1.md) and this showeth clearly
that He drank vinegar because of the sin of <span
class="small">ADAM</span>. The Breath of Life that had breathed upon
<span class="small">ADAM</span> drank vinegar, and the Hand that had
founded the earth was pierced with a nail. He Who for the sake of <span
class="small">ADAM</span> abased Himself was born, and took the form of
a servant.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_178">p. 178</span>

<span id="page_178_note_1"></span>[1](#page_178_fr_1.md) Psalm lxxxvii. 2.

<span id="page_178_note_2"></span>[2](#page_178_fr_2.md) Psalm lxxxvii. 3.

<span id="page_178_note_3"></span>[3](#page_178_fr_3.md) Exodus xxv. 10,
"an ark of shittim wood."

<span id="page_178_note_4"></span>[4](#page_178_fr_4.md) Exodus xvi. 33,
"take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein."

<span id="footnotes_page_179">p. 179</span>

<span id="page_179_note_1"></span>[1](#page_179_fr_1.md) Exodus xvii. 6.

<span id="page_179_note_2"></span>[2](#page_179_fr_2.md) Matthew vii. 24,
25.

<span id="footnotes_page_180">p. 180</span>

<span id="page_180_note_1"></span>[1](#page_180_fr_1.md) John x. 7, 9.

<span id="page_180_note_2"></span>[2](#page_180_fr_2.md) Matthew xvi. 18.

<span id="page_180_note_3"></span>[3](#page_180_fr_3.md) John x. 11, 14.

<span id="page_180_note_4"></span>[4](#page_180_fr_4.md) John xxi. 17.

<span id="page_180_note_5"></span>[5](#page_180_fr_5.md) John xv. 5, 16.

<span id="page_180_note_6"></span>[6](#page_180_fr_6.md) Exodus x. 21, 22.

<span id="page_180_note_7"></span>[7](#page_180_fr_7.md) Exodus vii. 10.

<span id="footnotes_page_181">p. 181</span>

<span id="page_181_note_1"></span>[1](#page_181_fr_1.md) Exodus vii. 19;
viii.

<span id="page_181_note_2"></span>[2](#page_181_fr_2.md) Exodus xvii. 11,
12 ff.

<span id="footnotes_page_182">p. 182</span>

<span id="page_182_note_1"></span>[1](#page_182_fr_1.md) Compare Exodus xv.
25.

<span id="page_182_note_2"></span>[2](#page_182_fr_2.md) Psalm xxii. 16.

<span id="footnotes_page_183">p. 183</span>

<span id="page_183_note_1"></span>[1](#page_183_fr_1.md) Psalm lxix. 21.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 99. Concerning the Two Servants](kn099.md)

</div>
