<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn094) 
[Next](kn096) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 95. *How the honourable estate of the King of* <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> *was universally accepted*

   Now through the <span class="small">KEBRA NAGAST</span> we know and
have learned that of a surety the King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> is honourable, and that he is the King of
<span class="small">ZION</span>, and the firstborn of the seed of <span
class="small">SHEM</span>, and that the habitation of God is in <span
class="small">ZION</span>, and that He there breaketh the might and
power of all his enemies and foes. And after him the King of <span
class="small">RÔMÊ</span> was the anointed of the Lord because of the
wood of the Cross. And as concerning the kingdom of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>—when the Pearl was born of them, and of the
Pearl again was born the Sun of Righteousness, Who hid Himself in her
body—now had He not hidden Himself in the body of a man He could not
have been seen by mortal eyes—and having put on our body He became like
unto us, and He walked about with \[men\]. And He wrought signs and
wonders in their midst. He raised their dead, and He healed their sick
folk, and He made the eyes of their blind to see, and He opened the ears
of their deaf folk, and He cleansed the lepers, and He satisfied the
hungry with food, and He performed many miracles, some of which are
written down and some of which are not, even as saith <span
class="small">JOHN</span> the Evangelist, the son of <span
class="small">ZEBEDEE</span>, "If everything which <span
class="small">JESUS</span> did were written down, the whole world would
not be able to hold all the writings that would have to be
written."<span id="page_167_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_167_note_1)

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

   And when the wicked children of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> saw
all this they thought that He was a man, and they were envious of Him
because of what they saw and heard, and they crucified Him upon the wood
of the Cross, and they killed Him. And He rose from the dead on the
third day, and went up into heaven in glory, \[and sat\] on the throne
of the Godhead. And He received from the Father a kingdom incorruptible
for ever and ever over the beings of the spirit, and the beings of
earth, and over every created being, so that every tongue shall adore
His Name, and every knee bow to Him; and He shall judge the living and
the dead and reward every man according to his work. So therefore when
the <span class="small">JEWS</span> shall see Him they shall be put to
shame, and shall be condemned to the fire which is everlasting. But we
who believe in the Orthodox Faith shall be upon our throne, and we shall
rejoice with our teachers the Apostles, provided that we have walked in
the way of <span class="small">CHRIST</span> and in His commandments.
And after the <span class="small">JEWS</span> crucified the Saviour of
the world, they were scattered abroad, and their kingdom was destroyed,
and they were made an end of and rooted out for ever and ever.

   And all the saints who were gathered together said, "Assuredly, in
very truth the King of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> is more
exalted, and more honourable than any other king upon the earth, because
of the glory and greatness of the heavenly <span
class="small">ZION</span>. And God loveth the people of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, for without knowing about His Law, they
destroyed their idols, whereas those unto whom the Law of God had been
given made idols and worshipped the gods which God hateth. And in the
later times when He was born to redeem <span class="small">ADAM</span>
He wrought signs and wonders before them, but they did not believe in
Him, neither in His preaching nor in the preaching of His fathers. But
the people of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> believed in one
trustworthy disciple, and for this reason God hath loved exceedingly the
people of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>."

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

   And the Bishops answered and said unto him (<span
class="small">GREGORY</span>), "Well hast thou spoken, and thy word is
true, and what thou hast expounded and interpreted to us is clear. Even
as <span class="small">PAUL</span> saith, 'Hath not the seed of <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> exalted the seed of <span
class="small">SHEM</span>?' They are all kings of the earth, but the
chosen ones of the Lord are the people of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. For there is the habitation of God, the
heavenly <span class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle of His Law and
the Tabernacle of His Covenant, which He hath made into a mercy-seat
through \[His\] mercy for the children of men; for the rains and the
waters from the sky, for the planted things (or, vegetation) and the
fruits, for the peoples and the countries, for the kings and nobles, for
men and beasts, for birds and creeping things."

   And <span class="small">GREGORY</span> the Bishop, the worker of
wonders, answered and said unto them, "Verily, salvation hath been given
unto all of us Christian people, unto those who have believed in our
Lady <span class="small">MARY</span>, the likeness of the heavenly <span
class="small">ZION</span>. For the Lord dwelt in the womb of the Virgin,
and was brought forth by her without carnal union. And the Ten Words
(Decalogue) of the Law were written by the Finger of God, and made
(i.e., placed) in <span class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle of the
Law of God. And now, come ye, and we will declare from the Law of <span
class="small">MOSES</span> the prophecies of the Prophets our Fathers,
the holy men of olden time, and the prophecies concerning <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> our Redeemer, so that the generations of
posterity may hear the interpretation (or, explanation) of the story,
and we will relate unto them the narrative of the interpretation of the
Scriptures. We will begin then with the beginning of the Book, and we
will make \[you\] to understand in the Spirit, as <span
class="small">DAVID</span> saith, through the Holy Spirit, 'In the
beginning the Book was written because of me.'"<span
id="page_169_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_169_note_1)

   And one answered and said, "What is the beginning of the Book?" And
they answered and said unto him, <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> "It
is the Law which was written concerning <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, the Son of God. And it saith, 'In the
beginning God made the heavens and the earth'<span
id="page_170_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_170_note_1); and they existed from
olden time. Now the earth was formless, but there were mixed together
darkness, and winds, and water, and mist, and dust; all of these were
mixed together. And the Spirit of God hovered above the waters. This
meaneth that by the Word of God the heavens and the earth were created;
and these words mean that the Spirit of God dwelt over all creation."

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_167">p. 167</span>

<span id="page_167_note_1"></span>[1](#page_167_fr_1) John xxi. 25.

<span id="footnotes_page_169">p. 169</span>

<span id="page_169_note_1"></span>[1](#page_169_fr_1) Psalm xl. 7.

<span id="footnotes_page_170">p. 170</span>

<span id="page_170_note_1"></span>[1](#page_170_fr_1) Genesis i. 1.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 96. Concerning the Prophecy about CHRIST](kn096)

</div>
