<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn096.md) 
[Next](kn098.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 97. *Concerning the Murmuring of* <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>

   And once again the children of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>
murmured concerning the ministration of the priests before the Lord,
saying, "Are we not <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, we the seed of
<span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, and why cannot we also offer up
sacrifice like them in <span id="page_175">p. 175</span> the Tent of
Witness by the Tabernacle of the Law of God, the holy <span
class="small">ZION</span>, with censers and incense and the holy
instruments? Why should <span class="small">MOSES</span>, and his
brother <span class="small">AARON</span>, and their children alone do
this? Are we not people whom God hath chosen as much as they are, and
shall we not do His Will?" And when <span class="small">MOSES</span>
heard \[this\] he said unto them, "Do ye whatsoever ye will." And the
elders of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> went and had made seventy
censers wherewith to cense <span class="small">ZION</span> and to praise
God, and they took incense and coals in the censers, and went and came
into the Holy of Holies to offer up incense. And immediately they threw
the incense into the censers, at the first swing of them fire came forth
from the censers, and they were burned up straightway and melted away.
And as wax melteth before the face of the fire, even so did they melt
away; and as grass withereth when flame approacheth it, even so were
they consumed, together with their instruments, and there was nothing
left of them except their censers. And God said, "Sanctify to Me these
censers for My Tent" (or, Pavilion), and they shall be used for My
offerings, for they are consecrated by the death of those men."<span
id="page_175_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_175_note_1.md)

   Now the censer is <span class="small">MARY</span>, and <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, the Son of God, the Godhead, is the coals,
and the odour of the incense is the perfume of <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, and through the perfume of Him Apostles,
and Prophets, and Martyrs, and Monks, have rejected the world and
inherited the kingdom of heaven. And the chains of the censers are the
ladder which <span class="small">JACOB</span> saw, to which \[the
angels\] clung as they went up and came down; and upon the perfume of
the incense the prayers of the pure go up to the throne of God.

   And when the flame had burned up the sinners, the people who were
kinsmen of these who had been destroyed reviled <span
class="small">MOSES</span> and <span class="small">AARON</span>, and
said unto them, "Ye have made our elders to perish"; and they <span
id="page_176">p. 176</span> took up stones to stone <span
class="small">MOSES</span> and <span class="small">AARON</span>.<span
id="page_176_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_176_note_1.md) And God was exceedingly
wroth with <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and He abominated as a
filthy rag the counsel of <span class="small">DATHAN</span> and <span
class="small">ABIRAM</span>, the sons of <span
class="small">KORAH</span>. And the Word of God made a sign to the
earth, and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, together
with all their companions, and their wives, and their children, and
their beasts. They went down into <span class="small">SHEÔL</span>
alive, and the earth shut herself up over them. And as for the people
who had been associated with them and had heard their revilings \[of
<span class="small">MOSES</span>\] God sent upon them a plague, and they
died forthwith. And <span class="small">MOSES</span> and <span
class="small">AARON</span> came with incense and censers, and they wept
before God, and entreated Him for forgiveness for the people, saying,
"Remember, O Lord, <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> Thy friend, and
<span class="small">ISAAC</span> Thy servant, and <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> Thy holy one, for we are their seed, and the
children of Thy people. Cool Thy wrath in respect of us, and make haste
to hear us, destroy us not, and remove Thy punishment from upon Thy
people." And God the Merciful saw the sincerity of <span
class="small">MOSES</span>, and had compassion upon them.

   And God spake unto <span class="small">MOSES</span> and said unto
him, "Speak thou to this people and say unto them, 'Sanctify ye
yourselves, and bring ye for each of the houses of your fathers a rod,'
and write ye \[the name\] upon it so that ye may know their rods, thou
and thy brother <span class="small">AARON</span>. Now of your houses let
<span class="small">AARON</span> write upon his rod, but upon thine own
rod make no mark, for it shall be a perfect miracle for the children of
thy people, a vindication for the wicked, and a sign of life for all
those who believe. If thou didst write \[thy name\] now with them, they
would say unto thee, 'This hath been a worker of miracles from of old by
the word of God'; let them say this when I have shown them a miracle by
it (i.e., the rod). But for the house of thy father write upon the rod
of <span class="small">AARON</span>."<span
id="page_176_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_176_note_2.md)

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_175">p. 175</span>

<span id="page_175_note_1"></span>[1](#page_175_fr_1.md) See Numbers xvi.

<span id="footnotes_page_176">p. 176</span>

<span id="page_176_note_1"></span>[1](#page_176_fr_1.md) Compare Exodus
xvii. 4; Numbers xvi. 41.

<span id="page_176_note_2"></span>[2](#page_176_fr_2.md) Numbers xvii. 8.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 98. Concerning the Rod of MOSES and the Rod of AARON](kn098.md)

</div>
