<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn095) 
[Next](kn097) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 96. *Concerning the Prophecy about* <span class="small">CHRIST</span>

   Moreover <span class="small">MOSES</span> proclaimed in the Law and
said, "A prophet like myself shall rise up for you from your brethren,
and hearken ye unto him; and every soul that will not hearken unto that
prophet ye shall root out from among the people."<span
id="page_170_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_170_note_2) And this he said
concerning <span class="small">CHRIST</span> the Son of God. And he also
prophesied concerning His Crucifixion, and said, "When the serpents
afflicted the children of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> they cried
out to <span class="small">MOSES</span>, and <span
class="small">MOSES</span> cried out to God to deliver them from the
serpents. And God said unto him, Make an image of brass of a serpent and
suspend it in a place where it can be known as a sign, and let every one
whom a serpent hath bitten look upon that image of brass, and he shall
live. And when they failed to look at it they died, and those who looked
on it and believed lived."<span id="page_170_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_170_note_3) And in like manner was
it with <span class="small">CHRIST</span>; those who paid no heed to Him
and did not believe in Him perished in <span class="small">SHEÔL</span>,
and those who believed and hearkened unto Him inherited the land of
everlasting life, where there will never be pain or suffering.

   And now we will make known unto you how they paid no heed to <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, the Word of God. When the children of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> spake against <span
class="small">MOSES</span>, saying, "Is it <span id="page_171">p.
171</span> that God hath spoken to <span class="small">MOSES</span>
only? How is it that we also do not hear the Word of God that we may
believe on Him?"<span id="page_171_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_171_note_1) And God, Who knoweth the
hearts of men, heard the murmuring of the children of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and He said unto <span
class="small">MOSES</span>, "Thou dost ask forgiveness for thy people,
and yet they murmur against thee, saying, Why doth not God speak with
us? And now, if they believe in Me, let them come hither to Me with
thee. And tell them to purify themselves, and to wash their apparel, and
let the great men of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> go up to hear
what commands I will give them, and let them hear My voice and perform
the commandments which I shall give them." And <span
class="small">MOSES</span> told the children of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> what he had been commanded, and the people
bowed low before God, and they purified themselves on the third day. And
the seventy elders of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span><span
id="page_171_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_171_note_2) went up into Mount <span
class="small">SINAI</span>, and they departed from the encampment and
ascended Mount <span class="small">SINAI</span>. And they were distant
from each other the space of the flight of an arrow, and they stood
still, each facing his neighbour. Now, though there were many of them
and they used their endeavours, they were not able to ascend into the
cloud with <span class="small">MOSES</span>, and fear and trembling
seized upon them, and the shadow of death enveloped them; and they heard
the sound of the horn and pipes, and \[they felt\] the darkness and the
winds. And <span class="small">MOSES</span> went into the cloud and held
converse with God, and all the great men of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> heard that Voice of God, and they were
afraid and quaked with terror, and because of the overwhelming terror
which was in their hearts they were unable to stand up. And when <span
class="small">MOSES</span> came forth they said unto him, "We will not
hear this word of God so that we may not die of terror. And behold, we
know that God holdeth converse with thee. And if there be anything that
He would say unto us, do thou hearken thereto and declare it unto us. Be
<span id="page_172">p. 172</span> thou unto us a mouth in respect of
God, and we will be unto Him His own people." Do ye not see that they
denied <span class="small">CHRIST</span> and said, "We will not hearken
to that Voice so that we may not die in terror"? Now <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> was the Word of God, and therefore when they
said, "We will not hearken to that Voice," they meant, "We do not
believe in <span class="small">CHRIST</span>."

   And again <span class="small">MOSES</span> spake unto God and said,
"Shew me Thy Face."<span id="page_172_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_172_note_1) And God said unto <span
class="small">MOSES</span>, "No one can look upon My Face and live, but
only as in a mirror. Turn thy face to the west and thou shalt see in the
rock the mirroring of My Face." And when <span
class="small">MOSES</span> saw the shadow of the Face of God, his own
face shone with a brightness which was seven times brighter than the
sun, and the light was so strong that the children of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span> could not look upon his face except through
a veil. And thereupon he saw that they did not desire to look upon the
Face of God, for they said unto him, "Make unto us a veil so that we may
not see thy face."<span id="page_172_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_172_note_2) And having said these
words it is evident that they hated the hearing of His words and the
sight of His Face.

   And moreover, when <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> took his son
<span class="small">ISAAC</span> up into Mount <span
class="small">ḲARMĔLĔWÔS</span> (<span class="small">CARMEL</span>), God
sent down from heaven a ram for the redemption of <span
class="small">ISAAC</span>. And <span class="small">ISAAC</span> was not
slaughtered, but the ram which had come down from heaven was
slaughtered. Now <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> is to be interpreted
God the Father, and <span class="small">ISAAC</span> is to be
interpreted as a symbol of <span class="small">CHRIST</span> the Son.
And when He came down from heaven for the salvation of <span
class="small">ADAM</span> and his sons, the Godhead which had come down
from heaven was not slain, but His body which He had put on for our
sakes, that earthly body which He had put on from <span
class="small">MARY</span>, was slain. Can ye understand and know that
likeness and similitude for the earthly being <span
class="small">ISAAC</span>, the son of <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, who was an offering of the will of <span
id="page_173">p. 173</span> his father? The heavenly ram became a
redemption (or, substitute), and the son of <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> was redeemed. And as for Him Who came down,
the Son of God, He became the redemption of the Godhead, His body for
the earthly, and He died in His body, the Godhead suffering in no wise
and remaining unchanged; and the mortal became living in the
Resurrection with the Godhead. And it is clearly manifest: in that <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, the Son of God, hath redeemed us, He hath
magnified us men. And we must honour especially, both upon the earth and
in heaven, this our Lady <span class="small">MARY</span> the Virgin, the
Mother of God.

   And, hearken ye to this explanation concerning the first man, who is
our father <span class="small">ADAM</span>. <span
class="small">EVE</span> was created from a man, from a bone in his
side, without carnal embrace and union, and she became his companion.
And having heard the word of guile, from being the helpmeet of <span
class="small">ADAM</span> she became a murderess by making him to
transgress the command. And in His mercy God the Father created the
Pearl in the body of <span class="small">ADAM</span>. He cleansed <span
class="small">EVE'S</span> body and sanctified it and made for it a
dwelling in her for <span class="small">ADAM'S</span> salvation. She
\[i.e., <span class="small">MARY</span>\] was born without blemish, for
He made her pure, without pollution, and she redeemed his debt without
carnal union and embrace. She brought forth in heavenly flesh a King,
and He was born of her, and He renewed his life in the purity of His
body. And He slew death with His pure body, and He rose without
corruption, and He hath raised us up with Him to immortality, the throne
of divinity, and He hath raised us up to Him, and we have exchanged life
in our mortal body and found the life which is immortal. Through the
seduction of <span class="small">ADAM</span> we suffered affliction, and
by the patient endurance of <span class="small">CHRIST</span> we are
healed. Through the transgression of <span class="small">EVE</span> we
died and were buried, and by the purity of <span
class="small">MARY</span> we receive honour, and are exalted to the
heights.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

   And <span class="small">EZEKIEL</span> also prophesied concerning
<span class="small">MARY</span> and said, "I saw a door in the east
which was sealed with a great and marvellous seal, and there was none
who went into it except the Lord of hosts; He went in through it and
came forth therefrom."<span id="page_174_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_174_note_1) Hear ye now this
explanation: When he saith, "I saw a door," it was the door of the gate
of heaven, the entrance of the saints into the kingdom of the heavens.
And when he saith that it was "in the east" he referreth to her purity
and her beauty. Men call her the "Gate of Salvation", and also "the
East" whereunto the saints look with joy and gladness. And the
"closedness" of which he speaketh referreth to her virginity and her
body. And when he saith that she was sealed with "a great, wonderful
seal", this showeth plainly that she was sealed by God, the Great and
Wonderful, through the Holy Ghost. And when he saith, "None goeth
through it except the Lord of hosts, He goeth in and cometh out," \[he
meaneth\] the Creator of the heavens and the earth, the Creator of the
angels and men and the lords. The Lord of hosts is the fruit of the
Godhead, Who put on our body from her, <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>. He went into and came forth from her
without polluting her.

   And <span class="small">MOSES</span> also prophesied concerning <span
class="small">MARY</span>, saying, "I saw a bramble bush on Mount <span
class="small">SINAI</span> which the devouring fire consumed not."<span
id="page_174_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_174_note_2) And the signification of
this fire is the Godhood of the Son of God; and the bramble bush, which
burned without the leaves thereof being shrivelled, is <span
class="small">MARY</span>.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_170">p. 170</span>

<span id="page_170_note_2"></span>[2](#page_170_fr_2) Compare
Deuteronomy xviii. 15.

<span id="page_170_note_3"></span>[3](#page_170_fr_3) Numbers xxi. 7.

<span id="footnotes_page_171">p. 171</span>

<span id="page_171_note_1"></span>[1](#page_171_fr_1) Numbers xii. 2.

<span id="page_171_note_2"></span>[2](#page_171_fr_2) Numbers xi. 16-24;
Exodus xix.

<span id="footnotes_page_172">p. 172</span>

<span id="page_172_note_1"></span>[1](#page_172_fr_1) Exodus xxxiii.
18-23.

<span id="page_172_note_2"></span>[2](#page_172_fr_2) Exodus xxxiv. 33.

<span id="footnotes_page_174">p. 174</span>

<span id="page_174_note_1"></span>[1](#page_174_fr_1) Ezekiel xliii. 1.

<span id="page_174_note_2"></span>[2](#page_174_fr_2) Exodus iii. 2.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 97. Concerning the Murmuring of ISRAEL](kn097)

</div>
