<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn098.md) 
[Next](kn100.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 99. *Concerning the Two Servants*

   Now \[it is said\] that a certain king had two slaves: the one was
arrogant and strong, and the other was humble and weak. And the arrogant
slave overcame the humble one, and smote him and all but slew him, and
robbed him, and the king upon his throne saw them. And the king
descending seized the arrogant slave, and beat him, and crushed him, and
bound him in fetters, and cast him into a place of darkness. And he
raised up his humble and weak slave, and embraced him, and brushed away
the dust from him, and washed him, and poured oil and wine into his
wounds, and set him upon his ass, and brought him into his city and set
him up on his throne, and seated him on his right hand. Now the king is
in truth <span class="small">CHRIST</span>, and the arrogant servant
whom I have mentioned is <span class="small">SATAN</span>, and the
humble servant is <span class="small">ADAM</span>. And when <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> saw how the arrogant servant overcame the
humble one, and cast him down in the dust, He came down from His throne
and raised up <span class="small">ADAM</span>, His servant, and bound
<span class="small">SATAN</span> in fetters in the terror of <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span>. And He seated the body of <span
class="small">ADAM</span> upon the throne of His Godhead, and magnified
him, and exalted him, and honoured him; and he was praised by all the
beings whom He had created, the angels and the archangels, thousands of
thousands, and tens of thousands of thousands of spiritual beings. For
He brought low the arrogant and raised up the humble, and reduced the
arrogant to shame and exalted to honour <span id="page_184">p.
184</span> the humble, and rejected the arrogant and loved the humble,
and scorned the haughty and had pity on the lowly. He cast down the
arrogant from his high place, and lifted the poor up out of the dust. He
snatched away the mighty one from his honour, and raised up the poor
from corruption, for with Him are honour and disgrace. Whom He wisheth
to honour He honoureth, and whom He wisheth to disgrace He disgraceth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 100. Concerning the Angels who rebelled](kn100.md)

</div>
