<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn093) 
[Next](kn095) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 94. *The first war of the King of* <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>

   And after three months they (i.e., <span class="small">DAVID</span>
and his soldiers) rose up to wage war from the city of the Government,
with <span class="small">MÂKĔDÂ</span> his mother and <span
class="small">ZION</span> his Lady. And the <span
class="small">LEVITES</span> carried the Tabernacle of the Law, together
with the things that appertained to their office, and they marched along
with great majesty, and as in times of old when God on Mount <span
class="small">SINAI</span> made <span class="small">ZION</span> to come
down in holiness to <span class="small">MOSES</span> and <span
class="small">AARON</span>, even so did <span
class="small">AZARIAH</span> and <span class="small">’ÊLMÎYÂS</span>
bear along the Tabernacle of the Law. And the other mighty men of war of
<span class="small">ISRAEL</span> marched on the right side of it and on
the left, and close to it, and before it and behind it, and although
they were beings made of dust they sang psalms and songs of the spirit
like the heavenly hosts. And God gave them beautiful voices and
marvellous songs, for He was well pleased to be praised by them.

   And they came from the city of the Government, and encamped at <span
class="small">MÂYA ’ABAW</span>, and on the following morning they laid
waste the district of <span class="small">ZÂWÂ</span> with <span
class="small">ḤADĔYÂ</span>, for enmity had existed between them from
olden time; and they blotted out the people and slew them with the edge
of the sword. And they passed on from that place and encamped at <span
class="small">GÊRRÂ</span>, and here also they laid waste the city of
vipers that had the faces of men, and the tails of asses attached to
their loins.

   And \[the Queen\] returned and encamped in the city of <span
class="small">ZION</span>, and they remained therein three months, then
their wagons moved on and came to the city of the <span id="page_166">p.
166</span> Government. And in one day they came to the city of <span
class="small">SÂBÂ</span>, and they laid waste <span
class="small">NÔBÂ</span>; and from there they camped round about <span
class="small">SÂBÂ</span>, and they laid it waste as far as the border
of <span class="small">EGYPT</span>. And the majesty (or, awe) of the
King of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> was so great that the King
of <span class="small">MĔDYÂM</span> and the King of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> caused gifts to be brought unto him, and they
came into the city of the Government, and from there they encamped in
<span class="small">’AB‛ÂT</span>, and they waged war on the country of
<span class="small">INDIA</span>, and the King of <span
class="small">INDIA</span> brought a gift and a present (or, tribute),
and himself did homage to the King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. He (i.e., <span
class="small">DAVID</span>) waged war wheresoever he pleased; no man
conquered him, on the contrary, whosoever attacked him was conquered.
And as for those who would have played the spy in his camp, in order to
hear some story and relate it in their city, they were unable to run by
the wagons, for <span class="small">ZION</span> herself made the
strength of the enemy to be exhausted. But King <span
class="small">DAVID</span>, with his soldiers, and the armies of his
soldiers, and all those who obeyed his word, ran by the wagons without
pain or suffering, and without hunger or thirst, and without sweat or
exhaustion, and travelled in one day a distance which \[usually\] took
three months to traverse. And they lacked nothing whatsoever of the
things which they asked God through <span class="small">ZION</span> the
Tabernacle of the Law of God to give them, for He dwelt with her, and
His Angel directed her, and she was His habitation. And as for the king
who ministered to His pavilion—if he were travelling on any journey, and
wished something to be done, everything that he wished for and thought
about in his heart, and indicated with his finger, everything \[I say\]
was performed at his word; and everyone feared him. But he feared no
one, for the hand of God was with him, and it protected him by day and
by night. And he did His Will, and God worked for him and protected him
from all evil for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

   This I found among the manuscripts of the Church of <span
class="small">SOPHIA</span> in <span
class="small">CONSTANTINOPLE</span>. And the Archbishops who were there
said unto him \[<span class="small">DOMITIUS</span> ?\], "This is what
is written from the days of <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the
King." And <span class="small">DOMITIUS</span> of <span
class="small">ANTIOCH</span> said, "Yea, that which is written up to the
day of the death of <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> is to be
accepted, and that which hath been written by other prophets after his
death is to be accepted likewise."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 95. How the honourable estate of the King of ETHIOPIA was
universally accepted](kn095)

</div>
