<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn091.md) 
[Next](kn093.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 92. *How they renewed the kingdom of* <span class="small">DAVID</span>

   And <span class="small">AZARIAH</span> said, "Bring hither the
jubilee trumpets, and let us go to <span class="small">ZION</span>, and
there we will make new the kingdom of our lord <span
class="small">DAVID</span>." And he took the oil of sovereignty and
filled the horn \[therewith\], and he anointed <span
class="small">DAVID</span> with the unguent, that is to say, with the
oil of sovereignty. And they blew horns and pipes and trumpets, and beat
drums, and sounded all kinds of musical instruments, and there were
singing and dancing and games, and \[displays\] with horses and shield
\[-men\], and all the men and women of the people of the country of
<span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> were present, small and great, and
the little Blacks, six thousand in number, and virgin women whom <span
class="small">AZARIAH</span> had chosen for the women of <span
class="small">ZION</span> by the law, whom <span
class="small">DAVID</span> the King had destined for \[the service of\]
the table and banquets in the royal fortress when he should go up
thereto \[clad in\] raiment of fine gold. And in this wise was renewed
the kingdom of <span class="small">DAVID</span>, the son of <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> the king of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, in the capital city, in Mount <span
class="small">MÂKĔDÂ</span>, in the House of <span
class="small">ZION</span>, when the Law was established for the first
time by the King of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

   And then when he had completed the stablishing of the Law, they made,
according to what they had seen in <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span>,
the Law in the House of <span class="small">ZION</span> for the nobles
of the kingdom, and for those who were inside, and for those that were
outside, and for the people, and for the islands, and for the cities,
and for the provinces; and for all the inhabitants and for all their
tribal kinsfolk they made ordinances in the same manner. And thus the
eastern boundary of the kingdom of the King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> is the beginning of the city of <span
class="small">GÂZÂ</span> in the land of <span
class="small">JUDAH</span>, that is, <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span>; and its boundary is the Lake of <span
class="small">JERICHO</span>, and it passeth on by the coast of its sea
to <span class="small">LÊBÂ</span> and <span class="small">SÂBÂ</span>;
and its boundary goeth down to <span class="small">BÎSÎS</span> and
<span class="small">’ASNÊT</span>; and its boundary is the Sea of the
Blacks and Naked Men, and goeth up Mount <span
class="small">KÊBÊRÊNÊYÔN</span> into the Sea of Darkness, that is to
say, the place where the sun setteth; and its boundary extendeth to
<span class="small">FÊNÊ’ÊL</span> and <span
class="small">LASÎFÂLÂ</span>; and its borders are the lands \[near\]
the Garden (i.e., Paradise), where there is food in plenty and abundance
of cattle, and \[near\] <span class="small">FÊNÊḲÊN</span>; and its
boundary reacheth as far as <span class="small">ZÂWÊL</span> and passeth
on to the Sea of <span class="small">INDIA</span>; and its boundary is
as far as the Sea of <span class="small">TARSÎS</span>, and in its
remote (?) part lieth the Sea of <span class="small">MEDYÂM</span>,
until it cometh to the country of <span class="small">GÂZÂ</span>; and
its boundary is the place where \[our enumeration\] began. And moreover,
the dominion of the King of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>
belongeth to him and to his seed for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 93. How the Men of RÔMÊ destroyed the Faith](kn093.md)

</div>
