<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn114.md) 
[Next](kn116.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 115. *Concerning the Judgement of* <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>

   And He shall answer and say unto them, "Why did ye deny Me, and
entreat Me evilly and crucify Me, \[seeing that\] I did all this for
you, and that by My coming down \[from heaven\] I delivered you from
<span class="small">SATAN</span> and from the slavery of <span
class="small">SATAN</span>, and that I came for your sakes? Look ye and
see how ye pierced Me with nails and thrust the spear through Me." And
the Twelve Apostles shall be raised up, and they shall pass judgement
upon them, and shall say unto them, "We would have made you hear, but ye
would not hear the prophecy of the Prophets and the preaching of us the
Apostles." And the <span class="small">JEWS</span> shall weep and repent
when it shall be useless to do so, and they shall pass into everlasting
punishment; and with the Devil, their father who had directed them, and
his demons who had led them astray, and with the wicked they shall be
shut in.

   And those who have believed and who have been baptized in the Holy
Trinity, and have received His Body and His Blood, shall become His
servants with their whole heart, for "there is no one who can hate His
Body altogether." The Body of <span class="small">CHRIST</span> crieth
out in our Body, and He hath compassion because of His Body and Blood,
for they have become His sons and His brethren. And if there be some who
have sinned they shall be judged in the fire according to the quantity
of their sins; he whose burden of sin is light his punishment <span
id="page_225">p. 225</span> shall be light, and he whose burden of sin
is heavy, exceedingly great shall his punishment be. One day with God is
as a period of ten thousand years; some there shall be who shall be
punished for a day; and some for half a day, and some for three hours of
a day, and some for one hour of a day; and some there shall be who shall
be tested and who shall be absolved from their transgressions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 116. Concerning the Chariot of ETHIOPIA](kn116.md)

</div>
