<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn116.md) 
[Next](kn118.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 117. *Concerning the King of* <span class="small">RÔMÊ</span> *and the King of* <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>

   And the King of <span class="small">RÔMÊ</span>, and the King of
<span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and the Archbishop of <span
class="small">ALEXANDRIA</span>—now the men of <span
class="small">RÔMÊ</span> were orthodox—were informed that they were to
destroy them. And they were to rise up to fight, to make war upon the
enemies of God, the <span class="small">JEWS</span>, and to destroy
them, the King of <span class="small">RÔMÊ ’ÊNYÂ</span>, and the King of
<span class="small">ETHIOPIA PINḤAS</span> (<span
class="small">PHINEHAS</span>); and they were to lay waste their lands,
and to build churches there, and they were to cut to pieces <span
class="small">JEWS</span> at the end of this Cycle in <span
id="page_226">p. 226</span> twelve cycles of the moon. Then the kingdom
of the <span class="small">JEWS</span> shall be made an end of and the
Kingdom of <span class="small">CHRIST</span> shall be constituted until
the advent of the False Messiah. And those two kings, <span
class="small">JUSTINUS</span> the King of <span
class="small">RÔMÊ</span> and <span class="small">KÂLÊB</span> the King
of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, met together in <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span>. And their Archbishop was to make ready
offerings and they were to make offerings, and they were to establish
the Faith in love, and they were to give each other gifts and the
salutation of peace, and they were to divide between them the earth from
the half of <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span>, even as we have
already said at the beginning of this book. And for love's sake they
were to have jointly the royal title \[of King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>\]. They were to be mingled with <span
class="small">DAVID</span> and <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> their
fathers. The one whom in faith they chose by lot to be named from the
Kings of <span class="small">RÔMÊ</span> was to be called "King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>", and the King of <span
class="small">RÔMÊ</span> likewise was to bear the name of "King of
<span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>", and he was to have part in the lot
whereby he should be named with <span class="small">DAVID</span> and
<span class="small">SOLOMON</span> their fathers, after the manner of
the Four Evangelists. And the fourth the one whom they were to choose
each in his own country. . .

   And thus after they had become united in a common bond, and had
established the right faith they were to determine that the <span
class="small">JEWS</span> were no longer to live, and each of them was
to leave his son there; and the King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> was to leave there his firstborn son whose
name was <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and was to return to his own
country in joy. And when he came to his royal house, he was to give
abundant thanks unto God, and to offer up his body as an offering of
praise to his God. And God shall accept him gladly, for he shall not
defile his body after he hath returned, but he shall go into a monastery
in purity of heart. And he shall make king his youngest son, whose name
is <span class="small">GABRA MASḲAL</span>, and he himself shall shut
himself up \[in a monastery\]. And when one hath told this to the King
of <span class="small">NÂGRÂN</span>, the son of <span
class="small">KÂLÊB</span>, <span id="page_227">p. 227</span> he shall
come in order to reign over <span class="small">ZION</span>, and <span
class="small">GABRA MASḲAL</span> shall make his armies to rise up, and
he shall journey in a chariot, and they shall meet together at the
narrow end of the Sea of <span class="small">LÎBÂ</span>, and shall
fight together. And on the same night the two of them shall pray from
sunset until the dawn, when the fight waxeth strong upon them. And when
they have cried out to Him with tears God will look upon the prayer of
both of them, and the penitent prayer of their father, and will say,
"This one is the elder and he hath stood up to perform the will of his
father, and that one, the younger, hath loved his father, and hath
prayed to God \[for him\]." And God will say to <span
class="small">GABRA MASḲAL</span>, "Choose thou between the chariot and
<span class="small">ZION</span>," and He will cause him to take <span
class="small">ZION</span>, and he shall reign openly upon the throne of
his father. And God will make <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> to
choose the chariot, and he shall reign secretly and he shall not be
visible, and He will send him to all those who have transgressed the
commandment of God. And no one shall build houses, and they shall live
in tents, and none shall suffer fatigue in labouring, and none shall
suffer thirst on the journey. And their days shall be double of those of
\[ordinary\] men, and they shall use bows and arrows, and shall shoot at
and pierce him that God hateth.

   Thus hath God made for the King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> more glory, and grace, and majesty than
for all the other kings of the earth because of the greatness of <span
class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle of the Law of God, the
heavenly <span class="small">ZION</span>. And may God make us to perform
His spiritual good pleasure, and deliver us from His wrath, and make us
to share His kingdom. Amen.

   And they answered and said unto him, "Verily, thou hast spoken well,
for thus was it revealed unto thee by the help of the Holy Spirit. Thou
hast told us everything which hath taken place, and thou art in
agreement with the book of <span class="small">DAMÔTÎYÔS</span> (<span
class="small">DOMITIUS</span>) of <span class="small">RÔMÊ</span>. And
<span id="page_228">p. 228</span> thou hast prophesied also what shall
happen to the two cities, the brides of <span
class="small">CHRIST</span>, the Churches <span
class="small">NESTÂSYÂ</span> and <span class="small">’ARḲÂDYÂ</span>,
and <span class="small">MÂRÊNÂ</span>, and <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, the great cities of God, wherein pure
sacrifices and offerings shall be offered up at all times.

   May God show us His grace! The blessing of all the saints and martyrs
\[be with us\] for ever and ever! Amen. <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> is our King, and in <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> is our life for ever and ever. Amen. And
Amen."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colophon](kn118.md)

</div>
