[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eom01)  [Next](eom03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417939699/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Karezza, Ethics of Marriage*, by Alice B. Stockham, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GREETING.

The author's work, TOKOLOGY, was written from years of professional
experience to meet a demand among inquiring women on subjects that
deeply concern the physical life of the wife and mother. In these later
years the world of thought has grown and new discoveries have been made
in spiritual as well as material science.

In answer to hundreds of letters of inquiry I send out this message -
KAREZZA, elucidating a theory of conjugal life, in which there is a love
communion between husband and wife from which results a mastery of the
physical and complete control of the fecundating power.

In The Familiar Letter of TOKOLOGY subjects usually considered delicate
in nature and difficult to handle are presented indirectly and briefly.
In an early edition those interested in a "wiser parentage" are cited to
a pamphlet written by a distinguished minister, who therein had given to
the world a new and unique theory of controlling propagation. Afterwards
to my regret

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

and the disappointment of numerous correspondents it was discovered that
the work was out of print.

In later editions of TOKOLOGY, alluding to methods of limiting
offspring, the following paragraph occurs: "By some a theory called
sedular absorption is advanced. This involves intercourse without
culmination. No discharge is allowed. People practicing this method
claim the highest possible enjoyment, no loss of vitality, and perfect
control of the fecundating power."

Many readers asked for further explanation. It proved that the word
Sedular is not found in the dictionaries, but as used in this connection
means pertaining to seed, and is so defined in the glossary of the book.

KAREZZA elucidates the above paragraph; gives a high ideal to parental
functions; pleads for justice to the unborn child; teaches that the
control of procreation is possible with every husband and wife; gives
honor to womanhood, and, most of all, controverts the prevailing ideas
of baseness and degradation associated with the sexual nature.

KAREZZA may be considered a supplement of TOKOLOGY, and like that, does
not deal with ideals, but with tested theories and practical truths.
They have been lived and demonstrated, and are here presented as living
facts.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

Men and women must learn the significance of the sexual relation, and
its possible influence upon life and character. Copulation is more than
a propagative act; it is a blending of body, soul and spirit, ennobling
or degrading according to the attitude of the participants. For both
husband and wife it has a function in soul development that hitherto has
been prevented and perverted by the traditional uncleanness attached to
this relation. Nature made but one mistake in the evolution of life,
according to man's edict, and that is, in creating the human
reproductive organs. Reverse this edict. Let the search-light of truth
illuminate this subject, and a satisfactory solution of many social
problems will be evolved. No part of the body should be under
condemnation. The young should be enlightened upon these important
subjects, while the knowledge of sexual science will open the door for
the true marriage.

KAREZZA makes a plea for a better birthright for the child, and aims to
lead individuals to seek a higher development of themselves through most
sacred relations. It presents truths that are attainable, and when the
goal of mastery is reached, the ideal marriage will be consummated in
united lives, giving a prophecy of generations of desired and welcome
offspring.

A. B. S.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. I: Ethics of Marriage](eom03)
