[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eom05)  [Next](eom07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417939699/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Karezza, Ethics of Marriage*, by Alice B. Stockham, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IV

### HEALTH.

All life in nature is perfect; man's life is no exception if he remove
self-made limitations.

Karezza is strengthening and sustaining and to husband and wife, because
it is virtually a union of the higher selves, from which naturally there
can be no reaction. As the spiritual is developed, the physical is
subordinated. Whatever contributes to soul growth enhances the power to
live free from the domination of the body, and bodily sensations. Thus
is secures harmonious physical conditions, and the spirit manifests or
pictures itself through the flesh as a harmonious whole.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Especially is it necessary for the wife to be freed from the usual dread
of excessive and undesired child-bearing. Fear and anxious thought, far
more than bacilli or bacteria, are productive of pain, disease and
suffering. The terrors and dread of childbirth, and the horrors of
undesired maternity, have been potent factors in causing the weakness
and the suffering of women.

To know that childbirth is natural, and that under harmonious conditions
it is not attended by suffering, removes a great curse from the lives of
women. To know that the inherent desire for maternity is to be fulfilled
under the best conditions and entirely at her own command, is a
wonderful boon to woman.

If, on the other hand, women are resigned to conditions that they deem
unavoidable, and patiently pay in frequent childbirths what they

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

consider the penalty of their sex, they become little more than breeding
animals. They are given no time for self-development and preparation for
their obligations to the fast increasing family.

Instances are rare when women can maintain a high standard of health and
strength and bear six or eight children in ten or twelve years, and at
the same time perform the combined offices of nurse, cook, laundress,
seamstress and governess. In drudgery they drag along through days and
nights, with no outlook for the future save a recurrence of similar
conditions.

Every woman owes it to herself to preserve the normal elasticity of
health and strength, to become enduring for all the many obligations and
activities of life, so to accord all her thinking and living that
increase of years will not be attended by weakness and debility. Her
maturer

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

years, on the contrary, should be filled with increasing strength and
power, veritably with the health and buoyancy of youth. The young "old
lady" should become the regenerated "new woman," the glory and
inspiration of the coming time. This may be consummated through the aid
of Karezza.

In Karezza the husband also experiences conditions which preserve his
health and natural, vital powers. Physicists have demonstrated with
incontrovertible facts that it is eminently healthy to conserve the
virile principle. The seminal secretion has a wonderful imminent value,
and if retained is absorbed into the system and adds enormously to man's
magnetic, mental and spiritual force. In ordinary married life this
force is constantly being wasted. Other things being equal, the man who
wisely conserves is in concentrated mental and physical power and
effectiveness,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

like a Daniel and his companions. He builds and constructs, he is the
organizer and executive head of industries, he is the orator and the
inventor. He is the leader of great movements, because his power is
drawn from an inexhaustible storage battery.

The testes may be considered analogous to the salivary and lachrymal
glands, in which there is no fluid secreted except at the demand of
their respective functions. The thought of food makes the mouth water
for a short time only, while the presence of the food causes an abundant
yield of saliva.

It is customary for physiologists to assume that the spermatic secretion
is analogous to bile, which when once formed, must be expelled. But
substitute the word tears for bile, and you put before the mind an idea
altogether different. Tears, as falling drops, are not essential to life

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

and health. A man may be in perfect health and not cry once in five or
even fifty years. The lachrymal fluid is ever present, but in such small
quantities that it is unnoticed. Where are tears while they remain
unshed? They are ever ready, waiting to spring forth when there is an
adequate cause, but they do not accumulate and distress the man because
they are not shed daily, weekly or monthly. The component elements of
the tears are prepared in the system, they are on hand, passing through
the circulation, ready to mix and flow whenever they are needed; but if
they mix, accumulate and flow without adequate cause, there is a disease
of the lachrymal glands. While there are no exact analogues in the body,
yet the tears and the spermatic fluids are much more closely analogous
in their normal manner of secretion and use than are the bile and the
semen. Neither flow of tears nor of

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

semen is essential to life or health. Both are largely under the control
of the imagination, the emotions, and the will; and the flow of either
is liable to be arrested in a moment by sudden mental action.

It is as degrading for men and boys to allow a seminal emission without
rational and proper cause, as it is unmanly for them to sheer tears
frequently or on trivial occasions. If they could know, moreover, that
an uncalled for emission is a destructive waste of life material,
perhaps the formation of habits of masturbation, promiscuous intercourse
and marital profligacy, with all their disastrous consequences, might be
largely prevented.

The mammary gland is an apt illustration of the law of demand and
supply. In its anatomical construction and physiological function is it
not analogous to the producing gland of the male?

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

No one has ever hinted that it is essential for health that the natural
lacteal fluid of the mammary gland must be continually or frequently
secreted and expelled. It is not considered a "physical necessity" or a
demand of nature. Indeed, the contrary opinion prevails, that an
abundant flow of milk is derogative to healthful conditions.

Milk flows in answer to the demand of a newborn infant, and should it
come at any other time than when thus demanded, it is considered a
perversion of nature and an unnecessary drain upon the system. May it
not prove that the unnecessary secretion and expulsion of the semen is
as great a perversion of nature?

May it not also prove that erectile tissue in action is not a positive
evidence of secretion in the gland?

Physiology alone proves that the practice of

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Karezza imparts
health and strength to man. When it is known that conservation is not so
much the result of retained secretions as the transmutation and
transformation of vital forces, - the innermost life of man, then
students will cease testing the fluids with chemicals, and the bodily
tissue with microscope and scalpel.

Although woman has not the semen to conserve, yet equally with man she
has the thrilling potency of passion, that when well directed, heals
sensitive nerves, vitalizes the blood and restores tissue. In this
deeper, truer union, the very heart of Karezza, woman as well as man
prevents and cures disease. Karezza has a therapeutic value not equaled
by any remedy of pharmacopia, or by any system of healing.

The natural woman knows that virtue is not sexual repression but rather
expression; that coldness, inertness, and want of feeling are due

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

to condemnation of the life that is the center and creator of all life.
She has been taught shame for the most sacred relations, and especially
for the sign of the power that creates offspring, but she reverses this
teaching. Is a plant ashamed to bud, bloom and bring forth fruit?

Women must bless the source of life; she must be loyal to her trust. She
must know that sex life and sex expression are a natural heritage, God
implanted. Wisely, thoughtfully should she seek conservation and
appropriation of that which is the heart of vitality.

Men who are borne down with sorrow because their wives are nervous,
feeble and irritable, have it in their own power, through Karezza,, to
restore the radiant hue of health to the faces of their loved ones,
strength and elasticity to their steps and harmonious action to every
part of their bodies. By manifestation of tenderness

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

and endearment, the husband may develop a response in the wife through
her love nature, which thrills every fiber into action and radiates
tonic to every nerve.

Men with hearts full of love and wisdom will not be slow to accord this
boon to wives whom they have pledged to love and protect, thus
fulfilling the marriage sacrament.

In Karezza, creative energy is transmuted into the very life of the
cell, from which is developed perfect structure and tissue. The impetus
to health derived from Karezza is the right of every man and woman. It
is co-operative building, love being the foundation, wisdom the designer
and executor. This planning and building prophesy perpetual youth, and
progeny surpassing all progenitors in strength and endurance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. 5: Parenthood](eom07)
