[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eom07)  [Next](eom09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417939699/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Karezza, Ethics of Marriage*, by Alice B. Stockham, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

## CHAPTER VI

### CONTROL OF PROCREATIVE POWERS.

No words can express the helplessness, the sense of personal
desecration, the despair which sinks into the heart of a woman forced to
submit to maternity under adverse circumstances, and when her own soul
rejects it. - H. C. Wright.

Through Karezza unsought and undesired paternity will be a thing of the,
past. Children that are desired will be planned for, favorable
conditions will be sought, and the conception of a human being will be
an occasion for the highest expression of creative power. Time,
circumstances and conditions for the best good of the parents and the
child may be chosen.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

The control of the fecundating power appeals especially to those mothers
who are forced into frequent childbearing, who not only suffer in loss
of health and strength themselves, but are overwhelmed by their
inability to do justice to their children. If such mothers are rich, the
little ones are turned to the pitiless care of a nurse; if poor, the
children must seek their own diversion and all their activities thus
lack wise direction. Alas! They are physical mothers only, lacking the
unperverted and unerring maternal instinct of the lower creation.

Women instinctively long for and desire the office of motherhood. With
this desire it is natural that they should wish suitable conditions and
circumstances to enable them to perform the office well, to give
children a rightful inheritance and to have the sacred office honored.
It is lack of these conditions for maternity that impels women to shrink
from it.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

Fear of suffering also, that frequently attends the office, causes women
to dread motherhood, and often has led them to use undue measures to
prevent it; it is now known that suffering is not a natural consequence
of child-bearing. Even on the physical plane if women live close to the
heart of nature, adopting simple habits of dress, food and exercise,
they can to a great degree prevent the pangs of childbirth. It has been
proven over and over again that painless parturition is possible.

A great truth, however, has been discovered. Through a knowledge of the
spiritual forces of life and the possibility of according one's life to
the law governing them, one may, under all circumstances, experience
health and harmony. The inference follows that the natural functions of
pregnancy and parturition, aided by a

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

knowledge of this truth, will be free from pain and disability.

The very desire to realize the spiritual ideal in reproduction, together
with consecration of the reproductive functions to that ideal, tends of
itself to lessen suffering.

The very young should be trained in this ideal. Girlsshould early have
instilled into their minds reverence for all the functions in their
natures pertaining to the maternal. At the approach of womanhood, a sign
of the development and ripening of the ovules occurs in what is called
menstruation. Girls should be taught that this is a symbol of
motherhood, a sign that the ovules are being prepared for the
fructifying principle. They have already learned that the ovule of
flowers is found embedded in a cell to which pollen is carried from the
anthers through the stigma. Thus seed germination is

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

accomplished. Speaking plainly, it is the sexual intercourse of plant
life, from which baby plants are produced.

There is such a close analogy sexually between human and plant life that
it should be taught with the same freedom and reverence. Most
emphatically the young should never receive the idea of shame or
debasement in connection with any natural function.

A girl should know that the highest goal of her life is reproduction.
All signs pointing to this should be joyfully welcomed. The indications
of womanhood are a pledge of motherhood. The inherent maternal instinct
has been expressed in fondness for dolls, foreshadowing the joys of
maternity; she gladly learns that maturity gives her the possibility of
its fulfillment. Women must understand that child-bearing is a natural
expression of creative energy.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They and their
physicians have looked upon and treated the function as a disease, and
ignorantly coddled and encouraged the disorders attending it. Maternity
is a divinely appointed mission, - to be a mother is a sacred trust. To
reverence this trust and to come into close communion with the heart of
all life replaces fear and dread with joy and satisfaction. This is an
agreement with nature's plan, a law of spirit. Acknowledgement of and
obedience to this law lessen or entirely overcome the usual sufferings
of pregnancy and of parturition.

Fearing nothing, but hoping and expecting the greatest earthly felicity,
women will cease to dread or to prevent childbearing on account of the
dangers attending it, for through knowledge there is nothing to fear.

For the sake, however, of the best conditions for the development and
birth of the child,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

men and women should intelligently and consciously control the
fecundating power. Every child has a right to a parentage of thoughtful
preparation, to the best that can be given him. In Karezza this right of
the unborn child is fulfilled. He becomes the inheritor of love's
behests and wise designs, which shape and mold his entire life and
character.

It has been taught that to fulfill literally the command to "multiply
and replenish" means that it is God's law to submit to chance
conception. Under other similar circumstances, that which would be
called an accident or incident, is in the procreation of a human being
called a special providence.

In his undeveloped wisdom man may provide protection and education for
his child, but fail to seek an opportunity for that child's conception,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

at a time when its protection and education can be assured.

Man takes circumstances into his own hands and accumulates a fortune for
the child to inherit, but he does not give a thought to the conditions
that bequeath to that child health and wisdom to enjoy and appropriate
such an inheritance.

Men and women devote their best years to education and culture, to
discoveries of ethnology in language, history and art, to the
interpretation of Norse legends and Oriental myths, to the deepest
philosophical and metaphysical questions, but in all this learning and
wisdom not one thought is ever breathed that will give to a child an
inheritance of thoughtful preparation, and chosen conditions.

Men inaugurate kindergartens, schools and colleges for post-natal
training, but in no wise

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

do they institute plans and preparations for any pre-natal culture.

This lack of knowledge and instruction directly deprives children of the
best birthright, and is nowise consistent with the many other measures
inaugurated for the protection and development of human beings. We
should accord to every child the great privilege of a birth that affords
the best advantage possible, and to do this the time and occasion should
be chosen for the purpose.

Karezza affords a certain scientific method of controlling procreation,
one in which there can be no objection on account of health, and one
that appeals to the reason of every thinking person.

Under wise control unwelcome children will be unknown, and the brand of
selfish desires and indulgence will no longer be impressed upon the
infant mind. As future generations understand

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the law of spiritual growth and mastery, their children will be superior
in power and achievement to any heretofore known.

Why should we not accord to a human being even greater intelligence in
its parenthood, its inception and development, than is given to the
propagation of animals? Have we no intelligent protest against the
ordinary chance procreation? Will not love, science and wisdom, combined
with prophetic intelligence for the betterment of the race, devise and
promulgate a theory of scientific reproduction?

O men of science and wisdom! Open your storehouses of knowledge, and
pour it forth to supply this demand. O women with hearts full of love
and intuition! Can you not tenderly lead your sisters to understand a
wise and benign appropriation of their creative powers in which the
welfare of offspring shall have first consideration?

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

Shall not the world cease to be peopled by unloved and undesired
children? Let love be the fulfillment of law, and let us have a race of
men and women that will bless the wisdom, consideration and deliberation
of their progenitors.

Breathe the spirit of progress into the institution of marriage and let
all strive for descendants that shall glorify the centuries to come.
Through thought force creative energy should project itself forward in
time, and give our children's children a birthright of love and an
inheritance more priceless than precious stones. Let us multiply the
Emersons, the Savonarolas, the Catherines of Siena, for they in turn
will bless the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. 7: Free Motherhood](eom09)
