[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ric07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Much of the material on which the statements in the preceding essay are
based is information collected by the University of California's
Ethnological and Archaeological Survey of California since 1901 and as
yet unpublished. Of old accounts dealing with the religion of the
Indians of California, the best is by the Franciscan missionary Boscana,
entitled Chinigchinich and published in the 1846 edition of a volume by
A. Robinson called Life in California. It deals with the Shoshonean
Indians of Mission San Juan Capistrano. An occasional reference of value
may be found in other works, such as Venegas' History of California. The
series of translations and republications of early explorers in
California and the Southwest, published in the Land of Sunshine, later
Out West, beginning in 1899, is also convenient, though naturally it
deals but incidentally with religion. Reid's account of the Indians of
Los Angeles county, published in an early Los Angeles newspaper and
republished by Alexander Taylor in the fourteenth volume of California
Farmer in 1861, is particularly good, though less so on the side of
religion than on most others. Stephen Powers' Tribes of California,
issued in 1877 as the third volume of the Contributions to North
American Ethnology, a government series, deals with the Indians of the
greater part of the state and contains many references to their
religious life. Powers is however often very inexact, and the value of
his work is in its comprehensiveness rather than in its reliability. An
important work is Creation Myths of Primitive America, by Jeremiah
Curtin, which consists of a collection of myths from the Wintun and Yana
of Northern California. The differences of form which these myths show
from most Indian myths that have been published in translation are
apparently chiefly due to the method of their presentation by the
author. Curtin's introduction is very suggestive but exaggerated.
Professor R. B. Dixon has brought out a paper on Maidu Myths, and
another, a great part of which is devoted to religion, on the Northern
Maidu, both in the seventeenth volume of the Bulletin of the American
Museum of Natural History. These two contributions are among the most
careful studies as yet made by a

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

trained observer in any part of the state. The same author has also
published briefer articles on Some Coyote Stories from the Maidu Indians
of California, System and Sequence in Maidu Mythology, and Some Shamans
of Northern California, in recent volumes of the Journal of American
Folk-Lore, and on The Mythology of the Shasta-Achomawi in the American
Anthropologist for 1905. Professor P. E. Goddard has published Life and
Culture of the Hupa, the last portion of which refers to religion; and
Hupa Texts (with both interlinear and current translations), almost all
of which are religious in character. These two papers constitute Volume
I of the University of California Publications in American Archaeology
and Ethnology. In the Journal of American Folk-Lore for 1906 is a paper
by the same author on Lassik Tales. Miss Constance Goddard DuBois has
published a number of valuable papers on the Mission Indians, mainly
concerning the mythology of the Diegueño, in the volumes of the Journal
of American Folk-Lore for 1901, 1904, and 1906. In the American
Anthropologist for 1905 Miss DuBois has an article on the Religious
Ceremonies and Myths of the Mission Indians, while another paper on The
Mythology of the Diegueños appears in the Proceedings of the Thirteenth
International Congress of Americanists. From the present author there
have appeared, in the second and fourth volumes of the series of
American Archaeology and Ethnology, of the University of California
Publications, Types of Indian Culture in California, in part treating of
religion, and Indian Myths from South-Central California; in the Journal
of American Folk-Lore between 1904 and 1906, A Ghost Dance in
California, Wishosk Myths, and Two Myths of the Mission Indians, in the
American Anthropologist for 1902, A Preliminary Sketch of the Mohave
Indians. In the American Anthropologist for 1905 and 1906 the late Major
H. N. Rust has two brief articles on The Obsidian Blades of California
and A Puberty Ceremony of the Mission Indians. The Journal of American
Folk-Lore has contained a rather confused article on The Cosmogony and
Theogony of the Mojave Indians, by Capt. J. G. Bourke, in 1889, and
others by G. W. James, on myths of the Mission Indians of Southern
California, in 1902 and 1903. In the same Journal appeared in 1902 An
Indian Myth from the

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

\[paragraph continues\] San Joaquin Basin by J. W. Hudson, and A
Composite Myth of the Pomo Indians by S. A. Barrett in 1906. Since 1906
the Journal has contained a series of Notes on California Folk-Lore.
