[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ric06)  [Next](ric08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF DIFFERENT TRIBES.

Such are the principal characteristics of the religion of the Indians of
California as a whole, and of the larger ethnographical areas of the
state. It is obvious that with so great a linguistic and political
diversification as existed among these Indians, there must have been
many local modifications of the scheme which has been outlined. The most
conspicuous or best known of these special modifications it is the
purpose of the remainder of this paper to consider. In this review the
groups to be taken up will, for the, sake of greatest convenience of
classification, be the linguistic families. These numerous families are
territorially so restricted, and usually so small in numbers, that they
almost form the equivalent of the tribe in other regions of North
America, that is to say, of a subdivision of the family. Strictly there
are no tribes in the greater part of California. The families or stocks
are the largest linguistic units, usually subdivided into several
dialectic areas, each of which contains a number of small village
communities that are the only units of political or social organization.

In the Northwestern region, in spite of the excessive imitation of this
territory, a distinction must be made between three tribes which occupy
the heart of the region, and show the culture in its most extreme form,
and a fringe of surrounding tribes where the Northwestern culture is
either less developed or subject to greater extraneous influences. The
three more characteristic

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

groups are the Yurok and Karok, small independent linguistic families,
and the Hupa division of the Athabascan family. These alone practice the
Deerskin dance and the "New Year's" or world-making ceremonies. With
them also the peculiar mythological and shamanistic conceptions typical
of the region are found in the purest form. The surrounding tribes are
the Wishosk or Wiyot, perhaps the Chimariko and some of the Shasta, the
Athabascan Tolowa, and the Athabascans southwest of the Hupa.

The Yurok held the Deerskin and Jumping dances at three places along the
Klamath river, and the Jumping dance alone at three points on the coast
to the south. At the mouth of the river an annual spring ceremony to
cause or regulate the ascent of the salmon was made. Until this ceremony
had been made salmon were not eaten. The shamans of the Yurok were
almost all women. Alone of all the tribes in the Northwestern region the
Yurok held no dance or public ceremony on the occasion of a girl's
puberty, Their traditions seem to have the peculiar Northwestern
qualities perhaps more deeply impressed upon them than even those of
their neighbors, the Karok and Hupa, especially in regard to the
underlying conception of a previous race and its function. In accord
with the development of this conception, the mythical heroes of the
Yurok show less approximation to being creators than those of the other
tribes, and animals are mentioned in the mythology surprisingly little.

The Karok, who live immediately upstream from the Yurok on the Klamath,
held the Deerskin and Jumping dances at three places. At each of these
the dances were conducted in connection with a sacred ceremony called
"New Year's" by the whites and "making the world" by the Indians. This
ceremony was performed early in autumn, practically by one man, the
priest who knew the formula and ritual. A similar ceremony was held at a
fourth locality in spring, in connection with the coming of the salmon.
The Karok regard the Deerskin and Jumping dances of the Yurok and Hupa
as the equivalents of these ceremonies of their own, reckoning
altogether ten places in the world at which they are performed.. Karok
mythology is of the Northwestern type, but shows more animal characters
than that of the Yurok.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

The territory held by the Hupa was much less extended than that of their
neighbors, and this was no doubt the occasion of their making only one
Deerskin and Jumping dance in their valley. They held a New Year's
ceremony in autumn which had distinct reference to the acorn crop.
Ceremonials and restrictions connected with menstruation were
considerably developed much more than among the neighboring Yurok. It
was thought dangerous to speak to a dog, as he might be provoked to
answer, which would be a fatal portent.

The religion of the other Athabascans in this part of the state is very
little known, but it is certain that before the southern end of Humboldt
county is reached, in other words, in the Eel river drainage, a totally
distinct set of conceptions and practices is encountered, which are
allied to those of the Central religion.

The Wiyot or Wishosk, who adjoin the Yurok on the south, did not
practice the Jumping dance, other ceremonies, which are very little
known, taking, its place among them. One dance was performed by women
standing up to the hips in water. Shamanism is of more prominence among
them than with their neighbors the Yurok, and men as well as women are
affected with supernatural powers. The sex of the guardian spirit is
usually the opposite of that of the shaman. It is possible that on
account of the almost complete disappearance of their tribal life and of
the communal religious practices, shamanism, which has been retained
with greater vigor among the Wiyot, now appears relatively more
important, as the only remnant of the religious side of their culture.
An elaborate hanging feather head-dress, a belt, a pipe for smoking, and
another for sucking, are the constant paraphernalia of the medicine-man.
Two shamans often support each other in curing disease, one diagnosing,
the other removing the pain. The mythology of the Wiyot resembles that
of the Yurok chiefly through possessing certain specific narrative
episodes in common with it. But the idea of a previous parallel race is
very little developed, and there is a true creator, Above-Old-Man. Most
of the other mythical characters are animals. The whole mythology
therefore is of the Central rather than of the Northwestern type.

With the Yuki of Mendocino county a pure form of the

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

Central culture obtains. The creator is Taikomol, "he who goes alone."
His companion, who supplements his work, especially as regards the
culture of man, is Coyote. There is a Taikomol ceremony in which this
character is impersonated, and which is shamanistic at least to the
degree of being performed to cure an individual of sickness. There is no
trace of the sacred formulae of the Northwest. The shaman, who is
usually a man, receives his power either by dreaming or in a vision in a
desolate place. His power is not sought by him and he possesses definite
guardian spirits. Bear shamans are much feared. All the Yuki possess a
sacred society initiation ceremony, in which performances of magic are
prominent. Among the northern Yuki and neighboring Wailaki this is
called Flint ceremony, and the initiates display magic powers in
handling and swallowing flint points. Among the southern Yuki, as among
the neighboring Pomo and Athabascan Kato, the ceremony relates to ghosts
and is popularly known as Devil dance. The members possess power of
causing sickness and contend against each other much like the shamans of
the Maidu and Yokuts.

One of the most conspicuous features of the religion of the Pomo, who
are south of the Yuki, is their shamanistic fetishes. The medicine-man
possesses a number of objects, stones, parts of animals, and other
articles, which he treasures and with which his power is largely bound
up. Pomo mythology is characterized by the importance of Coyote, who
comes nearer than any other personage to playing the part of creator. In
certain ceremonies there are exhibitions of fire-eating and the clown
occurs.

The Wintun occupy a territory which is of much greater extent from north
to south than from east to west. The northern and southernmost members
of the family therefore differ considerably. In the north there is a
well defined conception of a creator who dwells above, and to whom
Coyote forms an antithesis. In the south, where everything shows the
Wintun and Pomo to have influenced each other considerably, he is
replaced by Coyote. In both regions a world-fire is prominent in the
mythology. In the north the shaman is inaugurated in his career in a
ceremony in which he is assisted by his older colleagues. The southern
Wintun may prove to have been the people who

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

largely developed the dances and ceremonies characteristic of a large
part of the Sacramento valley. They show much in common with their
western neighbors the Pomo, and with the Maidu who adjoin them on the
east and who themselves declare that they have derived the Hesi and
other dances from them.

None of the groups so far discussed, with the possible exception of part
of the Wintun, practiced any distinct mourning ceremony. On the other
hand, all that follow, with the possible doubtful exception of one or
two tribes on the outskirts of the state, held mourning ceremonies as
among the most important of all their religious practices.

The Maidu everywhere possessed a secret society. Their system of dances
becomes less and less developed as one proceeds farther from Wintun
influence. Among the mountain tribes almost all ceremonies were much
less developed than in the Sacramento valley. Shamanistic beliefs and
practices also varied, although there was everywhere a clear idea of
spirits personally acquired and controlled by the medicine-man. Among
the northeastern Maidu every shaman's son invariably became a shaman,
although only through his own acquisition of spirits, which might be
those of his father. In the Sacramento valley spirits were acquired by
involuntary dreaming without much regard to heredity. Puberty ceremonies
for girls were performed both among the northwestern and northeastern
Maidu, perhaps among those of the south also. The mythology of the
several Maidu divisions is much more uniform than their religious
practices. The creator is always opposed and his beneficent work
rendered incomplete by Coyote. It is clear that the mythology of the
Maidu is distinctive and much less under Wintun influence than their
ceremonies.

Among the Miwok the Coyote largely takes the place of the creator. As
among their northern neighbors the Maidu, the mourning ceremony was
important, and the two stocks held at least certain dances in common.
The individual mourning practices and restrictions of the widow were
elaborate and severe. Nothing is as yet known of a secret society, but
as both the southern and northern neighbors of the Miwok performed
initiation ceremonies, it is likely that they also possessed them.

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

Among the Yokuts, who occupied the head of the San Joaquin-Tulare valley
south of the Miwok, there are no traces of the ceremonial system of the
Sacramento valley, which is replaced by public shamanistic ceremonies,
in which contests and exhibitions of magic were conspicuous. The annual
rattlesnake ceremony which has been described is of this type, as is the
Ohowish, a ceremony in which medicine-men from different villages or
districts directed their powers against each other. There seem to have
been also certain animal dances among the Yokuts. Medicine-men usually
acquired their power by dreaming, sometimes by visions while alone. Bear
shamans were known, but were not so much dreaded as farther north. Rain
doctors, who could control the weather, were important. Their power was
bound up with certain stone amulets evidencing a fetishistic
development. Formulae, some with ritualistic accompaniment, were spoken,
but differed from those of the Northwest in being short direct prayers
or supplications instead of mythical narratives. The creators in Yurok
mythology are several animals, the chief of whom is the eagle and among
whom Coyote always finds a place. A favorite mythological personage is
the prairie-falcon, and a myth which has found a particular development
relates the visit of a husband to the world of the dead in pursuit of
his wife.

Very little is known of the ethnology of the coast tribes west of the
Miwok and Yokuts. Among the Southern Costanoan peoples creation myths
resembling those of the Yokuts are found. Coyote is at once a trickster
and a giver of civilization and arts to man. Similar ideas probably
prevailed among the Salinan tribes. As regards the Esselen and Chumash
nothing is known.

Tribes belonging to the great Shoshonean family held almost all the
eastern border of the state as well as a large part of the southern
desert and coast region. The former inhabited the Great Basin, and are
culturally entirely distinct from those of Southern California, of whom
alone is there any considerable knowledge extant as regards religion.
Certain of the northern groups, such as the Mono, lived on the western
or California slope of the Sierra Nevada, in contact with the Yokuts and
Miwok, and partook more largely of the culture and presumably religion
of these people than of the tribes of the Basin.

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

Among the Shoshoneans of Southern California, such as the Gabrielino and
Luiseño, the so-called Mission Indians, mourning ceremonies were more
important than any others, and were held both on the death of a person,
sometime afterwards, and again in a still more public manner at large
gatherings. At some of these ceremonies images representing the dead,
and recalling those of the Maidu far to the north, were burned. One form
of mourning ceremony was the Eagle dance, performed with an eagle that
was slowly killed as the ceremony went on through the night. Many of the
songs of the mourning ceremonies are of mythological content, referring
to the great leader or culture-hero Wiyot. The puberty ceremonial for
girls was elaborate and contained symbolic actions. The initiation of
males was intended for boys, and therefore also took on largely the
character of a puberty ceremony. This character was heightened by the
presence of numerous ordeals. Part of the initiation of boys consisted
of the drinking of jimson-weed. Sand paintings of a very simple type,
evidently influenced by basket patterns, but thoroughly symbolic in
meaning and therefore essentially of the same nature as those of the
Pueblos and Navaho, were made in connection with this initiation. On the
whole religious symbolism was more developed than in Central California
or even among the Yuman tribes to the east, who are geographically so
much nearer the Indians of the Southwest. The shaman acquired his power
by dreaming, and the pipe with which he sucked as well as smoked was of
the utmost importance to him. Paraphernalia were much used by the
shamans, especially boards or wooden swords, which were swallowed and
worn as head-dresses. These, however, were not purely fetishistic
objects, but of potency rather through symbolism and association. The
mythology of the Shoshonean Mission Indians was not essentially
different from that of the other Indians of Southern California.

The Yuman family, which is so much represented in Arizona and Lower
California, occupied the southernmost portion of Southern California.
The Diegueño in the coast mountains and on the coast were culturally
similar to the Shoshonean Luiseño, with whom they are generally included
as the present Mission Indians. Along the Colorado river the physical
and ethnic environment

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

was quite different, but as has already been said, there was much closer
resemblance to the Mission Indians in matters of religion than in almost
any other phase of culture. The principal Yuman tribes in this Colorado
region are the Mohave and the Yuma. The religion of only the former is
known, but the two give every evidence of having been very similar. The
religion of the Shoshonean Paiute or Chemehuevi in the desert adjoining
the Mohave has been largely colored by the influence of the latter. The
most distinctive feature of Mohave religion is the insistence upon
dreaming as the source of everything religious, although this dreaming
must be interpreted rather as a belief in the presence of the individual
in spirit form at the great events of mythic times. All myths that are
at all of sacred character are believed not to be handed down by
tradition, but to be dreamed by each narrator. The shaman receives his
power by dreaming ritualistic myths, which reveal to him his practices.
The lengthy series of songs which are the essence of all ceremonies, and
the mythical narratives connected with them, are also learned in dreams.
It is probably a result of this importance of the dream-world and of the
identification of myth and ceremony, of religious belief and religious
practice, that ritualism is so slightly developed among the Mohave.
Their geographical nearness and intercourse with the Hopi and other
southwestern tribes, among whom ritualism and symbolism find perhaps
their highest development on the continent north of Mexico, would
certainly justify a contrary expectation. Both ceremonial actions and
ceremonial paraphernalia and dress are developed only to a very slight
extent. There is no initiation or society. The singing ceremonies, which
with the exception of a few minor observances such as that for a girl's
puberty, constitute all the Mohave ceremonies other than mourning
ceremonies, are quite numerous, more than twenty being known. Some of
these ceremonies are acknowledged to have been borrowed from other Yuman
tribes, especially the Yuma, and these Indians no doubt have also
acquired Mohave ceremonies. Some of the ceremonies are primarily
mythical in character, others somewhat shamanistic. All are also sung in
mourning. In addition there is a distinctive mourning ceremony held
annually for important men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](ric08)
