[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi06)  [Next](twi08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRL0Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Tune With the Infinite*, by Ralph Waldo Trine, \[1910\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### FULLNESS OF LIFE—BODILY HEALTH AND VIGOR.

God is the Spirit of Infinite Life. If we are partakers of this life,
and have the power of opening ourselves fully to its divine inflow, it
means more, so far as even the physical life is concerned, than we may
at first think. For very clearly, the life of this Infinite Spirit, from
its very nature, can admit of no disease; and if this is true, no
disease can exist in the body where it freely enters, through which it
freely flows.

Let us recognize at the outset that, so far as the physical life is
concerned, *all life is from within out*. There is an immutable law
which says: "As within, so without; cause, effect." In other words, the
thought forces, the various mental states and the emotions, all have in
time their effects upon the physical body.

Some one says: "I hear a great deal said today in regard to the effects
of the mind upon the body, but I don't know as I place very much
confidence in this." Don't you? Some one brings you sudden news. You
grow pale, you

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

tremble, or perhaps you fall into a faint. It is, however, through the
channel of your mind that the news is imparted to you. A friend says
something to you, perhaps at the table, some thing that seems very
unkind. You are hurt by it, as we say. You have been enjoying your
dinner, but from this moment your appetite is gone. But what was said
entered into and affected you through the channel of your mind.

Look! yonder goes a young man, dragging his feet, stumbling over the
slightest obstruction in the path. Why is it? Simply that he is
weak-minded, an idiot. In other words, *a falling state of mind is
productive of a falling condition of the body*. To be sure minded is to
be sure footed. To be uncertain in mind is to be uncertain in step.

Again, a sudden emergency arises. You stand trembling and weak with
fear. Why are you powerless to move? Why do you tremble? And yet you
believe that the mind has but little influence upon the body. You are
for a moment dominated by a fit of anger. For a few hours afterwards you
complain of a violent headache. And still you do not seem to realize
that the thoughts and emotions have an effect upon the body.

A day or two ago, while conversing with a

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

friend, we were speaking of worry. "My father is greatly given to
worry," he said. "Your father is not a healthy man," I said. "He is not
strong, vigorous, robust, and active." I then went on to describe to him
more fully his father's condition and the troubles which afflicted him.
He looked at me in surprise and said, "Why, you do not know my father?"
"No," I replied. "How then can you describe so accurately the disease
with which he is afflicted?" "You have just told me that your father is
greatly given to worry. When you told me this you indicated to me cause.
In describing your father's condition I simply connected with the cause
its own peculiar effects."

Fear and worry have the effect of closing up the channels of the body,
so that the life forces flow in a slow and sluggish manner. Hope and
tranquillity open the channels of the body, so that the life forces go
bounding through it in such a way that disease can rarely get a
foothold.

Not long ago a lady was telling a friend of a serious physical trouble.
My friend happened to know that between this lady and her sister the
most kindly relations did not exist. He listened attentively to her
delineation of her troubles, and then, looking her squarely in the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

face, in a firm but kindly tone said: "Forgive your sister." The woman
looked at him in surprise and said: "I can't forgive my sister." "Very
well, then," he replied, "keep the stiffness of your joints and your
kindred rheumatic troubles."

A few weeks later he saw her again. With a light step she came toward
him and said: "I took your advice. I saw my sister and forgave her. We
have become good friends again, and I don't know how it is, but somehow
or other from the very day, as I remember, that we became reconciled, my
troubles seemed to grow less, and today there is not a trace of the old
difficulties left; and really, my sister and I have become such good
friends that now we can scarcely get along without one another." Again
we have effect following cause.

We have several well-authenticated cases of the following nature: A
mother has been dominated for a few moments by an intense passion of
anger, and the child at her breast has died within an hour's time, so
poisoned became the mother's milk by virtue of the poisonous secretions
of the system while under the domination of this fit of anger. In other
cases it has caused severe illness and convulsions.

The following experiment has been tried a

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

number of times by a well-known scientist: Several men have been put
into a heated room. Each man has been dominated for a moment by a
particular passion of some kind; one by an intense passion of anger, and
others by different other passions. The experimenter has taken a drop of
perspiration from the body of each of these men, and by means of a
careful chemical analysis he has been able to determine the particular
passion by which each has been dominated. Practically the same results
revealed themselves in the chemical analysis of the saliva of each of
the men.

Says a noted American author, an able graduate of one of our greatest
medical schools, and one who has studied deeply into the forces that
build the body and the forces that tear it down: "The mind is the
natural protector of the body. . . . Every thought tends to reproduce
itself, and ghastly mental pictures of disease, sensuality, and vice of
all sorts, produce scrofula and leprosy in the soul, which reproduces
them in the body. Anger changes the chemical properties of the saliva to
a poison dangerous to life. It is well known that sudden and violent
emotions have not only weakened the heart in a few hours, but have
caused death and insanity. It has been discovered by scientists that
there is

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

a chemical difference between that sudden cold exudation of a person
under a deep sense of guilt and the ordinary perspiration; and the state
of the mind can sometimes be determined by chemical analysis of the
perspiration of a criminal, which, when brought into contact with
selenic acid, produces a distinctive pink color. It is well known that
fear has killed thousands of victims; while, on the other hand, *courage
is a great invigorator*.

"Anger in the mother may poison a nursing child. Rarey, the celebrated
horse-tamer, said that an angry word would sometimes raise the pulse of
a horse ten beats in a minute. If this is true of a beast, what can we
say of its power upon human beings, especially upon a child? Strong
mental emotion often causes vomiting. Extreme anger or fright may
produce jaundice. A violent paroxysm of rage has caused apoplexy and
death. Indeed, in more than one instance, a single night of mental agony
has wrecked a life. Grief, long-standing jealousy, constant care and
corroding anxiety sometimes tend to develop insanity. Sick thoughts and
discordant moods are the natural atmosphere of disease, and crime is
engendered and thrives in the miasma of the mind."

From all this we get the great fact we are

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

scientifically demonstrating today,—that the various mental states,
emotions, and passions have their various peculiar effects upon the
body, and each induces in turn, if indulged in to any great extent, its
own peculiar forms of disease, and these in time become chronic.

Just a word or two in regard to their mode of operation. If a person is
dominated for a moment by, say a passion of anger, there is set up in
the physical organism what we might justly term a bodily thunder-storm,
which has the effect of souring, or rather of corroding, the normal,
healthy, and life-giving secretions of the body, so that instead of
performing their natural functions they become poisonous and
destructive. And if this goes on to any great extent, by virtue of their
cumulative influences, they give rise to a particular form of disease,
which in turn becomes chronic. So the emotion opposite to this, that of
kindliness, love, benevolence, good-will, tends to stimulate a healthy,
purifying, and life-giving flow of all the bodily secretions. All the
channels of the body seem free and open; the life forces go bounding
through them. And these very forces, set into a bounding activity, will
in time counteract the poisonous and disease-giving effects of their
opposites.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

A physician goes to see a patient. He gives no medicine this morning.
Yet the very fact of his going makes the patient better. He has carried
with him the spirit of health; he has carried brightness of tone and
disposition; he has carried hope into the Sick chamber; he has left it
there. In fact, the very hope and good cheer he has carried with him has
taken hold of and has had a subtle but powerful influence upon the mind
of the patient; and this mental condition imparted by the physician has
in turn its effects upon the patient's body, and so through the
instrumentality of this mental suggestion the healing goes on.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Know, then, whatever cheerful and serene  
 Supports the mind, supports the body, too.  
 Hence the most vital movement mortals feel  
 Is *hope;* the balm and life-blood of the soul."</span>

</div>

We sometimes hear a person in weak health say to another, "I always feel
better when you come." There is a deep scientific reason underlying the
statement. "The tongue of the wise is health." The power of suggestion
so far as the human mind is concerned is a most wonderful and
interesting field of study. Most wonderful and powerful forces can be
set into operation through this agency. One of the world's most noted
scientists, recognized everywhere as one of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the most eminent anatomists living, tells us that he has proven from
laboratory experiments that the entire human structure can be completely
changed, made over, within a period of less than one year, and that some
portions can be entirely remade within a period of a very few weeks.

"Do you mean to say," I hear it asked, "that the body can be changed
from a diseased to a healthy condition through the operation of the
interior forces?" Most certainly; and more, this is the natural method
of cure. The method that has as its work the application of drugs,
medicines and external agencies is the artificial method. The only thing
that any drug or any medicine can do is to remove obstructions, that the
life forces may have simply a better chance to do their work. *The real
healing process must be performed by the operation of the life forces
within*. A surgeon and physician of world-wide fame recently made to his
medical associates the following declaration: "For generations past the
most important influence that plays upon nutrition, the *life principle*
itself, has remained an unconsidered element in the medical profession,
and the almost exclusive drift of its studies and remedial paraphernalia
has been confined to the action of matter over mind. This has seriously
interfered with the evolutionary

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

tendencies of the doctors themselves, and consequently the psychic
factor in professional life is still in a rudimentary or comparatively
undeveloped state. But the light of the nineteenth century has dawned,
and so the march of mankind in general is taken in the direction of the
hidden forces of nature. Doctors are now compelled to join the ranks of
students in psychology and follow their patrons into the broader field
of mental therapeutics. There is no time for lingering, no time for
skepticism or doubt or hesitation. *He who lingers is lost, for the
entire race is enlisted in the movement*."

I am aware of the fact that in connection with the matter we are now
considering there has been a great deal of foolishness during the past
few years. Many absurd and foolish things have been claimed and done;
but this says nothing against, and it has absolutely nothing to do with
the great underlying laws themselves. The same has been true of the
early days of practically every system of ethics or philosophy or
religion the world has ever known. But as time has passed, these
foolish, absurd things have fallen away, and the great eternal
principles have stood out ever more and more clearly defined.

I know *personally* of many cases where an entire and permanent cure has
been affected, in

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

some within a remarkably short period of time, through the operation of
these forces. Some of them are cases that had been entirely given up by
the regular practice, *materia medica*. We have numerous accounts of
such cases in all times and in connection with all religions. And why
should not the power of effecting such cures exist among us today? The
*power does exist*, and it will be actualized in just the degree that we
recognize the same great laws that were recognized in times past.

One person may do a very great deal in connection with the healing of
another, but this almost invariably implies co-operation on the part of
the one who is thus treated. In the cures that Christ performed he most
always needed the co-operation of the one who appealed to him. His
question almost invariably was, "Dost thou believe?" He thus stimulated
into activity the life-giving forces within the one cured. If one is in
a very weak condition, or if his nervous system is exhausted, or if his
mind through the influence of the disease is not so strong in its
workings, it may be well for him for a time to seek the aid and
co-operation of another. But it would be far better for such a one could
he bring himself to a vital realization of the omnipotence of his own
interior powers.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

One may cure another, but to be *permanently healed* one must do it
himself. In this way another may be most valuable as a teacher by
bringing one to a clear realization of the power of the forces within,
but in every case, in order to have a permanent cure, the work of the
self is necessary. Christ's words were almost invariably,—Go and sin no
more, or, thy sins are forgiven thee, thus pointing out the one eternal
and never-changing fact,—that all disease and its consequent suffering
is the direct or the indirect result of the violation of law, either
consciously or unconsciously, either intentionally or unintentionally.

Suffering is designed to continue only so long as sin continues, sin not
necessarily in the theological, but always in the philosophical sense,
though many times in the sense of both. The moment the violation ceases,
the moment one comes into perfect harmony with the law, the cause of the
suffering ceases; and though there may be residing within the cumulative
effects of past violation, the cause is removed, and consequently there
can be no more effects in the form of additions, and even the diseased
condition that has been induced from past violation will begin to
disappear as soon as the right forces are set into activity.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

There is nothing that will more quickly and more completely bring one
into harmony with the laws under which he lives than this vital
realization of his oneness with the Infinite Spirit, which is the life
of all life. In this there can be no disease, and nothing will more
readily remove from the organism the obstructions that have accumulated
there, or in other words, the disease that resides there, than this full
realization and the complete opening of one's self to this divine
inflow. "I shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live."

The moment a person realizes his oneness with the Infinite Spirit he
recognizes himself as a spiritual being, and no longer as a mere
physical, material being. He then no longer makes the mistake of
regarding himself as body, subject to ills and diseases, but he realizes
the fact that he is spirit, spirit now as much as he ever will or can
be, and that he is the builder and so the master of the body, the house
in which he lives; and the moment he thus recognizes his power as master
he ceases in any way to allow it the mastery over him. He no longer
fears the elements or any of the forces that he now in his ignorance
allows to take hold of and affect the body. The moment he realizes his
own supremacy, instead of fearing them as he did when he was out of

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

harmony with them, he learns to love them. He thus comes into harmony
with them; or rather, he so orders them that they come into harmony with
him. He who formerly was the slave has now become the master. The moment
we come to love a thing it no longer carries harm for us.

There are almost countless numbers today, weak and suffering in body,
who would become strong and healthy if they would only give God an
opportunity to do His work. To such I would say, *Don't shut out the
divine inflow*. Do anything else rather than this. Open yourselves to
it. Invite it. In the degree that you open yourselves to it, its
inflowing tide will course through your bodies a force so vital that the
old obstructions that are dominating them today will be driven out
before it. "My words are life to them that find them, and health to all
their flesh."

There is a trough through which a stream of muddy water has been flowing
for many days. The dirt has gradually collected on its sides and bottom,
and it continues to collect as long as the muddy water flows through it.
Change this. Open the trough to a swift-flowing stream of clear, crystal
water, and in a very little while even the very dirt that has collected
on its sides

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and bottom will be carried away. The trough will be entirely cleansed.
It will present an aspect of beauty and no longer an aspect of ugliness.
And more, the water that now courses through it will be of value; it
will be an agent of refreshment, of health and of strength to those who
use it.

Yes, in just the degree that you realize your oneness with this Infinite
Spirit of Life, and thus actualize your latent possibilities and powers,
you will exchange dis-ease for ease, inharmony for harmony, suffering
and pain for abounding health and strength. And in the degree that you
realize this wholeness, this abounding health and strength in yourself,
will you carry it to all with whom you come in contact; for *we must
remember that health is contagious as well as disease*.

 

I hear it asked, What can be said in a concrete way in regard to the
practical application of these truths, so that one can hold himself in
the enjoyment of perfect bodily health; and more, that one may heal
himself of any existing disease? In reply, let it be said that the chief
thing that can be done is to point out the great underlying principle,
and that each individual must make his own application; one person
cannot well make this for another.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

First let it be said, that the very fact of one's holding the thought of
perfect health sets into operation vital forces which will in time be
more or less productive of the effect,—perfect health. Then speaking
more directly in regard to the great principle itself, from its very
nature, it is clear that more can be accomplished through the process of
realization than through the process of affirmation, though for some
affirmation may be a help, an aid to realization.

In the degree, however, that you come into a vital realization of your
oneness with the Infinite Spirit of Life, whence all life in individual
form has come and is continually coming, and in the degree that through
this realization you open yourself to its divine inflow, do you set into
operation forces that will sooner or later bring even the physical body
into a state of abounding health and strength. For to realize that this
Infinite Spirit of Life can from its very nature admit of no disease,
and to realize that this, then, is the life in you, by realizing your
oneness with it, you can so open yourself to its more abundant entrance
that the diseased bodily conditions—effects—will respond to the
influences of its all-perfect power, this either quickly or more
tardily, depending entirely upon yourself.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

There have been those who have been able to open themselves so fully to
this realization that the healing has been instantaneous and permanent.
The degree of intensity always eliminates in like degree the element of
time. *It must, however, be a calm, quiet, and expectant intensity,
rather than an intensity that is fearing, disturbed, and non-expectant*.
Then there are others who have come to this realization by degrees.

Many will receive great help, and many will be entirely healed by a
practice somewhat after the following nature: With a mind at peace, and
with a heart going out in love to all, go into the quiet of your own
interior self, holding the thought,—I am one with the Infinite Spirit of
Life, the life of my life. I then as spirit, I a spiritual being, can in
my own real nature admit of no disease. I now open my body, in which
disease has gotten a foothold, I open it fully to the inflowing tide of
this Infinite Life, and it now, even now, is pouring in and coursing
through my body, and the healing process is going on. Realize this so
fully that you begin to feel a quickening and a warming glow imparted by
the life forces to the body. Believe the healing process is going on.
Believe it, and hold continually to it. Many people greatly

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

desire a certain thing, but expect something else. They have greater
faith in the power of evil than in the power of good, and hence remain
ill.

If one will give himself to this meditation, realization, treatment, or
whatever term it may seem best to use, at stated times, as often as he
may choose, and then *continually hold himself in the same attitude of
mind*, thus allowing the force to work continually, he will be surprised
how rapidly the body will be exchanging conditions of disease and
inharmony for health and harmony. There is no particular reason,
however, for this surprise, for in this way he is simply allowing the
Omnipotent Power to do the work, which will have to do it ultimately in
any case.

If there is a local difficulty, and one wants to open this particular
portion, in addition to the entire body, to this inflowing life, he can
hold this particular portion in thought, for to fix the thought in this
way upon any particular portion of the body stimulates or increases the
flow of the life forces in that portion. It must always be borne in
mind, however, that whatever healing may be thus accomplished, effects
will not permanently cease until causes have been removed. In other
words, *as long as there is the* 

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

*violation of law, so long disease and suffering will result*.

This realization that we are considering will have an influence not only
where there is a diseased condition of the body, but even where there is
not this condition it will give an increased bodily life, vigor, and
power.

We have had many cases, in all times and in all countries, of healing
through the operation of the interior forces, entirely independent of
external agencies. Various have been the methods, or rather, various
have been the names applied to them, but the great law underlying all is
one and the same, and the same today. When the Master sent his followers
forth, his injunction to them was to heal the sick and the afflicted, as
well as to teach the people. The early church fathers had the power of
healing, in short, it was a part of their work.

And why should we not have the power today, the same as they had it
then? Are the laws at all different? Identically the same. Why, then?
Simply because, with a few rare exceptions here and there, we are unable
to get beyond the mere letter of the law into its real vital spirit and
power. It is the letter that killeth, it is the spirit that giveth life
and power. Every soul who becomes so individualized

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

that he breaks through the mere letter and enters into the real vital
spirit, *will have the power*, as have all who have gone before, and
when he does, he will also be the means of imparting it to others, for
he will be one who will move and who will speak with authority.

We are rapidly finding today, and we shall find even more and more, as
time passes, that practically all disease, with its consequent
suffering, has its origin in perverted mental and emotional states and
conditions. *The mental attitude we take toward anything determines to a
greater or less extent its effects upon us*. If we fear it, or if we
antagonize it, the chances are that it will have detrimental or even
disastrous effects upon us. If we come into harmony with it by quietly
recognizing and inwardly asserting our superiority over it, in the
degree that we are able successfully to do this, in that degree will it
carry with it no injury for us.

No disease can enter into or take hold of our bodies unless it find
therein something corresponding to itself which makes it possible. And
in the same way, no evil or undesirable condition of any kind can come
into our lives unless there is already in them that which invites it and
so makes it possible for it to come. The sooner

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

we begin to look within ourselves for the cause of whatever comes to us,
the better it will be, for so much the sooner will we begin to make
conditions within ourselves such that only good may enter.

We, who from our very natures should be masters of all conditions, by
virtue of our ignorance are mastered by almost numberless conditions of
every description.

Do I fear a draft? There is nothing in the draft—a little purifying
current of God's pure air—to cause me trouble, to bring on a cold,
perhaps an illness. The draft can affect me only in the degree that *I
myself* make it possible, only in the degree that I allow it to affect
me. We must distinguish between causes and mere occasions. The draft is
not cause, nor does it carry cause with it.

Two persons are sitting in the same draft. The one is injuriously
affected by it, the other experiences not even an inconvenience, but he
rather enjoys it. The one is a creature of circumstances; he fears the
draft, cringes before it, continually thinks of the harm it is doing
him. In other words, he opens every avenue for it to enter and take hold
of him, and so it—harmless and beneficent in itself—brings to him
exactly what he has empowered it to bring.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The other
recognizes himself as the master over and not the creature of
circumstances He is not concerned about the draft. He puts himself into
harmony with it, makes himself positive to it, and instead of
experiencing any discomfort, he enjoys it, and in addition to its doing
him a service by bringing the pure fresh air from without to him, it
does him the additional service of hardening him even more to any future
conditions of a like nature. But if the draft was cause, it would bring
the same results to both. The fact that it does not, shows that it is
not a cause, but a condition, and it brings to each, effects which
correspond to the conditions it finds within each.

Poor draft! How many thousands, nay millions of times it is made the
scapegoat by those who are too ignorant or too unfair to look their own
weaknesses square in the face, and who instead of becoming imperial
masters, remain cringing slaves. Think of it, what it means! A man
created in the image of the eternal God, sharer of His life and power,
born to have dominion, fearing, shaking, cringing before a little draft
of pure life-giving air. But scapegoats are convenient things, even if
the only thing they do for us is to aid us in our constant efforts at
self-delusion.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

The best way to disarm a draft of the bad effects it has been accustomed
to bring one, is first to bring about a pure and healthy set of
conditions within, then, to change one's mental attitude toward it.
Recognize the fact that of itself it has no power, it has only the power
you invest it with. Thus you will put yourself into harmony with it, and
will no longer sit in fear of it. Then sit in a draft a few times and
get hardened to it, as every one, by going at it judiciously, can
readily do. " But suppose one is in delicate health, or especially
subject to drafts?" Then be simply a little judicious at first; don't
seek the strongest that can be found, especially if you do not as yet in
your own mind feel equal to it, for if you do not, it signifies that you
still fear it. That supreme regulator of all life, *good common sense*,
must be used here, the same as elsewhere.

If we are born to have dominion, and that we are is demonstrated by the
fact that some have attained to it,—and what one *has* done, soon or
late all *can* do,—then it is not necessary that we live under the
domination of any physical agent. In the degree that we recognize our
own interior powers, then are we rulers and able to dictate; in the
degree that we fail to recognize them, we are slaves, and are dictated
to. We build whatever

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

we find within us; we attract whatever comes to us, and all in
accordance with spiritual law, for all natural law is spiritual law.

The whole of human life is cause and effect; there is no such thing in
it as chance, nor is there even in all the wide universe. Are we not
satisfied with whatever comes into our lives? The thing to do, then, is
not to spend time in railing against the imaginary something we create
and call fate, but to look to the within, and change the causes at work
there, in order that things of a different nature may come, fox there
will come exactly what we cause to come. This is true not only of the
physical body, but of all phases and conditions of life. We invite
whatever comes, and did we not invite it, either consciously or
unconsciously, it could not and it would not come. This may undoubtedly
be hard for some to believe, or even to see, at first. But in the degree
that one candidly and open-mindedly looks at it, and then studies into
the silent, but subtle and, so to speak, omnipotent workings of the
thought forces, and as he traces their effects within him and about him,
it becomes clearly evident, and easy to understand.

And then whatever does come to one depends for its effects entirely upon
his mental attitude

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

toward it. Does this or that occurrence or condition cause you
annoyance? Very well; it causes you annoyance, and so disturbs your
peace merely because you allow it to. You are born to have absolute
control over your own dominion, but if you voluntarily hand over this
power, even if for a little while, to some one or to some thing else,
then you of course, become the creature, the one controlled.

To live undisturbed by passing occurrences you must first find your own
centre. You must then be firm in your own centre, and so rule the world
from within. He who does not himself condition circumstances allows the
process to be reversed, and becomes a conditioned circumstance. Find
your centre and live in it. Surrender it to no person, to no thing. In
the degree that you do this will you find yourself growing stronger and
stronger in it. And how can one find his centre? By realizing his
oneness with the Infinite Power, and by living continually in this
realization.

But if you do not rule from your own centre, if you invest this or that
with the power of bringing you annoyance, or evil, or harm, then take
what it brings, but cease your railings against the eternal goodness and
beneficence of all things.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I swear the earth shall surely be complete  
 To him or her who shall be complete;  
 The earth remains jagged and broken  
 Only to him who remains jagged and broken."</span>

</div>

If the windows of your soul are dirty and streaked, covered with matter
foreign to them, then the world as you look out of them will be to you
dirty and streaked and out of order. Cease your complainings, however;
keep your pessimism, your "poor, unfortunate me" to yourself, lest you
betray the fact that your windows are badly in need of something. But
know that your friend, who keeps his windows clean, that the Eternal Sun
may illumine all within and make visible all without,—know that he lives
in a different world from yours.

Then, go wash your windows, and instead of longing for some other world,
you will discover the wonderful beauties of this world; and if you don't
find transcendent beauties on every hand here, the chances are that you
will never find them anywhere.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The poem hangs on the berry-bush  
  When comes the poet's eye,  
 And the whole street is a masquerade  
  When Shakspeare passes by."</span>

</div>

This same Shakspeare, whose mere passing causes all this commotion, is
the one who put

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

into the mouth of one of his creations the words: "The fault, dear
Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are underlings."
And the great work of his own life is right good evidence that he
realized full well the truth of the facts we are considering. And again
he gave us a great truth in keeping with what we are considering when he
said:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">               "Our doubts are traitors,  
And make us lose the good we oft might win  
By *fearing* to attempt."</span>

</div>

There is probably no agent that brings us more undesirable conditions
than fear. We should live in fear of nothing, nor will we when we come
fully to know ourselves. An old French proverb runs:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Some of your griefs you have cured,  
  And the sharpest you still have survived;  
 But what *torments of pain* you endured  
  From evils that never arrived."</span>

</div>

Fear and lack of faith go hand in hand. The one is born of the other.
Tell me how much one is given to fear, and I will tell you how much he
lacks in faith. Fear is a most expensive guest to entertain, the same as
worry is: so expensive are they that no one can afford to entertain
them. *We invite what we fear, the* 

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

*same as, by a different attitude of mind, we invite and attract the
influences and conditions we desire*. The mind dominated by fear opens
the door for the entrance of the very things, for the actualization of
the very conditions it fears.

"Where are you going?" asked an Eastern pilgrim on meeting the plague
one day. "I am going to Bagdad to kill five thousand people," was the
reply. A few days later the same pilgrim met the plague returning. "You
told me you were going to Bagdad to kill five thousand people," said he,
"but instead, you killed fifty thousand." "No," said the plague. "*I
killed only five thousand*, as I told you I would; *the others died of
fright*."

Fear can paralyze every muscle in the body. Fear affects the flow of the
blood, likewise the normal and healthy action of all the life forces.
Fear can make the body rigid, motionless, and powerless to move.

Not only do we attract to ourselves the things we fear, but we also aid
in attracting to others the conditions we in our own minds hold them in
fear of. This we do in proportion to the strength of our own thought,
and in the degree that they are sensitively organized and so influenced
by our thought, and this, although it be unconscious both on their part
and on ours.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

Children, and especially when very young, are, generally speaking, more
sensitive to their surrounding influences than grown people are. Some
are veritable little sensitive plates, registering the influences about
them, and embodying them as they grow. How careful in their prevailing
mental states then should be those who have them in charge, and
especially how careful should a mother be during the time she is
carrying the child, and when every thought, every mental as well as
emotional state has its direct influence upon the life of the unborn
child. Let parents be careful how they hold a child, either younger or
older, in the thought of fear. This is many times done, unwittingly on
their part, through anxiety, and at times through what might well be
termed over-care, which is fully as bad as under-care.

I know of a number of cases where a child has been so continually held
in the thought of fear lest this or that condition come upon him, that
the very things that were feared have been drawn to him, which probably
otherwise never would have come at all. Many times there has been no
adequate basis for the fear. In case there is a basis, then far wiser is
it to take exactly the opposite attitude, so as to neutralize the force
at work, and then to hold

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the child in the thought of wisdom and strength that it may be able to
meet the condition and master it, instead of being mastered by it.

But a day or two ago a friend was telling me of an experience of his own
life in this connection. At a period when he was having a terrific
struggle with a certain habit, he was so continually held in the thought
of fear by his mother and the young lady to whom he was engaged,—the
engagement to be consummated at the end of a certain period, the time
depending on his proving his mastery,—that he, very sensitively
organized, *continually* felt the depressing and weakening effects of
their negative thoughts. He could always tell exactly how they felt
toward him; he was continually influenced and weakened by their fear, by
their questionings, by their suspicions, all of which had the effect of
lessening the sense of his own power, all of which had an
endeavor-paralyzing influence upon him. And so instead of their
begetting courage and strength in him, they brought him to a still
greater realization of his own weakness and the almost worthless use of
struggle.

Here were two who loved him dearly, and who would have done anything and
everything to help him gain the mastery, but who, ignorant of the
silent, subtle, ever-working and all

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

telling power of the thought forces, instead of imparting to him
courage, instead of adding to his strength, disarmed him of this, and
then added an additional weakness from without. In this way the battle
for him was made harder in a three-fold degree.

Fear and worry and all kindred mental states are too expensive for any
person, man, woman, or child, to entertain or indulge in. Fear paralyzes
healthy action, worry corrodes and pulls down the organism, and will
finally tear it to pieces. Nothing is to be gained by it, but everything
to be lost. Long-continued grief at any loss will do the same. Each
brings its own peculiar type of ailment. An inordinate love of gain, a
close-fisted, hoarding disposition will have kindred effects. Anger,
jealousy, malice, continual fault-finding, lust, has each its own
peculiar corroding, weakening, tearing-down effects.

We shall find that not only are happiness and prosperity concomitants of
righteousness,--living in harmony with the higher laws, but bodily
health as well. The great Hebrew seer enunciated a wonderful chemistry
of life when he said,—"As righteousness tendeth to life, so he that
pursueth evil, pursueth it to his own death." On the other hand, "In the
way of

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

righteousness is life; and in the pathway thereof there is no death."
The time will come when it will be seen that this means far more than
most people *dare even to think as yet*. "It rests with man to say
whether his soul shall be housed in a stately mansion of ever-growing
splendor and beauty, or in a hovel of his own building,—a hovel at last
ruined and abandoned to decay."

The bodies of almost untold numbers, living their one-sided, unbalanced
lives, are every year, through these influences, weakening and falling
by the wayside long before their time. Poor, poor houses! Intended to be
beautiful temples, brought to desolation by their ignorant, reckless,
deluded tenants. Poor houses!

 

A close observer, a careful student of the power of the thought forces,
will soon be able to read in the voice, in the movements, in the
features, the effects registered by the prevailing mental states and
conditions. Or, if he is told the prevailing mental states and
conditions, he can describe the voice, the movements, the features, as
well as describe, in a general way, the peculiar physical ailments their
possessor is heir to.

We are told by good authority that a study of the human body, its
structure, and the length

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

of time it takes it to come to maturity, in comparison with the time it
takes the bodies of various animals and their corresponding longevity,
reveals the fact that its natural age should be nearer a hundred and
twenty years than what we commonly find it today. But think of the
multitudes all about us whose bodies are aging, weakening, breaking, so
that they have to abandon them long before they reach what ought to be a
long period of strong, vigorous middle life.

Then, the natural length of life being thus shortened, it comes to be
what we might term a race belief that this shortened period is the
natural period. And as a consequence many, when they approach a certain
age, seeing that as a rule people at this period of life begin to show
signs of age, to break and go down hill as we say, they, thinking it a
matter of course and that it must be the same with them, by taking this
attitude of mind, many times bring upon themselves these very conditions
long before it is necessary. Subtle and powerful are the influences of
the mind in the building and rebuilding of the body. As we understand
them better it may become the custom for people to look forward with
pleasure to the teens of their second century.

There comes to mind at this moment a friend,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

a lady well on to eighty years of age. An old lady, some, most people in
fact, would call her, especially those who measure age by the number of
the seasons that have come and gone since one's birth. But to call our
friend old, would be to call black white. She is no older than a girl of
twenty-five, and indeed younger, I am glad to say, or I am sorry to say,
depending upon the point of view, than *many* a girl of this age.
Seeking for the good in all people and in all things, she has found the
good everywhere. The brightness of disposition and of voice that is hers
today, that attracts all people to her and that makes her so beautifully
attractive to all people, has characterized her all through life. It has
in turn carried brightness and hope and courage and strength to hundreds
and thousands of people through all these years, and will continue to do
so, apparently, for many years yet to come.

No fears, no worryings, no hatreds, no jealousies, no sorrowings, no
grievings, no sordid graspings after inordinant gain, have found
entrance into her realm of thought. As a consequence her mind, free from
these abnormal states and conditions, has not externalized in her body
the various physical ailments that the great majority of people are
lugging about with

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

them, thinking in their ignorance, that they are natural, and that it is
all in accordance with the "eternal order of things" that they should
have them. Her life has been one of varied experiences, so that all
these things would have found ready entrance into the realm of her mind
and so into her life were she ignorant enough to allow them entrance. On
the contrary she has been wise enough to recognize the fact that in one
kingdom at least she is ruler,—the kingdom of her mind, and that it is
hers to dictate as to what shall and what shall not enter there. She
knows, moreover, that in determining this she is determining all the
conditions of her life. It is indeed a pleasure as well as an
inspiration to see her as she goes here and there, to see her sunny
disposition, her youthful step, to hear her joyous laughter. Indeed and
in truth, Shakspeare knew whereof he spoke when he said,—"It is the mind
that makes the body rich."

With great pleasure I watched her but recently as she was walking along
the street, stopping to have a word and so a part in the lives of a
group of children at play by the wayside, hastening her step a little to
have a word with a washerwoman toting her bundle of clothes, stopping
for a word with a laboring man returning with dinner pail in hand from
his work,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

returning the recognition from the lady in her carriage, and so
imparting some of her own rich life to all with whom she came in
contact.

And as good fortune would have it, while still watching her, an old lady
passed her,—really old, this one, though at least ten or fifteen years
younger, so far as the count by the seasons is concerned. Nevertheless
she was bent in form and apparently stiff in joint and muscle. Silent in
mood, she wore a countenance of long-faced sadness, which was
intensified surely several fold by a black, sombre headgear with an
immense heavy veil still more sombre looking if possible. Her entire
dress was of this description. By this relic-of-barbarism garb, combined
with her own mood and expression, she continually proclaimed to the
world two things,—her own personal sorrows and woes, which by this very
method she kept continually fresh in her mind, and also her lack of
faith in the eternal goodness of things, her lack of faith in the love
and eternal goodness of the Infinite Father.

Wrapped only in the thoughts of her own ailments, and sorrows, and woes,
she received and she gave nothing of joy, nothing of hope, nothing of
courage, nothing of value to those whom she passed or with whom she came
in contact. But on the contrary she suggested to

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

all and helped to intensify in many, those mental states all too
prevalent in our common human life And as she passed our friend one
could notice a slight turn of the head which, coupled with the
expression in her face, seemed to indicate this as her thought,—Your
dress and your conduct are not wholly in keeping with a lady of your
years. Thank God, then, thank God they are not. And may He in His great
goodness and love send us an innumerable company of the same rare type;
and may they live a thousand years to bless mankind, to impart the
life-giving influences of their own royal lives to the numerous ones all
about us who stand so much in need of them.

Would you remain always young, and would you carry all the joyousness
and buoyancy of youth into your maturer years? Then have care concerning
but one thing,—how you live in your thought world. This will determine
all. It was the inspired one, Gautama, the Buddha, who said,—"The mind
is everything; what you think you become." And the same thing had Ruskin
in mind when he said,—"Make yourself nests of pleasant thoughts. None of
us as yet know, for none of us have been taught in early youth, what
fairy palaces we may build of beautiful thought,—*proof against all
adversity*."

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And would you have
in your body all the elasticity, all the strength, all the beauty of
your younger years? Then live these in your mind, making no room for
unclean thought, and you will externalize them in your body. In the
degree that you keep young in thought will you remain young in body. And
you will find that your body will in turn aid your mind, for body helps
mind the same as mind builds body.

You are continually building, and so externalizing in your body
conditions most akin to the thoughts and emotions you entertain. And not
only are you so building from within, but you are also continually
drawing from without, forces of a kindred nature. Your particular kind
of thought connects you with a similar order of thought from without. If
it is bright, hopeful, cheerful, you connect yourself with a current of
thought of this nature. If it is sad, fearing, despondent, then this is
the order of thought you connect yourself with.

If the latter is the order of your thought, men perhaps unconsciously
and by degrees you have been connecting yourself with it. You need to go
back and pick up again a part of your child nature, with its careless
and cheerful type of thought. "The minds of the group of children at
play are unconsciously concentrated in drawing

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

to their bodies a current of playful thought. Place a child by itself,
deprive it of its companions, and soon it will mope and become slow of
movement. It is cut off from that peculiar thought current and is
literally 'out of its element.'

"You need to bring again this current of playful thought to you which
has gradually been turned off. You are too serious or sad, or absorbed
in the serious affairs of life. You can be playful and cheerful without
being puerile or silly. You can carry on business all the better for
being in the playful mood when your mind is off your business. There is
nothing but ill resulting from the permanent mood of sadness and
seriousness,—the mood which by many so long maintained makes it actually
difficult for them to smile at all.

"At eighteen or twenty you commenced growing out of the more playful
tendency of early youth. You took hold of the more serious side of life.
You went into some business. You became more or less involved in its
cares, perplexities and responsibilities. Or, as man or woman, you
entered on some phase of life involving care or trouble. Or you became
absorbed in some game of business which, as you followed it, left no
time for play. Then as you associated

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

with older people you absorbed their old ideas, their mechanical methods
of thinking, their acceptance of errors without question or thought of
question. In all this you opened your mind to a heavy, care-laden
current of thought. Into this you glided unconsciously. That thought is
materialized in your blood and flesh. The seen of your body is a deposit
or crystallization of the unseen element ever flowing to your body from
your mind. Years pass on and you find that your movements are stiff and
cumbrous,—that you can with difficulty climb a tree, as at fourteen.
Your mind has all this time been sending to your body these heavy,
inelastic elements, making your body what now it is. . . .

"Your change for the better must be gradual, and can only be
accomplished by bringing the thought current of an all-round symmetrical
strength to bear on it,—by demanding of the Supreme Power to be led in
the best way, by diverting your mind from the many unhealthy thoughts
which habitually have been flowing into it without your knowing it, to
healthier ones. . . .

"Like the beast, the bodies of those of our race have in the past
weakened and decayed. This will not always be. Increase of spiritual
knowledge will show the cause of such decay,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

and will show, also, how to take advantage of a Law or Force to build us
up, renew ever the body and give it greater and greater strength,
instead of blindly using that Law or Force, as has been done in the
past, to weaken our bodies and finally destroy them."

 

Full, rich, and abounding health is the normal and the natural condition
of life. Anything else is an abnormal condition, and abnormal conditions
as a rule come through perversions. God never created sickness,
suffering, and disease; they are man's own creations. They come through
his violating the laws under which he lives. So used are we to seeing
them that we come gradually, if not to think of them as natural, then to
look upon them as a matter of course.

The time will come when the work of the physician will not be to treat
and attempt to heal the body, but to heal the mind, which in turn will
heal the body. In other words, the true physician will be a teacher; his
work will be to keep people well, instead of attempting to make them
well after sickness and disease comes on; and still beyond this there
will come a time when each will be his own physician. In the degree that
we live in harmony with the higher laws of

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

our being, and so, in the degree that we become better acquainted with
the powers of the mind and spirit, will we give less attention to the
body,—no less *care*, but less *attention*.

The bodies of thousands today would be much better cared for *if* their
owners gave them less thought and attention. As a rule, those who think
least of their bodies enjoy the best health. Many are kept in continual
ill health by the abnormal thought and attention they give them.

Give the body the nourishment, the exercise, the fresh air, the sunlight
it requires, keep it clean, and then think of it as little as possible.
In your thoughts and in your conversation never dwell upon the negative
side. Don't talk of sickness and disease. By talking of these you do
yourself harm and you do harm to those who listen to you. Talk of those
things that will make people the better for listening to you. Thus you
will infect them with health and strength and not with weakness and
disease.

To dwell upon the negative side is always destructive. This is true of
the body the same as it is true of all other things. The following from
one whose thorough training as a physician has been supplemented by
extensive study and observations along the lines of the powers of the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

interior forces, are of special significance and value in this
connection: "We can never gain health by contemplating disease, any more
than we can reach perfection by dwelling upon imperfection, or harmony
through discord. We should keep a high ideal of health and harmony
constantly before the mind. . . .

"Never affirm or repeat about your health what you do not wish to be
true. Do not dwell upon your ailments, nor study your symptoms. Never
allow yourself to be convinced that you are not complete master of
yourself. Stoutly affirm your superiority over bodily ills, and do not
acknowledge yourself the slave of any inferior power. . . . I would
teach children early to build a strong barrier between themselves and
disease, by healthy habits of thought, high thinking, and purity of
life. I would teach them to expel all thoughts of death, all images of
disease, all discordant emotions, like hatred, malice, revenge, envy,
and sensuality, as they would banish a temptation to do evil. I would
teach them that bad food, bad drink, or bad air makes bad blood; that
bad blood makes bad tissue, and bad flesh bad morals. I would teach them
that healthy thoughts are as essential to healthy bodies as pure
thoughts to a clean life. I would teach them to cultivate a strong will

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

power, and to brace themselves against life's enemies in every possible
way. I would teach the sick to have hope, confidence, cheer. Our
thoughts and imaginations are the only real limits to our possibilities.
No man's success or health will ever reach beyond his own confidence; as
a rule, we erect our own barriers.

"Like produces like the universe through. Hatred, envy, malice,
jealousy, and revenge all have children. Every bad thought breeds
others, and each of these goes on and on, ever reproducing itself, until
our world is peopled with their offspring. The true physician and parent
of the future will not medicate the body with drugs so much as the mind
with principles. The coming mother will teach her child to assuage the
fever of anger, hatred, malice, with the great panacea of the
world,—Love. The coming physician will teach the people to cultivate
cheerfulness, good-will, and noble deeds for a health tonic as well as a
heart tonic; and that a merry heart doeth good like a medicine."

 

The health of your body, the same as the health and strength of your
mind, depends upon what you relate yourself with. This Infinite Spirit
of Life, this Source of all Life, can from

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

its very nature, we have found, admit of no weakness, no disease. Come
then into the full, conscious, vital realization of your oneness with
this Infinite Life, open yourself to its more abundant entrance, and
full and ever-renewing. bodily health and strength will be yours.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And good may ever conquer ill,  
  Health walk where pain has trod;  
 'As a man thinketh, so is he,'  
  Rise, then, and think with God."</span>

</div>

The whole matter may then be summed up in the one sentence, "God is well
and so are you." You must awaken to the knowledge of your *real being*.
When this awakening comes, you will have, and you will see that you
have, the power to determine what conditions are externalized in your
body. You must recognize, you must realize yourself, as one with
Infinite Spirit. God's will is then your will; your will is God's will,
and "with God all things are possible." When we are able to do away with
all sense of separateness by living continually in the realization of
this oneness, not only will our bodily ills and weaknesses vanish, but
all limitations along all lines.

Then "delight thyself in the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of
thine heart."

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then will you feel
like crying all the day long, "The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant
places; yea, I have a goodly heritage." Drop out of mind your belief in
good things and good events coming to you in the future. Come now into
the real life, and coming, appropriate and actualize them now. Remember
that only the best is good enough for one with a heritage so royal as
yours.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"We buy ashes for bread;  
 We buy diluted wine;  
 Give me the true,—  
 Whose ample leaves and tendrils curled  
 Among the silver hills of heaven,  
 Draw everlasting dew."</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Secret, Power, and Effects of Love](twi08)
