[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi11)  [Next](twi13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRL0Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Tune With the Infinite*, by Ralph Waldo Trine, \[1910\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

### PLENTY OF ALL THINGS—THE LAW OF PROSPERITY.

This is the Spirit of Infinite Plenty, the Power that has brought, that
is continually bringing, all things into expression in material form. He
who lives in the realization of his oneness with this Infinite Power
becomes a magnet to attract to himself a continual supply of whatsoever
things he desires.

If one hold himself in the thought of poverty, he will be poor, and the
chances are that he will remain in poverty. If he hold himself, whatever
present conditions may be, continually in the thought of prosperity, he
sets into operation forces that will sooner or later bring him into
prosperous conditions. The law of attraction works unceasingly
throughout the universe, and the one great and never changing fact in
connection with it is, as we have found, that like attracts like. If we
are one with this Infinite Power, this source of all things, then in the
degree that we live in the realization of this oneness, in that degree
do we actualize in ourselves a power that will bring to us an abundance

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

of all things that it is desirable for us to have. In this way we come
into possession of a power whereby we can actualize at all times those
conditions that we desire.

As all truth exists *now*, and awaits simply our perception of it, so
all things necessary for present needs exist *now*, and await simply the
power in us to appropriate them. God holds all things in His hands. His
constant word is, My child, acknowledge me in all your ways, and in the
degree that you do this, in the degree that you live this, then what is
mine is yours. Jehovah-jireh,—the Lord will provide. "He giveth to all
men liberally and upbraideth not." He giveth liberally to all men who
put themselves in the right attitude to receive from Him. He forces no
good things upon any one.

The old and somewhat prevalent idea of godliness and poverty has
absolutely no basis for its existence, and the sooner we get away from
it the better. It had its birth in the same way that the idea of
asceticism came into existence, when the idea prevailed that there was
necessarily a warfare between the flesh and the spirit. It had its
origin therefore in the minds of those who had a distorted, a one-sided
view of life. True godliness is in a sense the same as true wisdom. The
one who is truly wise, and who

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

uses the forces and powers with which he is endowed, to him the great
universe always opens her treasure house. The supply is always equal to
the demand,—equal to the demand when the demand is rightly, wisely made.
When one comes into the realization of these higher laws, then the fear
of want ceases to tyrannize over him.

Are you out of a situation? Let the fear that you will not get another
take hold of and *dominate* you, and the chances are that it may be a
long time before you will get another, or the one that you do get may be
a very poor one indeed. Whatever the circumstances, you must realize
that you have within you forces and powers that you can set into
operation that will triumph over any and all apparent or temporary
losses. Set these forces into operation and you will then be placing a
magnet that will draw to you a situation that may be far better than the
one you have lost, and the time may soon come when you will be even
thankful that you lost the old one.

Recognize, working in and through you, the same Infinite Power that
creates and governs all things in the universe, the same Infinite Power
that governs the endless systems of worlds in space. Send out your
thought,—thought is a

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

force, and it has occult power of unknown proportions when rightly used
and wisely directed,—send out your thought that the right situation or
the right work will come to you at the right time, in the right way, and
that you will recognize it when it comes. Hold to this thought, never
allow it to weaken, hold to it, and continually water it with firm
expectation. You in this way put your advertisement into a psychical, a
spiritual newspaper, a paper that has not a limited circulation, but one
that will make its way not only to the utmost bounds of the earth, but
of the very universe itself. It is an advertisement, moreover, which if
rightly placed on your part, will be far more effective than any
advertisement you could possibly put into any printed sheet, no matter
what claims are made in regard to its being "the great advertising
medium." In the degree that you come into this realization and live in
harmony with the higher laws and forces, in that degree will you be able
to do this effectively.

If you wish to look through the "want" columns of the newspapers, then
do it not in the ordinary way. Put the higher forces into operation and
thus place it on a higher basis. As you take up the paper, take this
attitude of mind: If there is here an advertisement that

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

it will be well for me to reply to, the moment I come to it I will
recognize it. Affirm this, believe it, expect it. If you do this in full
faith you will somehow feel the intuition the moment you come to the
right one, and this intuition will be nothing more nor less than your
own soul speaking to you. When it speaks then act at once.

If you get the situation and it does not prove to be exactly what you
want, if you feel that you are capable of filling a better one, then the
moment you enter upon it take the attitude of mind that this situation
is the stepping-stone that will lead you to one that will be still
better. Hold this thought steadily, affirm it, believe it, expect it,
and all the time be faithful, *absolutely faithful* to the situation in
which you are at present placed. If you are *not* faithful to it then
the chances are that it will not be the stepping-stone to something
better, but to something poorer. If you are faithful to it, the time may
soon come when you will be glad and thankful, when you will rejoice,
that you lost your old position.

This is the law of prosperity: When apparent adversity comes, be not
cast down by it, but make the best of it, and always look forward for
better things, for conditions more prosperous.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To hold yourself
in this attitude of mind is to set into operation subtle, silent, and
irresistible forces that sooner or later will actualize in material form
that which is today merely an idea. But ideas have occult power, and
ideas, when rightly planted and rightly tended, are the seeds that
actualize material conditions.

Never give a moment to complaint, but utilize the time that would
otherwise be spent in this way in looking forward and actualizing the
conditions you desire. Suggest prosperity to yourself. See yourself in a
prosperous condition. Affirm that you will before long be in a
prosperous condition. Affirm it calmly and quietly, but strongly and
confidently. Believe it, believe it absolutely. Expect it,—keep it
continually watered with expectation. You thus make yourself a magnet to
attract the things that you desire. Don't be afraid to suggest, to
affirm these things, for by so doing you put forth an ideal which will
begin to clothe itself in material form. In this way you are utilizing
agents among the most subtle and powerful in the universe. If you are
particularly desirous for anything that you feel it is good and right
for you to have, something that will broaden your life or that will
increase your usefulness to others, simply hold the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

thought that at the right time, in the right way, and through the right
instrumentality, there will come to you or there will open up for you
the way whereby you can attain what you desire.

I know of a young lady who a short time ago wanted some money very
badly. She wanted it for a good purpose; she saw no reason why she
shouldn't have it. She is one who has come into an understanding of the
power of the interior forces. She took and held herself in the attitude
of mind we have just pointed out. In the morning she entered into the
silence for a few moments. In this way she brought herself into a more
complete harmony with the higher powers. Before the day closed a
gentleman called, a member of a family with which she was acquainted. He
asked her if she would do for the family some work that they wanted
done. She was a little surprised that they should ask her to do this
particular kind of work, but she said to herself, "Here is a call. I
will respond and see what it will lead to." She undertook the work. *She
did it well*. When she had completed it there was put into her hands an
amount of money far beyond what she had expected. She felt that it was
an amount too large for the work she had done. She protested.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They replied, "No;
you have done us a service that transcends in value the amount we offer
to pay you." The sum thus received was more than sufficient for the work
she wished to accomplish.

This is but one of many instances in connection with the wise and
effective use of the higher powers. It also carries a lesson,—Don't fold
your hands and expect to see things drop into your lap, but set into
operation the higher forces and then take hold of the first thing that
offers itself. Do what your hands find to do, *and do it well*. If this
work is not thoroughly satisfactory to you, then affirm, believe, and
expect that it is the agency that will lead you to something better.
"The basis for attracting the best of all the world can give to you is
to first surround, own, and live in these things in mind, or what is
falsely called imagination. All so-called imaginings are realities and
forces of unseen element. Live in mind in a palace and gradually
palatial surroundings will gravitate to you. But so living is *not*
pining, or longing, or complainingly wishing. It is when you are 'down
in the world,' calmly and persistently seeing yourself as up. It is when
you are now compelled to eat from a tin plate, regarding that tin plate
as only the certain step to one of

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

silver. It is *not* envying and growling at other people who have silver
plate. That growling is just so much capital stock taken from the bank
account of mental force."

A friend who knows the power of the interior forces, and whose life is
guided in every detail by them, has given a suggestion in this form:
When you are in the arms of the bear, even though he is hugging you,
look him in the face and laugh, but all the time keep your eye on the
bull. If you allow all of your attention to be given to the work of the
bear, the bull may get entirely out of your sight. In other words, if
you yield to adversity the chances are that it will master you, but if
you recognize in yourself the power of mastery over conditions then
adversity will yield to you, and will be changed into prosperity. If
when it comes you calmly and quietly recognize it, and use the time that
might otherwise be spent in regrets, and fears, and forebodings, in
setting into operation the powerful forces within you, it will soon take
its leave.

Faith, absolute dogmatic faith, is the only law of true success. When we
recognize the fact that a man carries his success or his failure with
him, and that it does not depend upon outside conditions, we will come
into the possession

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

of powers that will quickly change outside conditions into agencies that
make for success. When we come into this higher realization and bring
our lives into complete harmony with the higher laws, we will then be
able so to focus and direct the awakened interior forces, that they will
go out and return laden with that for which they are sent. We will then
be great enough to attract success, and it will not always be apparently
just a little ways ahead. We can then establish in ourselves a centre so
strong that instead of running hither and thither for this or that, we
can stay at home and draw to us the conditions we desire. If we firmly
establish and hold to this centre, things will seem continually to come
our way.

The majority of people of the modern world are looking for things that
are practical and that can be utilized in every-day life. The more
carefully we examine into the laws underlying the great truths we are
considering, the more we will find that they are not only eminently
practical, but in a sense, and in the deepest and truest sense, they are
the only practical things there are.

There are people who continually pride themselves upon being exceedingly
"practical;" but

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

many times those who of themselves think nothing about this are the most
practical people the world knows. And, on the other hand, those who take
great pride in speaking of their own practicality are many times the
least practical. Or again, in some ways they may be practical, but so
far as life in its totality is concerned, they are absurdly impractical.

What profit, for example, can there be for the man who, materially
speaking, though he has gained the whole world, has never yet become
acquainted with his own soul? There are multitudes of men all about us
who are entirely missing the real life, men who have not learned even
the a, b, c of true living. Slaves they are, abject slaves to their
temporary material accumulations. Men who thinking they possess their
wealth are on the contrary completely possessed by it. Men whose lives
are comparatively barren in service to those about them and to the world
at large. Men who when they can no longer hold the body,—the agency by
means of which they are related to the material world,—will go out poor
indeed, pitiably poor. Unable to take even the smallest particle of
their accumulations with them, they will enter upon the other form of
life naked and destitute.

The kindly deeds, the developed traits of

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

character, the realized powers of the soul, the real riches of the inner
life and unfoldment, all those things that become our real and eternal
possessions, have been given no place in their lives, and so of the real
things of life they are destitute. Nay, many times worse than destitute.
We must not suppose that habits once formed are any more easily broken
off in the other form of life than they are in this. If one voluntarily
grows a certain mania here, we must not suppose that the mere dropping
of the body makes all conditions perfect. All is law, all is cause and
effect. As we sow, so shall we also reap, not only in this life but in
all lives.

He who is enslaved with the sole desire for material possessions here
will continue to be enslaved even after he can no longer retain his
body. Then, moreover, he will have not even the means of gratifying his
desires. Dominated by this habit, he will be unable to set his
affections, for a time at least, upon other things, and the desire,
without the means of gratifying it will be doubly torturing to him.
Perchance this torture may be increased by his seeing the accumulations
he thought were his now being scattered and wasted by spendthrifts. He
wills his property, as we say, to others, but he can have no word as to
its use.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

How foolish, then, for us to think that any material possessions *are
ours*. How absurd, for example, for one to fence off a number of acres
of God's earth and say they are *his*. Nothing is ours that we cannot
retain. The things that come into our hands come not for the purpose of
being possessed, as we say, much less for the purpose of being hoarded.
They come into our hands to be used, to be wisely used. We are stewards
merely, and as stewards we shall be held accountable for the way we use
whatever is entrusted to us. That great law of compensation that runs
through all life is wonderfully exact in its workings, although we may
not always fully comprehend it, or even recognize it when it operates in
connection with ourselves.

The one who has come into the realization of the higher life no longer
has a desire for the accumulation of enormous wealth, any more than he
has a desire for any other *excess*. In the degree that he comes into
the recognition of the fact that he is wealthy within, external wealth
becomes less important in his estimation. When he comes into the
realization of the fact that there is a source within from which he can
put forth a power to call to him and actualize in his hands at any time
a sufficient supply for all his needs, he no longer burdens himself with
vast material

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

accumulations that require his constant care and attention, and thus
take his time and his thought from the real things of life. In other
words, he first finds the *kingdom*, and he realizes that when he has
found this, all other things follow in full measure.

It is as hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, said
the Master,—he who having nothing had everything,—as it is for a camel
to pass through the eye of a needle. In other words, if a man give all
his time to the accumulation, the hoarding of outward material
possessions far beyond what he can possibly ever use, what time has he
for the finding of that wonderful kingdom, which when found, brings all
else with it. Which is better, to have millions of dollars, and to have
the burden of taking care of it all,—for the one always involves the
other,—or to come into the knowledge of such laws and forces that every
need will be supplied in good time, to know that no good thing shall be
withheld, to know that we have it in our power to make the supply always
equal to the demand?

The one who enters into the realm of this higher knowledge, never cares
to bring upon himself the species of insanity that has such a firm hold
upon so many in the world today.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He avoids it as he
would avoid any loathsome disease of the body. When we come into the
realization of the higher powers, we will then be able to give more
attention to the real life, instead of giving so much to the piling up
of vast possessions that hamper rather than help it. It is the medium
ground that brings the true solution here, the same as it is in all
phases of life.

Wealth beyond a certain amount cannot be used, and when it cannot be
used it then becomes a hindrance rather than an aid, a curse rather than
a blessing. All about us are persons with lives now stunted and dwarfed
who could make them rich and beautiful, filled with a perennial joy, if
they would begin wisely to use that which they have spent the greater
portion of their lives in accumulating.

The man who accumulates during his entire life, and who leaves even all
when he goes out for "benevolent purposes," comes far short of the ideal
life. It is but a poor excuse of a life. It is not especially
commendable in me to give a pair of old, worn-out shoes that I shall
never use again to another who is in reed of shoes. But it is
commendable, if indeed doing anything we ought to do can be spoken of as
being commendable, it is commendable for

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

me to give a good pair of strong shoes to the man who in the midst of a
severe winter is practically shoeless, the man who is exerting every
effort to earn an honest living and thereby take care of his family's
needs. And if in giving the shoes I also give myself, he then has a
double gift, and I a double blessing.

There is no wiser use that those who have great accumulations can make
of them than wisely to put them into life, into character, *day by day
while they live*. In this way their lives will be continually enriched
and increased. The time will come when it will be regarded as a disgrace
for a man to die and leave vast accumulations behind him.

Many a person is living in a palace today who in the real life is poorer
than many a one who has not even a roof to cover him. A man may own and
live in a palace, but the palace for him may be a poorhouse still.

Moth and rust are nature's wise provisions—God's methods—for
disintegrating and scattering, in this way getting ready for use in new
forms, that which is hoarded and consequently serving no use. There is
also a great law continually operating whose effects are to dwarf and
deaden the powers of true enjoyment, as well as all the higher faculties
of the one who hoards.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

Multitudes of people are continually keeping away from them higher and
better things because they are forever clinging on to the old. If they
would use and pass on the old, room would be made for new things to
come. Hoarding always brings loss in one form or another. Using, wisely
using, brings an ever renewing gain.

If the tree should as ignorantly and as greedily hold on to this year's
leaves when they have served their purpose, where would be the full and
beautiful new life that will be put forth in the spring? Gradual decay
and finally death would be the result. If the tree is already dead, then
it may perhaps be well enough for it to cling on to the old, for no new
leaves will come. But as long as the life in the tree is active, it is
*necessary* that it rid itself of the old ones, that room may be made
for the new.

Opulence is the law of the universe, an abundant supply for every need
if nothing is put in the way of its coming. The natural and the normal
life for us is this,—To have such a fullness of life and power by living
so continually in the realization of our oneness with the Infinite Life
and Power that we find ourselves in the constant possession of an
abundant sup ply of all things needed.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

Then not by hoarding but by wisely using and ridding ourselves of things
as they come, an ever renewing supply will be ours, a supply far better
adapted to present needs than the old could possibly be. In this way we
not only come into possession of the richest treasures of the Infinite
Good ourselves, but we also become open channels through which they can
flow to others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. How Men Have Become Prophets, Seers, Sages, and
Saviours](twi13)
