[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRL0Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Tune With the Infinite*, by Ralph Waldo Trine, \[1910\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

### ENTERING NOW INTO THE REALIZATION OF THE HIGHEST RICHES.

I hear the question, What can be said in a concrete way in regard to the
method of coming into this realization? The facts underlying it are,
indeed, most beautiful and true, but how can we actualize in ourselves
the realization that carries with it such wonderful results?

The method is not difficult if we do not of ourselves make it difficult.
The principal word to be used is the word,—Open. Simply to open your
mind and heart to this divine inflow which is waiting only for the
opening of the gate, that it may enter. It is like opening the gate of
the trough which conducts the water from the reservoir above into the
field below. The water, by virtue of its very nature, will rush in and
irrigate the field if the gate is but opened. As to the realization of
our oneness with this Infinite Life and Power, after seeing, as I think
we have clearly seen by this time, the relations it bears to us and we
to it, the chief thing to be said is simply,—Realize your oneness with
it. The

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

open mind and heart whereby one is brought into the receptive attitude
is the first thing necessary. Then the earnest, sincere desire.

It may be an aid at first to take yourself for a few moments each day
into the quiet, into the silence, where you will not be agitated by the
disturbances that enter in through the avenues of the physical senses.
There in the quiet alone with God, put yourself into the receptive
attitude. Calmly, quietly, and expectantly desire that this realization
break in upon and take possession of your soul. As it breaks in upon and
takes possession of the soul, it will manifest itself to your mind, and
from this you will feel its manifestations in every part of your body.
Then in the degree that you open yourself to it you will feel a quiet,
peaceful, illuminating power that will harmonize body, soul, and mind,
and that will then harmonize these with all the world. You are now on
the mountain top, and the voice of God is speaking to you. *Then, as you
descend, carry this realization with you*. Live in it, waking, working,
thinking, walking, sleeping. In this way, although you may not be
continually on the mountain top, you will nevertheless be continually
living in the realization of all the beauty, and inspiration, and power
you have felt there.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

Moreover, the time will come when in the busy office or on the noisy
street you can enter into the silence by simply drawing the mantle of
your own thoughts about you and realizing that there and everywhere the
Spirit of Infinite Life, Love, Wisdom, Peace, Power, and Plenty is
guiding, keeping, protecting, leading you. This is the spirit of
continual prayer. This it is to pray without ceasing. This it is to know
and to walk with God. *This it is to find the Christ within*. This is
the new birth, the second birth. First that which is natural, then that
which is spiritual. It is thus that the old man Adam is put off and the
new man Christ is put on. This it is to be saved unto life eternal,
whatever one's form of belief or faith may be; for it is life eternal to
know God. "The Sweet By and By" will be a song of the past. We will
create a new song—"The Beautiful Eternal Now."

This is the realization that you and I can come into this very day, this
very hour, this very minute, if we desire and if we will it. And if now
we merely set our faces in the right direction, it is then but a matter
of time until we come into the full splendors of this complete
realization. To set one's face in the direction of the mountain and then
simply to journey on,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

whether rapidly or more slowly, will bring him to it. But unless one set
his face in the right direction and make the start, he will not reach
it. It was Goethe who said:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Are you in earnest? Seize this very minute:  
 What you can do, or dream you can, begin it;  
 Boldness has genius, power, and magic in it.  
 Only engage and then the mind grows heated;  
 Begin and then the work will be completed."</span>

</div>

Said the young man, Gautama Siddhartha, I have awakened to the truth and
I am resolved to accomplish my purpose,—Verily I shall become a Buddha.
It was this that brought him into the life of the Enlightened One, and
so into the realization of Nirvana right here in this life. That this
same realization and life is within the possibilities of all here and
now was his teaching. It was this that has made him the Light Bearer to
millions of people.

Said the young man, Jesus, Know ye not that I must be about my Father's
business? Making this the one great purpose of his life he came into the
full and complete realization,—I and the Father are one. He thus came
into the full realization of the Kingdom of Heaven right here in this
life. That all could come into this same realization and life here and
now was,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

his teaching. It was this that has made him the Light Bearer to millions
of people.

And so far as practical things are concerned, we may hunt the wide
universe through and we shall find that there is no injunction more
practical than, Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness
and all other things shall be added unto you. And in the light of what
has gone before, I think there is no one who is open to truth and honest
with himself who will fail to grasp the underlying reason and see the
great laws upon which it is based.

Personally I know lives that have so fully entered into the kingdom
through the realization of their oneness with the Infinite Life and t
Trough the opening of themselves so fully to its divine guidance, that
they are most wonderful concrete examples of the reality of this great
and all-important truth. They are people whose lives are in this way
guided not only in a general way, but literally in every detail. They
simply live in the realization of their oneness with this Infinite
Power, continually in harmony with it, and so continually in the
realization of the kingdom of heaven. An abundance of all things is
theirs. They are never at a loss for anything. The supply seems always
equal to the demand. They never seem at a loss in regard

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

to what to do or how to do it. Their lives are care-less lives. They are
lives free from care because they are continually conscious of the fact
that the higher powers are doing the guiding, and they are relieved of
the responsibility. To enter into detail in connection with some of
these lives, and particularly with two or three that come to my mind at
this moment, would reveal facts that no doubt to some would seem almost
incredible if not miraculous. But let us remember that what is possible
for one life to realize is possible for all. This is indeed the natural
and the normal life, that which will be the every-day life of every one
who comes into and who lives in this higher realization and so in
harmony with the higher laws. This is simply getting into the current of
that divine sequence running throughout the universe; and when once in
it, life then ceases to be a plodding and moves along day after day much
as the tides flow, much as the planets move in their courses, much as
the seasons come and go.

All the frictions, all the uncertainties, all the ills, the sufferings,
the fears, the forebodings, the perplexities of life come to us because
we are out of harmony with the divine order of things. They will
continue to come as long as we so live. Rowing against the tide is hard

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

and uncertain. To go with the tide and thus to take advantage of the
working of a great natural force is safe and easy. To come into the
conscious, vital realization of our oneness with the Infinite Life and
Power is to come into the current of this divine sequence. Coming thus
into harmony with the Infinite, brings us in turn into harmony with all
about us, into harmony with the life of the heavens, into harmony with
all the universe. And above all, it brings us into harmony with
ourselves, so that body, soul, and mind become perfectly harmonized, and
when this is so, life becomes full and complete.

The sense life then no longer masters and enslaves us. The physical is
subordinated to and ruled by the mental; this in turn is subordinated to
and continually illumined by the spiritual. Life is then no longer the
poor, one-sided thing it is in so many cases; but the threefold, the
all-round life with all its beauties and ever increasing joys and powers
is entered upon. Thus it is that we are brought to realize that the
middle path is the great solution of life; neither asceticism on the one
hand nor license and perverted use on the other. Everything is for use,
but all must be wisely used in order to be fully enjoyed.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

As we live in these higher realizations the senses are not ignored but
are ever more fully perfected. As the body becomes less gross and heavy,
finer in its texture and form, all the senses become finer, so that
powers we do not now realize as belonging to us gradually develop. Thus
we come, in a perfectly natural and normal way, into the super-conscious
realms whereby we make it possible for the higher laws and truths to be
revealed to us. As we enter into these realms we are then not among
those who give their time in speculating as to whether this one or that
one had the insight and the powers attributed to him, but we are able to
know for ourselves. Neither are we among those who attempt to lead the
people upon the hearsay of some one else, but we know whereof we speak,
and only thus can we speak with authority. There are many things that we
cannot know until by living the life we bring ourselves into that state
where it is possible for them to be revealed to us. "If any man will do
His will, he shall know of the doctrine." It was Plotinus who said, The
mind that wishes to behold God must itself become God. As we thus make
it possible for these higher laws and truths to be revealed to us, we
will in turn become enlightened ones, channels through which they may be
revealed to others.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

When one is fully alive to the possibilities that come with this higher
awakening, as he goes here and there, as he mingles with his fellow-men,
he imparts to all an inspiration that kindles in them a feeling of power
kindred to his own. We are all continually giving out influences similar
to those that are playing in our own lives. We do this in the same way
that each flower emits its own peculiar odor. The rose breathes out its
fragrance upon the air and all who come near it are refreshed and
inspired by this emanation from the soul of the rose. A poisonous weed
sends out its obnoxious odor; it is neither refreshing nor inspiring in
its effects, and if one remain near it long he may be so unpleasantly
affected as to be made even ill by it.

The higher the life the more inspiring and helpful are the emanations
that it is continually sending out. The lower the life the more harmful
is the influence it continually sends out to all who come in contact
with it. Each one is continually radiating an atmosphere of one kind or
the other.

We are told by the mariners who sail on the Indian Seas, that many times
they are able to tell their approach to certain islands long before they
can see them by the sweet fragrance of the sandalwood that is wafted far
out upon the

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

deep. Do you not see how it would serve to have such a soul playing
through such a body that as you go here and there a subtle, silent force
goes out from you that all feel and are influenced by; so that you carry
with you an inspiration and continually shed a benediction wherever you
go; so that your friends and all people will say,—His coming brings
peace and joy into our homes, welcome his coming; so that as you pass
along the street, tired, and weary, and even sin-sick men and women will
feel a certain divine touch that will awaken new desires and a new life
in them; that will make the very horse as you pass him turn his head
with a strange, half-human, longing look? Such are the subtle powers of
the human soul when it makes itself translucent to the Divine. To know
that such a life is within our living here and now is enough to make one
burst forth with songs of joy. And when the life itself is entered upon,
the sentiment of at least one song will be:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Oh! I stand in the Great Forever,  
  All things to me are divine;  
 I eat of the heavenly manna,  
  I drink of the heavenly wine.

"In the gleam of the shining rainbow  
  The Father's Love I behold,  
 As I gaze on its radiant blending  
  Of crimson and blue and gold.

</div>

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"In all the bright birds that are singing,  
  In all the fair flowers that bloom,  
 Whose welcome aromas are bringing  
  Their blessings of sweet perfume;

"In the glorious tint of the morning,  
  In the gorgeous sheen of the night,  
 Oh! my soul is lost in rapture,  
  My senses are lost in sight."

</div>

As one comes into and lives continually in the full, conscious
realization of his oneness with the Infinite Life and Power, then all
else follows. This it is that brings the realization of such splendors,
and beauties, and joys as a life that is thus related with the Infinite
Power alone can know. This it is to come into the realization of
heaven's richest treasures while walking the earth. This it is to bring
heaven down to earth, or rather to bring earth up to heaven. This it is
to exchange weakness and impotence for strength; sorrows and sighings
for joy; fears and forebodings for faith; longings for realizations This
it is to come into fullness of peace, power, and plenty. This it is to
be in tune with the Infinite.

 

 

 

 
