[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/co1007)  [GNT](../gnt/co1007) 
[Vul](../vul/co1007)   
  
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1006)  [Next](co1008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: 1 Corinthians Chapter 7

<span id="001">1</span> Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto
me: It is good for a man not to touch a woman.  

<span id="002">2</span> Nevertheless, to avoid
[fornication](../ebd/ebd137.htm#008), let every man have his own wife,
and let every woman have her own husband.  

<span id="003">3</span> Let the husband render unto the wife due
benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband.  

<span id="004">4</span> The wife hath not power of her own body, but the
husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body,
but the wife.  

<span id="005">5</span> Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with
consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and
[prayer](../ebd/ebd300.htm#000); and come together again, that
[Satan](../ebd/ebd323.htm#000) tempt you not for your incontinency.  

<span id="006">6</span> But I speak this by permission, and not of
commandment.  

<span id="007">7</span> For I would that all men were even as I myself.
But every man hath his proper [gift](../ebd/ebd148.htm#005) of God, one
after this manner, and another after that.  

<span id="008">8</span> I say therefore to the unmarried and
[widows](../ebd/ebd381.htm#003), It is good for them if they abide even
as I.  

<span id="009">9</span> But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for
it is better to marry than to burn.  

<span id="010">10</span> And unto the married I command, yet not I, but
the Lord, Let not the wife depart from her husband:  

<span id="011">11</span> But and if she depart, let her remain unmarried
or be reconciled to her husband: and let not the husband put away his
wife.  

<span id="012">12</span> But to the rest speak I, not the Lord: If any
brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with
him, let him not put her away.  

<span id="013">13</span> And the woman which hath an husband that
believeth not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave
him.  

<span id="014">14</span> For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by
the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else
were your children unclean; but now are they holy.  

<span id="015">15</span> But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart.
A brother or a sister is not under [bondage](../ebd/ebd062.htm#002) in
such cases: but God hath called us to peace.  

<span id="016">16</span> For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou
shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt
save thy wife?  

<span id="017">17</span> But as God hath distributed to every man, as
the Lord hath called every one, so let him walk. And so ordain I in all
churches.  

<span id="018">18</span> Is any man called being circumcised? let him
not become uncircumcised. Is any called in uncircumcision? let him not
be circumcised.  

<span id="019">19</span> [Circumcision](../ebd/ebd083.htm#007) is
nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
commandments of God.  

<span id="020">20</span> Let every man abide in the same
[calling](../ebd/ebd069.htm#007) wherein he was called.  

<span id="021">21</span> Art thou called being a servant? care not for
it: but if thou mayest be made free, use it rather.  

<span id="022">22</span> For he that is called in the Lord, being a
servant, is the Lord's freeman: likewise also he that is called, being
free, is Christ's servant.  

<span id="023">23</span> Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the
servants of men.  

<span id="024">24</span> Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called,
therein abide with God.  

<span id="025">25</span> Now concerning virgins I have no commandment of
the Lord: yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained
[mercy](../ebd/ebd249.htm#005) of the Lord to be
[faithful](../ebd/ebd130.htm#005).  

<span id="026">26</span> I suppose therefore that this is good for the
present distress, I say, that it is good for a man so to be.  

<span id="027">27</span> Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be
loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.  

<span id="028">28</span> But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned;
and if a [virgin](../ebd/ebd377.htm#009) marry, she hath not sinned.
Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the
[flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007): but I spare you.  

<span id="029">29</span> But this I say, brethren, the time is short: it
remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they had none;  

<span id="030">30</span> And they that weep, as though they wept not;
and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy,
as though they possessed not;  

<span id="031">31</span> And they that use this world, as not abusing
it: for the fashion of this world passeth away.  

<span id="032">32</span> But I would have you without carefulness. He
that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he
may please the Lord:  

<span id="033">33</span> But he that is married careth for the things
that are of the world, how he may please his wife.  

<span id="034">34</span> There is difference also between a wife and a
[virgin](../ebd/ebd377.htm#009). The unmarried woman careth for the
things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in
[spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009): but she that is married careth for the
things of the world, how she may please her husband.  

<span id="035">35</span> And this I speak for your own profit; not that
I may cast a [snare](../ebd/ebd346.htm#009) upon you, but for that which
is comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.  

<span id="036">36</span> But if any man think that he behaveth himself
uncomely toward his [virgin](../ebd/ebd377.htm#009), if she pass the
flower of her age, and need so require, let him do what he will, he
sinneth not: let them marry.  

<span id="037">37</span> Nevertheless he that standeth stedfast in his
heart, having no necessity, but hath power over his own will, and hath
so decreed in his heart that he will keep his
[virgin](../ebd/ebd377.htm#009), doeth well.  

<span id="038">38</span> So then he that giveth her in marriage doeth
well; but he that giveth her not in marriage doeth better.  

<span id="039">39</span> The wife is bound by the law as long as her
husband liveth; but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be
married to whom she will; only in the Lord.  

<span id="040">40</span> But she is happier if she so abide, after my
judgment: and I think also that I have the
[Spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009) of God.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 8](co1008)
