[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/deu020)  [Sep](../sep/deu020)  [Tan](../tan/deu020) 
[Vul](../vul/deu020)   
  
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu019)  [Next](deu021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Deuteronomy Chapter 20

<span id="001">1</span> When thou goest out to battle against thine
enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be
not afraid of them: for the LORD thy God is with thee, which brought
thee up out of the land of [Egypt](../ebd/ebd113.htm#009).  

<span id="002">2</span> And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the
battle, that the [priest](../ebd/ebd300.htm#003) shall approach and
speak unto the people,  

<span id="003">3</span> And shall say unto them, Hear, O
[Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000), ye approach this day unto battle
against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not
tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them;  

<span id="004">4</span> For the LORD your God is he that goeth with you,
to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.  

<span id="005">5</span> And the officers shall speak unto the people,
saying, What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath not
dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man dedicate it.  

<span id="006">6</span> And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard,
and hath not yet eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house,
lest he die in the battle, and another man eat of it.  

<span id="007">7</span> And what man is there that hath betrothed a
wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest
he die in the battle, and another man take her.  

<span id="008">8</span> And the officers shall speak further unto the
people, and they shall say, What man is there that is fearful and
fainthearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's
heart faint as well as his heart.  

<span id="009">9</span> And it shall be, when the officers have made an
end of speaking unto the people that they shall make captains of the
armies to lead the people.  

<span id="010">10</span> When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight
against it, then proclaim peace unto it.  

<span id="011">11</span> And it shall be, if it make thee answer of
peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is
found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve
thee.  

<span id="012">12</span> And if it will make no peace with thee, but
will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it:  

<span id="013">13</span> And when the LORD thy God hath delivered it
into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of
the [sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003):  

<span id="014">14</span> But the women, and the little ones, and the
[cattle](../ebd/ebd074.htm#002), and all that is in the city, even all
the spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.  

<span id="015">15</span> Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which
are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these
nations.  

<span id="016">16</span> But of the cities of these people, which the
LORD thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive
nothing that breatheth:  

<span id="017">17</span> But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely,
the [Hittites](../ebd/ebd179.htm#006), and the
[Amorites](../ebd/ebd021.htm#006), the
[Canaanites](../ebd/ebd070.htm#007), and the
[Perizzites](../ebd/ebd290.htm#006), the
[Hivites](../ebd/ebd179.htm#007), and the
[Jebusites](../ebd/ebd199.htm#004); as the LORD thy God hath commanded
thee:  

<span id="018">18</span> That they teach you not to do after all their
abominations, which they have done unto their gods; so should ye
[sin](../ebd/ebd344.htm#006) against the LORD your God.  

<span id="019">19</span> When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in
making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees
thereof by forcing an [axe](../ebd/ebd037.htm#003) against them: for
thou mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them down (for the tree
of the field is man's life) to employ them in the siege:  

<span id="020">20</span> Only the trees which thou knowest that they be
not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and thou shalt
build [bulwarks](../ebd/ebd066.htm#005) against the city that maketh war
with thee, until it be subdued.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 21](deu021)
