[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/eze016)  [Sep](../sep/eze016)  [Tan](../tan/eze016) 
[Vul](../vul/eze016)   
  
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze015)  [Next](eze017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Ezekiel Chapter 16

<span id="001">1</span> Again the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,  

<span id="002">2</span> Son of man, cause
[Jerusalem](../ebd/ebd204.htm#005) to know her abominations,  

<span id="003">3</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD unto
[Jerusalem](../ebd/ebd204.htm#005); Thy [birth](../ebd/ebd059.htm#002)
and thy nativity is of the land of [Canaan](../ebd/ebd070.htm#005); thy
father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite.  

<span id="004">4</span> And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast
born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple
thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.  

<span id="005">5</span> None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto
thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open
field, to the lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.  

<span id="006">6</span> And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted
in thine own [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000), I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000), Live; yea, I said unto thee
when thou wast in thy [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000), Live.  

<span id="007">7</span> I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the
field, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come to
excellent ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown,
whereas thou wast [naked](../ebd/ebd266.htm#003) and bare.  

<span id="008">8</span> Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee,
behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee,
and covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008) with thee, saith the Lord GOD, and
thou becamest mine.  

<span id="009">9</span> Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly
washed away thy [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) from thee, and I anointed
thee with oil.  

<span id="010">10</span> I clothed thee also with broidered work, and
shod thee with badgers' skin, and I girded thee about with fine
[linen](../ebd/ebd229.htm#008), and I covered thee with
[silk](../ebd/ebd343.htm#005).  

<span id="011">11</span> I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put
bracelets upon thy hands, and a [chain](../ebd/ebd075.htm#008) on thy
[neck](../ebd/ebd269.htm#000).  

<span id="012">12</span> And I put a jewel on thy
[forehead](../ebd/ebd137.htm#002), and [earrings](../ebd/ebd110.htm#007)
in thine ears, and a beautiful [crown](../ebd/ebd093.htm#001) upon thine
head.  

<span id="013">13</span> Thus wast thou decked with
[gold](../ebd/ebd152.htm#001) and [silver](../ebd/ebd344.htm#000); and
thy raiment was of fine [linen](../ebd/ebd229.htm#008), and
[silk](../ebd/ebd343.htm#005), and broidered work; thou didst eat fine
[flour](../ebd/ebd136.htm#001), and [honey](../ebd/ebd181.htm#001), and
oil: and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a
kingdom.  

<span id="014">14</span> And thy renown went forth among the
[heathen](../ebd/ebd170.htm#005) for thy beauty: for it was perfect
through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord GOD.  

<span id="015">15</span> But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and
playedst the [harlot](../ebd/ebd164.htm#005) because of thy renown, and
pouredst out thy fornications on every one that passed by; his it was.  

<span id="016">16</span> And of thy garments thou didst take, and
deckedst thy high places with divers colours, and playedst the
[harlot](../ebd/ebd164.htm#005) thereupon: the like things shall not
come, neither shall it be so.  

<span id="017">17</span> Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my
[gold](../ebd/ebd152.htm#001) and of my [silver](../ebd/ebd344.htm#000),
which I had given thee, and madest to thyself images of men, and didst
commit whoredom with them,  

<span id="018">18</span> And tookest thy broidered garments, and
coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine
[incense](../ebd/ebd188.htm#002) before them.  

<span id="019">19</span> My meat also which I gave thee, fine
[flour](../ebd/ebd136.htm#001), and oil, and
[honey](../ebd/ebd181.htm#001), wherewith I fed thee, thou hast even set
it before them for a sweet savour: and thus it was, saith the Lord
GOD.  

<span id="020">20</span> Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy
daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed
unto them to be devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter,  

<span id="021">21</span> That thou hast slain my children, and delivered
them to cause them to pass through the fire for them?  

<span id="022">22</span> And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms
thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast
[naked](../ebd/ebd266.htm#003) and bare, and wast polluted in thy
[blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000).  

<span id="023">23</span> And it came to pass after all thy wickedness,
(woe, woe unto thee! saith the LORD GOD;)  

<span id="024">24</span> That thou hast also built unto thee an eminent
place, and hast made thee an high place in every street.  

<span id="025">25</span> Thou hast built thy high place at every head of
the way, and hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast opened thy
feet to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms.  

<span id="026">26</span> Thou hast also committed
[fornication](../ebd/ebd137.htm#008) with the Egyptians thy neighbours,
great of [flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007); and hast increased thy
whoredoms, to provoke me to [anger](../ebd/ebd024.htm#002).  

<span id="027">27</span> Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand
over thee, and have diminished thine ordinary food, and delivered thee
unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the
[Philistines](../ebd/ebd294.htm#002), which are ashamed of thy lewd
way.  

<span id="028">28</span> Thou hast played the whore also with the
Assyrians, because thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the
[harlot](../ebd/ebd164.htm#005) with them, and yet couldest not be
satisfied.  

<span id="029">29</span> Thou hast moreover multiplied thy
[fornication](../ebd/ebd137.htm#008) in the land of
[Canaan](../ebd/ebd070.htm#005) unto [Chaldea](../ebd/ebd076.htm#000);
and yet thou wast not satisfied therewith.  

<span id="030">30</span> How weak is thine heart, saith the LORD GOD,
seeing thou doest all these things, the work of an imperious whorish
woman;  

<span id="031">31</span> In that thou buildest thine eminent place in
the head of every way, and makest thine high place in every street; and
hast not been as an [harlot](../ebd/ebd164.htm#005), in that thou
scornest hire;  

<span id="032">32</span> But as a wife that committeth
[adultery](../ebd/ebd010.htm#009), which taketh strangers instead of her
husband!  

<span id="033">33</span> They give gifts to all whores: but thou givest
thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto
thee on every side for thy whoredom.  

<span id="034">34</span> And the contrary is in thee from other women in
thy whoredoms, whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in
that thou givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore
thou art contrary.  

<span id="035">35</span> Wherefore, O [harlot](../ebd/ebd164.htm#005),
hear the word of the LORD:  

<span id="036">36</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thy filthiness
was poured out, and thy nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with
thy lovers, and with all the idols of thy abominations, and by the
[blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) of thy children, which thou didst give
unto them;  

<span id="037">37</span> Behold, therefore I will gather all thy lovers,
with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou hast loved,
with all them that thou hast hated; I will even gather them round about
against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto them, that they may
see all thy nakedness.  

<span id="038">38</span> And I will [judge](../ebd/ebd213.htm#005) thee,
as women that break wedlock and shed [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) are
judged; and I will give thee [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) in
[fury](../ebd/ebd140.htm#002) and [jealousy](../ebd/ebd198.htm#008).  

<span id="039">39</span> And I will also give thee into their hand, and
they shall throw down thine eminent place, and shall break down thy high
places: they shall strip thee also of thy clothes, and shall take thy
fair jewels, and leave thee [naked](../ebd/ebd266.htm#003) and bare.  

<span id="040">40</span> They shall also bring up a company against
thee, and they shall [stone](../ebd/ebd351.htm#005) thee with stones,
and thrust thee through with their swords.  

<span id="041">41</span> And they shall burn thine houses with fire, and
execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women: and I will cause
thee to cease from playing the [harlot](../ebd/ebd164.htm#005), and thou
also shalt give no hire any more.  

<span id="042">42</span> So will I make my [fury](../ebd/ebd140.htm#002)
toward thee to rest, and my [jealousy](../ebd/ebd198.htm#008) shall
depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.  

<span id="043">43</span> Because thou hast not remembered the days of
thy youth, but hast fretted me in all these things; behold, therefore I
also will recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord GOD: and
thou shalt not commit this [lewdness](../ebd/ebd228.htm#002) above all
thine abominations.  

<span id="044">44</span> Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use
this [proverb](../ebd/ebd301.htm#002) against thee, saying, As is the
mother, so is her daughter.  

<span id="045">45</span> Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth
her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters,
which lothed their husbands and their children: your mother was an
Hittite, and your father an Amorite.  

<span id="046">46</span> And thine [elder](../ebd/ebd114.htm#008) sister
is [Samaria](../ebd/ebd320.htm#004), she and her daughters that dwell at
thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand,
is [Sodom](../ebd/ebd347.htm#004) and her daughters.  

<span id="047">47</span> Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor
done after their abominations: but, as if that were a very little thing,
thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways.  

<span id="048">48</span> As I live, saith the Lord GOD,
[Sodom](../ebd/ebd347.htm#004) thy sister hath not done, she nor her
daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters.  

<span id="049">49</span> Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister
[Sodom](../ebd/ebd347.htm#004), pride, [fulness](../ebd/ebd139.htm#007)
of [bread](../ebd/ebd064.htm#006), and abundance of idleness was in her
and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the
[poor](../ebd/ebd298.htm#006) and needy.  

<span id="050">50</span> And they were haughty, and committed
[abomination](../ebd/ebd005.htm#003) before me: therefore I took them
away as I saw good.  

<span id="051">51</span> Neither hath [Samaria](../ebd/ebd320.htm#004)
committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations
more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations
which thou hast done.  

<span id="052">52</span> Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear
thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable
than they: they are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded
also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.  

<span id="053">53</span> When I shall bring again their
[captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002), the
[captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002) of [Sodom](../ebd/ebd347.htm#004) and
her daughters, and the [captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002) of
[Samaria](../ebd/ebd320.htm#004) and her daughters, then will I bring
again the [captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002) of thy captives in the
midst of them:  

<span id="054">54</span> That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and
mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a
comfort unto them.  

<span id="055">55</span> When thy sisters,
[Sodom](../ebd/ebd347.htm#004) and her daughters, shall return to their
former estate, and [Samaria](../ebd/ebd320.htm#004) and her daughters
shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall
return to your former estate.  

<span id="056">56</span> For thy sister [Sodom](../ebd/ebd347.htm#004)
was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,  

<span id="057">57</span> Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the
time of thy reproach of the daughters of [Syria](../ebd/ebd355.htm#002),
and all that are round about her, the daughters of the
[Philistines](../ebd/ebd294.htm#002), which despise thee round about.  

<span id="058">58</span> Thou hast borne thy
[lewdness](../ebd/ebd228.htm#002) and thine abominations, saith the
LORD.  

<span id="059">59</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even deal
with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the
[oath](../ebd/ebd276.htm#000) in breaking the
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008).  

<span id="060">60</span> Nevertheless I will remember my
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008) with thee in the days of thy youth,
and I will establish unto thee an [everlasting](../ebd/ebd127.htm#007)
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008).  

<span id="061">61</span> Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be
ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine
[elder](../ebd/ebd114.htm#008) and thy younger: and I will give them
unto thee for daughters, but not by thy
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008).  

<span id="062">62</span> And I will establish my
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008) with thee; and thou shalt know that I
am the LORD:  

<span id="063">63</span> That thou mayest remember, and be confounded,
and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the Lord GOD.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 17](eze017)
