[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jer016)  [Sep](../sep/jer016)  [Tan](../tan/jer016) 
[Vul](../vul/jer016)   
  
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer015)  [Next](jer017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Jeremiah Chapter 16

<span id="001">1</span> The word of the LORD came also unto me,
saying,  

<span id="002">2</span> Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt
thou have sons or daughters in this place.  

<span id="003">3</span> For thus saith the LORD concerning the sons and
concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and concerning
their mothers that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat
them in this land;  

<span id="004">4</span> They shall die of grievous deaths; they shall
not be lamented; neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as
[dung](../ebd/ebd109.htm#003) upon the face of the earth: and they shall
be consumed by the [sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003), and by
[famine](../ebd/ebd131.htm#000); and their carcases shall be meat for
the fowls of [heaven](../ebd/ebd170.htm#006), and for the beasts of the
earth.  

<span id="005">5</span> For thus saith the LORD, Enter not into the
house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have
taken away my peace from this people, saith the LORD, even
lovingkindness and mercies.  

<span id="006">6</span> Both the great and the small shall die in this
land: they shall not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor
cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them:  

<span id="007">7</span> Neither shall men tear themselves for them in
mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall men give them the
[cup](../ebd/ebd094.htm#000) of consolation to
[drink](../ebd/ebd107.htm#009) for their father or for their mother.  

<span id="008">8</span> Thou shalt not also go into the house of
feasting, to sit with them to eat and to
[drink](../ebd/ebd107.htm#009).  

<span id="009">9</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of
[Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000); Behold, I will cause to cease out of
this place in your eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth, and the
voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the
[bride](../ebd/ebd065.htm#001).  

<span id="010">10</span> And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew
this people all these words, and they shall say unto thee, Wherefore
hath the LORD pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our
iniquity? or what is our [sin](../ebd/ebd344.htm#006) that we have
committed against the LORD our God?  

<span id="011">11</span> Then shalt thou say unto them, Because your
fathers have forsaken me, saith the LORD, and have walked after other
gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken
me, and have not kept my law;  

<span id="012">12</span> And ye have done worse than your fathers; for,
behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his evil heart, that
they may not hearken unto me:  

<span id="013">13</span> Therefore will I cast you out of this land into
a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your fathers; and there shall ye
serve other gods day and night; where I will not shew you favour.  

<span id="014">14</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the
LORD, that it shall no more be said, The LORD liveth, that brought up
the children of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000) out of the land of
[Egypt](../ebd/ebd113.htm#009);  

<span id="015">15</span> But, The LORD liveth, that brought up the
children of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000) from the land of the north,
and from all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them
again into their land that I gave unto their fathers.  

<span id="016">16</span> Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the
LORD, and they shall [fish](../ebd/ebd134.htm#005) them; and after will
I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain,
and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.  

<span id="017">17</span> For mine eyes are upon all their ways: they are
not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes.  

<span id="018">18</span> And first I will recompense their iniquity and
their [sin](../ebd/ebd344.htm#006) double; because they have defiled my
land, they have filled mine inheritance with the carcases of their
detestable and abominable things.  

<span id="019">19</span> O LORD, my strength, and my fortress, and my
refuge in the day of affliction, the [Gentiles](../ebd/ebd146.htm#001)
shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely
our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no
profit.  

<span id="020">20</span> Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they
are no gods?  

<span id="021">21</span> Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them
to know, I will cause them to know mine hand and my might; and they
shall know that my name is The LORD.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 17](jer017)
