[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/joh016)  [GNT](../gnt/joh016.md) 
[Vul](../vul/joh016.md)   
  
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh015)  [Next](joh017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: John Chapter 16

<span id="001">1</span> These things have I spoken unto you, that ye
should not be offended.  

<span id="002">2</span> They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea,
the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God
service.  

<span id="003">3</span> And these things will they do unto you, because
they have not known the Father, nor me.  

<span id="004">4</span> But these things have I told you, that when the
time shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them. And these
things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with you.  

<span id="005">5</span> But now I go my way to him that sent me; and
none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou?  

<span id="006">6</span> But because I have said these things unto you,
sorrow hath filled your heart.  

<span id="007">7</span> Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the
[Comforter](../ebd/ebd087.htm#001.md) will not come unto you; but if I
depart, I will send him unto you.  

<span id="008">8</span> And when he is come, he will reprove the world
of [sin](../ebd/ebd344.htm#006.md), and of
[righteousness](../ebd/ebd313.htm#004.md), and of judgment:  

<span id="009">9</span> Of [sin](../ebd/ebd344.htm#006.md), because they
believe not on me;  

<span id="010">10</span> Of [righteousness](../ebd/ebd313.htm#004.md),
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;  

<span id="011">11</span> Of judgment, because the
[prince](../ebd/ebd300.htm#004.md) of this world is judged.  

<span id="012">12</span> I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now.  

<span id="013">13</span> Howbeit when he, the
[Spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009.md) of truth, is come, he will guide you
into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.  

<span id="014">14</span> He shall [glorify](../ebd/ebd150.htm#005.md) me:
for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you.  

<span id="015">15</span> All things that the Father hath are mine:
therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto
you.  

<span id="016">16</span> A little while, and ye shall not see me: and
again, a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the
Father.  

<span id="017">17</span> Then said some of his disciples among
themselves, What is this that he saith unto us, A little while, and ye
shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me: and,
Because I go to the Father?  

<span id="018">18</span> They said therefore, What is this that he
saith, A little while? we cannot tell what he saith.  

<span id="019">19</span> Now [Jesus](../ebd/ebd205.htm#006.md) knew that
they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye enquire among
yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and
again, a little while, and ye shall see me?  

<span id="020">20</span> Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall
weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful,
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.  

<span id="021">21</span> A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow,
because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child,
she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the
world.  

<span id="022">22</span> And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will
see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh
from you.  

<span id="023">23</span> And in that day ye shall ask me nothing.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, he will give it you.  

<span id="024">24</span> Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask,
and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.  

<span id="025">25</span> These things have I spoken unto you in
proverbs: but the time cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in
proverbs, but I shall shew you plainly of the Father.  

<span id="026">26</span> At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say
not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you:  

<span id="027">27</span> For the Father himself loveth you, because ye
have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.  

<span id="028">28</span> I came forth from the Father, and am come into
the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.  

<span id="029">29</span> His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest
thou plainly, and speakest no [proverb](../ebd/ebd301.htm#002.md).  

<span id="030">30</span> Now are we sure that thou knowest all things,
and needest not that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that
thou camest forth from God.  

<span id="031">31</span> [Jesus](../ebd/ebd205.htm#006.md) answered them,
Do ye now believe?  

<span id="032">32</span> Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that
ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone:
and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.  

<span id="033">33</span> These things I have spoken unto you, that in me
ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have
[tribulation](../ebd/ebd372.htm#005.md): but be of good cheer; I have
overcome the world.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 17](joh017.md)
