[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jos023)  [Sep:JsB](../sep/jsb023) 
[Tan](../tan/jos023)  [Vul](../vul/jos023)   
  
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos022)  [Next](jos024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Joshua Chapter 23

<span id="001">1</span> And it came to pass a long time after that the
LORD had given rest unto [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000) from all their
enemies round about, that [Joshua](../ebd/ebd211.htm#006) waxed old and
stricken in age.  

<span id="002">2</span> And [Joshua](../ebd/ebd211.htm#006) called for
all [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000), and for their elders, and for their
heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said unto them,
I am old and stricken in age:  

<span id="003">3</span> And ye have seen all that the LORD your God hath
done unto all these nations because of you; for the LORD your God is he
that hath fought for you.  

<span id="004">4</span> Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these
nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from
[Jordan](../ebd/ebd211.htm#004), with all the nations that I have cut
off, even unto the great sea [westward](../ebd/ebd380.htm#008).  

<span id="005">5</span> And the LORD your God, he shall expel them from
before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess
their land, as the LORD your God hath promised unto you.  

<span id="006">6</span> Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to
do all that is written in the book of the law of
[Moses](../ebd/ebd260.htm#003), that ye turn not aside therefrom to the
right hand or to the left;  

<span id="007">7</span> That ye come not among these nations, these that
remain among you; neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor
cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor
[bow](../ebd/ebd063.htm#003) yourselves unto them:  

<span id="008">8</span> But cleave unto the LORD your God, as ye have
done unto this day.  

<span id="009">9</span> For the LORD hath driven out from before you
great nations and strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand
before you unto this day.  

<span id="010">10</span> One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the
LORD your God, he it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised
you.  

<span id="011">11</span> Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that
ye love the LORD your God.  

<span id="012">12</span> Else if ye do in any
[wise](../ebd/ebd382.htm#004) go back, and cleave unto the remnant of
these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make
marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you:  

<span id="013">13</span> Know for a certainty that the LORD your God
will no more drive out any of these nations from before you; but they
shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and
thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the
LORD your God hath given you.  

<span id="014">14</span> And, behold, this day I am going the way of all
the earth: and ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that
not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the LORD your God
spake concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing
hath failed thereof.  

<span id="015">15</span> Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all
good things are come upon you, which the LORD your God promised you; so
shall the LORD bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed
you from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.  

<span id="016">16</span> When ye have transgressed the
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008) of the LORD your God, which he
commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves
to them; then shall the [anger](../ebd/ebd024.htm#002) of the LORD be
kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land
which he hath given unto you.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 24](jos024)
