[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/lam001)  [Sep](../sep/lam001)  [Tan](../tan/lam001) 
[Vul](../vul/lam001)   
  
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](jer052)  [Next](lam002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Lamentations Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of
people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among the
nations, and princess among the provinces, how is she become
tributary!  

<span id="002">2</span> She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are
on her cheeks: among all her lovers she hath none to comfort her: all
her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her
enemies.  

<span id="003">3</span> [Judah](../ebd/ebd212.htm#007) is gone into
[captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002) because of affliction, and because of
great servitude: she dwelleth among the
[heathen](../ebd/ebd170.htm#005), she findeth no rest: all her
persecutors overtook her between the straits.  

<span id="004">4</span> The ways of [Zion](../ebd/ebd394.htm#002) do
[mourn](../ebd/ebd261.htm#004), because none come to the solemn feasts:
all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted,
and she is in bitterness.  

<span id="005">5</span> Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies
prosper; for the LORD hath afflicted her for the multitude of her
transgressions: her children are gone into
[captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002) before the enemy.  

<span id="006">6</span> And from the daughter of
[Zion](../ebd/ebd394.htm#002) all her beauty is departed: her princes
are become like harts that find no pasture, and they are gone without
strength before the pursuer.  

<span id="007">7</span> [Jerusalem](../ebd/ebd204.htm#005) remembered in
the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things
that she had in the days of old, when her people fell into the hand of
the enemy, and none did help her: the adversaries saw her, and did mock
at her sabbaths.  

<span id="008">8</span> [Jerusalem](../ebd/ebd204.htm#005) hath
grievously sinned; therefore she is removed: all that honoured her
despise her, because they have seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth, and
turneth backward.  

<span id="009">9</span> Her filthiness is in her skirts; she remembereth
not her last end; therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no
[comforter](../ebd/ebd087.htm#001). O LORD, behold my affliction: for
the enemy hath magnified himself.  

<span id="010">10</span> The [adversary](../ebd/ebd011.htm#001) hath
spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things: for she hath seen that
the [heathen](../ebd/ebd170.htm#005) entered into her
[sanctuary](../ebd/ebd321.htm#005), whom thou didst command that they
should not enter into thy [congregation](../ebd/ebd088.htm#004).  

<span id="011">11</span> All her people sigh, they seek
[bread](../ebd/ebd064.htm#006); they have given their pleasant things
for meat to relieve the soul: see, O LORD, and consider; for I am become
vile.  

<span id="012">12</span> Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by?
behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is
done unto me, wherewith the LORD hath afflicted me in the day of his
fierce [anger](../ebd/ebd024.htm#002).  

<span id="013">13</span> From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and
it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a
[net](../ebd/ebd271.htm#002) for my feet, he hath turned me back: he
hath made me desolate and faint all the day.  

<span id="014">14</span> The [yoke](../ebd/ebd384.htm#009) of my
transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, and come up upon
my [neck](../ebd/ebd269.htm#000): he hath made my strength to fall, the
LORD hath delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise
up.  

<span id="015">15</span> The LORD hath trodden under foot all my mighty
men in the midst of me: he hath called an assembly against me to crush
my young men: the LORD hath trodden the [virgin](../ebd/ebd377.htm#009),
the daughter of [Judah](../ebd/ebd212.htm#007), as in a winepress.  

<span id="016">16</span> For these things I weep; mine eye, mine eye
runneth down with water, because the [comforter](../ebd/ebd087.htm#001)
that should relieve my soul is far from me: my children are desolate,
because the enemy prevailed.  

<span id="017">17</span> [Zion](../ebd/ebd394.htm#002) spreadeth forth
her hands, and there is none to comfort her: the LORD hath commanded
concerning [Jacob](../ebd/ebd194.htm#007), that his adversaries should
be round about him: [Jerusalem](../ebd/ebd204.htm#005) is as a
menstruous woman among them.  

<span id="018">18</span> The LORD is righteous; for I have rebelled
against his commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my
sorrow: my virgins and my young men are gone into
[captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002).  

<span id="019">19</span> I called for my lovers, but they deceived me:
my priests and mine elders gave up the [ghost](../ebd/ebd147.htm#005) in
the city, while they sought their meat to relieve their souls.  

<span id="020">20</span> Behold, O LORD; for I am in distress: my
[bowels](../ebd/ebd063.htm#004) are troubled; mine heart is turned
within me; for I have grievously rebelled: abroad the
[sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003) bereaveth, at home there is as death.  

<span id="021">21</span> They have heard that I sigh: there is none to
comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad
that thou hast done it: thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called,
and they shall be like unto me.  

<span id="022">22</span> Let all their wickedness come before thee; and
do unto them, as thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for
my sighs are many, and my heart is faint.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 2](lam002)
