[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# She-rab Dong bu

### Notes to the hypertext transcription

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The She-rab Dong-bu is an ethical treatise written by the illustrious
Nagarjuna. Although he is celebrated as one of the most subtle thinkers
that Buddhism, and indeed the world, has ever produced, this work is
fairly simple and intended for a broad audience. Particularly striking
is the (nearly rabid) [misogyny](srdb.htm#pp_246.md), a feature fully in
keeping with the time and place of composition, but one that we might
wish not to see in the writing of the grand formulator of the Madhyamika
school of philosophy.

In the original text the Tibetan and the English translation face each
other on opposite pages. In this edition, only the English has been
reproduced. There is also some Tibetan in the footnotes, and this is
shown in Unicode and not transcribed. The only unicode font I can find
at the time of publication (June 2002) that will display Tibetan (under
Windows) is Arial Unicode MS Font for Publisher 2000. It is absolutely
massive (about 23 MB), but it is probably one of the most complete
Unicode fonts freely available. I have placed all of the combining
Tibetan characters after their roots, which may not display properly in
a fully-implemented Tibetan Font (which the MS Arial Unicode is not),
but is the way that the characters would be transcribed and pronounced
(if all of the characters were pronouncing). This may need to be
corrected in a future edition.

NOTE: The Microsoft font is no longer available for download. For more
information about unicode at Intangible Textual Heritage, refer to [this
page](../../unicode).(JBH.md)

There were three corrigenda bound into the copy that I scanned from.
These have been added to the original text after the text that they are
meant to replace, enclosed in brackets \[ \].
