[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](title) [Next](srdb)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

### PREFACE.

The S<span class="small">HE-RAB</span> D<span
class="small">ONG-BU</span> (Tree of Wisdom) is a metrical translation
in Tibetan of a Sanscrit ethical work entitled Prajnya Danda, written by
Nagarjuna who flourished in the fourth century of the Buddhist era
(about 100 B.C.), The Tibetan version was probably made about the 11th
century of our era but the exact date has not been determined. It is
included in the Ten-gyur, ངོ་ section, volume གོ་, beginning at leaf
165. The Tibetan translator describes it as the second volume but I
cannot say whether the remainder of the work has been preserved in
Tibetan--the Sanscrit original is apparently lost.

   When this work was selected as one of the textbooks for the Higher
Proficiency Examination in Tibetan, the Tibetan text was edited by the
late Rai Bahadur Sarat Chandra Das and printed in continuous lines as is
done in Tibet. This adds to the difficulties of the student as there is
nothing to show where one verse ends and the next begins. No English
translation was prepared at that time, and the present attempt has been
made with the object of assisting future students of Tibetan.

   The poem is known by name to the educated classes in Tibet but few
laymen appear to have read it and fewer still to understand the many
obscure passages. In the course of two years spent in Tibet I sought the
assistance of monks and laymen in and around Gyantse but only succeeded
in finding one elderly scholar who had read the poem. The Abbot of the
Palkor Monastery was good enough to make enquiries at Trashi Lhunpo
regarding the possible existence of a commentary on this work, but
without success. By the courtesy of the Tibetan Trade Agent at Gyantge,
Khenchung Lobzang Chungne Lotsawa, the printed text was compared with
the xylograph edition forming part of the Ten-gyur collection in the
Palkor Monastery and a number of errors detected. It must, however, be
added that the Palkor text does not appear to be absolutely accurate.
All that can be claimed for the present edition is that it is more
correct than the earlier printed text. A number of emendations have been
suggested in the foot-notes.

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

   Rai Bahadur Sarat Chandra Das remarked in his preface that the
She-rab Dong-bu was "largely quoted by Tibetan authors" but it is hardly
quotation in the ordinary sense of the word. Later writers have borrowed
many of the sentiments and sometimes entire lines, inserting them in
their own compositions. This is particularly the case in the Sakya
Leg-she (Sans. Subhashita Ratna Niti Nama Shastra), written by the
celebrated Kun-gah Gyaltsen in the 13th century of our era, which is
said to be a rechauffé of the works of three earlier writers on the same
subject. I mention this here as the works of Nagarjuna appear to have
been not so much the subject of quotation as the source of extensive
literary piracies

   The present translation was made at Gyantse, but the number of
passages to which no clear meaning could be assigned by the Tibetans was
so great that I was in doubt whether it would be possible to proceed
with publication, until I came to Gangtok and obtained the invaluable
assistance of Kazi Dawa Samdup, Head Master, Bhutia Boarding School.
Kazi Dawa Samdup had the advantage of receiving a scholarly explanation
of the first 102 verses from a learned Lama Ge-she Kachen Tundrup of
Shigatse, who studied the book some years ago and was accordingly able
to give the meaning assigned by tradition to some of the passages which
appear quite incomprehensible at first sight. The latter part of the
translation was done without this special advantage and some of the more
difficult passages remain to be properly explained. The extreme baldness
of the translation is intentional.

   I take this opportunity of recording my gratitude to the many Tibetan
gentlemen who assisted me at the start, and above all to Kazi Dawa
Samdup, without whose assistance this translation would never have seen
the light. Finally I would acknowledge my obligation to the Hon'ble Sir
Asutosh Mookerjee Sind the Calcutta University who have undertaken the
printing of the text and translation.

W. L. C<span class="small">AMPBELL.</span>   

 G<span class="small">ANGTOK</span>, S<span
class="small">IKKIM</span>:  
   *October*, 1918.

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE FOOT-NOTES.

|        |                                                        |
|-------:|--------------------------------------------------------|
| S.C.D. | The late Rai Bahadur Sarat Chandra Das.                |
|   D.S. | Kazi Dawa Samdup.                                      |
|   P.T. | The xylograph text in the Palkor Monastery at Gyantse. |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](srdb)
