[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th108)  [Next](th110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### VI

#### AN EGYPTIAN PROTOTYPE OF THE MAIN FEATURES OF THE PŒMANDRES’ COSMOGONY

##### THE HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE “PŒMANDRES”

<span class="smallcaps">One</span> has only to read through the remains
of the Trismegistic literature preserved to us to assure himself that
the whole of it looked back to the Pœmandres instruction as the most
primitive form of the tradition in the language of Greece. The extant
form of our “Pœmandres” sermon is clearly not the most primitive form;
but whatever that form was, it must have contained the cosmological
part.

Now, if we regard this cosmogenesis as a purely literary compilation,
the task of the higher criticism will be to try to sift out the various
elements in it, and if possible to trace them to their sources.

But before making any attempt of this nature, it will be as well to
consider the nature of the literary art of our document. It purports
itself to be an apocalypse, or rather the record of an apocalyptic
vision, and not a purely literary compilation from already existing
literary sources. It declares itself to be the work of a seer and
prophet and not of a scribe or commentator; it claims to be an inspired
document, a scripture, and not the work of a schoolman.

Of this class of writing we have very many examples in other scriptures,
and it will be as well to consider

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

briefly the nature of such documents. In the original form of
apocalypses we do not as a rule find that prior formal literary material
is used—that is to say, we do not find that previously existing written
sources are incorporated; what we do find is that in almost every case
the seer uses the forms and terms of previously existing ideas to
express what he sees. These forms and terms are found in already
existing written and oral traditions, and the prophetical writer is
compelled to use the thought-language of his own mind and of that of his
age to express himself. This, however, does not negate the possibility
of his having seen a true vision, of his having been inspired.

It is evident that whoever wrote the “Pœmandres” must have been
saturated with the religious, mystical, philosophic, and scientific
thought of his age, clothed in the forms of the thought-language of his
day; and it is also clear that whatever “newness” there may have been in
him, was owing to the nature of the “touch” of inspiration he had
received. This striking of a new keynote, as it were, in his inner
nature, enabled him to regroup and reconstruct the previous ideas he had
imbibed from his studies.

##### A PROTOTYPE OF ITS COSMOGENESIS

Now as far as our cosmogenesis is concerned, it has not yet been found
possible to trace the exact verbal forms of its elements to any precise
literary sources, but it has been found possible to point to written
sources which contain similar ideas; and not only so, but with regard to
the main features of it, a distinct prototype has been found in Egypt
itself. This discovery is due to Reitzenstein (pp. 59 ff.),and the
prototype is to be found in an Egyptian inscription in the British

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Museum, which was
first read correctly and interpreted by Dr J. H. Breasted. <span
id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_278) Before using it, however, Reitzenstein
got his colleague Professor Spiegelberg to go through it; and again when
Maspero, in reviewing <span id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_279) Breasted’s
work, had further confirmed the view of it which Reitzenstein had in his
mind, Spiegelberg again revised certain points in the translation owing
to Maspero’s suggestions.

The inscription itself is dated about the eighth century B.C., but it
states that it is the reproduction of a then old written text from the
temple of Ptah at Memphis.

The chief content has to do with the Osiris-myth, but into this is
inserted the distinctive Ptah-doctrine. Ptah is supposed by some to have
originally been simply the god of handicraft, seeing that he is equated
by the Greek interpreters of god-names with Hephaistos. He was, however,
rather the Demiurgus, for in very early times he is found in the closest
connection with the Gods of Heaven and Gods of Light, and is conceived
as the Dispenser of all life.

In our text Ptah is brought into the closest relations with the Supreme
Deity (Atum). This “God the Father” emanates from himself eight deities
(the Ogdoad). Each one of these is Ptah with a distinctive epithet. To
the fourth <span id="fr_280"></span>[3](#fn_280) of them, “Ptah the
Great,” a theological system is attached, which, though not entirely
ignoring the former presentation, is but loosely interwoven with it.

Before, however, Reitzenstein proceeds to deal with this, he gives
Professor Spiegelberg’s translation of a

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prayer to Ptah, of
the time of Ramses III. (*c.* 1233 B.C.), from the Papyrus Harris (I.
44, 3 ff.), in order to make clearer the circle of ideas into which we
shall be introduced. This Prayer is as follows:

##### A PRAISE-GIVING TO PTAH

> “Hail to thee! Thou art great, thou art old, Tatenen, <span
> id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_281) Father of the gods,  
> God ancient from the beginning;  
> Who fashioned men,  
> Who made the gods,  
> Who began with the creation as the first creator,  
> Who created for all who came after him,  
> Who made the heaven; as his heart <span
> id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_282) he created it;  
> Who hanged it up,  
> As God Shu raised himself; <span id="fr_283"></span>[3](#fn_283)  
> Who founded the earth of thy own power,  
> Who circled in the primal water of the Great Green, <span
> id="fr_284"></span>[4](#fn_284)  
> Who created the invisible world, which brings the dead bodies to rest;

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

> Who let Rā come to make them glad,  
> As Prince of Eternity,  
> Lord of Eternity,  
> Lord of Life;  
> Who fills the lungs with air,  
> Who gives breath to every nostril,  
> Who vivifies all beings with his gifts.  
> Length of life, fortune, and fate are subject unto him  
> They live by that which goeth forth out of his mouth. <span
> id="fr_285"></span>[1](#fn_285)  
> Who made contentment for all the gods,  
> In his form of ancient primal water; <span
> id="fr_286"></span>[2](#fn_286)  
> Lord of Eternity, to whom Eternity is subject,  
> Breath of Life for all beings.”

There are other hymns of an exactly similar nature in which other gods
are praised, especially Thoth and Horus. And now to turn to our
inscription, and to that part of the text assigned to the fourth of the
Forms of Manifestation, or Aspects or Persons, of Ptah.

##### PTAH-THOTH THE WISE ONE

*l*. 52. Ptah the Great is the heart and tongue of the god-circle. <span
id="fr_287"></span>[3](#fn_287)

§ 1, *l.* 53. (Two gods) <span id="fr_288"></span>[4](#fn_288) are they,
the one as heart, the other as tongue, emanations of Atum. Exceeding
great is Ptah; if he . . . then are their *ka’s* in this heart and
tongue \[of his\].

*l*. 54. When Horus arose in him (Atum) as Ptah, and when Thoth arose in
him as Ptah, the power of heart

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

and tongue came into being through him. (It is Atum) who brings forth
his being out of every body and out of every mouth of all the gods. All
men, all quadrupeds, all creeping things live through his thinking and
uttering whatsoever he will.

§ 2, *l*. 55. His god-circle is before him; he is teeth \[and\] lips,
vessels \[and\] hands. Atum (is in his) god-circle; Atum is in his
vessels, in his hands; the god-circle is also teeth and lips in that
mouth which hath uttered the name of everything, and out of which Shu
and Tefnut have proceeded. <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_289)

*l*. 56. Then the god-circle organised the seeing of the eye, the
hearing of the ear, the smelling of the nose, wherewith they made the
desire of the heart to arise. And this \[heart\] it is which
accomplishes every desire, but it is the tongue which repeats <span
id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_290) what the heart desires.

§ 3. He (Ptah) gives existence <span id="fr_291"></span>[3](#fn_291)
unto all gods, to Atum and his god-circle, for every god-word <span
id="fr_292"></span>[4](#fn_292) comes into existence through the desire
of the heart and the command of the tongue.

*l*. 57. He makes the *ka* . . . ; he makes all nourishment and all
offerings <span id="fr_293"></span>[5](#fn_293) with this word; he makes
what

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

is loved and what is hated. He gives life to the pious, death to the
impious. He makes every fabric, and every fabrication.

*l*. 58. The doing of the arms, the going of the feet, the movement of
all limbs, is accomplished by the utterance of the word, because of the
desire of the heart, \[the word\] which comes from the tongue and
effects the whole of all things. So arises the teaching: Atum has made
the gods to become Ptah Tatenen <span id="fr_294"></span>[1](#fn_294) so
soon as the gods come into existence. All things proceed from him:
sacrifice and food as well as oblation and all fair things.

§ 4, *l*. 59. He is Thoth the Wise, whose power is greater than that of
the other gods. He (Thoth) at-oned himself with Ptah, after he had
brought forth all things and all god-words; <span
id="fr_295"></span>[2](#fn_295) after that he had fashioned the gods,
had made the cities, settled the nomes, established the gods in their
shrines,

*l*. 60. When he had ordained their sacrifices, founded their shrines,
and had made statues of \[? for\] their bodies for their contentment.

§ 5. If the gods enter into their body, so is he (Ptah) in every wood,
in every jewel, in every metal. <span id="fr_296"></span>[3](#fn_296)
All things thrive after him if they \[the gods\] are there. To him all
gods and their *ka’s* make oblation, uniting and binding themselves
together \[for him who is\] Lord of the Two Lands. <span
id="fr_297"></span>[4](#fn_297)

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

With these words the special theological system attached to the fourth
person of Ptah is concluded, and the text returns to the Osiris-myth.

##### EGYPTIAN SYNCRETISM 1000 B.C.

From this most interesting inscription copied from an ancient written
document, we learn in the first place that in Egypt already, a good
thousand years before the date of our “Pœmandres,” we have what the
critical mind would call a distinct specimen of syncretism; namely, an
attempt to combine three God-myths, or traditions, into a single system.
These, if we persist in taking a purely traditional view, are: (i.) The
Hermopolitan myth of Thoth as the Logos-Demiurge, who also in it
frequently appears as an aspect of the Supreme; (ii.) The doctrine of
the Ptah-priests of Memphis, according to which Ptah as the Primal Deity
creates himself and all gods and men, and fashions the world; and (iii.)
The Heliopolitan theology, in which Atum as the first of an ennead of
gods unites his eight fellow-gods in himself and is the Primal God and
Primal Basis of all things.

In all this the scribe or prophet has employed very early conceptions:
on the one hand, that the plurality of gods are but “members” of a One
and Only God; and on the other, that a sharply-defined and in some
respect special God is similar to another more-general God in some
particular attribute of his. Thus Atum is really the Primal God; but the
God-circle, his “Body” (or Pleroma), consists of Eight different Forms
of Ptah. Atum has emanated them; he is therefore “he who himself creates
himself”; but equally so has Ptah created Atum and himself. The most
important Member of this universal Ptah-Being or Cosmic God is Ptah the
Great,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

who is Heart and Tongue—the former as Horus, the latter as Thoth. Thoth
proceeds into manifestation as Tongue or Word to accomplish the cosmic
purpose; but the Word is only the thought which has proceeded, or in a
certain fashion emanated, out of the Person. Thoth and Horus are
inseparably united with Ptah.

Reitzenstein thinks that the occasion for introducing the whole of this
system into an exposition which otherwise deals with the Osiris-myth,
was afforded by the parts played by Horus and Thoth in that myth. But it
is evidently in itself a special system in which Thoth was the One God,
the Word by whom all things were made.

All of this must be quite manifest to any careful reader, and therefore
there is no reason for its further elaboration. But though we have
recovered one specimen of this kind of syncretism only, it is not to be
supposed that it was unusual; indeed, it was a necessity in Egypt,
where, beyond all other lands, the idea of a number of divinities united
in one, each showing forth in separation some attribute dominantly, but
in union possessing simultaneously the attributes of all the others, was
the only key possible to a state of affairs where a plurality of gods
existed side by side with the doctrines of the One and the All.

##### THE DOCTRINE OF “PŒMANDRES” COMPARED WITH THAT OF ITS PROTOTYPE

Nevertheless, our inscription is not only of general use, but of special
use for an elucidation of the main elements in the “Pœmandres”
cosmogony. Any attempt to translate the ideas of the Atum-Ptah-Thoth
combination into Greek could have resulted in no other nomenclature than
θέος (God)—δημιουργὸς or δημιουργὸς νοῦς (Demiurge or Demiurgic
Mind)—νοῦς

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

and λόγος (Mind and Word), as is the case in our treatise.

This argument is all the stronger if we reflect that if Thoth, after the
ordering of the cosmos, at-oned himself again with Ptah, then he must
have completed this ordering which was emanated from Ptah. It is thus
that the writer has brought to clear expression the conception that the
Word is the Proceeding Thought of Ptah, and that both are inseparably
united with one another.

So, too, we find in the “Pœmandres” that the Logos, after the completion
of the cosmic ordering, returns to the Demiurgic Mind and is at-oned
with him.

This similarity of fundamental conception cannot be due to chance, and
we must therefore conclude that a doctrine essentially corresponding
with the theology of our inscription is the main source of the
“Pœmandres” cosmogony. This fairly establishes the main content of our
cosmogony on an Egyptian ground.

If to this we add the general Egyptian belief that a man’s soul, after
being “purified” in the after-death state, goes back to God, to live for
the eternity as a god with the gods, <span
id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_298) then we have established the chief part
of the “Pœmandres” treatise as the Hellenised doctrine of the Egyptian
priests—the mystery-tradition.

With all of this agrees the thought that the God as Mind dwells in the
pious, as we learn from the Hermes Prayers. So also it is Ptah in our
inscription who gives life to the pious and death to the impious. In
very early accounts we find Ptah, the Mind, is the

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

imparter of the gnosis for the gods—that is, as a Greek would say, he
was the inventor of philosophy, as indeed Diogenes Laërtius tells us
(Proœm. 1): “The Egyptians declare that Hephaistos was the source of
philosophy, the presidents of which are priests and prophets.” Ptah, the
Mind, reveals himself to his own and gives them good counsel; “Ptah hath
spoken to thee,” Suidas tells us (*s.v.*), was a Greek-Egyptian saying,
which is best elucidated by the Stele of Intef, which tells us that the
people say of the heart of Intef: “It is an oracle of the god which is
in every body.” <span id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_299)

All of this and much more of a like nature make it indubitably clear
that the fundamental conceptions of the “Pœmandres” are Egyptian, and
that the theory of Neoplatonic forgery must be for ever abandoned; so
that even the dreams of Dévéria are nearer the truth than the confident
assertions of many a great name in scholarship.

##### THE MAN-DOCTRINE

But what, says Reitzenstein (p. 69), is not Egyptian, is the doctrine of
the Man, the Heavenly Man, the Son of God, who descends and becomes a
slave of the Fate-Sphere; the Man who, though originally endowed with
all power, descends into weakness and bondage, and has to win his own
freedom and regain his original state.

This doctrine seems to have been in its origin part and parcel of the
Chaldæan mystery-tradition; but it was widely spread in Hellenistic
circles, and had analogies in all the great mystery-traditions, as we
shall now proceed to see, and chiefly by the analysis of what has
hitherto been regarded as one of the most chaotic and puzzling documents
of Gnosticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_278"></span>[130:1](th109.htm#fr_278) *Zeitschr. f. äg.
Sprache* (1901), pp. 39 ff.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[130:2](th109.htm#fr_279) “Sur la
Tout-puissance de la Parole,” *Recueil des Travaux rel. à la Phil. . . .
égypt.,* xxiv. 168 ff.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[130:3](th109.htm#fr_280) The God of Fire and
Mind.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[131:1](th109.htm#fr_281) An epithet of Ptah.
But compare the Hymn to Rā given by Budge (*op. cit.,* i. 339): “Praise
to thee O Rā, exalted Sekhem, Ta-thenen, Begetter of his Gods.” Sekhem
is vital “power”; Tathenen is, therefore, presumably Creative Life, or
the Demiurgic or Creative Power. On page 230 Budge tells us that
Tathenen is elsewhere symbolised as a fire-spitting serpent armed with a
knife.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[131:2](th109.htm#fr_282) The Heaven is the
Great Heart of the Great Cosmos; in man the little cosmos, the heart,
was the seat of the true understanding and will.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[131:3](th109.htm#fr_283) Shu generally
represents the dry air between the earth and sky. *Cf.* the Hymn to
Amen-Rā: “Thou art the One God, who did’st form thyself into two gods;
thou art the creator of the egg, and thou did’st produce thy Twin-gods”
(Budge, *op. cit.,* ii. 89). Shu’s twin or syzygy is Tefnut, who in
terrene physics represents the moist air; but Shu is elsewhere equated
with the Light.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[131:4](th109.htm#fr_284) The Ocean of Heaven.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[132:1](th109.htm#fr_285) The life or breath of
the Creator.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[132:2](th109.htm#fr_286) *Sc.* the water of
the Great Green.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[132:3](th109.htm#fr_287) *Paut,* sphere, or
group, or company, or hierarchy, or pleroma,—here an Ogdoad.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[132:4](th109.htm#fr_288) Namely, Thoth and
Horus.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[133:1](th109.htm#fr_289) That is, the heart
(Horus) rules action by fingers (and toes), by means of the ducts or
vessels (arteries, veins, and nerves) leading to them, and all that
these mean on the hidden side of things; while the tongue in the mouth
(Thoth), by means of teeth and lips, is the organ of speech, or
intelligent or meaning utterance.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[133:2](th109.htm#fr_290) This appears to be a
mistranslation; it seems by what follows to mean “commands” or “gives
expression to.”

<span id="fn_291"></span>[133:3](th109.htm#fr_291) Not being; that is,
brings them into manifestation. He is the Demiurge.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[133:4](th109.htm#fr_292) R. glosses this as
hieroglyph; but it should perhaps mean “word of the language of the
gods”—the language shown by action in the world.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[133:5](th109.htm#fr_293) That is to say,
apparently, the fruit of actions on which gods and men feed. *Cf.*
Hermes-Prayer, II. 2, where Hermes is said to “collect the nourishment
of gods and men.”

<span id="fn_294"></span>[134:1](th109.htm#fr_294) That is, as we have
seen above, Ptah as the Demiurgic Power.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[134:2](th109.htm#fr_295) Hieroglyphics;
showing that the oldest hieroglyphics were symbols of the words of
action—that is to say, modes of expression of being in action.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[134:3](th109.htm#fr_296) Lit., copper.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[134:4](th109.htm#fr_297) That is, the worlds
of gods, or immortals, and of men, or mortals. But Reitzenstein says:
“Thus the God of Memphis \[*i.e.* Ptah\] is the divinity or ‘*the* God’
of all Egypt”—meaning thereby the physical upper and lower lands; but I
prefer a wider sense.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[137:1](th109.htm#fr_298) This does not mean, I
hold, that there was no “reincarnation,” that is, that the “being” of
the man did not emanate other “souls,” but that the “soul” of a
particular life did not return—that all of it deserving of immortality
became a god with the gods, or “those-that-*are,*” and do not only
*ex*-ist.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[138:1](th109.htm#fr_299) *Cf.* Breasted,
*Zeit. f. äg. Spr.* (1901), p. 47.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Myth of Man in the Mysteries](th110)
