[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th144)  [Next](th146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

### XI

#### CONCERNING THE ÆON-DOCTRINE

“<span class="smallcaps">Hear</span> then, my son, how standeth God and
All. God; Æon; Cosmos; Time; Becoming.”—*C. H.,* xi. (xii.) 1.

##### THE SCOPE OF OUR ESSAY

While rigidly excluding any consideration of the amazing elaboration of
Christo-Gnostic æonology, it may not be unserviceable to offer a “few
notes in connection with the simpler idea of the Æon. The subject really
requires a treatise in itself, but that would, of course, be too lengthy
an undertaking for these Prolegomena. <span
id="fr_1310"></span>[1](#fn_1311)

Let us, then, first turn to a striking passage which purports to give us
the Orphic tradition of the Genesis of the World-Egg, and of the
relation of its Glorious Progeny to the Æon.

The passage is of great interest for us in our present enquiry, for if
it is not a direct quotation from Apion, the Alexandrian savant, and
bitter opponent of the Jews and of Philo, during the first half of the
first

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

century A.D., it at anyrate represents the view of the Hellenistic
theology of that period.

The passage is found in one of the sources of the composite and
overworked document known as the *Clementine Homilies,* <span
id="fr_1311"></span>[1](#fn_1312) and runs as follows:

##### THE ORPHIC TRADITION OF THE GENESIS OF THE WORLD-EGG

III\. “There was when naught was but Chaos and an indistinguishable
mixture of unordered elements still jumbled all together; both Nature
herself being witness to it, and great men having thought it must be so.

“And as witness, I will bring forward for you the greatest of the great
in wisdom, Homer himself, speaking about the original con-fusion:

> <span style="font-size: small">“But may you all become water and
> earth <span id="fr_1312"></span>[2](#fn_1313)—</span>

—meaning that thence all things have had their genesis, and that after
the dissolution of their moist and earthy essence they are all restored
again to their first nature—which is Chaos.

“And Hesiod, in his Theogony, says:

> <span style="font-size: small">“In truth Chaos came into being the
> very first. <span id="fr_1313"></span>[3](#fn_1314) </span>

“And by ‘came into being’ he evidently means that

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

it was generated as are things generable, and not that it for ever was
as are things ingenerable.

“Orpheus also likens Chaos to an Egg in which was the con-fusion of the
primordial elements. <span id="fr_1314"></span>[1](#fn_1315)

“This is what Hesiod supposes by Chaos, what Orpheus calls an Egg—a
thing generable, projected from the infinity of Matter (Hylē), and
brought into being as follows:

IV\. “Both fourfold Matter <span id="fr_1315"></span>[2](#fn_1316) being
ensouled and the whole Infinitude being as though it were a Depth
(Βυθός), flowing perpetually and indistinguishably moving, and over and
over again pouring forth countless imperfect mixtures, now of one kind
and now of another, and thereby dissolving them again owing to its lack
of order, and engulphing so that it could not be bound \[together\] to
serve for the generation of a living creature—it happened that the
infinite Sea itself, being driven round <span
id="fr_1316"></span>[3](#fn_1317) by its own peculiar nature, flowed
with a natural motion in an orderly fashion from out of itself into
itself, as it were a vortex, <span id="fr_1317"></span>[4](#fn_1318) and
blended its essences, and thus involuntarily the most developed part of
all of them, <span id="fr_1318"></span>[5](#fn_1319) that which was most
serviceable for the generation of a living creature, flowed, as it were
in a funnel, down the middle of the universe, and was carried to the
bottom

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

by means of the vortex that swept up everything, and drew after it the
surrounding Spirit, <span id="fr_1319"></span>[1](#fn_1320) and so
gathering itself together as it were into the most productive \[form of
all\], it constituted a discrete state \[of things\].

“For just as a bubble is made in water, so a sphere-like hollow form
gathered itself together from all sides.

“Thereupon, itself being impregnated in itself, carried up <span
id="fr_1320"></span>[2](#fn_1321) by the Divine Spirit that had taken it
to itself as consort, it thrust forth its head (προέκυψεν <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[3](#fn_1322)) into the Light—this, the greatest
thing perchance that’s ever been conceived, as though it were out of the
Infinite Deep’s universe a work of art had been conceived and brought to
birth, an ensouled work \[in form\] like unto the circumference of eggs,
\[in speed\] like to the swiftness of a wing. <span
id="fr_1322"></span>[4](#fn_1323)

V. “I would therefore have you think of Cronus (Κρόνος) as Time
(Χρόνον <span id="fr_1323"></span>[5](#fn_1324)), and of Rhea (῾Ρέα) as
the flowing (τὸ ρέον) of the Moist Essence; for the whole of Matter
being moved in Time brought forth, as it were, an Egg, the whole
surrounding sphere-like Heaven (Ὀυρανός), which in the beginning was
full of the productive marrow, <span id="fr_1324"></span>[6](#fn_1325)
so that it might be able to bring forth elements and colours of all
kinds; and yet the

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

manifold appearances which it was ever presenting, all came from One
Essence and One Colour.

“For just as in the product of the peacock, although the colour of the
egg seems to be one, it has nevertheless potentially in it the countless
colours of the bird that is to be brought to perfection, so also the
Ensouled Egg conceived from Infinite Matter, when it is set in motion
from the perpetually flowing Matter below it, <span
id="fr_1325"></span>[1](#fn_1326) exhibits changes of all kinds.

“For from within the circumference a certain male-female Living Creature
is imaged out by the Foreknowledge of the Divine Spirit that indwells in
it, whom <span id="fr_1326"></span>[2](#fn_1327) Orpheus doth call
Manifestor (Φάνης—Phanēs), because when he is manifest (φανείς) the
universe shines forth from him, through the lustre of Fire, most
glorious of elements, perfected in the Moist \[Element\].

“Nor is this incredible, for in the case of glow-worms, for example,
Nature allows us to see a ‘moist light.’

VI\. “Accordingly the First Egg that was ever produced being gradually
warmed by the Living Creature within it, breaks open, and then there
takes shape and comes forth some such thing as Orpheus says:

> <span style="font-size: small">“When the skull-like <span
> id="fr_1327"></span>[3](#fn_1328) wide-yawning Egg did break
> \[etc.\]. <span id="fr_1328"></span>[4](#fn_1329) </span>

“So by the mighty power of Him who came forth and who made Himself
manifest, ‘the shell’ <span id="fr_1329"></span>[5](#fn_1330) receives
its articulation <span id="fr_1330"></span>[6](#fn_1331) and obtains its
orderly arrangement;

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

while He Himself presides as though it were upon a throne on Heaven’s
height, and in the \[realms\] ineffable sends forth His light all round
upon the Boundless Æon.”

##### COMMENTARY

This is evidently the Logos—the God from the Egg, and the God from the
Rock; for the Primal Firmament was symbolised as Rock, as Adamant; just
as in physical nature, the life-spark appears from the mineral kingdom.

The Logos presides in highest heaven, in the ineffable spaces, whence He
sends out His rays upon the Æon, that Bound of Bounds which is itself
Boundless. For the Egg may be thought of as the Boundary of some special
universe or system; whereas the Æon is the Boundary of all universes.

The information given in this quotation purports to be the Orphic
tradition of cosmogony; with this cosmogony all Hellenistic theologians
would be familiar, and therefore we are not surprised to find many
points of contact between it and the general ideas in our “Pœmandres”
cosmogenesis, which, though doubtless having an original nucleus of
Egyptian tradition in it, is nevertheless strongly overworked by minds
that were also saturated with the mingled traditions of Plato,
Pythagoras, and Orpheus.

Indeed, both “Plato” and “Pythagoras,” on their mystical side, are
strongly tinged with “Orpheus.” Now, Orphicism was the revival of
pre-Hesiodic Orphism initiated by Onomacritus under the Peisistratidæ.
Original Orphism was, in my opinion, a blend of Hellenic Bardic lore
with “Chaldæan” elements. It is not surprising, therefore, that when the
“Books of the Chaldæans,” collected for the Alexandrian Library, were

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

turned into Greek, great interest should have been taken in them by
Hellenistic scholars, who found therein a confirmation of the Greek
Wisdom of Orpheus, little suspecting that that Wisdom was in origin
partially from the same source.

##### THE SETHIAN GNOSIS

In illustration of this Chaldæo-Orphic symbolical cosmogony as
“philosophised” in a Hellenistic Gnostic environment, we will quote from
a system ascribed by Hippolytus to the Sēthians (a name indicating an
Egyptian environment), and brought by him into the closest connection
with those whom he calls the Naassenes—that is to say, with what he
considers to be one of the earliest forms of the Christian Gnosis, but
which, as we have shown, is a form of the pre-Christian Gnosis
overworked in Christian terms about the middle of the second century. Of
these Sēthians, Hippolytus <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1](#fn_1332) tells
us as follows:

“They think that there are Three Principles <span
id="fr_1332"></span>[2](#fn_1333) of the universals having certain
definite boundaries, and yet that each of these Principles possesses
boundless potentialities.

“Now, the Essences of these Principles (he says) are Light and Darkness;
and in the midst of these is pure Spirit.

“The Spirit, however, that is set in the midst of the Darkness that is
below and of the Light that is above, is not a spirit \[or breath\] like
a blast of wind or some light breeze that can be felt; but is as it were
the delicate scent of unguent or of incense compounded and

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

prepared,—a force of fragrance that travels with a motion so rapid as to
be quite inconceivable and far beyond the power of words to express.

“Now, since Light is above and Darkness below, and Spirit in some such
way as I have said between them,—the Nature of the Light is that it
shines forth from above, like a ray of the sun, into the Darkness
beneath, while that of the fragrance of the Spirit, which has the middle
rank, is, contrary wise, that it extends itself and is carried in every
direction; just as in the case of incense on a fire, we see its
fragrance carried in every direction.

“And such being the Power of the triply divided \[Principles\], the
combined Power of the Spirit and Light descends into the Darkness which
is set beneath them.

“And the Darkness is an awesome Water into which the Light together with
the Spirit is drawn down and transferred.

“The Darkness, however, is not without understanding, but quite
intelligent, and it knows that if Light were taken from Darkness,
Darkness would remain isolated, unmanifest, <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1](#fn_1334) splendourless, powerless, ineffectual,
strengthless.

“Wherefore is it constrained with all its intelligence and understanding
to hold down to itself the lustre and spark of the Light together with
the fragrance of the Spirit.

“And one can see an image of the nature of the latter in a man’s
face—\[namely\] the pupil of the eye, <span
id="fr_1334"></span>[2](#fn_1335) which is dark because of the waters
underlying it, yet illumined by Spirit.

“As, therefore, the Darkness contends for the Splendour, in order that
it may make a slave of the

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Light-spark and
see, so also the Light and the Spirit contend for their own Power; they
strive to raise and bring back to themselves those powers which are
mingled with the dark and awesome Water beneath.

“Now all the powers of the three Principles, being infinitely infinite
in number, are sagacious and intelligent each according to its own
essence. And though they are countless in multitude, yet, being
sagacious and intelligent, as long as they remain by themselves, they
are all at peace.

“If, however, one power is brought into contact with another power, the
dissimilarity in their juxtaposition brings about a certain motion and
energy that takes its shape from the concurrent motion of the
juxtaposition of the contacting powers. <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[1](#fn_1336)

“For the con-currence of the powers constitutes as it were the
impression (τύπος) of a seal struck off by concussion <span
id="fr_1336"></span>[2](#fn_1337) so as to resemble the \[die\] that
stamps the substances brought into contact with it.

“Since then the powers of the three Principles are infinite in number,
and from the infinite powers are infinite concurrences, images of
infinite seals are of necessity produced.

“These images, then, are the forms (ἰδέαι) of the different kinds of
living creatures.

“Now from the first mighty concurrences of the three Principles there
resulted a mighty type of seal—Heaven and Earth.

“And Heaven and Earth have a configuration

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

resembling a Womb, with the embryo <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1](#fn_1338) in the middle; and if (he says) one
would bring this to the test of sight, let him scrutinise scientifically
the gravid womb of whatsoever living creature he wishes, and he will
find the model of Heaven and Earth and of all things between them lying
before him without any alteration.

“So the configuration of Heaven and Earth was such that it resembled a
Womb as it were, according to the first concourse \[of the three
Principles\].

“And again in the midst of Heaven and Earth infinite concourses of
powers occurred, and every single concourse effected and expressed the
image of nothing else but a seal of Heaven and Earth—a thing resembling
a Womb.

“And in the Earth itself there developed from the infinite seals of
different kinds of living creatures, \[living things\] still more
infinite.

“And into all this infinity below the Heaven in the different kinds of
living creatures, the fragrance of the Spirit from above together with
the Light was sown and was distributed. <span
id="fr_1338"></span>[2](#fn_1339) . . .

“Accordingly there arose out of the Water a first-born source—Wind
vehement and boisterous—and cause of all genesis.

“For by making a certain seething <span
id="fr_1339"></span>[3](#fn_1340) in the waters it <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[4](#fn_1341) raises up waves from the waters.

“And the genesis of the waves, being as it were a

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

certain pregnant <span id="fr_1341"></span>[1](#fn_1342) impulse, is the
source of the production of man or mind, whenever \[this motion\]
quickens under the impulse of the Spirit.

“And whenever this wave, raised from the Water by the Wind, and
rendering nature pregnant, receives in itself the power of production of
the female, it keeps down the Light from above that has been sown into
it together with the fragrance of the Spirit,—that is to say, mind that
takes forms in the various types; that is a perfect god, brought down
from the Ingenerable Light from above and Spirit into a human nature, as
into a temple, by the course of Nature and motion of the Wind, generated
from Water, commingled and blended with bodies, as though he were the
salt of existing things and the light of the Darkness, struggling to be
freed from bodies, and unable to find liberation and the way out of
himself.

“For as it were a very minute spark . . . like a ray <span
id="fr_1342"></span>[2](#fn_1343) . . . .

“Every thought and care of the Light above, therefore, is how and in
what way mind may be liberated from the Death of the evil and dark
Body, <span id="fr_1343"></span>[3](#fn_1344) from the Father below, who
is the Wind that in ferment and turmoil raised up the waves and brought
to birth perfect mind, son of himself, and yet not his own in essence.

“For he was a ray from above, from that Perfect Light, overpowered in
the sinuous <span id="fr_1344"></span>[4](#fn_1345) and awesome and
bitter <span id="fr_1345"></span>[5](#fn_1346)

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

and blood-stained Water; and that Light is the Spirit of Light borne
upon the water. <span id="fr_1346"></span>[1](#fn_1347) . . .

“But the Wind, being both boisterous and vehement in its rush, is in its
whistling <span id="fr_1347"></span>[2](#fn_1348) like unto a Serpent—a
winged one.

“From the Wind, that is from the Serpent, the source of generation arose
in the way that has been said; all things receiving together the
beginning of generation.

“When then (he says) the Light and the Spirit have been received down
into the impure and disorderly Womb of manifold suffering, the
Serpent—the Wind of the Darkness, the First-born of the Waters—entering
in generated man, and the impure Womb neither loves nor recognises any
other form. <span id="fr_1348"></span>[3](#fn_1349)

“And so the Perfect Logos of the Light from above having made Himself
like unto the Beast, the Serpent, entered into the impure Womb, having
deceived it <span id="fr_1349"></span>[4](#fn_1350) through His
similitude to the Beast; in order that He may loose the bonds that are
laid upon the perfect mind that is generated in the impurity of the Womb
by the First-born of the Water—Snake, Wind, Beast.

“This (he says) is the Servant’s Form; <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[5](#fn_1351) and this is

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

the necessity of the Descent of the Logos of God into the Womb of the
Virgin.

“But it is not sufficient (he says) that the Perfect Man, the Logos, has
entered into the Womb of the Virgin and loosed the pains that are in
that Darkness; nay, but after entering into the foul mysteries in the
Womb, He washed Himself and drank the Cup of Living Water
bubbling-forth—a thing that everyone must do who is about to strip off
the Servant-Form and put on the Celestial Garment.”

There can be little doubt but that the main *ideas* in the background of
this system of the Gnosis are closely connected with general Orphic and
Chaldæan ideas, and also with the main schematology of our “Pœmandres”
tractate.

From the Orphic tradition handed on by Apion we have seen that the Æon
is the Circle of Infinitude and Eternity illumined by the Logos.

##### THE “MITHRIAC ÆON”

The whole of this Orphic lore (in other words, the Chaldæan
wisdom-teaching) seems to me to be summed up in one division of the
symbolism of the Mithra-cult, as may be seen by an inspection of the
monuments reproduced by Cumont, and especially those of the mysterious
figure which he calls “*la divinité léontocéphale,*” and the birth of
the God from the Rock; this seems to point, as we might very well
suspect, to a strong Chaldæan element in the Mithriac tradition.

Cumont <span id="fr_1351"></span>[1](#fn_1352) tells us that although
some scholars have rejected the name of “Mithriac Æon,” which was

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

given by Zoëga to this awe-inspiring mystic figure, <span
id="fr_1352"></span>[1](#fn_1353) in his opinion (and he knows more of
the subject than any other authority) it may very well have been
actually called Æon in the sacred books of the mysteries.

If, however, this was the case, the mystic meaning, says Cumont, was of
such a nature that it was concealed from the profane.

Our classical authorities inform us that the Magi expressed the name of
the Supreme God, which was in reality ineffable, by various substitutes.
The general name for the Mystery Deity was Cronus, and Cronus in the
sense of Time.

“The Mithriac Cronus is a personification of Time, and this fact, which
is now fairly established, permits us immediately to determine the
identity of this pseudonymous God.

“There is only one Persian divinity which he can possibly represent, and
that is Zervan Akarana, Infinite Time, whom, from the time of the
Achemenides, a sect of the Magi placed at the origin of things, and from
whom they would have both Ormuzd and Ahriman to have been born.

“It was this God that the adepts of the mysteries placed at the head of
the celestial hierarchy, and considered as the first principle; or, to
put it differently, it was the Zervanist system that the Mazdæans of
Asia Minor taught to the Western followers of the Iranian religion.”

This all seems to me to point not to a Persian origin

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

of the Æon, as Cumont supposes, but to a Chaldæan element dominating the
Mithriac form of the Magian tradition. <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1](#fn_1354)

##### PROBABLE DATE OF ORIGIN OF THE HELLENISTIC DOCTRINE

Now the Chaldæan and Egyptian wisdom-cultures had many root-ideas in
common (were they not regarded by the Greeks as *the* wisdom-traditions
*par excellence*?); we are not therefore surprised to find that Egypt,
with its ever-recurring grandiose mystery-phrases of enormous
time-periods, such as “He of the millions of years,” had on its own soil
a highly developed idea of Eternity and of Eternities—that is, of the
Æon and of the Æons; and indeed the strongly Egyptian forms of the
Gnosis, which we have preserved to us under Christian overworking, are
involved in the most complex æonology.

It seems, however, almost as though the evidence suggests that this
Egyptian element had been revivified, and rescued from the oblivion in
which it had been buried in a decadent age, in the symbolism of an
almost forgotten past, by a stream of Chaldæan ideas that poured into
Hellenistic circles in the early Alexandrian period. When precisely the
Æon-idea forced itself upon the philosophic mind of Alexandrian thinkers
as an unavoidable mystic necessity, it is difficult to say with any
certainty. It can, however, be said without fear of serious
contradiction that it may have done so from early Ptolemaic times, and
with certainty that it did so in the first century B.C. as truly as in
the first century A.D.

That the term Æon was in frequent use in the

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

popular Hermes-cult may be seen in Hermes-Prayer v. 4, where Thoth is
characterised as the “Æon of the Æons who changes himself into all forms
in visions.” So also in Prayer viii. 2, the Good Daimon, who has
different names given him in the different hours, is called
“Wealth-giving Æon.” So also with Isis, who is called Wisdom and Æon in
the Papyri. <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1](#fn_1355)

In conclusion, we may glance at what Reitzenstein (pp. 272 ff.) has to
say concerning this “*Aionenlehre*.”

##### ABRAXAS

The name Abraxas, which consisted of seven elements or letters, was a
mystery-designation of the God who combined in himself the whole power
of the Seven Planets, and also of the Year of 365 days, the sum of the
number-values of the letters of Abraxas working out to 365. This
mysterious Being was the “Year”; but the Year as the Eternity, also
conceived of in a spatial aspect, as the Spirit or Name that extends
from Heaven to Earth, the God who pervades and full-fills the Seven
Spheres, and the Three Hundred and Sixty-five Zones, the Inner God, “He
who has His seat within the Seven Poles—ΑΕΗΙΟΥΩ,” as the Papyri have it,
and also without them, as we shall see.

The mysterious formula “the Name of which the figure is 365” meets us in
such connections, that it cannot be taken to mean simply the “Year-God,”
but is a synonym of the Highest God, a secret, mysterious Being. In
brief it was, as we have seen, no other than the Lion-headed God, called
in Greek Æon.

Indeed, we know from Philo of Byblos <span
id="fr_1355"></span>[2](#fn_1356) that, at least in his day, the second
half of the first century A.D. (and,

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

for all we know, prior to it), there were in Phœnicia communities of the
Æon—of the Highest and Supercelestial One.

##### THE FEAST OF THE ÆON

The first dated use of the word in a religious sense is found in Messala
(who was Consul, 53 B.C.), as Johannes Lydus tells us. <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[1](#fn_1357) Moreover, Lydus informs us that the
Ancients (οἱ πάλαι) celebrated a Feast of the Æon on January 5th. <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[2](#fn_1358) This can be no other than the Feast of
which Epiphanius gives us such interesting details in treating of the
Epiphany, when he writes, after describing the festival in the Koreion
at Alexandria: <span id="fr_1358"></span>[3](#fn_1359)

“And if they are asked the meaning of this mystery, they answer and say:
To-day at this hour the Maiden (Korē), that is the Virgin, has given
birth to the Æon.” <span id="fr_1359"></span>[4](#fn_1360)

In the next paragraph Epiphanius designates this Æon as the
Alone-begotten. Here, then, we have striking evidence that in its
Egyptian environment the cult of the Æon was associated with
mystery-rites reminding us strongly of the symbolism of the
Christ-mystery.

##### THE QUINTESSENCE AND THE MONAD

Moreover, Messala <span id="fr_1360"></span>[5](#fn_1361) tells us of
this Æon, that He “who made all things and governs all things, joined

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

together by means of the surrounding Heaven the power and nature of
Water and Earth, heavy and downward, flowing down into the Depth, and
that of Fire and Spirit, light and rushing upward to the measureless
Height. It is this mightiest power of Heaven that hath bound together
these two unequal powers.”

Lydus (*ibid.*) furthermore tells us that the idea of the Æon was
associated by the Pythagoreans with the idea of the Monad; indeed, they
seem to have derived the word *aiōn* from ἰά, the Ionic form of μία
(one).

Any attempt to refer this Pythagorean identification to the earlier
Pythagoreans would be at once rejected by the majority of scholars, but
I believe myself that the original Pythagoreans were far too close to
the Borderland between mythology and philosophy not to have personified
or at least substantiated their “Numbers” and the Source of them. At
anyrate it is highly instructive to find Plato himself writing in the
*Timæus*:

##### THE ÆON IN PLATO

“And when the Father who begot it \[the Cosmos\] saw that by its motion
and its life it had become a likeness of the Everlasting Gods, He
marvelled, and in delight determined further to make it still more like
its Original. <span id="fr_1361"></span>[1](#fn_1362) And as the latter
is an Everlasting Living Being, He sought to make this \[Sensible\]
Universe as far as possible like it.

“Now the nature of the Living Being was eternal (αἰώνιος—æonian); but to
bestow this quality entirely on a generable creature was not possible.

“Accordingly He determined to make a moving

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

image of Eternity (Αἰῶνος); and so in setting the Heaven in order He
makes it an everlasting (αἰώνιον) image, moving according to number, of
Eternity (Αἰῶνος) that rests in One—an image which we have, you know,
called Time.” <span id="fr_1362"></span>[1](#fn_1363)

Here it is very plain that Æon is not Time, but the Paradigm
thereof—Eternity. It is the Consummation of the Eternal Gods—namely, the
Plērōma, the Monad *par excellence*. We, therefore, find already in
Plato the idea of the Æon fully developed. Did Plato “invent” it? Or did
he put an already existing idea into philosophical terms? He presumably
found it already existing. Was it then Orphic (Pythagorean), or did he
learn of it in Egypt? Who shall say precisely?

##### CONCERNING THE HELLENISTIC ORIGIN OF ÆONOLOGY

Seeing, however, that we find the idea of the Æon fully developed in
Plato, and seeing that Plato was, so to speak, scripture for our
Hermetic writers, it is exceedingly puzzling that we should find it
apparently introduced at a certain stage into the Trismegistic
literature as a new doctrine.

It may be, however, that those who had followed Plato on purely
philosophical lines had hitherto paid little attention to the idea of
the Æon, except as an ultimate principle beyond the reach of
speculation. When, however, the enthusiastic seership of mysticism dared
to soar beyond heaven into the Heaven of heavens, and so to divide the
Simplicity into an Infinitude of Multiplicity, the term Æon came to be
used no longer for a transcendent unity but as the connotation of a
grade of Being.

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

It may then have been that our Hermetic writers reasserted the use of
the term in its simpler philosophic meaning as a check to
over-enthusiastic speculation.

But even if it were a reaction against a too great luxury of
speculation, it must have been contemporaneous with the development of
æonology; so that in any case *C. H.* xi. (xii.) must be dated from this
point of view.

When æonology arose we cannot say precisely; but æonology in the Gnostic
sense of the term was, as we have seen, to some extent at least existing
as early as the earliest Christian documents.

##### THE ÆON THE LOGOS

Now though the Trismegistic tractate *C. H.,* xi. (xii.) is evidently in
literary contact with the *Timæus,* <span
id="fr_1363"></span>[1](#fn_1364) it nevertheless purports to give more
“esoteric,” or at any rate more precise, instruction than is to be found
in Plato’s famous cosmogonical treatise. It does not follow Plato, but
hands on an instruction that has already been formulated in a precise
and categorical fashion. The ladder of existence is God, Æon, Cosmos,
Time, Genesis;—each following one from the other.

Æon is the Power of God (§ 3), whereas Cosmos is God’s creation and work
(§§ 3, 4). The Æon, standing between God and Cosmos, is the Paradigm,
and so also the Son of God (§ 15), and the final end of man is that he
should become Æon (§ 20)—that is, Son of God. Æon is thus evidently the
Logos of God, or the Intelligible Cosmos, as distinguished from the
Sensible Cosmos. This

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Æon is the
Fullness in which all things move, and chiefly the Seven Cosmoi (§ 7).

##### THE ROMAN SÆCULUM-CULT DERIVED FROM EGYPT

Now, Reitzenstein (pp. 274 ff.) shows very clearly that the Cult of the
Saeculum or Æon was strongly developed in Roman theology in at least the
first century B.C. This is too early a date for us to assign this
development to the influence of the Mithras-cult. Can it then be that
Rome was influenced by Egypt? Such at anyrate is Reitzenstein’s opinion
(p. 277), who points to the fact that Messala, who is fully imbued with
the Æon-idea, was a contemporary of Nigidius, the most learned of the
Romans after Varro, and a Pythagorean philosopher of high attainments.
Now it is remarkable that in his work, *De Sphæra Barbarica,* Nigidius
treats of the *Egyptian* Sphere.

##### THE ÆONIC IMMENSITIES OF EGYPT

Egypt, as we have already remarked, at a very early date arrived at the
idea of eternal or at anyrate of enormously long periods of time, and
had symbolised this conception in a primordial syzygy or pair of Gods.
Indeed, the names of the primordial Time-pair, Ḥḥw (Ḥeḥu) and Ḥḥt
(Ḥeḥut), are immediately derived from “Ḥḥ,” generally translated
“Million,” but by Brugsch and others as Æon. <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1](#fn_1365) All the Egyptian Gods were Lords of
the Eternity or of the Eternities. But not only so, the

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

term “eternity” was used in connection with definite time-periods; for
instance, “in a million (or eternity) of thirty year periods.” And
again: “Thy kingdom will have the lastingness of eternity and of
infinitely many hundred-and-twenty-year periods; ten millions of thy
years, millions of thy months, hundred-thousands of thy days,
ten-thousands of thine hours.” <span id="fr_1365"></span>[1](#fn_1366)

Here we must remark the numbers 120 (that is 12 × 10) and 30; all
essential numbers of the Gnostic Plērōma of Æons.

It is also of interest in connection with the Time-pair, to note that
Horapollo, the Alexandrian grammarian, tells us that the Egyptians when
they desire to express the idea of Æon write “sun and moon” <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[2](#fn_1367) (i. 1), and when they want to write
“year” they draw “Isis,” that is “woman” (i. 3).

We thus see that in Egypt there were Æons of Periods or Years, and Years
of Æons. Above all these ruled the God of the Æons, the highest God of
many a mystic community.

##### A SONG OF PRAISE TO THE ÆON

And so we read the following song of praise to the Æon, inscribed on a
“secret tablet” by some unknown Brother of a forgotten Order:

1\. “Hail unto Thee, O thou All-Cosmos of æthereal Spirit! Hail unto
Thee, O Spirit, who doth extend from Heaven to Earth, and from the Earth
that’s in the middle of the orb of Cosmos to the ends of the Abyss!

2\. “Hail unto Thee, O Spirit who doth enter into me, who clingeth unto
me or who doth part thyself from

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

me, according to the Will of God in goodness of His heart!

3\. “Hail unto Thee, O thou Beginning and thou End of Nature naught can
move! Hail unto thee thou vortex of the liturgy <span
id="fr_1367"></span>[1](#fn_1368) unweariable of \[Nature’s\] elements!

4\. “Hail unto Thee, O thou Illumination of the solar beam that shines
to serve the world. Hail unto Thee, thou Disk of the night-shining moon,
that shines unequally! Hail, ye Spirits all of the æthereal statues \[of
the Gods\]!

5\. “Hail to you \[all\], whom holy Brethren and holy Sisters ought to
hail in giving of their praise!

6\. “O Spirit, mighty one, most mighty circling and incomprehensible
Configuration of the Cosmos, celestial, æthereal, inter-æthereal,
water-like, earth-like, fire-like, air-like, like unto light, to
darkness like, shining as do the stars,—moist, hot, cold Spirit!

7\. “I praise Thee, God of gods, who ever doth restore the Cosmos, and
who doth store the Depth away <span id="fr_1368"></span>[2](#fn_1369)
upon its throne of settlement no eye can see, who fixest Heaven and
Earth apart, and coverest the Heaven with thy golden everlasting
(αἰωνίαις) wings, and makest firm the Earth on everlasting thrones!

8\. “Thou who hangest up the Æther in the lofty Height, and scatterest
the Air with thy self-moving blasts, who mak’st the Water eddy round in
circles!

9\. “O Thou who raisest up the fiery whirlwinds, and makest thunder,
lightning, rain, and shakings of the earth, O God of Æons! Mighty art
thou, Lord God, O Master of the All!” <span
id="fr_1369"></span>[3](#fn_1370)

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

Here there is no separation of God as intra-cosmic and extra-cosmic; He
is both the one and the other. He is both the Fullness of the Godhead
and also the Fullness of Cosmos. He is both the Cosmos, and He who is
above the Cosmos and below the Cosmos. <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[1](#fn_1371)

##### THE DEMIURGIC ÆON

Reitzenstein (p. 278), referring to our Trismegistic tractate, *C. H.,*
xi. (xii.), points to the distinction made between Æon and God on one
side and Æon and Cosmos on the other. This, he thinks, shows signs of
the influence of a fundamental trait of Hellenistic theology which makes
the Demiurge the Second God.

However this may be, there certainly was a distinction drawn between the
Creative, or rather Formative, God and the Supreme Deity, in many a
Christian Gnostic System, and not unfrequently of a very disparaging
nature to the former. Already in Jewish mystic and philosophic (Gnostic)
circles a distinction had had to be drawn between the idea of God as the
Creator God, and the idea of God as the Ineffable Mystery of Mysteries.
This had been necessitated by the contact of the Jewish Gnostics with
the old wisdom-ideas and with the fundamental postulates of Greek
philosophy.

##### THE ÆON IN THEURGIC LITERATURE

Many examples could be given, <span id="fr_1371"></span>[2](#fn_1372)
but we prefer to follow Reitzenstein (p. 279) in his references to the
Magic Papyri, or Apocryphal literature of the same class,

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

and append the translation of two striking quotations, as opening up an
entirely novel side of the subject.

Thus in the eighth *Book of Moses,* we find the following passage in
which the Jewish Creator God is placed in the second rank as compared
with the Egyptian Supreme Principle.

“And God, looking down unto the earth, said: IAŌ! And all stood still,
and then came into being from His Voice a Great God, most mighty, who is
Lord of all things, who caused to stand the things that shall be; and no
longer was there any thing without order in the æthereal realms.” <span
id="fr_1372"></span>[1](#fn_1373)

So also in an invocation to an unknown God, most probably to the Spirit
to whom the Brother of the unknown community addressed his praise-giving
as given above—we meet with the same distinction.

“Thee, the only and blest Father of the Æons, I invoke with prayers like
unto Cosmos! <span id="fr_1373"></span>[2](#fn_1374)

“Come unto me who fillest the whole Cosmos with thy Breath, and dost
hang up on high the Fire out of the Water, <span
id="fr_1374"></span>[3](#fn_1375) and dost from out the Water separate
the Earth. . . . The Lord bore witness to thy Wisdom, that is the Æon,
and bade thee to have strength as He Himself hath strength.” <span
id="fr_1375"></span>[4](#fn_1376)

And, later on, the Theurgist exclaims:

“Receive my words as shafts of fire, for that I am God’s Man, for whom
was made the fairest plasm of spirit, dew <span
id="fr_1376"></span>[5](#fn_1377) and earth.”

He is a Man whose words are effective and bring all

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

things to pass; for his “words” are compelling “acts,” or “theurgic.”

Other passages are brought forward by Reitzenstein (pp. 280-286) to show
that the idea of the Logos or Æon as Second God was a fundamental
conception in Hellenistic theology.

This may very well have been the case in general Hellenistic theology;
but in philosophical circles, as we have pointed out in treating of the
Logos-idea in Philo, the distinction was formal and not essential. So
also in our Trismegistic treatises, which are saturated with
transcendental pantheistic or monistic, or rather panmonistic,
conceptions, if the Logos or Æon is momentarily treated of as apart from
Supreme Deity, it is not so in reality; for the Logos is the Season of
God, God in His eternal Energy, and the Æon is the Eternity of Deity,
God in His energic Eternity, the Rest that is the Source of all Motion.

For the fullest exposition of the Æon-doctrine in our Trismegistic
tractates, see *The Perfect Sermon,* xxx.-xxxii., and my commentary
thereon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[387:1](th145.htm#fr_1310) From Prof. Montet’s
report (*Asiatic Qr. Rev*., Oct. 1904) of the “Proceedings of the Second
International Congress of the History of Religions” (Bâle), Aug.
20-Sept. 2, 1904, I see that Reitzenstein presented a monograph on the
“Aion” to the Congress. I do not, however, know whether this has yet
been published.

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[388:1](th145.htm#fr_1311) *Clement. Hom.,*
VI. iii. ff.; ed. A. Schwegler (Stuttgart, 1847), pp. 168 ff.; ed. P. de
Lagarde (Leipzig, 1865), pp. 74 ff. See also Lobeck, *Aglaophamus,* pp.
475, 478; and my *Orpheus,* pp. 156 and 162, 163. For the latest
critical view on the Apion-speeches, see Waitz (H.), *Die
Pseudoklementinen Homilien und Rekognitionen* (*Texte und
Untersuchungen,* Neue Folge, Bd. X. Hft. IV.), pp. 251-256, “Der Dialog
des Klemens mit Appion über die heidnische Mythologie.”

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[388:2](th145.htm#fr_1312) *Il.,* vii. 99.
*Cf.* the Earth-and-Water of *C. H.,* i. 5.

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[388:3](th145.htm#fr_1313) *Theog.,* 116.

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[389:1](th145.htm#fr_1314) Orpheus apparently
does nothing of the kind, but draws a distinction between Chaos and the
Egg.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[389:2](th145.htm#fr_1315) *Cf.* the
Pythagorean Tetraktys, in the famous oath—“The Fourfold Root of
Ever-flowing Nature.”

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[389:3](th145.htm#fr_1316) Or impelled or
pushed in every direction.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[389:4](th145.htm#fr_1317) Thus forming the
Vortex Atom of the Cosmos.

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[389:5](th145.htm#fr_1318) The text reads: καὶ
οὕτως ἐξ ἀκουστοῦ τῶν πάνπων τὸ νοστιμώτατον. As ἐξ ἀκουστοῦ has
hitherto proved insoluble for all editors, I would suggest ἐξ ἀκουσίου.
As to νοστιμώτατον, L. and S. are of little assistance unless it is
taken in the sense of “ripest.” Sophocles gives “essential, valuable,
perfect, the best part of any thing.”

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[390:1](th145.htm#fr_1319) This probably means
the Spirit that ensouled Matter; or to use a more familiar expression,
the Spirit of God which “brooded over the Deep.”

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[390:2](th145.htm#fr_1320) *Sc.* out of the
Depth of Matter or Darkness, on to the surface of it, where was the
Light.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[390:3](th145.htm#fr_1321) *Cf. C. H.,* i. 14:
“bent his face downwards” (παρέκυψεν), and note thereon.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[390:4](th145.htm#fr_1322) According to
Basilides the “wings” of the Sonship are the Holy Spirit. This symbolism
is presumably to be connected with the Egyptian “Winged Globe.” See *F.
F. F.,* p. 26.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[390:5](th145.htm#fr_1323) A very ancient
word-play.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[390:6](th145.htm#fr_1324) Sometimes used for
brain. *Cf. C. H.,* x. (xi.) 11, and the Jewish Commentator in the
Naassene Document. This is the Spermatic Essence of the Logos.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[391:1](th145.htm#fr_1325) It is thought of as
floating in this Matter.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[391:2](th145.htm#fr_1326) The Living One.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[391:3](th145.htm#fr_1327) κραναίου—an
otherwise unknown word. Many emendations have been suggested; but it
does not seem to be necessary to go beyond κρανίον, especially as we
have seen (for instance, in the Naassene Document) that this was a
favourite symbol of the Heaven.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[391:4](th145.htm#fr_1328) Unfortunately, the
rest of the Orphic quotation is not given.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[391:5](th145.htm#fr_1329) Or body—the matter
in the Egg.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[391:6](th145.htm#fr_1330) ἁρμονίαν—its
fitting together, or harmony.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[393:1](th145.htm#fr_1331) *Philos.,* v. 19;
ed. C., p. 209 ff.; ed. D. and S., pp. 198 ff.; ed. M., 138 ff.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[393:2](th145.htm#fr_1332) ἀρχάς—sources or
beginnings.

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[394:1](th145.htm#fr_1333) ἀφανές—the opposite
of Phanes.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[394:2](th145.htm#fr_1334) Have we here any
further clue to the title Κόρη Κόσμου?

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[395:1](th145.htm#fr_1335) I may be mistaken,
but the ideas involved in this exposition seem to be precisely the same
as those involved in the most modern dynamic theories of atomicity,
except that the atoms or rather monads of our Gnostics are intelligent.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[395:2](th145.htm#fr_1336) Lit., con-currence.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[396:1](th145.htm#fr_1337) Lit., navel; but
the word stands metaphorically for anything like a navel—*e.g.* the boss
of a shield, a knob of any kind; hence any centre, or nucleus.

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[396:2](th145.htm#fr_1338) Hippolytus here
seems to have omitted some important section of his source from his
summary; in any case the text of that which follows is very corrupt, and
in some important details demonstrably imperfect, as may be seen by
comparing the Epitome, X. iv.

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[396:3](th145.htm#fr_1339) Or ferment.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[396:4](th145.htm#fr_1340) *Sc.* Wind.

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[397:1](th145.htm#fr_1341) ἐγκύμων—a play on
κῦμα, which means embryo as well as wave.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[397:2](th145.htm#fr_1342) The text is here
destroyed beyond hope of conjecture.

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[397:3](th145.htm#fr_1343) *Sc.* Darkness.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[397:4](th145.htm#fr_1344) σκολιῷ. *Cf.* the
σκολιῶς of *C. H.,* i. 4.

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[397:5](th145.htm#fr_1345) Cf, the Naassene
Hymn: “She seeks to flee the bitter Chaos”; and compare Jacob Böhme’s
“Bitterness,” and also his “three Principles,” with those of our system.
The analogies are striking, and yet Jacob could not possibly have known
this system physically.

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[398:1](th145.htm#fr_1346) The following lines
are destroyed beyond the power of reconstruction.

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[398:2](th145.htm#fr_1347) In the case of a
serpent this would be “hissing”; σύριγμα, however, is properly the sound
of a pipe, and puts us in mind of the Syriktēs of the Naassene Document.

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[398:3](th145.htm#fr_1348) *Sc.* than that of
the Serpent.

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[398:4](th145.htm#fr_1349) *Sc.* the Womb.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[398:5](th145.htm#fr_1350) *Cf.* Philipp., ii.
7: “But He emptied Himself, taking on the Servant’s Form, being made in
the likeness of men.” The “emptying” or κένωσις was the change from the
πλήρωμα or Fullness of Light to the κένωμα or Emptiness of Darkness.
Paul (or the writer of the Epistle, whoever he was) is here using the
technical language of the Gnosis.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[399:1](th145.htm#fr_1351) *Textes et
Monuments Figurés relatifs aux Mystères de Mithra* (Bruxelles, 1899), i.
76 ff., where all the references are given.

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[400:1](th145.htm#fr_1352) A Being with lion’s
head, and eagle’s wings, and brute’s feet, and human body, enwrapped
with a serpent, standing on a globe and holding the keys of life and
death in its two hands. There are many variants, however, all of them
highly instructive, as pourtraying the Autozoon, or Living Creature in
itself, the summation of all forms of life, including man.

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[401:1](th145.htm#fr_1353) Reitzenstein (p.
276) is also of this opinion.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[402:1](th145.htm#fr_1354) R. 270.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[402:2](th145.htm#fr_1355) *Ap.* Euseb.,
*Præp. Evang.,* I. 10, 7; 34 B.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[403:1](th145.htm#fr_1356) *De Mens.,* iv.
(ed. Wünsch, p. 64, 6).

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[403:2](th145.htm#fr_1357) Or rather 6th.
Reitzenstein’s (p. 274) gloss (πρὸ εἰδῶν) to ἐπὶ τῆς πέμπτης, is
erroneous, for this would make the date January 11th.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[403:3](th145.htm#fr_1358) For a translation
of the passage, see the Commentary on the *K. K.* Excerpts in treating
of the term “Virgin of the World.”

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[403:4](th145.htm#fr_1359) Epiphanius,
*Haer.,* li. 22; ed. Dindorf, ii. 483. *Cf. D. J. L.,* pp. 410 f., “The
Crucifixion and Resurrection Mystery-Rite.”

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[403:5](th145.htm#fr_1360) Quoted by
Macrobius, *Saturnal.,* I. ix.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[404:1](th145.htm#fr_1361) That is, the Ideal
Cosmos.

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[405:1](th145.htm#fr_1362) *Tim*., 37 C, D.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[406:1](th145.htm#fr_1363) *Cf.* § 1: “As many
men say many things, and these diverse about the All and Good”; and
*Tim.,* 29 C: “If then, O Socrates, since many men say many things about
the Gods and the genesis of the All.”

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[407:1](th145.htm#fr_1364) Budge (*op. cit.,*
i. 285) writes: “According to the late Dr Brugsch (*Religion,* p. 132),
the name Ḥeḥ is connected with the word which indicates an undefined and
unlimited number, *i.e.* ḥeḥ; when applied to time the idea suggested is
‘millions of years,’ and Ḥeḥ is equivalent to the Greek αἰών.”

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[408:1](th145.htm#fr_1365) Brugsch,
*Wörterbuch,* vi. 839.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[408:2](th145.htm#fr_1366) The usual symbols
for “everlasting.”

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[409:1](th145.htm#fr_1367) Or
service—λειτουργία.

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[409:2](th145.htm#fr_1368) θησαυρίσας—or
treasure away.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[409:3](th145.htm#fr_1369) Wessely, *Denkschr.
d. K. K. Akad.* (1888), p. 72, 11. 1115 ff.; R. 277, 278.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[410:1](th145.htm#fr_1370) *Cf.* R. 28;
Hermes-Prayer, vii. 1.

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[410:2](th145.htm#fr_1371) See my *Fragments
of a Faith Forgotten*.

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[411:1](th145.htm#fr_1372) Dieterich,
*Abraxas,* 184-99.

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[411:2](th145.htm#fr_1373) That is,
presumably, “offerings of the reason,” as our tractates have it; or
prayers that put the mind in sympathy with the true order of things.

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[411:3](th145.htm#fr_1374) The Heaven Ocean.

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[411:4](th145.htm#fr_1375) Wessely, *Denkschr.
d. K. K. Akad.* (1888), p. 73, 11. 1168 ff.

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[411:5](th145.htm#fr_1376) Or pure water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Seven Zones and their Characteristics](th146)
