[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th143)  [Next](th145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

### X

#### “HERMAS” AND “HERMES”

##### AN ANTICIPATION

<span class="smallcaps">When</span>, in a recent book, <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[1](#fn_1278) I was treating of the Early Church
document *The Shepherd of Hermas,* in connection with the ancient and
mysterious *Book of Elxai,* which, according to Epiphanius, circulated
among the Essenes, Nazorenes, Ebionites, and Sampsæans, I wrote as
follows:

“It is also of very great interest to notice the many intimate points of
contact between the contents of the Apocalyptic Hermas and the teaching
of the Early ‘Shepherd of Men’ tractate of the mystic school who looked
to Hermes the Thrice-Greatest as their inspirer, that is to say, the
earliest deposit of the Trismegistic literature. But that is another
story which has not yet been told.”

At the same time, all unknown to me, Reitzenstein must have written, or
have been writing, his learned pages on “Hermas and Poimandres,” coming
to practically the same conclusion as I had in cruder form expressed
several years earlier, when commenting on Hilgers’ theory <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[2](#fn_1279) that the “Shepherd of Men” was

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

written in opposition to the “Shepherd of Hermas,” and suggesting that
if there were any dependence of one on the other, it was in exactly the
reverse sense to that of Hilger’s assumption. <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1](#fn_1280)

##### THE HIGHER CRITICISM OF “THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS”

Like all the other extant extra-canonical documents of the Early Church,
and especially the Antilegomena, as Eusebius calls them, that is to say
books disputed in his day but earlier admitted by wide circles into the
canon, *The Shepherd of Hermas* has been submitted to the most searching
analysis by modern criticism. Though its unity is still strenuously
defended by some scholars, the majority are convinced of its composite
nature; and I follow Hilgenfeld, <span id="fr_1280"></span>[2](#fn_1281)
who detects in the present form of this document three elements, or, so
to say, three deposits: (i.) The Apocalyptic—Viss. i.-iv.; (ii.) The
Pastoral—Vis. v.-Sim. vii.; (iii.) The Secondary, or appendix of the
latest redactor—Simm. viii.-x. “Hermas i.” and “Hermas ii.” cite nothing
from any of the canonical books of the New Testament, and this should
be, for most scholars, a striking indication of their early date.

##### THE INTRODUCTION OF THE “PASTORAL HERMAS”

“Hermas ii.,” the “Pastoral Hermas,” begins as follows: <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[3](#fn_1282)

1\. “Now when I had prayed in my house, and sat me

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

down upon my couch, there entered a man of glorious appearance, in the
guise of a Shepherd, clad in a white skin, <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[1](#fn_1283) with a wallet on his shoulders, and a
staff in his hand. And he embraced me, and I embraced him. <span
id="fr_1283"></span>[2](#fn_1284)

2\. “And straightway he sat down by my side. He saith to me: I am sent
by the most Sovereign Angel, that I may dwell with thee for the rest of
the days of thy life.

3\. “I thought that he had come to tempt me; <span
id="fr_1284"></span>[3](#fn_1285) and I say unto him: Who art thou? For
I do know (say I) into whose charge I have been given. He saith to me:
Dost thou not know? Nay—answer I. I am (saith he) the Shepherd <span
id="fr_1285"></span>[4](#fn_1286) into whose charge thou hast been
given.

4\. “E’en as he spoke, his aspect changed, and I knew him, that it was
he to whom I had been given in charge.”

##### COMPARISON WITH OUR “PŒMANDRES”

If we now compare the Greek text of this interesting passage with that
of the introductory paragraphs of the “Pœmandres,” it will be found
impossible to refer their striking similarities merely to a common type
of expression; the verbal agreements are too precise, and

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

stand out convincingly at the first glance, without needing the
assistance of the large type in which Reitzenstein (pp. 11, 12) has had
them printed in his reproduction of the texts.

Most remarkable of all, however, is the similarity of ideas; for
“Hermas” as for “Hermes” the Shepherd is not only a shepherd but a
“shepherd of men,” even as in a different connection but in the same
circle of ideas Peter and others were to become “fishers of men.” <span
id="fr_1286"></span>[1](#fn_1287)

Now, not only on general grounds is it difficult for any one who has
carefully studied the two documents, to believe that the writer of the
philosophic-mystical treatise not only had the Christian apocalyptic
writing before him but took it as his point of departure; but, even if
we are still strongly dominated by what has hitherto been the
traditional view in all such questions, and cling to the theory that
when there is similarity the Christian scripture must necessarily have
been first in the field, it is very difficult to believe that a copier
of “Hermas” should have left no traces of an acquaintance with the very
distinctive feature of the robe and staff and wallet of the shepherd,
and of the conversation which follows in what, on this theory, would be
the presupposed original.

##### THE POPULAR SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATION OF THE SHEPHERD

The mystical representation and thought-atmosphere of the writer or
redactor of our present “Pœmandres” are far removed from any direct
traces of contact with the folk-consciousness, in which the
appurtenances mentioned by “Hermas” were the typical literary
description

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

of a shepherd since the time of Theocritus; <span
id="fr_1287"></span>[1](#fn_1288) not only so, but this was the symbolic
representation of the “Shepherd of Men” in the general Hellenistic
religious consciousness. Indeed, we find unquestionable proofs that
Hermes was pre-eminently regarded as the “Good Shepherd,” and a figure
of him with staff and wallet and single robe was a great favourite in
the popular cult. <span id="fr_1288"></span>[2](#fn_1289)

In one passage <span id="fr_1289"></span>[3](#fn_1290) in which mention
is made of this wallet and staff, further details are given showing that
these simple symbols were well understood. The right hand is raised, and
the left holds staff and wallet. Moreover, the staff has a serpent
entwined round it, and Hermes is clad in a single robe. Like Isis, he
stands upon the world-sphere, which has also a serpent twined round it.
Hermes here represents the Mind or Logos, the father-mother (staff and
wallet) force of nature; with the “left” he brings into generation, with
the “right” he leads souls out of genesis, either to death, or
regeneration. In this prayer, Hermes (as the sun) is called “the
Shepherd who hath his fold in the West.” <span
id="fr_1290"></span>[4](#fn_1291)

It is to be further remarked that Hermes is in the dress of the
“Poor,” <span id="fr_1291"></span>[5](#fn_1292) and of the
“Naked.” <span id="fr_1292"></span>[6](#fn_1293)

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

##### THE NAME “HERMAS”

But to return to *Hermas*. Why “Hermas” of all names in the world in
this connection? We have a large literature in which “Hermes” plays the
part of seer, and prophet, and revealer, and writer of sacred
scriptures; in it, moreover, he figures as the beloved disciple of the
Heavenly Mind, the Shepherd of Men. But what have we in Christian
tradition to explain the name “Hermas”? Nothing, absolutely nothing, but
contradictory hypotheses which try to discover a historic Hermas so as
to authenticate the provenance of what is manifestly, like nearly every
similar document of the time, pseudepigraphic. In my opinion, indeed,
the very name Hermas betrays more clearly than anything else the
“Hermes” source of the Christian writer’s setting of part of his most
interesting apocalyptic. “Hermas” is because of “Hermes,” rather than
“Hermes” in answer to “Hermas,” as Hilgers would have it.

##### AN EARLY FORM OF THE “PŒMANDRES”

This, however, does not mean to say that “Hermas” took the setting of
the introduction of his Pastoral apocalypses from precisely the same
text of the “Pœmandres” which now lies before us, for our present text
is manifestly the redaction of an earlier form; so that if we could
recover the other form we should in all probability find some additional
verbal agreement of “Hermas” with “Hermes.”

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

That the ideas of the “Pœmandres” treatise were the mystical and
philosophical side of much that appears in the popular cult of the time,
may be seen by an inspection of the prayers from the Magic Papyri which
we have translated. <span id="fr_1293"></span>[1](#fn_1294) In them the
Mind, as the Shepherd of Men, and the Revealer of the Light, is clearly
set forth. Reitzenstein’s view (p. 32), accordingly, is that the
Christian writer must have taken his description of the Shepherd from
what originally was a fuller text of the “Pœmandres” than the one
preserved to us, and that this will account for several features which
would otherwise be peculiar to “Hermas.” This text was in closer verbal
agreement with the general language of the popular Hermes religion as
preserved to us in the Hermes-Prayers. <span
id="fr_1294"></span>[2](#fn_1295)

##### THE HOLY MOUNT

But the direct points of contact between “Hermas” and the Trismegistic
literature are not confined to the “Pœmandres” document. As the original
writer of “Hermas” was dependent on “Hermes” for the setting of the
introduction to his Pastoral apocalypses, so also it is highly probable
that the redactor was influenced by a lost treatise referred to in the
introduction of “The Sacred Sermon on the Mountain,” *C. H.,* xiii.
(xiv.).

In this treatise reference is made to one of the now lost “General
Sermons,” <span id="fr_1295"></span>[3](#fn_1296) the scene of which
also took

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

place on a mountain. For in connection with it mention is made by Tat of
his passing over a mountain, or ascending a mountain, at the beginning
of his noviciate, when he became a “suppliant”; <span
id="fr_1296"></span>[1](#fn_1297) while it is further stated by Tat that
at that stage the doctrine was not clearly explained, but rather hidden
in riddles; for that as yet he was not sufficiently purified, and made
“a stranger to the world-illusion.”

Now, it is remarkable that “Hermas,” in the appendix to the book (Sim.
ix.), tells us that after these revelations the Shepherd came to him
again, and told him that much had not been explained because of his
“weakness in the flesh”; but now that he has been strengthened by the
Spirit, the Shepherd will explain all “with greater clearness.” He then
takes him away into Arcadia (a very unexpected locality for a Christian
writer in Rome to choose), to a “breast-like mountain,” where he has the
further teaching revealed to him.

But, strangely enough, it was precisely in Arcadia that the chief
Hellenic cult of Hermes existed, as stated by Lactantius, basing himself
on the common belief at Rome; <span id="fr_1297"></span>[2](#fn_1298)
and from Arcadia it was that Hermes, according to a tendency-legend that
even at Rome went back at least to the second century B.C., set forth to
teach the Egyptians.

##### “GNOSTIC” ELEMENTS

Moreover, “Hermas” is throughout strongly tinged with “Gnostic”
elements. As I wrote in my last book, <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[3](#fn_1299) it is practically one of the very
numerous

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

permutations and combinations of the Sophia-mythus—one of the many
settings-forth of the mystic lore and love of the Christ and the Sophia,
or Wisdom, of the Son of God and His spouse or sister, the Holy Spirit,
of the King and Queen, of the Lord and the Virgin Church. In its most
instructive series of visions are depicted the mystic scenes of the
allegorical drama of man’s inner nature—the mystery-play of all time.

But when we say “Gnostic” we mean much that is also Hellenistic
mysticism, and therefore much that is also “Hermetic,” for in the
Trismegistic literature there is set forth a Gnosis of a far simpler
type than in any of the Christian systems technically called “Gnostic.”

##### THE VICES AND VIRTUES

A striking example of the similarity of ideas of this nature is found in
comparing the list of twelve vices and ten (seven and three) virtues,
given in *C. H.,* xiii. (xiv.) 7-10, <span
id="fr_1299"></span>[1](#fn_1300) with “Hermas,” Sim. ix. 15, 1-3, where
twelve “virgins,” each bearing the name of a virtue, are set over
against twelve “women clothed in black,” each bearing the name of a
vice; and with “Hermas,” Vis. iii. 8, 7, where seven women, each in turn
the mother of the other, are called by the names of seven virtues.

We need not, of course, necessarily suppose any direct contact in this
case, though it is curious that the list of virtues occurs precisely in
the sermon “On the Mountain”; but both writers clearly move in, or are
influenced by, the same circle of ideas, and that, too, ideas of a very
special nature.

The above points are sufficient for our purpose, and throw a most
interesting light on one element in the

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

composition of the very ancient Christian document whose exclusion from
the canon, after enjoying for so many years practically canonical
authority, is to be regretted.

##### THE EARLY DATE OF THE ORIGINAL “HERMAS”

Now, “Apocalyptic Hermas” is distinctly “anti-Pauline,” and perhaps this
more than anything else accounts for the final exclusion of the book
from the canon; it is therefore in vain to seek in it quotations from
any of the Pauline Letters. But what is still more remarkable, neither
it nor the “Pastoral Hermas” quote from any of the Canonical Gospels.
This argues a very early date.

If, then, we are inclined to accept the statement of the writer of the
Muratorian Fragment (*c.* 170 A.D.) that “Hermas” was written at Rome
during the bishopric of Pius (140-*c.* 155 A.D.), this must refer to the
completed work of the last redactor who is held responsible for “Hermas
iii.,” and who was acquainted with several books of the canon. The
“Pastoral Hermas” may thus be fairly pushed back to the beginning of the
first century.

We have also to remember—a point which Reitzenstein does not seem to
have taken into consideration—not only that the Greek original of our
form of “Hermas” is lost, but that the Old Latin version has also
disappeared, and that we possess only a Greek retranslation from the
Latin. <span id="fr_1300"></span>[1](#fn_1301) Under these
circumstances, it is still more surprising that such strong traces of
direct literary dependence on the original form of the “Pœmandres”
introduction should still remain in our “Hermas.”

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

##### THE DEPENDENCE THEORY TO BE USED WITH CAUTION

It would, however, in my opinion be a grave mistake to push the theory
of literary dependence too far, and to seek to account for the main
content of “Hermas” on any theory of direct borrowing from allied
sources, or even solely of direct external conditioning by the mystical
and theological ideas of the time. There is no *a priori* reason against
the high probability that the original writer was recording some genuine
inner experiences, however much, as was the fashion of the time, and of
other times and climes, they may have been expanded, interpolated, and
polished by literary art.

It is true that all such inner experiences would be strongly conditioned
by the prior conceptions, thought-tone, and theological beliefs of the
writer, and by the current and traditional types of such experiences
known in his day. Indeed, it is very difficult anywhere to meet with the
record of visions or apocalyptic utterances which are not so
conditioned. The Buddhist seer, sees in the mode of traditional Buddhist
conceptions of the unseen; the Hellenic mantis and sibyl find themselves
in an invisible world of the familiar nature known to them from the
mythologists, and poets, and mystery-traditions; the Egyptian prophet
moves amid the familiar topography and schematology of the Amenti of his
nation; even an Ezekiel sees in the symbols of the Babylonian cultus;
while the Christian mystic invariably finds himself in the conventional
heaven of the saints and the hell of the sinners.

It is not, therefore, necessary to follow Reitzenstein (pp. 8-11) in
detail, when he seeks to show the strong influence of heathen mystical
literature on the early

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christian document
we are discussing, and to point to striking parallels between the
setting of the first four visions of “Hermas,” and the visions of
Zosimus, as preserved in the fragments of his “Acts,” <span
id="fr_1301"></span>[1](#fn_1302) or the “Visit to Hades” of Setme and
Si-Osiri, and their passing through the Seven Halls, <span
id="fr_1302"></span>[2](#fn_1303) as partially preserved in the Demotic
“Tales of Khamuas.” <span id="fr_1303"></span>[3](#fn_1304)

It is true that Zosimus, who nourished towards the end of the third
century, was a member of the Pœmandres community, and, therefore, what
he has to say is of great interest to us, for doubtless his visions were
strongly conditioned by the Trismegistic tradition and especially by the
Isis-type of its literature, and the cognate Egyptian “Books of Hermes”;
but the points on which Reitzenstein lays stress seem somewhat too
general to allow of our drawing any direct conclusion with regard to
“Hermas” and “Hermes.”

There is a certain similarity; but our information is too scanty to
permit of any precise drawing of general conclusions. There is, however,
a valuable piece of information which prevents us from attributing all
the similarities which may be noticed purely to the general
thought-atmosphere of the times. In one particular at least, we can be
more definite.

##### THE VISIONS OF CRATES

Zosimus is not the only follower of Thrice-greatest Hermes whose visions
are still on record. Crates also

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

has left an account of his mystic experiences, though unfortunately
transmitted to us only in Arabic translation from the original
Greek. <span id="fr_1304"></span>[1](#fn_1305)

Crates leaves his body and enters the unseen world. “While I was
praying,” he writes, “I felt myself suddenly carried into the airs \[of
heaven\], following the same path as the sun and moon.” Here he meets
with Thrice-greatest Hermes in the guise of “an old man, the most
beautiful of men, seated on a chair; he was clad in white raiment, and
held a book in his hand resting on the arm of the chair.”

Compare this with “Hermas” (Vis. ii. 2, 2): “I see opposite me a chair,
and on it a covering of wool white as hail; <span
id="fr_1305"></span>[2](#fn_1306) then came there an old woman, in
shining white raiment, having a book in her hand, and sat down alone.”

After this revelation, and when the “old woman” had ceased reading from
the book, four young men came and carried off the chair, and departed
with it to the East (*ibid.,* 4, 1).

Here again it is of interest to compare this with the introduction to a
magical “light-ritual,” where the seer has a vision of four men with
crowns on their heads who bring in the “throne of the god.” <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[3](#fn_1307)

Crates is taught from the book and bidden to write what he is told.
“Make thy book according to the instructions which I have given; and
know that I am with thee and will never leave thee till thou hast
accomplished all.”

So also “Hermas”; compare also the last sentence

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

with the phrase in the Introduction to the “Pastoral Hermas”: “I am
sent . . . that I may dwell with thee for the rest of the days of thy
life.”

In another vision, Crates is instructed in a dialogue which strongly
reflects the style and substance of our Trismegistic sermons. And in yet
another he moves in the psychic reflection of the setting of the now for
the most part lost Isis-type of the literature, which has a more
strongly Egyptian colouring. He is transported to yet another heaven and
firmament, and there sees the temple of Ptah (Hephæstus), and the statue
of Venus (Isis), which holds converse with him.

He was then evidently saturated with the Trismegistic tradition, and had
access to treatises which are now, unfortunately, lost to us, for it is
just this type of the literature which shows signs of the more direct
influence of Egyptian ideas, and the mention of the temple of Ptah is a
striking confirmation that Reitzenstein is on the right track in his
analysis of the oldest deposit of the “Pœmandres,” which he connects
with the Ptah-tradition.

##### THE GENERAL CHRISTIAN “MANY” AND THE GNOSTIC “FEW”

That the end and aim of the later Egyptian religion, and of all
Hellenistic religious circles in general, was a Gnosis, or definite
mystical experience in the form of visions and apocalypses, is manifest
on all sides; and that this also was the chief interest of very numerous
circles in the Early Church is a fundamental fact in the study of
Christian origins which should not be impatiently brushed on one side,
or minimised almost to extinction as of no real importance, but which
should be restored to the first rank in seeking

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

an explanation of the many obscure problems of these early days which no
purely objective considerations will solve.

That the General Christian of these days, as of all subsequent
centuries, had naturally much to learn in these matters from the trained
Mystic, whether of his own faith or of another, is saying nothing to his
discredit, for he naturally belonged to the “many” who were striving to
become the “few.” General Christianity, however, spread so rapidly that
the definite cultivation of the spiritual faculties practised by the
early contemplatives of the faith soon gave place to a fanatical
enthusiasm for a misunderstood monkdom, which swamped the monasteries
with a flood of the “many,” who were often without any true vocation for
the holy life, and not unfrequently quite ignorant of the elements of
contemplation.

We need not speak of the wild fanaticism of warrior monkdom let loose
with pick and hatchet and fire-brand to destroy the treasures of
religious art throughout the beautiful Hellenic world, but even among
the quiet and peaceable brethren there was much ignorance. How unknowing
some of these good folk were, we may learn from a naïve story, the very
simplicity of which convinces the reader of its genuineness.

Perhaps some one may here interject: But this has nothing to do with
“Hermas”! Perhaps not; but it has a great deal to do with a proper
understanding of the history of the development of General Christianity
and its relationship to the deeper religious consciousness of the first
centuries. When, then, I read the Greek text of this simple story, as
reproduced by Reitzenstein, <span id="fr_1307"></span>[1](#fn_1308) I
thought that some who could not read

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greek, but who
take a very deep interest in such matters, might like to hear it, and so
I have set it down in English.

##### THE STORY OF ABBOT OLYMPIUS

The story runs as follows:

“Abbot Olympius <span id="fr_1308"></span>[1](#fn_1309) said that one
day a priest of the \[Heathen\] Greeks came down to Scetis; <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[2](#fn_1310) he came to my cell and passed the
night there.

“Seeing the manner of life of the monks, he saith to me: ‘Living in this
way, do ye not enjoy visions from your God?’ ‘Nay!’ I answer.

“Then saith the priest to me: ‘So long as we duly serve our God with
holy deeds, he hideth nought from us, but revealeth unto us his
mysteries. And ye, in spite of all your great labours—watchings, keeping
silence, disciplines—sayest thou, ye see nought? Assuredly, then, if ye
see nought, ye have let evil reasonings come into your hearts which shut
you from your God; and ’tis for this cause his mysteries are not
revealed to you.’

“And I went and told the elder \[brethren\] the words of the priest; and
they were astonished and agreed that so it was. For impure reasonings do
shut off God from man.”

I do not exactly understand what is the precise meaning of λογισμούς,
which usually means

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

“reasonings,” and seems on the face of it to suggest that the monks’
intellectual grasp of the matter was at fault. It may, however, mean
simply that their “thoughts” were impure. But this is not any more
satisfactory, for the monks must have known already that impure thoughts
were to be driven out.

What is clear is that the “priest of the Greeks” had personal experience
of these pious exercises, and came from a circle where such things were
normally practised; he, moreover, knew what was the reason for the
monks’ non-success in contemplation. He knew that it all depended on
thought, and that, too, on “good thought,” so that the “Good” might
descend on the “good,” as the Hermes-Prayer (i. 9, 13) says. But he knew
more than this; he knew that there was also need of “right thought,” of
Gnosis as well as of faith, of the proper use of the intelligence and
the driving out of erroneous ideas with regard to the nature of God.

##### A FINAL WORD

But for a final word on “Hermas.” This early document was written at
Rome; so all are agreed. It would, then, seem necessary to allow of
sufficient time for a wide circulation of the older form of the
“Pœmandres,” before it could reach Rome from Egypt. This time could not
have been short, for it must be reckoned not by geographical
considerations, which are hardly of any consequence in this connection,
but by the fact that the “Pœmandres” was the gospel of a school that
laid the greatest possible stress on secrecy. How, then, could a
Christian writer have got possession of a copy? Had the pledge of
secrecy already by this time been removed? This is not credible, for
later Trismegistic documents still lay the greatest stress upon it.

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

Were, then, the early Christian mystical writers in intimate
relationship with such circles as the Pœmandres-community? Some Gnostics
undoubtedly were; was the writer of “Hermas”? Was there once friendship
where subsequently was bitter strife?

Such and many other most interesting questions arise, but there is
little hope that any satisfactory answer will be given them until the
work on the mystical religious environment of the time has been pushed
forward to such a point, that men may gradually become accustomed to the
view that much of the secret of the Origins lies concealed in that very
environment.

In any case, the way is cleared for pushing back the earlier “Pœmandres”
document well into the first century, and for ranking it, therefore, as
at least contemporary with the earliest of the New Testament writings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[369:1](th144.htm#fr_1277) *Did Jesus Live 100
B.C.?—An Enquiry into the Talmud Jesus Stories, the Toldoth Jeschu, and
Some Curious Statements of Epiphanius* (London, 1903), pp. 365 ff.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[369:2](th144.htm#fr_1278) See Hilgers (J.),
*De Hermetis Trismegisti Poimandro Commentatio* (Bonn, 1855).

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[370:1](th144.htm#fr_1279) See *The
Theosophical Review,* xxiv. 302, 303 (June 1899).

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[370:2](th144.htm#fr_1280) Hilgenfeld (A.),
*Hermæ Pastor* (2nd ed.: Leipzig, 1881).

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[370:3](th144.htm#fr_1281) Ἀποκάλυψις έ, the
fifth revelation or vision of our composite document, which for all we
know may have stood first in some earlier “source.”

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[371:1](th144.htm#fr_1282) Presumably a
sheep’s skin of white wool.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[371:2](th144.htm#fr_1283) Compare the Story
of the Spirit Double who came down unto Jesus when a boy, as told by
Mary the Mother, in the *Pistis Sophia,* 121: “He embraced thee and
kissed thee, and thou also didst kiss him; ye became one.” Compare this
with the common mystic belief of the time in the possibility of union
with such a spiritual presence; and also the possession by a daimon
(λῆψις δαίμονος), which is treated of at length by Reitzenstein, and
particularly referred to this pasage in *Hermas* (R. 230).

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[371:3](th144.htm#fr_1284) Compare *Pistis
Sophia,* 120: “I was in doubt and thought it was a phantom tempting me.”

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[371:4](th144.htm#fr_1285) On this Gebhardt
and Harnack, in their edition (Leipzig, 1877), can only comment: “*In
visionibus angelicus pastor nusquam memoratur*.”

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[372:1](th144.htm#fr_1286) Compare the
interesting inscription from Sakkāra quoted from Erman (note, below).

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[373:1](th144.htm#fr_1287) R. 11, n. 3.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[373:2](th144.htm#fr_1288) Compare Wessely,
*Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad.* (1888), 103, 2359 ff.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[373:3](th144.htm#fr_1289) *Ibid.,* 104, 2373.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[373:4](th144.htm#fr_1290) Erman (*Ägypten,*
515) refers to an inscription from Sakkāra, in which a mystical shepherd
says to his flock: “Your Shepherd is in the West with the fishes,”—an
interesting conjunction of ideas for students of archaic Christian
symbolism. The idea is also Babylonian, the Star-flocks of the Gods
being fed beyond the Ocean in the West.

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[373:5](th144.htm#fr_1291) Compare the dress
of the Essenes, and the account of the sending forth of the disciples,
Matt. x. 9 = Mark vi. 8 = Luke ix. 3. The direct contradiction of the
account in Mark to the statements in Matthew and Luke, makes it
exceedingly probable that not only the one robe, and staff, but also the
wallet, were the typical signs of those who went forth to “raise the
dead.”

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[373:6](th144.htm#fr_1292) He is clad in the
περίζωμα, the working dress (or apron), in which men were said to work
“naked” (*nudus,* γυμνός)—that is, clad in one robe. See also note on
the sentence: “And naked I sought the Naked,” in treating of the
Gymnosophists (or Naked Philosophers), in my *Apollonius of Tyana*
(London, 1901), p. 100.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[375:1](th144.htm#fr_1293) See “The Popular
Theurgic Hermes Cult in the Greek Magic Papyri.”

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[375:2](th144.htm#fr_1294) Compare *Hermas,*
Vis. v. 2: “I am sent . . . that I may dwell with thee for the rest of
the days of thy life,” with Prayer i. 10: “for all the length of my
life’s days”; and v. 3: “I know into whose charge I have been given,”
with Prayer ii. 7: “I know thee, Hermes.”

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[375:3](th144.htm#fr_1295) ἐν τοῖς γενεκοῖς.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[376:1](th144.htm#fr_1296) A term used by
Philo as a synonym of Therapeut.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[376:2](th144.htm#fr_1297) *Div. Institt.,* i.
6—as cited among Evidences from the Fathers, where see my note on
Phenëus.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[376:3](th144.htm#fr_1298) *Op. sup. cit.,* p.
365.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[377:1](th144.htm#fr_1299) The very treatise
to which we have previously referred in connection with the “mountain.”

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[378:1](th144.htm#fr_1300) See Gebhardt and
Harnack, *op. cit.,* Prolegg. xi. n. 2.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[380:1](th144.htm#fr_1301) The texts are given
by Berthelot (M. P. S.), *Les Alchimistes grecs*.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[380:2](th144.htm#fr_1302) See *The Book of
the Dead,* cxliv., cxlvii.

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[380:3](th144.htm#fr_1303) Griffith (F. Ll.),
*Stories of the High Priests of Memphis* (Oxford, 1900), pp. 45 ff.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[381:1](th144.htm#fr_1304) Berthelot (M. P.
S.), *La Chimie au Moyen Âge,* iii. 44 ff., 268, n. 1; R. 361.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[381:2](th144.htm#fr_1305) According to the
Ethiopic translation. See *The Apostolic Fathers,* p. 325, n. 4, in the
“Ante-Nicene Christian Library,” vol. i. (Edinburgh, 1867).

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[381:3](th144.htm#fr_1306) Kenyon (F. G.),
*Greek Pap. Cat.,* p. 65; R. 280, n. 3.

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[383:1](th144.htm#fr_1307) R. 34—from
*Apophthegmata Patrum,* in Cotelerius’ *Ecclesiæ Græcæ Monumenta,* i.
582.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[384:1](th144.htm#fr_1308) I do not know who
this Olympius was, unless, perchance, he may have been the monk referred
to by Nilus (ii. 77), the famous ascetic of Sinai, who flourished in the
first quarter of the fifth century.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[384:2](th144.htm#fr_1309) Again, I can find
no information about this place; it was, however, presumably in the
Nitriote nome south of the Delta—for the priest “ came down.’’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Concerning the Æon-Doctrine](th145)
