[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inca](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](rly01) [Next](rly1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

## INTRODUCTION.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

M<span class="small">UCH</span> as students would now prize the
information that was collected by the Spaniards who first overran the
New World, they can only obtain a small fraction of it. In these days,
when scientific methods are understood, and all evidence can be sifted
and receive its relative weight, much of that evidence is lost. Of all
the narratives and reports furnished to Herrera, for his history of the
Indies, and of which he made such scanty and unintelligent use, very few
have been preserved. Diligent search, for which we have to thank Don
Pascual de Gayangos, has brought four such documents to light, relating
to ancient Peruvian history, translations of which have been selected by
the Council of the Hakluyt Society to form a volume of their series. The
originals are manuscripts in the National Library at Madrid, marked B
135.

 The first of these manuscripts is a report on the fables and rites of
the Yncas, addressed by Christoval de Molina, the priest of the hospital
for natives, at Cuzco, to Dr. Don Sebastian do Artaun, the bishop of
that ancient capital. It must have been written between 1570 and 1584;
the period during which Artaun was bishop of Cuzco.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

 The second is an account of the antiquities of Peru, by an Indian named
Juan de Santa Cruz Pachacuti-yamqui Salcamayhua. His great-great grand
parents were living at the time of the Spanish conquest of Peru; so that
the author may have written in about 1620.

 The third is an account of the religion and traditions of the Indians
of the mountainous province of Huarochiri, on the Pacific slope of the
maritime Cordillera, near Lima, by a resident priest, named Dr.
Francisco de Avila. It was written in 1608.

 The fourth is a report, written in a memorandum book, apparently as a
rough draft, among the papers of the Licentiate Polo de Ondegardo, an
able and accomplished statesman, who was Corregidor of Cuzco, in 1560.

 The first of these documents is the most important. Cristoval de Molina
had peculiar opportunities for collecting accurate information. He was a
master of the Quichua language; he examined native chiefs and learned
men who could remember the Ynca empire in the days of its prosperity,
and he was intimately acquainted with the native character, from his
position in the hospital at Cuzco. In his opening address to the bishop,
he mentions a previous account which he had submitted, on the origin,
history, and government of the Yncas. Fortunately this account has been
preserved, by Miguel Cavello Balboa,<span
id="page_viii_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_viii_note_1) who tells us that his
history is based on the <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span> learned writings
of Christoval de Molina. The present manuscript shows the importance of
Molina as an authority, and a special value is thus given to Balboa's
work, which may now be looked upon as the most authentic version of
early Yncarial traditions and history.

 The report on the fables and rites is supplementary to the history used
by Balboa; but which is not now extant as a separate work. It contains a
minute and detailed account of the ceremonies performed in the different
months throughout the Ynca year, with the prayers used by the priests on
each occasion in Quichua and Spanish, the sacrifices, and festivities.
There are some very interesting points, which must be noticed in their
order, in connection with Molina's account of the Yncas; for they throw
fresh light on several doubtful questions.

 The first of these points is the position held by the Supreme Being or
Creator, in the religion of the Yncas. Our knowledge of this subject has
hitherto been derived from Garcilasso de la Vega, who tells us that,
besides the Sun, the Yncas worshipped the true supreme God and Creator;
that they called him Pachacamac, a name signifying "He who gives
animation to the universe," or "He who does to the universe what the
soul does to the body;" that they held Him in much greater inward
veneration than the Sun; but that they did not build temples to him,
<span id="page_x">p. x</span> nor offer him sacrifices.<span
id="page_x_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_x_note_2) He quotes from Blas Valera,
that all subjugated tribes were ordered to worship the most powerful god
Ticci-Uira-ccocha, otherwise called Pachacamac;<span
id="page_x_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_x_note_3) and in another place, he
says that the temple of Pachacamac, on the sea-coast, was the only one
to the Supreme Being throughout the whole of Peru.<span
id="page_x_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_x_note_4)

 I have discussed the questions relating to the temple on the sea coast,
in my introduction to the "Reports on the Discovery of Peru" (Hakluyt
Society, 1872); and have shown that it was not dedicated to the Supreme
Being of the Yncas. Garcilasso de la Vega wrote the particulars touching
what he had heard in Peru, after a lapse of many years, but without
conscious exaggeration. Indeed his statements, as a rule, are
wonderfully accurate, as I shall presently show. But the evidence of
Molina is more reliable, because he wrote on the spot, with a full
knowledge of the language, and after carefully examining the surviving
priests and wise men of the old Ynca court.

 The name *Pachacamac* occurs three times in the prayers given by
Molina, as an attribute of the Deity; but the term most constantly used
was *Pachayachachic*, "the teacher of the universe." Another name was
*Tecsi-viracocha*, which Molina interprets, "the incomprehensible God."
In the prayers, however, the first word is *Aticsi*, probably from
*Atini* (I conquer), and the meaning would rather be the <span
id="page_xi">p. xi</span> conquering *Uiracocha*. Respecting the meaning
of the word *Uira-cocha*, I am at present doubtful; but Garcilasso has
clearly shown that it does not mean, as has been suggested by writers
unacquainted with the language, "the foam of the sea."<span
id="page_xi_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_xi_note_5) The usual names for the
god of the Yncas, and those which occur in their prayers, are
Pachayachachic Aticsi-Uiracocha. Molina relates that one of the Yncas
erected a temple to the Supreme Being at Cuzco,<span
id="page_xi_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_xi_note_6) on a site now occupied by
the Church of the Nazarenes, and in Molina's days by the house of Hernan
Lopez de Segovia.<span id="page_xi_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_xi_note_7) The
Indian Salcamayhua also mentions this temple, and it is quite true that
on the site indicated, there are the walls of an ancient edifice, with
serpents carved in relief on the stones. Molina adds, that there was a
golden statue to represent the Creator in this temple, which received
honours at all the periodical festivals.

 The sun, moon, and thunder, appear to have been deities next in
importance to Pachayachachic; sacrifices were made to them at all the
periodical festivals, and several of the prayers given by Molina are
addressed to them. Another image, called *Huanacauri*, which is said to
have been the most sacred of the ancestral gods of the Yncas, received
equal honours. In all this we may discern the popular religion of the
Andean people, which consisted in the belief that all things in nature
had an ideal or soul which ruled and guided them, and to which men might
pray for <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> help. This worship of nature
was combined with the worship of ancestors; the nature gods being called
*huaca*, and the ancestral deities *pacarina* or *pacarisca*. The
universal tradition pointed to a place called Paccari-tampu, as the
cradle or point of origin of the Yncas. It was, from Cuzco, the nearest
point to the sun-rising; and as the sun was chosen as the *pacarisca* of
the Yncas, the place of their origin was at first assigned to
Paccari-tampu. But when their conquests were extended to the Collao,
they could approach nearer to the sun, until they beheld it rising out
of lake Titicaca, and hence the inland sea became a second traditional
place of royal origin.

 The language of the Collas, Pacasas, and Lupacas, the people in the
basin of the lake Titicaca (erroneously called Aymara), added very few
words to the rich idiom of the Yncas; but a vast number of Quichua words
were adopted by the Collas. Two or three Colla words, however, occur in
the manuscripts of Molina and Salcamayhua, which may give rise to
speculation. According to Molina, the Ynca name for the sun was
*Punchau*,<span id="page_xii_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_xii_note_8) the god
of day, and not *Ynti*, as given by Garcilasso. In the prayers, the word
used is always *Punchau*. But Salcamayhua records a speech which the
chief of the Collas made to the Ynca: "Thou art Lord of Cuzco, I am Lord
of the Collas. I have a silver throne, thy throne is of gold. Thou art a
worshipper of Uira-ccocha Pachayachachic. <span id="page_xiii">p.
xiii</span> I worship Ynti."<span
id="page_xiii_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_xiii_note_9) Further on we are told
that Ynti was the god of the Collas,<span
id="page_xiii_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_xiii_note_1) and that the Ynca
adopted the name when he set up an image at Titicaca.<span
id="page_xiii_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_xiii_note_2) According to these
accounts, Punchau was the sun-god of the Yncas, and Ynti was that of the
Collas. Yet the modern word for the sun, in the Collao, is *Lupi*, from
the Quichua word *Rupay*, meaning heat and warmth. The word for the moon
in the Colla dialect (*Pacsa*) also occurs twice in the manuscript of
Molina. He speaks of *Pacsa-mama*,<span
id="page_xiii_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_xiii_note_3) in one place, as the
name of the moon-god, the Quichua word being *Quilla*; and he gives two
names for the month of July.<span
id="page_xiii_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_xiii_note_4) One is
*Tarpui-quilla*, composed of two Quichua words, meaning "the sowing
month." The other is *Moron-pasca*, the last word being the Colla name
for the moon.

 A fourth point of interest is the additional proof furnished in these
manuscripts of the antiquity of the Quichua drama of Ollanta.<span
id="page_xiii_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_xiii_note_5) Hitherto no evidence
has been discovered of the word *Ollanta* being as old as the time of
the Yncas; and the place now called Ollantay-tampu, the traditionary
scene of the events recorded in the drama, is simply called Tampu by all
other old Spanish writers. But both Molina<span
id="page_xiii_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_xiii_note_6) and Salcamayhua<span
id="page_xiii_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_xiii_note_7) speak of it as
Ollanta-tampu. This is a proof that the name is not of modern origin.
<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> In the introduction to my translation
of the Quichua drama,<span
id="page_xiv_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_xiv_note_8) I gave a derivation of
the word Ollanta, suggested by Señor Barranca. A more probable etymology
has since been given by Dr. Vicente Lopez.<span
id="page_xiv_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_xiv_note_9) *Oll*, he says, should
be *Uill* or *Uilla*, a legend, from *Uillani* (I record); and *Anta*,
the Andes—*Ollanta*, "a legend of the Andes." So that before the Spanish
conquest, as we now learn from Molina and Salcamayhua, there was a place
called *Ollanta-tampu*—"the site of the legend, or drama of the Andes."
Salcamayhua mentions plays as being enacted at the festivals of the
Yncas; one called *Anay-sauca*, which means literally, "How pleasant!"
another *Hayachuco*, and others.

 The full details of Ynca ceremonies given by Molina furnish incidental
evidence of the truthfulness of Garcilasso de la Vega. Thus the account
of the feast of *Situa*, in the *Royal commentaries*,<span
id="page_xiv_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_xiv_note_1) would serve as a very
accurate abstract of the fuller and more detailed narrative of
Molina.<span id="page_xiv_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_xiv_note_2) Garcilasso
wrote from memory, forty years after he had left Peru, with the aid of
letters from correspondents.<span
id="page_xiv_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_xiv_note_3) His main object was to
publish a commentary, correcting the errors of Spanish authors who
professed to give a history of the Yncas without being acquainted with
their language. In doing this, he added much precious information from
the storehouse of his own <span id="page_xv">p. xv</span> memory, and
the more his work is sifted and examined, the more clearly does it
appear that he was scrupulously truthful, and that, allowing for the
disadvantages under which he laboured, his statements are wonderfully
accurate. Perhaps the excellence of the Ynca's memory is best shown in
his topographical details. He gives the conquests of each successive
Ynca, mentioning the places through which the conquerors marched in the
gradual acquisition of their vast empire. He enumerates three hundred
and twenty places in Peru, yet, in describing the marches, he does not
make a single mistake, nor give one of these places out of its order, or
in the wrong position. When Garcilasso's routes of each conquering Ynca
are placed on a map, they furnish convincing proofs of the remarkable
accuracy of the author. The narrative of Molina also supplies more than
one incidental corroboration of the correctness of Garcilasso's
statements.

 The words of the prayers actually offered up by the Ynca Priests to
their Deities are the most valuable part of Molina's report. He gives
fourteen of these prayers: four to the Supreme Being; two to the Sun;
one for fruitful flocks; four for the Yncas; two for or to the other
*huacas* or gods, and one to the earth. Unfortunately the Quichua words
have, in many instances, been incorrectly transcribed, so that the
meaning is not always clear; and the translations in Spanish, which are
now given in English, are in some cases far from literal. Under these
circumstances I have thought the best course would be to give all the
Quichua words in an alphabetical index, with the <span id="page_xvi">p.
xvi</span> English meanings of those which can be recognized.<span
id="page_xvi_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_xvi_note_4) The translations in the
text give the meaning of the Quichua with general accuracy.

 The second Report, entitled "An Account of the Antiquities of Peru," by
an Indian named Salcamayhua, was written about forty years after the
time of Molina. It is curious and valuable, because it gives the
traditions of Ynca history, as they were handed down by the
grandchildren of those who were living at the time of the Spanish
conquest, to their grandchildren. Salcamayhua gives two prayers which
are traditionally attributed to Manco Ccapac, the first Ynca, in the
original Quichua, and two or three other Quichua prayers and speeches.
His narrative of events, and record of customs and ceremonies, are
valuable so long as they are given their due place. They are entitled to
a certain authority as coming from a recipient of native tradition,
living a generation or two after the death of the last man who had seen
the Ynca empire in the days of its glory. Salcamayhua, as an authority,
ranks after Cieza de Leon, Polo de Ondegardo, Molina, Balboa, and
Garcilasso de la Vega; but before Spanish writers who were ignorant of
the native language, though they lived and wrote before his time, such
as Zarate, Fernandez, and Acosta. Montesinos both wrote after
Salcamayhua, and is totally unreliable. The Indian Salcamayhua was
intimately acquainted with the language, which was his own, and he
received the traditions from his own people. But neither he nor Molina
corroborate one of the fabulous stories <span id="page_xvii">p.
xvii</span> told by Montesinos; whose pretensions to having received his
list of a hundred kings, and other absurdities, from the Indian
*Amautas* or wise men, are discredited by the absence of all
corroborative testimony. It is clear that Montesinos was ignorant of the
Quichua language, and his work, in my opinion, is quite inadmissible as
an authority.

 The third document in the present collection is a narrative of the
false gods and other superstitions of the Indians of the province of
Huarochiri, by the Dr. Francisco de Avila, Priest of the principal
village in the province. This is one of the very few fragments from
which we can glean some slight knowledge of the mysterious civilized
nation which occupied the coast of Peru, before the Ynca conquest.
Researches into the history of this coast-people are surrounded by
peculiar difficulties. The Yncas conquered the Peruvian coast two or
three generations before the arrival of the Spaniards, and used all
their influence and power to substitute the Quichua language, and to
destroy the separate polity and religion of the conquered race. Hence
many Quichua words appear in their traditions, as told by Father Avila,
and the student must carefully eliminate them, before forming any
conclusions respecting the intellectual position of the original people
of the Pacific coast. For instance, the god of the Huarochiri is said to
be *Coniraya Uiracocha*, the former word being indigenous, and the
latter a foreign term introduced by the Yncas; just as we should say the
*God Vishnu*, combining an English and a Hindu word. The root *Con*, in
the words *Coniraya* and <span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> *Conopa*,
is the term for the deity, or for anything sacred in the language of the
coast, and has nothing to do with Quichua.

 The province of Huarochiri, of which a map is given to illustrate the
curious narrative of Avila, is very mountainous. It occupies the western
slopes of the maritime cordillera of the Andes, overhanging the coast
plain from the latitude of Lima to that of Pachacamac. Avila
unconsciously furnishes evidence that the inhabitants of Huarochiri
originally came from the coast. "They declare," he says, "that in the
days of Coniraya their country was *yunca*,"<span
id="page_xviii_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_xviii_note_5) "and that the crops
ripened in five days." Avila enters into an elaborate explanation to
prove that this is impossible. But obviously the tradition referred to
the time when the ancestors of the Huarochiri people inhabited the
*yuncas* of the coast.

 The sources of information respecting the civilized race of the
Peruvian coast are very scanty, and consequently very precious. We have
the silent testimony of the grand ruins of Chimu near Truxillo,<span
id="page_xviii_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_xviii_note_6) and in other coast
valleys, of the great mounds, and of the works of irrigation. There is a
grammar and vocabulary of their language, written by Fernando de la
Carrera in 1644; and the Lord's Prayer in *Mochica*, one of their
dialects, preserved by Bishop Orè, and published at Naples in 1602.
Cieza de Leon<span id="page_xviii_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_xviii_note_7)
travelled through the coast valleys in the early <span id="page_xix">p.
xix</span> days of the Spanish conquest, and gave an interesting account
of what he saw, to which Garcilasso de la Vega<span
id="page_xix_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_xix_note_8) has added some
additional particulars. Balboa<span
id="page_xix_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_xix_note_9) relates the legends of
the coast Indians of Lambayeque respecting their first arrival by sea;
and the curious report of Arriaga<span
id="page_xix_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_xix_note_1) on the destruction of
idols in the provinces of Yauyos and Conchucos, has some bearing on the
people of the coast. But here again great care must be taken to
eliminate all Ynca words and ideas, before use can be made of the
report, in an inquiry as to the Yuncas of the sea board. A still more
remarkable report was made by an Augustin<span
id="page_xix_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_xix_note_2) friar, in 1555, on the
idolatry and superstitions of the inhabitants of the province of
Huamachuco, which, like Conchucos, Yauyos, and Huarochiri, overhangs the
coast valleys. It is from these scanty materials that some knowledge can
be acquired, after careful study, of the civilized race on the coast,
and of the extent to which branches from it had spread over the
mountainous districts of the maritime cordillera. The most curious of
these sources of information, is, I think, the narrative of Father
Avila, which has never been printed in Spanish, and a translation of
which is now printed for the first time.

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

 The last document in this volume is a Report by Polo de Ondegardo, an
accomplished lawyer and statesman who came to Peru with the President
Gasca. He was Corregidor of Charcas, and afterwards of Cuzco, and
studied the language and laws of the Yncas with minute care, in order
that he might be better able to conduct the administration of the
provinces under his charge. The document is in the form of a rough draft
or set of notes, apparently intended as material for a more finished
report. He describes the principle on which the Ynca conquests were
made, the division and tenure of land, the system of tribute, the
regulations for preserving game and for forest conservancy, and other
administrative details; and he points out, here and there, the way in
which the wise legislation of the Yncas ought to be utilized and
imitated by their conquerors.

 These four curious papers, which have never been printed in the
language in which they were written, are now translated for the first
time; and it is believed that they will form an important addition to
the sources of knowledge respecting the early civilization of the
American races.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](rly1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span id="page_viii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_viii_fr_1) A French
translation of the work of Balboa was published by Ternaux Compans, in
the sccond series of his translations, in 1840. <span
id="footnotes_page_ix">p. ix</span> Balboa commenced his work at Quito
in 1576, and completed it in 1586; the very period when Molina was
prosecuting his researches at Cuzco.

<span id="footnotes_page_x">p. x</span>

<span id="page_x_note_2"></span>[2](#page_x_fr_2) G. de la Vega, i, p.
106.

<span id="page_x_note_3"></span>[3](#page_x_fr_3) *Ibid*., ii, p. 38.

<span id="page_x_note_4"></span>[4](#page_x_fr_4) *Ibid*., ii, p. 186.

<span id="footnotes_page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span id="page_xi_note_5"></span>[5](#page_xi_fr_5) G. de la Vega, ii,
p. 66.

<span id="page_xi_note_6"></span>[6](#page_xi_fr_6) [P.
11](rly1.htm#page_11).

<span id="page_xi_note_7"></span>[7](#page_xi_fr_7) [P.
11](rly1.htm#page_11).

<span id="footnotes_page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span id="page_xii_note_8"></span>[8](#page_xii_fr_8) See also *Arriaga.
Extirpacion de la idolatria del Peru.*

<span id="footnotes_page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

<span id="page_xiii_note_9"></span>[9](#page_xiii_fr_9) [P.
90](rly2.htm#page_90).

<span id="page_xiii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xiii_fr_1) [P.
101](rly2.htm#page_101).

<span id="page_xiii_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xiii_fr_2) [P.
112](rly2.htm#page_112).

<span id="page_xiii_note_3"></span>[3](#page_xiii_fr_3) [P.
37](rly1.htm#page_37).

<span id="page_xiii_note_4"></span>[4](#page_xiii_fr_4). [P.
19](rly1.htm#page_19).

<span id="page_xiii_note_5"></span>[5](#page_xiii_fr_5) See "*Ollanta,
an ancient Ynca Drama, translated from the original Quichua, by Clements
R. Markham, C. B. (Trübner,* 1871*.)*

<span id="page_xiii_note_6"></span>[6](#page_xiii_fr_6) [P.
51](rly1.htm#page_51).

<span id="page_xiii_note_7"></span>[7](#page_xiii_fr_7) [P.
116](rly2.htm#page_116).

<span id="footnotes_page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<span id="page_xiv_note_8"></span>[8](#page_xiv_fr_8) P. 11.

<span id="page_xiv_note_9"></span>[9](#page_xiv_fr_9) *Les races
Aryennes du Pérou*, p. 327.

<span id="page_xiv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xiv_fr_1) See my
translation, ii, p. 228.

<span id="page_xiv_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xiv_fr_2) [Pp.
20](rly1.htm#page_20)-34.

<span id="page_xiv_note_3"></span>[3](#page_xiv_fr_3) See my translation
of the *Royal Commentaries*, i, p. 76.

<span id="footnotes_page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

<span id="page_xvi_note_4"></span>[4](#page_xvi_fr_4) See p. 186.

<span id="footnotes_page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<span id="page_xviii_note_5"></span>[5](#page_xviii_fr_5) *Yunca* is a
warm tropical plain or valley.

<span id="page_xviii_note_6"></span>[6](#page_xviii_fr_6) Described by
Rivero, and photographed, in detail, by Mr. Squier.

<span id="page_xviii_note_7"></span>[7](#page_xviii_fr_7) See my
translation, pp. 233-63.

<span id="footnotes_page_xix">p. xix</span>

<span id="page_xix_note_8"></span>[8](#page_xix_fr_8) See my
translation, ii, pp. 147, 154, 185, 193, 195, 424, 428, 460.

<span id="page_xix_note_9"></span>[9](#page_xix_fr_9) P. 89 (Ternaux
Compans' ed.)

<span id="page_xix_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xix_fr_1) *Extirpacion de la
idolatria del Peru, dirigido al Rey N.S., en su real Consejo de Indias:
por el Padre Pablo Joseph de Arriaga de la Compania de Jesus* (*Lima*,
1621.).

<span id="page_xix_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xix_fr_2) Translated into
French by M. Ternaux Compans, in his *Recueil de Documents et Mémoires
originaux sur l'Histoire des Possessions Espagnoles dans l'Amérique*
(*Paris*, 1840), p. 85.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
