[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj041)  [Next](csj043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXXIX

### SEVEN LOAVES, A FEW FISHES—TEST OF FAITH—LEAVEN OF THE PHARISEES—THE BETHSAIDAN'S SIGHT RESTORED

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Decapolis*. *Dalmanutha*. *Bethsaida*.

Mark 8, 1-26: Matthew 15, 32-39; John 6, 1-12.

IN those days the multitude being great, and having nothing to eat,
Jesus called his disciples, and saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been with me
three days, and have nothing to eat: and if I send them away fasting to
their own houses, they will faint by the way.

</div>

For divers of them came from far.

His disciples say, From whence can a man satisfy these *men* with bread
here in the wilderness? Jesus saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. How many
loaves have ye?

</div>

They said, Seven, and a few little fishes.

He commanded the people to sit on the ground: and he took the seven
loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to set
before the people. The few small fishes he blessed, and commanded to set
them also before *them*.

So they did all eat, and were filled. They took up of the broken *meat*
that was left seven baskets full. And they that had eaten were about
four thousand, beside women and children. He sent them away.

¶Straightway Jesus entered into a ship with his disciples, and came into
the coasts of Magdala, into the parts of Dalmanutha.

The Pharisees with the Sadducees came forth to question with him,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him. He sighed deeply in his
spirit, and saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

Why doth this generation seek after a sign? verily I say unto you, There
shall no sign be given unto this generation.

When it is evening, ye say, *It will be* fair weather: for the sky is
red.

And in the morning, *It will be* foul weather to day: for the sky is red
and lowering.

O *ye* hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not
*discern* the signs of the times? A wicked and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the
sign of the prophet Jonas.

</div>

Entering into the ship again, Jesus departed to the other side.

¶Now *the disciples* had forgotten to take bread; neither had they in
the ship with them more than one loaf. Then Jesus charged them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the
Sadducees, and of the leaven of Herod.

</div>

They reasoned among themselves, saying, *It is* because we have taken no
bread. *Which* when Jesus perceived, he said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

O ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have
brought no bread? Perceive ye not yet, neither understand? Have ye your
heart yet hardened? Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye
not? and do ye not remember?

Do ye not understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five
thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? Neither the seven loaves of
the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?

When I brake the five loaves among the five thousand, how many baskets
full of fragments took ye up?

</div>

They answer, Twelve.

<div class="jesussaid">

And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of
fragments took ye up?

</div>

They said, seven. And Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you
concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees
and of the Sadducees?

</div>

Then understood they how that he bade *them* not beware of the leaven of
bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[\*](#fn_43)

¶Jesus cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He took the man by
the hand, and led him out of the town; and when Jesus had put his hands
upon his eyes, he asked him if he saw aught. The man looked up, and
said, I see men as trees, walking.

Jesus again put *his* hands upon his eyes, and made him look up: and he
was restored, and saw every man clearly. Jesus sent him away, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Neither go into the town, nor tell *it* to any in the town.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[55:\*](csj042.htm#fr_45) For two of the other
examples of symbolism turn to the footnotes in XXXVI and in XLV in this
book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XL. “Upon This Rock I Will Build My Church”](csj043)
