[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj022)  [Next](csj024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XX

### THE TWELVE BY NAME—THE SERMON IN THE PLAIN: BENISONS AND ADMONITIONS, PRECEPTS, THE GOLDEN RULE AGAIN), JUDGE NOT, GIVE

A.D. 28. Age 31. *Near Capernaum*.

Matthew 10, 2-4: Mark 3, 16-19: Luke 6, 14-38.

IN those days Jesus went out into a mountain, and continued all night in
prayer to God. When it was day, he called *unto him* his twelve
disciples.

Now the names of the twelve apostles are these:  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[†](#fn_21)Simon \[whom he also surnamed Peter\], and
Andrew his brother; James *the son* of Zebedee, and John his brother;
James *the son* of Alpheus, and Thomas; and Lebbeus whose surname was
Thaddeus \[Jude\]; Philip, Bartholomew \[Nathanael\]; and Matthew the
publican \[Levi\]; and Simon called Zelotes, the Canaanite; and Judas
Iscariot, who also was the traitor, and betrayed Jesus.

¶Jesus came down with them, and stood in the plain; and the company of
the disciples stood with them. A multitude of people out of all Judea
and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon came to hear
him, and to be healed.

¶Jesus lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Blessed *be ye* poor: for yours is the kingdom of God.

Blessed *are ye* that hunger now: for ye shall be filled.

Blessed *are ye* that weep now: for ye shall laugh.

Blessed are ye, when men shall have you, and when they shall separate
you *from their company*, and shall reproach *you*, and cast out your
name as evil, for the Son of man's sake.

Before ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward *is*
great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the
prophets.

But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your consolation.

Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger.

Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.

</div>

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did their
fathers to the false prophets.

¶But I say unto you which hear,

Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you, bless them that curse
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you.

And unto him that smiteth thee on the *one* cheek offer also the other;
and him that taketh away by cloak forbid not *to take thy* coat also.

Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh away thy
goods ask *them* not again.

 <span id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_22)And as ye would that men should do
to you, do ye also to them likewise.

For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also
love those that love them. And if ye do good to them which do good to
you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same. And if ye
lend *to them* of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for
sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again.

But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of
the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and *to* the evil. Be ye
therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven:

Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For
with the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you
again.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[29:†](csj023.htm#fr_22) As to the names of "the
twelve," a comparison of the texts is interesting: Matthew 10, 2-4; Mark
3, 14-19; Luke 6, 13-16; and ("the eleven") Acts 1, 13.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[30:\*](csj023.htm#fr_23) The Golden Rule (Luke
6, 31). Compare with the paraphrase (Matthew 7, 12) in XVI of this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXI. The Sermon in the Plain (Concluded)](csj024)
