[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj052)  [Next](csj054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### L

### "WHEN YE PRAY, SAY" (LUKE 11, 2)—PARABLES AND PRECEPTS—"BLESSED IS THE WOMB THAT BARE THEE"—"A GREATER THAN SOLOMON IS HERE"—JESUS DINES WITH PHARISEE: CHIDES PHARISEES AND LAWYERS

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Perea*.

Luke 11, 1-13; 27-54.

AS Jesus was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his
disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his
disciples. Jesus said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_64"></span>[\*](#fn_61)When ye pray, say, Our Father which
art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done,
as in heaven, so in earth.

Give us day by day our daily bread.

And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted
to us.

And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.

</div>

And he said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and
say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves; for a friend of mine in his
journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him?

And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not: the door is now
shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee.

</div>

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his
friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many
as he needeth.

And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asketh
receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it
shall be opened.

If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give
him a stone? or if *he ask* a fish, will he for a fish give him a
serpent? Or, if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children;
how much more shall *your* heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him?

</div>

And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the
company lifted up her voice, and said, Blessed *is* the womb that bare
thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked. But Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Yea rather, blessed *are* they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

</div>

¶When the people were gathered thick together, he began to say,

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_65"></span>[\*](#fn_62)This is an evil generation: they
seek a sign; and there shall no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas
the prophet. For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also
the Son of man be to this generation.

The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of
this generation, and condemn them: for she came from the utmost parts of
the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than
Solomon *is* here.

The men of Nineveh shall rise up in the judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and,
behold, a greater than Jonas *is* here.

No man, when he hath lighted a candle, putteth *it* in a secret place,
neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which come in
may see the light. The light of the body is the eye: therefore when
thine eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light; but when
*thine eye* is evil, thy body also *is* full of darkness. Take heed
therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness. If thy whole
body therefore be full of light, having no part dark, the whole shall
*be* full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle doth give
thee light.

</div>

As Jesus spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him: he
went in, and sat down to meat. The Pharisee marvelled that Jesus had not
washed before dinner. The Lord said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter;
but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. *Ye* 

</div>

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

fools, did not he that made that which is without, make that which is
within also? But rather give alms of such things as ye have; and,
behold, all things are clean unto you.

But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of
herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to
have done, and not to leave the other undone.

Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the
synagogues, and greetings in the markets.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as graves
which appear not, and the men that walk over *them* are not aware *of
them*.

</div>

¶Then answered one of the lawyers, Master, thus saying thou reproachest
us also. Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens grievous to
be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your
fingers.

Woe unto you! for we build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your
fathers killed them. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of
your fathers: for they indeed killed them, and ye build their
sepulchres.

Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and
apostles, and *some* of them they shall slay and persecute: that the
blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the
world, may be required of this generation; from the blood of Abel unto
the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the altar and the temple:
verily I say unto you, It shall be required of this generation.

Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye
entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered.

</div>

As he said these things, the scribes and the Pharisees began to provoke
him to speak of many things: laying wait for him, to catch something out
of his mouth, that they might accuse him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[74:\*](csj053.htm#fr_64) Thus Luke (11, 2-4).
Turn back to XV in this book, and compare with the Lord's Prayer in the
Sermon On The Mount (Matthew 6, 9-13).

<span id="fn_62"></span>[75:\*](csj053.htm#fr_65) Thus Luke (11, 29-32).
Compare with similar saying in XXVII of this book (being Matthew 12,
39-42).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LI. Sermon to the Innumerable Multitude](csj054)
