[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj057)  [Next](csj059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LV

### SABBATH HEALING OF DROPSY—A SERMON IN PARABLES: HUMBLE GUEST, GREAT SUPPER, COUNTING THE COST, THE WARRING KING—EXCUSE-MAKING—SALT

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Perea*.

Luke 14, 1-35.

ON a sabbath day, as Jesus went into the house of one of the chief
Pharisees to eat bread, they watched him. And, behold, there was a man
which had the dropsy. And Jesus spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees,
saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?

</div>

They held their peace. Jesus healed the man, and let him go, saying unto
them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit, and will not
straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?

</div>

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

They could not answer him.

¶To those which were bidden, when he marked how they chose out the chief
rooms, he put forth a parable, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

When thou are bidden of any *man* to a wedding, sit not down in the
highest room; lest a more honorable man than thou be bidden of him; and
he that bade thee and him come and say to thee, Give this man place; and
thou begin with shame to take the lowest room.

But when thou are bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room; that when
he that bade thee cometh, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher:
then shalt thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat
with thee.

For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted.

</div>

¶Then said he to the Pharisee that bade him,

<div class="jesussaid">

When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy
brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor *thy* rich neighbors; lest they also
bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But when thou makest a
feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind; and thou shalt be
blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed
at the resurrection of the just.

</div>

One of them that sat at meat with Jesus said unto him, Blessed is he
that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God. Then said Jesus,

<div class="jesussaid">

A certain man made a great supper, and bade many: and sent his servant
at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for all things are
now ready. And they all with one consent began to make excuse.

The first said unto him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must
needs go and see it: I pray thee have me excused. And another said, I
have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: I pray thee have
me excused. And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I
cannot come.

So that servant came and shewed his lord these things. Then the master
of the house being angry said to his servant, Go out quickly into the
streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the
maimed, and the halt, and the blind.

And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and yet
there is room.

And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges,
and compel *them* to come in, that my house may be filled. For I say
unto you, That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my
supper.

</div>

There went multitudes with Jesus: and he turned, and said unto them,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

If any *man* come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife,
and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come
after me, cannot be my disciple.

For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first,
and counteth the cost, whether he have *sufficient* to finish *it?* Lest
haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish
*it*, all that behold *it* begin to mock him, saying, This man began to
build, and was not able to finish.

Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down
first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him
that cometh against him with twenty thousand? Or else, while the other
is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and desireth conditions
of peace. So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all
that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.

¶Salt *is* good: but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it
be seasoned? It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill;
*but* men cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LVI. Sermon In Parables (Continued): The Prodigal Son](csj059)
