[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj025)  [Next](csj027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXIII

### JOHN, FROM PRISON, SENDS MESSENGERS—JESUS REPLIES—EXTOLS JOHN: A SERMON WITH PARABLES—"FRIEND OF SINNERS"

A.D. 28 . Age 31. *Galilee, near Cana*.

Matthew 11, 2-15; 16-19: Luke 7, 24-35.

NOW when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two
of his disciples to Jesus. Unto him they said, John Baptist hath sent us
unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come? or do we look for
another?

And in that same hour Jesus cured many of *their* infirmities; and unto
many *that were* blind he gave sight.

Then said Jesus unto the two disciples \[of John\],

<div class="jesussaid">

Go your way, and tell John again what things ye have seen and heard: how
that the blind receive their sight, and the lane walk, the lepers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have
the gospel preached to them. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be
offended <span id="fr_25"></span>[†](#fn_24) in me.

</div>

¶When the messengers of John were departed, Jesus began to speak unto
the people concerning John, <span id="fr_26"></span>[‡](#fn_25)

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

What went ye out into the wilderness for to see? A reed shaken with the
wind? But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment?
Behold, they that wear soft *clothing*, they which are gorgeously
apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings’ courts, in kings’ houses.

But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and
much more than a prophet. For this is *he* of whom it is written,
Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way
before thee.

Verily, I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not
risen a greater prophet than John the Baptist: notwithstanding, he that
is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.

And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven
suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force. For all the
prophets and the law prophesied until John. And if ye will receive *it*,
this is Elias, which was for to come.

He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

</div>

The people that heard *him*, and the publicans, justified God, being
baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers
rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of
him. Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

¶But whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation? and to
what are they like? They are like unto children sitting in the
marketplace, and calling unto their fellows, one to another, and saying,
We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto
you, and ye have not lamented: ye have not wept.

For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine; and
they say, He hath a devil. The Son of man is come eating and drinking;
and they say, Behold a man gluttonous and a winebibber, a friend of
publicans and sinners!

But wisdom is justified of all her children.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[32:†](csj026.htm#fr_25) ". . . be offended in
me: find in me nothing to his hurt.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[32:‡](csj026.htm#fr_26) The reader interested
in comparing the two texts of Christ's address "to the people concerning
John" will note that Luke's (7, 24-35) is briefer than Matthew's (11,
7-30).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. Woe Unto Chorazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum](csj027)
