[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj068)  [Next](csj070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### LXVI

### CHRIST'S AUTHORITY CHALLENGED—PARABLES: THE SONS WHO WERE OF TWO MINDS; THE LORD OF THE VINEYARD, HIS SON, AND THE MURDEROUS HUSBANDMEN

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem, in the Temple*.

Matthew 21, 23-46: Mark 11, 27-33; 12, 1-12: Luke 20, 1-19.

 <span id="fr_84"></span>[\*](#fn_80)ON one of those days, as Jesus was
walking in the temple, and preached the gospel, the chief priests, and
the scribes came with the elders, saying, By what authority doest thou
these things? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

I also will ask of you one question, which if ye will tell me, and
answer me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these
things: The baptism of John, whence was it? was it from heaven, or of
men? Answer me.

</div>

They reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he
will say, Why then did ye not believe him? But and if we shall say, Of
men; the people will stone us: for they be persuaded that John was
indeed a prophet.

They feared the people. And they answered, We cannot tell.

Jesus saith unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.

</div>

¶Then began he to speak by parables:

<div class="jesussaid">

But what think ye? A *certain* man had two sons; and he came to the
first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard. He answered and
said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went.

And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said,
I *go*, sir: and went not.

Whether of them twain did the will of *his* father?

</div>

They say, The first. Jesus saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the
kingdom of God before you. For John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the
harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen *it*, repented not
afterward, that ye might believe him.

¶Hear another parable: There was a certain householder, which planted a
vineyard, and set a hedge round about it, and digged a place in it for
the winevat; and digged a winepress in it; and built a tower, and let it
out to husbandmen, and went into a far country for a long time.

</div>

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

And at the season when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent a
servant to the husbandmen, that he might receive from them of the fruit
of the vineyard: but the husbandmen caught *him*, and beat him, and sent
*him* away empty.

And again he sent unto them another servant; they beat him also, and at
him they cast stones, and wounded *him* in the head, and handled *him*
shamefully, and sent *him* away empty.

And again he sent a third: and him they wounded also, and killed, and
they cast *him* out: and many others, more than the first: and they did
unto them likewise, beating some, and killing some.

Having yet therefore one son, his well beloved, then said the lord of
the vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son: last of all
he sent unto them his son, saying, It may be they will reverence *him*,
my son, when they see him.

But when those husbandmen saw the son, they reasoned among themselves,
saying, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his
inheritance, and the inheritance shall be ours.

So they caught him, and slew *him*, and cast *him* out of the vineyard.

When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto
those husbandmen? He will come and miserably destroy those wicked men,
and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render
him the fruits *in* their seasons.

</div>

When they heard *it*, they said, God forbid. Jesus beheld them, and
said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Did ye never read in the Scriptures?

What is this then that is written? Have ye not read this Scripture: The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
corner: this was the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our
eyes? <span id="fr_85"></span>[\*](#fn_81)

Therefore I say unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you,
and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And whosoever
shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall
fall, it will grind him to powder.

</div>

The chief priests and Pharisees heard Jesus’ parables: they perceived
that he had spoken the parables against them. And they sought to lay
hold on him, but feared the people, because they took him for a prophet;
and they left him, and went their way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[102:\*](csj069.htm#fr_84) The text itself, as
phrased by the three narrators of these episodes, furnishes interesting
likenesses and contrasts (book, chapter, and verse indicated above.)

<span id="fn_81"></span>[103:\*](csj069.htm#fr_85) Psalms 118, 22-23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXVII. “Many Are Called”—“Render unto Cesar”](csj070)
