[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj021)  [Next](csj023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIX

### IN THE CORNFIELD ON THE SABBATH—"THE SABBATH WAS MADE FOR MAN"—THE WITHERED HAND—THE PHARISEES CONSPIRE—THE TWELVE ORDAINED—PARABLES

A.D. 28. Age 31. *Capernaum*.

Matthew 12, 1-16: Mark 2, 23-28; 3, 1-15; 22-29: Luke 6, 1-13; 11,
24-26.

AT that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the cornfields; and
his disciples were a hungered, and began, as they went, to pluck the
ears of corn, and to eat, rubbing *them* with *their* hands.

But certain of the Pharisees said unto Jesus, Behold, why do thy
disciples on the sabbath day that which is not lawful? Jesus said unto
them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Have ye never read so much as this: what David did, when himself was a
hungered, and had need, he, and they which were with him: how he went
into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did
take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them which were with him,
which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with
him, but for the priests alone?

Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath days the priests
in the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless?

But I say unto you, That in this place is *one* greater than the temple.
But if ye had known what *this* meaneth, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.

The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath: therefore the
Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.

</div>

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

¶On another sabbath, Jesus entered into the synagogue and taught.

There was a man there whose right hand was withered. The scribes and
Pharisees watched Jesus, whether he would heal on the sabbath day. But
he knew their thoughts, and he said to the man,

<div class="jesussaid">

Rise up, and stand forth in the midst.

</div>

He arose and stood forth. Then said Jesus unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

I will ask you one thing: Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good,
or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? to save life, or to destroy it?

</div>

But thy held their peace. And Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it
fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift
it out? How much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is
lawful to do well on the sabbath days.

</div>

When Jesus had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for
the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man,

<div class="jesussaid">

Stretch forth thine hand.

</div>

He did so: and his hand was restored whole, like as the other.

¶The Pharisees were filled with madness; they went forth, and
straightaway took counsel with the Herodians what they might do to
Jesus.

Jesus knew it: he withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea. And he
straitly charged them that they should not make him known.

¶Jesus goeth up into a mountain, and calleth *unto* him whom he would:
and they came. He ordained twelve, whom also he named apostles, that
they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach,
and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils.

¶The scribes said, He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils
casteth he out devils. Jesus said unto them in parables, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_19)

<div class="jesussaid">

How can Satan cast out Satan?

And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand. And
if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but
hath an end.

No man can enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except
he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his house.

Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men,
and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: but he that shall
blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in
danger of eternal damnation.

</div>

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Because they said, he hath an unclean spirit.

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_20)When the unclean spirit is gone out
of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest: and finding none,
he saith, I will return unto my house whence I came out. And when he
cometh, he findeth *it* swept and garnished. Then goeth he, and taketh
*to him* seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and the last
*state* of that man is worse than the first.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[27:\*](csj021.htm#fr_19) Wine-skins were the
"bottles."

<span id="fn_19"></span>[28:\*](csj022.htm#fr_20) This record of
Christ's reply to the scribes is Mark's (3, 22-29). In XXVI of this book
Christ's similar reply to certain Pharisees is from Matthew and Luke.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[29:\*](csj022.htm#fr_21) Thus Luke (11, 24-26).
In XXVII of this book the same saying is phrased somewhat differently in
the narrative from Matthew (12, 43-45).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. The Twelve by Name—The Sermon in the Plain](csj023)
