[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj047)  [Next](csj049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLV

### AT THE FEAST OF THE TABERNACLE—OPINIONS DIVIDED

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Jerusalem*. *Galilee*.

John 7, 1-46, 53; 8, 1.

AFTER these things, Jesus <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_55) walked in
Galilee: for he would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill
him.

Now the Jews’ feast of the tabernacles was at hand. Jesus’ brethren
therefore said unto him, Go into Judea, that thy disciples also may see
the works that thou doest. For *there is* no man *that* doeth anything
in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these
things, shew thyself to the world.

For neither did his brethren believe in him.

Then Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

My time is not yet come: but your time is always ready. The world cannot
hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works
thereof are evil. Go ye up unto this feast: for my time is not yet full
come.

</div>

¶Jesus abode *still* in Galilee.

But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast,
not openly, but as it were in secret.

There was much murmuring among the people concerning him: for some said,
He is a good man: others said, Nay; but he deceiveth the people. Howbeit
no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews. The Jews sought him at
the feast.

¶Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple and
taught. The Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having
never learned? Jesus answered,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or *whether*
I speak of myself. He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory:
but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him.

Did not Moses give you the law, and *yet* none of you keepeth the law?
Why go ye about to kill me?

</div>

The people answered, Who goeth about to kill thee? Thou hast a devil.
Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

I have done one work, and ye all marvel.

Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision (not because it is of Moses,
but of the fathers); and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man. If a
man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses
should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man
every whit whole on the sabbath day?

Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

</div>

Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to
kill? But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the
rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ? Howbeit we know this
man whence he is, but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is.

Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am: and I am not come of myself,
but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not. But I know him; for I am
from him, and he hath sent me.

</div>

Then they sought to take him: but his hour was not yet come.

Many believed on Jesus, and said, When Christ cometh, will he do more
miracles than those which this man hath done?

¶The Pharisees and chief priests heard that the people murmured such
things concerning Jesus, and sent officers to take him. Then said Jesus,

<div class="jesussaid">

Yet a little while am I with you, and *then* I go unto him that sent me.
Ye shall seek me, and shall not find *me:* and where I am, *thither* ye
cannot come.

</div>

Then said the Jews among themselves, What *manner of* saying is this
that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find *me:* and where I am,
*thither* ye cannot come?

¶In the last day, that great *day* of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,

<div class="jesussaid">

If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on
me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water.

</div>

 <span id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_56) (But this spake he of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

receive.)

¶Many of the people, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this
is the Prophet. Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall
Christ come out of Galilee?

So there was a division among the people because of him. And some of
them would have taken him; but no man laid hands upon him.

¶Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees. They said,
Why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, Never man spake like
this man.

And every man went unto his own home. Jesus went unto the mount of
Olives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[63:\*](csj048.htm#fr_58) Turn back, and reread
XXXVI in this book.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[64:\*](csj048.htm#fr_59) <span id="page_65">p.
65</span> For other examples of symbolism turn back to the footnotes in
VII and XXXVI in this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVI. The Woman Taken In Adultery](csj049)
