[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj028)  [Next](csj030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXVI

### THE MAN BLIND, MUTE, AND BEDEVILED—DOUBTING PHARISEES ADMONISHED—PARABLES—"EVERY IDLE WORD"

A.D. 28. Age 31. *Capernaum*.

Matthew 12, 22-37: Luke 11, 17-23: Mark 3, 22-29.

UNTO Jesus was brought one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb; and
he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw.

The people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David? But the
Pharisees said, This *fellow* doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub
the prince of the devils.

Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_28)Every kingdom divided against
itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against
itself falleth: *it* shall not stand: and if Satan cast out Satan, he is
divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand? because ye
say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub.

And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast
them out? therefore they shall be your judges.

But if I with the finger of God cast out devils by the Spirit of God,

</div>

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

no doubt then the kingdom of God is come unto you.

Or else, how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his
goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil his
house.

When a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace: but
when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he taketh
from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divideth the spoils.

He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me
scattereth abroad.

¶Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto the sons of men: but the blasphemy *against* the Holy
Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost is in danger
of eternal damnation: it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this
world, neither in the *world* to come.

Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree
corrupt: for the tree is known by *his* fruit.

O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man out of
the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil
man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.

But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.

For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be
condemned.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[35:\*](csj029.htm#fr_29) From Matthew, and
Luke. In XIX of this book a rebuke similar to the following, but
addressed to certain scribes, is a part of Mark's narrative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII. Doubters Seek a Sign](csj030)
