[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj084)  [Next](csj086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXXXII

### THE BETRAYAL: JUDAS’ KISS—PETER MILITANT—CHRIST HAILED TO COURT—AN OFFICER STRIKES JESUS THOUGH BOUND—"ALL THE DISCIPLES FORSOOK HIM"

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Gethsemane. Jerusalem*.

Matthew 26, 48-58: Mark 14, 44-50; 53-54: Luke 22, 47-55: John 18,
10-16; 19-23.

NOW Judas had given them a token (sign), saying, Whomsoever I shall
kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.

 <span id="fr_102"></span>[\*](#fn_98)Judas went before, and drew near
unto Jesus, to kiss him: and saith, Hail, Master; and kissed him.

Jesus said unto Judas,

<div class="jesussaid">

Friend, wherefore art thou come? <span id="fr_103"></span>[†](#fn_99)
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?

</div>

Then they laid hands on Jesus.

They which were about him said, Lord, shall we smite them with the
sword?

And Simon Peter having a sword smote the high priest's servant, Malchas,
and cut off his right ear. Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Suffer thus far.

</div>

And he touched his ear and healed him. Then said Jesus unto Peter,

<div class="jesussaid">

Put up again thy sword into his place in the sheath: for all they that
take the sword shall perish with the sword: the cup which my Father hath
given me, shall I not drink it? Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to
my [Father](errata.htm#7), and he shall presently give me more than
twelve legions of angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be?

</div>

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

In that same hour said Jesus unto the multitude,

<div class="jesussaid">

Be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves for to take
me?

When I sat daily with you, teaching in the temple, ye stretched forth no
hands against me: ye laid no hold on me: ye took me not: but this is
your hour, and the power of darkness. But all this was done that the
Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. The Scriptures must be
fulfilled.

</div>

Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

¶The officers of the Jews bound Jesus and led him away. They brought him
into the palace of the high priest, Caiaphas that year.

Simon Peter followed, to see the end. And *so did* another disciple:
that disciple was known to Caiaphas, and went with Jesus into the
palace. But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that disciple
and spake unto her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.

When they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, Peter sat amongst
the servants, and warmed himself at the fire.

¶With Caiaphas the high priest were assembled the chief priests and the
elders and the scribes.

Caiaphas asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine, Jesus
answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

I spake openly to the world: I ever taught in the synagogues, and in the
temple, whither the Jews always resort: and in secret have I said
nothing. Ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold,
they know what I said. Why askest thou me?

</div>

When Jesus had thus spoken, one of the officers struck him with the palm
of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

If I have spoken evil, bear witness to the evil: but if well, why
smitest thou me?

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[130:\*](csj085.htm#fr_102) See footnote at the
beginning of LXXXI. The several narrators exhibit their wonted
likenesses and contrasts in the phrasing.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[130:†](csj085.htm#fr_103) Thus the *King James
Version* (Matthew 26, 50). The *Revised Version:* Friend, *do* that for
which thou art come. The *Goodspeed Translation* (1923): My friend, do
your errand. *The Moffat Translation* (1922): My man, do your errand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXIII. Christ's Trial](csj086)
