[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj013)  [Next](csj015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI

### AT THE POOL: THE IMPOTENT MAN CURED—SABBATH HEALING JUSTIFIED—JESUS' SONSHIP SET FORTH—"SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES"

A.D. 27. Age 30. Jerusalem: Pool of Bethesda.

John 5, 1-47.

AFTER this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.

At Jerusalem there is a pool, called Bethesda, having five porches. In
these lay impotent folk: blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving
of the water. For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool,
and troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the
water stepped in was made whole of whatever disease he had.

A certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years.
When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in
that case, he saith unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Wilt thou be made whole?

</div>

The impotent man answered, Sir, I have no man, when the water is
troubled, to put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another
steppeth down before me. Jesus saith unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.

</div>

Immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked: and
on the same day was the sabbath.

¶The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the sabbath day:
it is not lawful for thee to carry *thy* bed.

He answered, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy
bed, and walk.

Then they asked him, What man is that? And he that was healed wist not
who it was: for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in
*that* place.

Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee.

</div>

The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus, which had made
him whole. And the Jews sought to slay Jesus, because he had done these
things on the sabbath day.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

¶But Jesus answered them,

<div class="jesussaid">

My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.

</div>

The Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the
sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal
with God. Then Jesus said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but
what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also
doeth the Son likewise. For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him
all things that himself doeth: and he will shew him greater works than
these, that ye may marvel.

For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth *them;* even so
the Son quickeneth whom he will.

For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the
Son; that all *men* should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father.
He that honoreth not the Son honoreth not the Father which hath sent
him.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth
on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation; but is passed from death unto life.

Verily, verily, I say unto you. The hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall
live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the
Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute
judgment also because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the
hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation.

I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment
is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father
which hath sent me. If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.

¶There is another that beareth witness of me; and I know that the
witness which he witnesseth of me is true.

Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. But I receive not
testimony from man: but these things I say, that ye might be saved. He
was a burning and a shining light: and we were willing for a season to
rejoice in his light.

¶But I have greater witness than *that* of John: for the works which the
Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness
of me, that the Father hath sent me. And the Father himself, which hath
sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at
any time, nor seen his shape. And ye have not his word abiding in you:
for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not.

</div>

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

¶Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and
they are they which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye
might have life.

I receive not honor from men. But I know you, that ye have not the love
of God in you. I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if
another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. How can ye
believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that
*cometh* from God only?

Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that
accuseth you, *even* Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words?

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Christ Reads in Synagogue at Nazareth](csj015)
