[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj066)  [Next](csj068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXIV

### FARING TOWARD JERUSALEM AMIDST HOSANNAS—JESUS WEEPS FORETELLING JERUSALEM'S FATE

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Bethphage*. *Jerusalem*.

John 11, 55-57: Matthew 21, 1-6: Mark 77, 1-11: Luke 19, 28-44.

THE Jews’ passover was nigh at hand; and many went out of the country up
to Jerusalem, before the passover, to purify themselves. Jesus went
before, ascending up to Jerusalem.

Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that if
any man knew where Jesus were, he should shew *it*, that they might take
him. Then they sought for him.

¶When Jesus was come to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives,
nigh unto Jerusalem, he sendeth forth two disciples, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Go ye your way into the village over against you, in the which, as soon
as ye be entered into it, straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a
colt with her, <span id="fr_82"></span>[\*](#fn_78) whereon yet never
man sat; loose them, and bring *them* hither unto me.

And if any man say aught unto you, and ask you, Why do ye this? why do
ye loose them? ye shall say, Because the Lord hath need of them; and
straightway he will send them hither.

</div>

The \[two\] disciples went, and did as Jesus had commanded. The owners
said, Why loose ye them? They answered, The Lord hath need of them. And
they let them go.

They brought the ass, and the colt, and put their garments on the colt;
and they set Jesus thereon.

As he went, many spread their clothes in the way; and others cut
branches off the trees, and strewed them in the way.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

At the descent of the mount of Olives, the multitude began to praise
God, saying, Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of he Lord.
Hosanna in the highest: peace in heaven!

Some of the Pharisees said unto Jesus, Master, rebuke thy disciples. He
answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

I tell you, that if these should hold their peace, the stones would
immediately cry out.

</div>

¶When Jesus was come near, he beheld the city (Jerusalem), and wept over
it, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
*which* belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a
trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every
side. And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within
thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because
thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.

</div>

¶When Jesus was come into Jerusalem, he taught daily in the temple. All
the city was moved. The blind and the lame came to him, and he healed
them.

The wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple,
Hosanna to the Son of David, displeased the chief priests and the
scribes; and they said unto Jesus, Hearest thou what these say? He
answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Yea; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou
hast perfected praise?

</div>

And when he had looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide
was come, he went out. With the twelve he went unto Bethany, and lodged
there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[99:\*](csj067.htm#fr_82) Thus Matthew. The
other three narrators tell of the colt only. The interested reader will
be repaid who will compare all four accounts, contrasting the
characteristic Phrasings (book, chapter, and verse indicated above).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXV. The Fig Tree Withered](csj068)
