[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj061)  [Next](csj063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LIX

### ONE GRATEFUL SAMARITAN AMONG TEN LEPERS HEALED—"THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU"—"THE SON OF MAN MUST SUFFER"—"REMEMBER LOT'S WIFE"—PARABLE: THE UNJUST JUDGE WAVERS—"SHALL THE SON OF MAN FIND FAITH ON THE EARTH?"

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Galilee*. *Samaria*. *Perea*.

Luke 17, 11-37; 18, 1-8.

AS Jesus went to Jerusalem, he passed through Samaria and Galilee. In a
certain village ten lepers, which stood far off, lifted up *their*
voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us. He said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Go shew yourselves unto the priests.

</div>

As they went, they were cleansed. And one of them turned back, and fell
at Jesus’ feet, giving him thanks: he was a Samaritan. Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Were there not ten cleansed? but where *are* the nine? There are not
found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger.

</div>

And he said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Arise, go thy way: thy faith hath made thee whole.

</div>

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

¶When Jesus was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God
should come, he answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

The kingdom of God cometh not with observation: neither shall they say,
Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you.

</div>

And he said unto his disciples,

<div class="jesussaid">

The days will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the
Son of man, and ye shall not see *it*. And they shall say to you, See
here; or, see there: go not after *them*, nor follow *them*. For as the
lightning, which lighteneth out of the one *part* under heaven, shineth
unto the other *part* under heaven; so shall also the Son of man be in
his day.

But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this
generation.

And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the
Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were
given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the
flood came, and destroyed them all.

Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank,
they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day
that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and
destroyed *them* all.

Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. In
that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his stuff in the
house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the
field, let him likewise not return back.

Remember Lot's wife.

Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall
lose his life shall preserve it.

I tell you, in that night there shall be two *men* in one bed; the one
shall be taken, and the other shall be left. Two *women* shall be
grinding together; the one shall be taken, and the other left. Two *men*
shall be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_71)

</div>

They said unto Jesus, Where, Lord? He answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Wheresoever the body *is*, thither will the eagles be gathered together.

</div>

¶He spake a parable *to this end*, that men ought always to pray, and
not to faint, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man:
and there was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying,
Avenge me of mine adversary.

</div>

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself,
Though I fear not God, nor regard man; yet because this widow troubleth
me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me.

And the Lord said,

Hear what the unjust judge saith. And shall not God avenge his own
elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them?
I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son
of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[91:\*](csj062.htm#fr_74) Thus Luke (17, 34-36).
Compare with Matthew 24, 40-41, in LXXII of this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LX. “Easier For a Camel to Go Through the Eye of a
Needle”](csj063)
