[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj078)  [Next](csj080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

### LXXVI

### CHRIST INSTITUTES HIS HOLY SUPPER—JUDAS THE BETRAYER—PETER'S THREE DENIALS PREDICTED—"YET A LITTLE WHILE I AM WITH YOU: LET NOT YOUR HEART BE TROUBLED"—MANY MANSIONS

A.D. 30 Age 33. Jerusalem: Upper Room.

Paul I. Corinthians 11, 24-25: Matthew 26, 21-29: Mark 14, 18-25: Luke
22, 19-38: John 13, 18-38; 14, 1-4.

THE *same* night in which he was betrayed, the Lord Jesus took bread,
and gave thanks, and blessed *it*, and brake *it*, and gave *it* to his
disciples, and said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Take, eat; this is my body, which is given <span
id="fr_95"></span>[\*](#fn_91) for you: this do in remembrance of me.

</div>

As they sat and did eat, Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.

¶But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me *is* with me on the
table. And truly the Son of man goeth, as it was determined: but woe
unto that man by whom he is betrayed!

I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that the
Scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up
his heel against me.

Now I tell you before it come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may
believe that I am *he*.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send
receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.

</div>

When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit; and testified,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you which eateth with me
shall betray me.

</div>

The disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake. They
were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto Jesus,
one by one, Lord, is it I? and another, Is it I? He answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

*It is* one of the twelve: he that dippeth *his* hand with me in the
dish, the same shall betray me.

The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him; but woe to that
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he
had never been born.

</div>

Now there was leaning on Jesus’ bosom one whom Jesus loved. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[†](#fn_92) Simon Peter beckoned to him, that he
should ask who it should be of whom

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jesus spake. He
then lying on Jesus’ breast saith, Lord, who is it? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it.

</div>

He dipped the sop: he gave *it* to Judas Iscariot: then said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

That thou doest, do quickly.

</div>

Judas said, Master, is it I? Jesus said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Thou hast said.

</div>

Judas went immediately out: and it was night. When he was gone, Jesus
said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is [glorified](errata.htm#6) in
him. If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself,
and shall straightway glorify him.

Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and
as I said unto the Jews, <span id="fr_97"></span>[\*](#fn_93) so now I
say to you, Whither I go, ye cannot come.

A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all *men* know
that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.

</div>

¶Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now: but thou shalt follow me
afterwards.

</div>

Peter said, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life
for thy sake. Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice.

</div>

¶There was a strife among the disciples, which of them should be
accounted the greatest. And Jesus said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

The kings of the Gentile exercise lordship over them; and they that
exercise authority upon them are called benefactors. But ye *shall* not
*be* so; but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger;
and he that is chief, as he that doth serve.

For whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that serveth?
*is* not he that sitteth at meat? but I am among you as he that serveth.

Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And I

</div>

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father hath appointed unto me; that ye
may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging
the twelve tribes of Israel.

</div>

¶And the Lord said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired *to have* you, that he may sift
you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and
when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

</div>

And Simon said, Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into prison, and
to death. And Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before that thou
shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me.

</div>

And he said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye anything?

</div>

They said, Nothing. Then said Jesus,

<div class="jesussaid">

But now, he that hath a purse, let him take *it*, and likewise *his*
scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one.

For I say unto you, that this that is written must yet be accomplished
in me, And he was reckoned among the transgressors.

For the things concerning me have an end.

</div>

And they said, Lord, behold, here *are* two swords. And he answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

It is enough.

</div>

When he had supped, Jesus after the same manner *took* the cup, and when
he had given thanks, gave *it* to them, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Drink ye all of it.

</div>

And they all drank of it. And he said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you; for
this is my blood of the new testament which is shed for many for the
remission of sins: this do ye, as oft as ye drink *it*, in remembrance
of me.

Verily I say unto you, I will drink henceforth no more of this fruit of
the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in the kingdom of
God, my Father's kingdom.

Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me.

</div>

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

In my Father's house are many mansions: if *it were* not *so*, I would
have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare
a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that
where I am, *there* ye may be also. And whither I go ye know, and the
way ye know.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[119:\*](csj079.htm#fr_95) Paul has it,
"broken."

<span id="fn_92"></span>[119:†](csj079.htm#fr_96) Supposed to be John,
the brother of James and son of Zebedee.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[120:\*](csj079.htm#fr_97) Told in XLVI of this
book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXVII. Last Supper (cont.) “I Am The Way, The Truth, The
Life”](csj080)
