[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CIII

### "JOHN SEETH THE THRONE OF GOD IN HEAVEN"

A.D. 96.

Revelation 4, 1-2; 14, 13; 16, 15; 19, 9-10; 21, 5-8; 22, 6-21.

AFTER this I looked, and, behold, a door *was* opened in heaven: and the
first voice which I heard *was* as it were of a trumpet talking with me;
which said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be
hereafter. And immediately I was in the Spirit: and, behold, a throne
was set in heaven, and *one* sat on the throne.

And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

Write, Blessed *are* the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth:
Yea,

Saith the Spirit,

That they may rest from their labors: and their works do follow them.

</div>

And I heard a great voice saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Behold, I come as a thief.

Blessed *is* he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk
naked, and they see his shame.

</div>

And he saith unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

Write, Blessed *are* they which are called unto the marriage supper of
the Lamb.

</div>

And he saith unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

These are the true sayings of God.

</div>

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

And I, John, fell at his feet to worship him. And he said unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

See *thou do it* not: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that
have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is
the spirit of prophecy.

</div>

And he that sat upon the throne said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Behold, I make all things new.

</div>

And he said unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

Write: for these words are true and faithful.

</div>

And he said unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give
unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely.

He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and
he shall be my son. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which
burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death.

</div>

And he said unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

These sayings *are* faithful and true: and the Lord God of the holy
prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must
shortly be done.

Behold, I come quickly: blessed *is* he that keepeth the sayings of the
prophecy of this book.

</div>

And I, John, saw these things, and heard *them*. And when I had heard
and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which
shewed me these things.

Then saith he unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

See *thou do it* not: for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren
the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship
God.

</div>

And he saith unto me,

<div class="jesussaid">

Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at
hand.

He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let
him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward *is* with me, to give

</div>

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

every man according as his work shall be.

I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.

Blessed *are* they that do his commandments, that they may have right to
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. For
without *are* dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.

I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the
churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, *and* the bright and
morning star.

And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say,
Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely.

For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of
this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are written in this book. And if any man shall take
away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away
his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and *from*
the things which are written in this book.

</div>

He which testifieth these things saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

Surely I come quickly. Amen.

Even so, come, Lord Jesus.  
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ *be* with you all. Amen.

</div>

¶ The names on this sketch are to be deemed scarcely more than pointers
to the places named in the text. The printing of the letters large
enough to be readily legible on so small a map rendered precise
placements impracticable.

 

 

 
