[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ram00)  [Next](ram02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0837115507/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Religion and Myth*, by James Macdonald, \[1883\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### PREFACE

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> volume is an effort to put into
popular form a number of facts connected with the religious observances
and social customs of African tribes. No attempt is made to treat the
subject exhaustively, and those who have made Ethnology a study will
find in it little that is absolutely new. But the ordinary reader, who
is interested in questions affecting a people slowly emerging from
barbarism, may have his sympathies quickened.

When I first began the study of Ethnology it opened to me a new world of
thought. Reading Mr. J. G. Frazer's *Golden Bough* last winter, I found
it touched so many subjects which long residence in Africa had made
familiar to me, that the idea of putting the results of my own
observations into permanent form took shape. This has been supplemented
by facts gleaned from such authorities as were at hand, and the result
is the present volume.

I have, in foot-notes, acknowledged my indebtedness to various authors.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

The facts have been gathered chiefly from Mr. Frazer's volumes; Bishop
Callaway's *Nursery Tales, Traditions and Histories of the Zulus;* Miss
C. G. Gordon-Cumming's *In the New Hebrides;* W. Mannhardt's *Antike
Wald-und Feld Kulte* and his other works; Winterbotham's *The Niger and
Laire Tribes;* Rowley's *Africa Unveiled;* Duff Macdonald's *Africana;*
Schweinfurth's *The Heart of Africa;* Chalmers’ *Tiyo Soga;* Brownlee's
MS. notes; Felkin's *Four Tribes of Central Africa;* Ramseyer's and
Kühne's *Four Years in Ashantee;* Ashe's *Two Kings of Uganda;* Arnot's
*Garanganze;* the missionaries New and Krapf, G. M. Theal, and several
others, without whose works my. book could not have been written.

Though living "at the back of the north wind," I still feel the African
fever; that is to say, the charm which it has to draw back to itself all
who have tasted its bitters and sweets.

My object throughout has been to stimulate an interest in African
peoples.

If the book serves this purpose, I shall be amply rewarded for the
labour bestowed upon it; in the. fullest sense a labour of love.

JAMES MACDONALD.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Reay Free Manse</span>,  
    *Christmas*, 1892.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ram02.md)
