[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ram04)  [Next](ram06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0837115507/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Religion and Myth*, by James Macdonald, \[1883\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### CHAPTER III

##### EVOLUTION OF DEITY

<span class="smallcaps">To</span> form a correct conception of African
and other primitive peoples, it is necessary to have some acquaintance
with the doctrine of souls, as that is understood by savage men. This
throughout Africa is vague, and the results of inquiry are far from
satisfactory. One hears accounts of souls, differing in all essentials,
from men who observe the same forms of worship and are subject to the
same system of government. The facts on which all are agreed are few and
easily enumerated. All men have souls, even idiots, though some deny
this, and the departure of the soul from the body is death. The soul is
air, breath, wind, spirit, or it may be regarded as being all these, or
having their essence. It is invisible, but in miniature an exact
reproduction of the man. It is his shadow, reflection, what speaks in
him. During sleep, or when a man is in a faint, his soul is absent from
the body, but returns with restored animation. Should a person in a
faint be removed from one place to another, as taking him out of his
house into the open air, he could not recover, as the soul would return
to the spot where the man fainted, and not finding him there, would go
away. Again, a sleeper must not be rudely or

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

hurriedly awakened, lest his soul, like Baal of old, should be on a
journey, and have no time to return to re-enter the body. In that case
the man might not die, but he would cease to be human, and go to wander
for ever in the forest like those corpses raised by the art of
witchcraft, and who are doomed to an eternal wandering in mist and rain.
The spirit or soul, in the case of temporary absence, leaves the body by
the natural openings, especially the nostrils, and must re-enter by the
way it went; hence placing a handkerchief over the face of a sleeper
would be highly reprehensible, as it might, probably would, lead to
certain death. So would closing the mouth, should the soul have left by
that door.

At death the soul leaves the body to return no more. Its leaving is not
regarded as voluntary, as death—that is, the expulsion of the soul—is
most frequently the work of wizards; but in any case it cannot re-enter
that body "whose eyes shall never see the sun again." Where does the
soul go when it leaves the body, either temporarily or permanently?
During the absence of sleep it may "visit the sleeper's friend in a
dream," or it may "flit about the roof;" in either case its return is
prompt the moment the slumberer begins to move his limbs. "The soul
hears even a long breath, should it be with my friend far away," said a
Kaffir once to me in a moment of unwonted confidence. At death the soul
hovers near the body till the latter is buried, and then takes up its
abode in the great world of spirits, except in those cases in which it
enters

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

an animal or object to watch over the doings of men.

But souls are almost as liable to danger from external circumstances as
human divinities are. They may be stolen, like a man's purse; snatched
away in a whiff of whirlwind, or lost through carelessness or neglect.
Should a South African native see an Incante, his soul would be snatched
away and he would die on the spot. When a "river calls," he must enter
it, but only to drown in its deep waters. The Hill living there demands
his soul. He may be bewitched by wizards, and his soul stolen, leaving
him a ghostly wanderer in fen and forest. A Zulu will not look into a
dark pool, as there is a creature "behind the reflection" that will
steal away his shadow, and he dies. To all mirrors and reflecting
surfaces there is the same objection. In either case the soul is
snatched away by the devil. So it happens that mirrors being "expressly
invented by the devil for his purposes," people in civilised countries
cover up theirs whenever there is a death in the house. To this day, in
the Highlands of Scotland, all mirrors are carefully covered over with
white cloths the moment a person expires. The same is done in
Madagascar; the custom is not extinct in England.

Such beliefs regarding the nature and habits of souls linger in odd
corners of Europe in a much more distinct form than the custom of
covering mirrors. In Greece, when a new house is being built, they have
a peculiar method of giving stability to the building. For this purpose
a cock is

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

killed and its blood allowed to flow on the foundation-stone. Another
and a more effectual method is for the builder to entice a man, on some
pretext, to enter where the builders are at work and then measure his
shadow by stealth. This measure placed under the foundation-stone, gives
the house absolute stability. The person whose shadow was measured "dies
within a year," but that is a secondary matter with the
contractor. <span id="fr_38"></span>[\*](#fn_38.md) This is beyond doubt a
survival of an ancient custom, and a belief that a man's soul and his
shadow were identical, or in any case indissolubly bound to one another.
I remember hearing my father tell of an old Highland tradition that
those who practised the black art cast no shadow. They had sold their
souls to the devil for supernatural power, and their immortal part being
his by right and possession, the body cast no shadow from the sun, soul
and shadow being one. Another danger of the soul was slow expulsion by
sorcery, but this belongs rather to the subject of witchcraft, under
which it falls to be considered.

Having thus seen the nature of the soul and a few of its dangers as
these are conceived by savage men, we can the more easily proceed to the
study of spiritual divinities as distinguished from, or evolved out of,
incarnate gods. We shall begin with South Africa. There every man
worships the spirits of his departed ancestors, especially those
recently deceased. In Africa, as elsewhere, old ghosts are not of much
account. The father's spirit must

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

be worshipped and his wants supplied by sacrifice; the grandfather's
must be honoured and his known wishes regarded, but the poor old
great-grandfather may sit in his horn in the corner and no one pay any
special regard to him, unless, indeed, he happened to be a noted man, as
the founder of a family or sept. The clans worship in the same manner
the spirits of their departed chiefs, and where all the clans composing
a tribe are supposed to be descended from a common ancestor, the spirits
of departed tribal chiefs are a kind of supreme, or at least superior,
deities. When a tribe is composed of different clans this powerful
element of union, the worship of a common ancestor, is wanting, as each
clan looks to its hereditary chief as its true divinity. They have no
very definite idea of the mode of existence of their deities, only they
inhabit the old places and are always at hand. A man cannot perform an
action unknown to the gods, though thieves disguise themselves to
deceive divinity. This, however, is never effectual, as the wise men
will say, "A thief is always known, though we cannot say his name."

Closely connected with the doctrine of divinity is that of other spirits
than the souls of ancestors. Those most commonly met with are water or
river spirits, inhabiting deep pools where there are strong eddies and
under-currents. These are wicked and malevolent beings, and are never
credited with any good. Whatever they possess they keep, and seize on
anything which comes within their reach, especially the souls of men.
Other spirits reside in forests, mountains and rocky caverns. They

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

frequently leave their haunts and assume animal form, as baboon, wolf,
wild dog, snake, or lizard. This is always for pure mischief, and their
malevolent designs can only be averted by the use of charm s prepared by
a magician, and sacrifice. Moremo, the god of the Bechuanas, was
malicious and cunning. <span id="fr_39"></span>[\*](#fn_39.md) They never
hesitated to express their indignation when he disappointed them, by
bitter invective and cursing. This same method was suggested to Job by
his wife: "Curse God and die," said that virago. When they had good
crops, Moremo got all the credit of it, and was patronised as a
generous, good-natured kind of a god after all. Evidently, from the
accounts that have reached us, Bechuana religion is not very profound,
nor is their god very consistent.

As we move northwards we find the deities undergoing considerable
modification, and along the west coast we make the acquaintance of
Fetish and Fetish idols, hardly a trace of which is to be found in east
and east-central Africa. These totems or sacred animals become the clan
badges, and from the animals held sacred we can recognise scattered
remnants of tribes separated by hundreds of miles, and having hardly any
customs in common except the sacred animal as their clan badge.
Throughout the whole continent we meet with customs, ritual, ceremonial
acts, and other observances which have at first sight no appearance of
being connected with any religious belief, but which have a religious
significance. And this is consistent with savage

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

thought, which always connects the most insignificant action that is
unusual with what is supernatural, as a cock crowing in the
evening <span id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_40.md) or a crane alighting on a
house-top. Actions done by individuals may influence the whole policy of
a tribe for generations either for good or evil. For example, the
natives of Senjero, Abyssinia, sell only female slaves, never men or
boys, and any one selling a male would bring upon himself the wrath of
the gods, even if he could hope to escape a visit from the executioner.
The origin of the custom is said to have been that a king long ago, when
kings were divine, had ordered a man to kill his wife and bring him a
piece of her flesh for the cure of an ailment from which he suffered.
The man refused to comply with the king's order, and saved his wife
alive. She was next sent for and told what had happened, after which she
was asked to slay her husband and bring a piece of his flesh to the
king. This the ungrateful woman did, and ever since then a Senjero man
may sell his daughter, or even his wife, but a man never. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[†](#fn_41.md) Human sacrifices to their divinities are
common among the people of Senjero. This, so runs the legend, was
introduced long ago, when the seasons got confused, summer and winter
being so mixed up that no crops ripened. The priests "ordered many
families to sacrifice their first-born," and the rulers of the town to
raze a huge iron pillar which stood outside the gate. The base

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

of the pillar, like "the stump of the roots" of the tree in
Nebuchadnezzar's vision, was to be left, and it and the throne to be
sprinkled with the blood of the victims. After this was done the seasons
resumed their normal course; <span id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_42.md) but in
memory of the event, and to prevent its recurrence, the sacrifices are
observed annually, and both throne and the spot where the pillar stood
sprinkled with blood. This myth, the iron pillar apart, is probably a
transcript of what the historian witnessed with his own eyes. These
obscure practices and legends point back to a time when the spirit of
vegetation, or creative energy, was worshipped and sacrifices offered to
it. The confusion of the seasons and their readjustment by sacrifice has
undoubtedly a close connection with the worship of the spirit of growth.
Another curious custom in Senjero is the throwing of a slave into Lake
Umo by dealers in men when setting out on a raiding expedition. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[†](#fn_43.md) The sacrifice is to the deity of the lake,
in order that he may, from the victim given as a seed-corn, give a
plentiful crop.

Among the Gallas the priests occupy a position distinct from the
magicians or exorcists. They have the highest place in all religious
ceremonies, and receive special honour and homage from their votaries.
Here we find trees and vegetation occupying a prominent place in all
religious observances and acts of worship. So marked is this
characteristic that it is more akin to the worship and sacrifice of the
Khonds of India than what we are familiar with in most parts of Africa.
The

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Galla priest will
sacrifice only under the woda-tree. In it, spirit, "even a higher
spirit," dwells, and no man dare fell a woda-tree. If he does so, he
forfeits his life. <span id="fr_44"></span>[\*](#fn_44.md) The tree itself
is sacred, and so too is the woda-mabi, or groves where it grows by the
River Hawash where the great yearly festivals are held. At these
gatherings the tree spirit is worshipped by offerings and
sacrifice. <span id="fr_45"></span>[†](#fn_45.md) Nor is the worship of
tree spirits peculiar to the Gallas. We meet with it in Lithuania, in
Bavaria, and in Southern Europe. The Ovaons of Bengal have a festival in
spring, while the sál-trees are in blossom, because they think that at
that time the marriage of earth is celebrated, and sál-flowers are
necessary for the ceremony. On the day appointed, the villagers,
accompanied by their priest, gather the flowers in a forest where a
goddess is supposed to dwell. Next day the priest visits each house
carrying the flowers with him. The women as he approaches bring out
water to wash his feet and do him obeisance. Then he dances with them,
placing flowers in their hair, after which they drench him with
water. <span id="fr_46"></span>[‡](#fn_46.md) This ceremony is supposed to
have an influence upon the course of the weather, especially the
rainfall, and the spirit of the sacred sál-tree is represented by both
the flowers and the priest who brings them, introducing us to the double
representation of the spirit of vegetation, by a person and object, as
that survives in the Grass king of Sommerberg or the May Bride of
Altmark. <span id="fr_47"></span>[§](#fn_47.md)

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

The Gallas have no idols, but revere objects and animals, serpents being
specially sacred. One variety of snake they regard as having been the
mother of the human family. This same belief was a prominent feature of
the ancient paganism of Abyssinia. The supreme Galla deity is water;
under him, or her, are two subordinate gods, a masculine, Oglie, to whom
cows are sacrificed in June and July, and his consort Atetie, whose
offerings are made in September, and may consist of animals or fruits.
She is the goddess of fecundity, and women are her principal votaries;
but as she can also make the earth "prolific," offerings are made to her
for that purpose. <span id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_48.md) These divinities
represent the creative and fructifying powers of nature, and this
nature-worship meets us under different forms in all parts of the
Continent. Even the Gold Coast moon-dance is an act of homage done to
the mother of all.

Passing from the Gallas to the Waganga, the same essentials are met with
in the national worship. There a cocoa-nut is hung up at the village
gate while the crops are ripening. This, curiously enough, is to prevent
theft, as any one touching the fruits of the earth while it is there
would be visited with the vengeance of the earth goddess. A secondary
object served is the protection of the crops from injury. An empty
cocoa-nut shell is placed on graves, and filled now and then with tembo,
for without this the spirit could not exist. Tembo to them represents
the spirit or essence of the earth's fruits: the life-blood of nature.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Of this earth divinity the visible representative is the Muansa. This is
simply a log of wood, hollowed out in a particular manner, so that when
rubbed it emits sounds resembling the roaring and bellowing of wild
animals. <span id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_49.md) It is carried about in
solemn procession at all great festivals, for in it the god resides. If
at such times it were seen by women or children they would fall down
dead. Should a woman, after seeing the Muansa, survive, she would become
barren. So, when the god roars, women must hide in the woods till it is
carried back to its house. Besides the great festivals, as that of
first-fruits, the god roars when the tribe sacrifices for rain, or when
men go to the forest to strangle a deformed infant, which is invariably
done, as is the case also with a cross-birth or abnormal presentation.
The Muansa is the centre of the religious life of the tribe, and is a
survival akin to the Egbo of the West Coast. The observances connected
with it leave no doubt as to the intention of the institution, that is,
the deification of nature, especially corn and vegetation generally. To
cut a cocoa-nut tree is equivalent to matricide: "The mother nourishes
her infant; the cocoa-nut tree men. Does an infant destroy its mother?
Should a man kill the spirit of the tree that is the bread of the
people?" Other Waganga and Waneka religious observances will fall to be
considered under oaths and ordeals.

These illustrations of the religious beliefs of East and Central Africa
are sufficient for our present purpose, but before passing to the
discussion of the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

divinities of the West Coast we may glance at one phase of a class of
social customs extending from the Cape of Good Hope to the banks of the
Nile, and which are substantially the same among all peoples over that
vast area, though with infinite variety of detail in the manner of their
performance. I refer to the ceremonies and usages connected with the
initiation of young people into manhood and womanhood at the age of
puberty. In South Africa circumcision and intonjane are universal. The
details of these ceremonies vary, but the object is the same in all. The
usual ritual connected with circumcision is as follows: At the season of
the year when crops are beginning to ripen, all the young men of a
locality are circumcised by the village doctor, and are then insolated
in huts, previously prepared, at some distance from the ordinary
dwellings, generally near the edge of a clump of trees. Men are
appointed to watch over the neophytes, and to prevent their having
intercourse of any kind whatsoever with women. They daub the young men
all over with a pure white clay, which for the period of probation is
their distinguishing badge. During their novitiate they are subjected to
considerable privations. What butcher's meat they receive they must
steal, and as every one is on the alert when "white boys" are about,
stealing is by no means a simple art, nor is failure in the attempt the
end of the affair. For failure they are unmercifully beaten by their
tutors, while a successful foray is worthy of all praise. They are
compelled to do violent bodily exercise in dancing

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

and running, and are often kept awake for several consecutive nights.
They are beaten with saplings and deprived of food, all of which is
meant to render them hardy and indifferent to pain, and also as a
privation before they receive that full license which is an essential
portion of their initiation. At the close of these preliminary
ceremonies the white clay is washed off their bodies; they receive new
garments, and then repair to the residence of the chief, where the
elders of the tribe and a great concourse of men and women have already
assembled. Their bodies are now anointed with oil. Harangues by the
minister of war, magician, and bards follow as to their duties to their
chief in peace and war. Arms are put into their hands, and they thereby
receive the privilege of manhood. A great festival follows, continued
for several days and nights. The customs sanctioned by law and usage at
these festivals are generally described as obscene. They are certainly
such as to lead to the inference that the whole ceremony of initiation
is based on the principle of doing homage to the powers of nature.

In the lake region of Central Africa, and especially among the Wayao,
the "mysteries" are performed at a corresponding period of life, and
there, even more than in the South, it is evident the object is to
honour the budding powers of nature as a divinity. The corresponding
ceremonies through which young women pass do not admit of description in
a popular work; the object is clearly the same.

When we ask a native to explain the purpose of

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

these ceremonial usages, he replies that without them the young folk
would always remain children, and never could become men and women in
the proper sense. There seems to be no distinct philosophy to explain
the custom; "it was always so, and if our people neglected it we would
die;'" which means, gradually decay and disappear as a people. Only when
the details are carefully studied—the ill-usage and privation of the
preliminary stage, the unchecked license of the festival, and manhood
not being attained without both—and compared with other customs common
everywhere, do we come to understand that the object is to do homage to
nature; that the beatings and fastings may even be symbolical of putting
the person, or at least the spirit of creative and reproductive energy,
to death, to be revived, honoured, almost worshipped, during the
festival which Closes the ceremonies.

These ceremonies are performed while the crops are still green but
approaching maturity, by sacred persons whose office is religious. Among
some tribes, as the Hottentots, circumcision must not be performed with
a knife, but with a sharp bit of quartz. Blood must be encouraged to
flow to a certain extent. The festival marking the close of the
ceremonies must be held before harvest operations are officially
commenced, and on the part of the performers there must be a display of
the utmost vital energy in dancing, wrestling, and other exercises. The
homage due to the goddess presiding over, or residing in, such powers is
the true significance of the customs and ritual belonging

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

to the period when youth emerges into manhood and womanhood. Nor does
this view lack confirmation from the usages of other countries and
times. Harvest festivals are, and have been, akin to the worship of
Bacchus, with the rites of Venus added. Men and women who are modest,
well-behaved, and in all respects reputable members of society, abandon
themselves at the season of first-fruits to the gods and goddesses of
nature till satiety and disgust recall them to their senses again. Such
revels are not the exclusive privilege of savages, for the conduct of
the Israelites regarding the Midianites whom they conquered is a case in
point. So, too, under other and far different conditions, the worship of
the Corinthian Venus and the practice common in Indian temples show the
same honours and homage, even worship given to the powers of nature. And
this is nothing else than the worship of the spirit of creative or
reproductive energy in the animal world, as we have already seen in
connection with the growth of trees, corn, and vegetation generally. The
deity is Mother Earth; the worship, to ensure her good offices in
continuing her bounteous office of reproduction.

The West Coast of Africa is the land of fetish. How this system
originated it is impossible to determine, but there are indications
which seem to point back to its beginnings as a separate religious
system. Among many African tribes it is common to preserve bones, and
especially skulls, of ancestors as relics of the dead. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[\*](#fn_50.md) These were supposed to be the

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

abode, temporary or permanent, of the departed soul, and were tended and
guarded with all the reverence due to an ancestral spirit itself. From
reverence and filial piety the transition to worship would be natural
and easy. The soul dwelling in the skull was able to give or withhold
certain blessings, and when treated with the respect due to it, could be
of great service to -the devout descendants who kept and tended it. In
this way may have originated at once the worship of fetish, and the
well-known African habit of giving the aged a help to leave the world,
on the assumption that their bones and disembodied spirits would be of
greater service to the living than their bodily presence, when age and
infirmity had rendered them helpless. The attention bestowed on an
invisible spirit residing in a well-cleaned skull, would not be more
troublesome than that required by an aged grandfather, while the former
in activity and power to benefit his descendants was vastly superior. At
first each family would preserve and tend its own relics, but with the
lapse of time their care would devolve on the priests, and with the
accumulation of bones suitable receptacles would be provided, developing
gradually into special houses or temples consecrated for this purpose,
and sacred. From such relic-reverence and worship to fetish would be
such an easy transition that no revolution in religious thought would be
needed to accomplish it, and once the departed spirit could take up its
abode in another object than a bone of its original owner, the growth of
fetish objects would proceed apace. The magician,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

by the exercise of his own supernatural power, could impart to any
object a sacred character and make it the home of the soul. For a
similar reason he could impart to objects, as necklets, virtues for the
protection of the wearer, this object being but a lower form of fetish
through which the supernatural influence for protection came to be
imparted to the possessor; only, in this case its virtues were
restricted to the person on whom the magician bestowed it. Where
relic-worship became common the object charmed by the magician would
naturally be supposed to be the home of a guardian spirit, and if rudely
carved into the image of a man the connection between it and a departed
ancestor needed no demonstration. Once this principle became established
there would be no limit to the multiplication of fetishes. And so it is
that any object in nature may be the abode of spirits. An islet in a
lake, a sharp pinnacle of rock, a stone above water in a river, a human
bone, a carved image, a ram's horn, or even a man's weapons, may be
fetish and have spirits dwelling in them. Fetish brings victory in war,
success in fishing, hunting, or trading. It cures all ailments from
insanity to sterility. <span id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_51.md) It preserves
life or destroys it, according to the intention of the votary and the
nature of the offering. <span id="fr_52"></span>[†](#fn_52.md) Its uses are
as wide as are the necessities of man, and it can be adapted to every
circumstance of life.

But this is not much worse than certain customs still lingering in
obscure corners of England.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One of these,
known as "Toad-day," seems to carry us back to the days of the Druids,
or even an earlier and pre-Aryan period. On Toad-day people resort to a
"wise man," or in other words a wizard, to purchase a charm or fetish
which is to protect them and theirs from injury for a year. This charm
consists of a leg torn from a living toad, which the purchaser devoutly
wears about his person. <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*](#fn_53.md) In Scotland
"wise women" cure rheumatism by giving the patient a potato which he
must carry in his trousers pocket. While it is in his possession, and
carried according to prescription, he is exempt from attack. I once
heard a shrewd, long-headed farmer say: "I ha’e haen a twinge o’
rheumatics. I had a tatie I got frae a wife, but I slipped it oot o’ my
pouch amang a wheen twine." The potato being lost or mislaid, his old
enemy had returned.

We have seen how religion, when the king ceases to be worshipped as a
man-god, tends to pass over to a deification of the powers of nature,
associating with these the reproductive energy of departed priests or
ancestors. These, or their spirit, may be present in any object, or they
may only occupy the position of an influence, as when an African says
when he escapes from danger, "The soul of my father saved me." This
tends to become pantheism—a deification of all nature. Such is the root
idea of Mlungu of the Zulus; the father of the race of men among the
Sillocks on the Nile; <span id="fr_54"></span>[†](#fn_54.md) Loma of the
Bongo; <span id="fr_55"></span>[‡](#fn_55.md) heaven fire or lightning of
the Mitto, <span id="fr_56"></span>[§](#fn_56.md) and the Lubare of the
Lake region. <span id="fr_57"></span>[\*\*](#fn_57.md) This is a
comparatively late

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

development, and can only be elaborated after religion has passed
through many phases, and man comes to regard the supernatural as
distinct from and independent of his own will. The older forms may and
do persist after philosophy has arrived at the pantheistic idea, but
they are on the wane, and preparing to follow the systems which preceded
into the land of forgetfulness. Before considering the doctrines of
substitution, sacrifice and sacrificial worship, we may examine traces
of nature-worship under the form of the creative or reproductive spirit,
as that has survived in civilised lands in popular superstition,
ceremonial acts, and national festivals.

One of the most familiar of festivals is the village May-pole, an
undoubted survival from very ancient times. We may the better understand
its significance if we compare the yearly merry-making on the village
green with the Galla festival of Woda, or, better still, with the annual
sacrifices to Tari by the Khonds of India. Our knowledge of this latter
festival is full and accurate. Major MacPherson, who suppressed the
custom now over forty years ago, wrote an account of it in all its
details, of which what follows is a brief summary:—The sacrifices were
intended to ensure good crops and avert accidents of all kinds in
connection with the fertility of the soil and yield of crops, as well as
fecundity and productiveness among the people. The victim, or Meriah,
was acceptable to the goddess only in the event of being purchased or
being born of a victim purchased at a previous time. To avoid accidents
or difficulty in procuring a suitable

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Meriah at the time
of the festival, a number were always kept on hand to be ready in case
of emergency. Of these, many were women, and, as the victims could not
be sacrificed if pregnant, many of them managed to escape their fate for
years. Their children were, however, doomed as victims from infancy, as
were also children of a free woman by a male Meriah. Even free people,
Khonds themselves, at times sold their children as victims. To sell a
son or daughter was the highest virtue, as "the child died that all the
world might live." <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_58.md) These ghastly
sacrifices were offered by tribes and sub-tribes, and were so arranged
that each householder got a shred of flesh to sow in his fields about
the time when the crop was laid down, or as the corn already in the
earth began to sprout.

The sacrifices were performed in the following manner:—Ten days before
the festival the victim's hair was cut off. Thereafter came days of
feasting, dancing, and devilry. On the day preceding the sacrifice the
victim was dressed in new and very fine garments, and then led from the
village in grand procession, with every possible circumstance of display
and honour. With music, dancing, exuberant merriment, and homage done to
the victim, the procession wended its way to the sacred grove, at a
distance from any dwellings, none of the trees of which might be felled
or touched with an axe. Arrived at the grove, the victim was tied to a
post, anointed with a mixture of oil and turmeric, and richly adorned
with cut flowers. During the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

whole of that day a species of reverence equivalent to adoration was
paid to the Meriah. There was a constant struggle to obtain a flower, a
particle of the turmeric, even a spittle from the victim's person, and
these were regarded as sovereign and absolute in all cases to secure the
end sought by the worshipper. On the day of sacrifice the dance was
continued till noon, when it ceased, and the assembled crowd—for young
and old were present—proceeded to the final act. The victim was again
anointed as before, and at times carried in triumphal procession from
house to house. At this stage the Meriah might not be bound nor make any
sign of resistance. It was indeed essential that there should be a
voluntary surrender and sacrifice. To ensure success and perfect
obedience with apparent willingness, the priests might, and often did,
break the bones of both arms and legs, or, when this was not done, they
gave a dose of some narcotic, as opium.

The method of putting the victim to death was strangulation, and that
was performed in the following manner:—A green branch from a tree was
cleft for a length of a few feet, and the victim's neck inserted into
the fork thus formed, after which the officiating priest closed and
secured the free ends. He then wounded the Meriah slightly with his axe,
when the crowd rushed forward with knives and bill-hooks to tear the
flesh from the bones in shreds and fibres, leaving the head, thorax, and
abdomen intact. An alternative method was to fasten the victim to the
trunk of a wooden elephant which revolved on a pivot. As it whirled
round

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

and round the crowd cut strips of flesh from the living Meriah. In each
case the flesh was treated in the manner we shall presently see. In one
district the method of death was slow roasting before a large fire. In
this case a low stage was formed and on it the victim was placed. Fires
were lighted and burning brands applied to make the sacrifice roll and
wriggle as long as possible. The more the victim rolled, and the more
tears and cries, the more plentiful would be the crop.

All this looks like a sacrifice to the goddess Tari, but when the
treatment of the victim while held captive, and the homage paid before
being put to death, together with the use made of the shreds of flesh is
considered, it is highly probable that the intention was the sacrifice
of the goddess herself; the decaying powers of nature put to death in
order that the spirit of these powers might re-enter the earth as a
creative and reproductive power, in the same manner as the spirit of the
slain king entered his successor and dwelt there. Confirmation of this
view is derived from the manner in which the flesh was disposed of,
which was as peculiar as it is suggestive.

The strips and shreds of flesh cut from the Meriah were instantly
carried away by appointed persons to the several villages represented at
the festival and sacrifice. To secure prompt arrival, relays of runners
were posted at short intervals along the roads. Arrived at the village,
the runner deposited the flesh in the place of public assembly, and
there the priest divided it into two portions.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One portion he
buried in a hole in the ground, to which, while he performed the
operation, he kept, his back carefully turned. Then each villager, all
having rigidly fasted till now, added a little earth till the hole was
filled up. The other portion of flesh the priest divided among heads of
families,. who wrapped up each his share in green leaves and proceeded
at once to bury it in their corn-fields. "For three days no house was
swept, and silence was generally observed." <span
id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_59.md) In three days corn sown sprouts; so, too,
by inference, the spirit of corn represented by the Meriah. The head and
entrails of the victim, which, as we have seen, had been left intact,
were watched by the priests for a night, and next day burned with a
whole sheep, and the ashes scattered over the fields.

These observances clearly show that power was ascribed to the victim
other than is associated with. sacrifice to secure the favour of deity.
But it may he objected that there is no connection between such bloody
rites as those represented by Khond sacrifices and the merry-making on
fine summer mornings, as ruddy youths and fair maidens dance around the
village May-pole. To trace that connection we must go back to a time
when May-day festivities meant, not the exuberant energy and frolic of
youth, but the stern realities of a religion observed by men in terrible
earnest, and accompanied by the sacrifice of quivering human beings to
secure life and favour from the gods. In order to understand this we
must trace briefly the history of another form

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

of sacrifice and development of divinity common among the Celtic tribes
of Europe.

The story of the death of Balder, the good and beautiful god, is
familiar to all readers of Professor Rhys' *Celtic Heathenism*. The
goddess Frigg obtained an oath from fire, water, metals, trees, beasts
of all kinds, birds, and creeping things, that they would not touch or
injure Balder. When this was done the god was regarded as invulnerable
and immortal. Loke, the evil-worker, was displeased at what Frigg had
done, and sought to discover if anything had been omitted from the oath
by which he could injure or kill the god. He discovered that the
mistletoe had not been included, as being too young to swear. So Loke
went and pulled the mistletoe, which he brought to the assembly of the
gods. A twig of it was given to Hödur, who made it into an arrow, which
he shot at Balder. It pierced him through the heart and he fell down
dead. The assembled gods stood speechless for a great space, and then
lifted up their voices and wept, for the best and bravest had fallen.
Then Balder's ship was launched by a giantess who came riding on a wolf,
and his body placed on board on a funeral pile. When his wife Nanna saw
what was done her heart burst for sorrow and she died. Her body was laid
beside her husband, and so too were his horse and trappings. The ship
having been fired, was sent to sea with its sad freight, and so ended
the life of Balder. This is briefly the story which in the original Edda
is told with great amplification of

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

circumstance. Its very minuteness suggests that it belongs to that class
of myths which are invented to explain ritual; for a myth is never so
graphic as when it is a transcript of what the narrator has seen. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[\*](#fn_60.md) The main incidents are: first, the
pulling of the mistletoe; and secondly, the death and burning of the
god. Both these incidents appear to have formed an essential part of
Celtic observances, as cut flowers and the death of the Meriah did of
the ritual of the Khonds. We may now turn to May-day customs.

In all parts of Europe the peasantry, from time immemorial, have been in
the habit of kindling fires and performing ceremonial acts on certain
days of the year. It is a universal custom to dance round Midsummer
fires, leap over them, and treat them as in a manner sacred. These
customs can be traced back to the time of the Druids. They, in various
forms, survived all and every change, and still persist, though
thousands of years have elapsed since the reasons which gave them birth
have passed away from the public mind. In Caithness, within the last
seventy years, each family in the neighbourhood of Watten carried bread
and cheese, before sunrise on May morning, to the top of a hill called
Heathercow, and left it there. <span id="fr_61"></span>[†](#fn_61.md) After
sunrise the cowherds might take away the spoil for their own use. No one
could explain the origin of the practice; it was unlucky to neglect it,
that was all. Here we have a survival of an offering to the earth
goddess, which in Druidical times was accompanied

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

with bloody rites and sacrifices, in which the sacred mistletoe played
an important part. It seems to carry us back to the days of Balder, when
men killed the spirit of vegetation and creative energy in the person of
their god, that it might re-enter the growing corn and make the earth
fruitful once more. In the Western Isles the people on a given day
poured out libations to the sea-god Shony, and then held a festival with
curious rites, which were observed not more than two centuries ago.
There is an account of the practice, written about 1690, as performed at
that date, and with which the writer seems to have been familiar:—"The
inhabitants of this island (Lewis) had an ancient custom to sacrifice to
the sea-god called Shony at Hallowtide, in the manner following. The
inhabitants round the island came to the Church of St. Malvay, having
each man his provision along with him; every family furnished a peck of
malt, and this was brewed into ale. One of their number was picked out
to wade into the sea up to the middle, and, standing still in that
posture, cried out with a loud voice: 'Shony, I give you this cup of
ale, hoping that you'll be so kind as to send us plenty of sea-ware for
enriching our land for the ensuing year;' and so threw the cup into the
sea. At his return to the land, they all went into the church, where
there was a candle burning upon the altar; and then, standing silent for
a time, one of them gave a signal at which the candle was put out, and
immediately all of them went to the fields, where they fell a-drinking
their ale, and spent the remainder of the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

night in dancing, singing, &c." <span id="fr_62"></span>[\*](#fn_62.md) One
would very much like to know what the worthy chronicler meant to convey
by "&c.," and whether here, as in savagedom generally, the worship of
Venus formed an essential part of the ceremony as performed at that
time. He does tell us that the reformed pastors had spent years trying
to suppress the practice, but with indifferent success. Corresponding
acts of devotion, now represented by ceremonial usages, were performed
by the Celts in early spring and at Midsummer.

Similar customs are common in every country in Europe. For example. In
Bohemia the Spring Queen is dressed with garlands and crowned with
flowers. She then, accompanied by a band of girls, who whirl round her
continually, singing as they go, proceeds from house to house announcing
that spring has come, and wishing them the blessings of the year. "In
Ruhea, as soon as the trees begin to grow green in spring, the children
assemble on Sunday and go out into the woods, where they choose one of
their playmates to be the Little Leaf Man. They break branches from the
trees and twine them about the child till only his shoes peep out from
the leafy mantle. Singing and dancing, they take him from house to house
asking for gifts of food. Lastly, they sprinkle the Leaf Man with water,
after which they feast on the food they have collected." <span
id="fr_63"></span>[†](#fn_63.md) A somewhat similar custom is observed in
England, where a chimney-sweep walks about encased in holly and ivy, and
accompanied by his

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

fellow-craftsmen, who collect money with which to have a carouse.

These customs, which might be illustrated indefinitely, are all
analogous to the setting up and decoration of the village May-pole.
Formerly it had to be renewed from year to year, the carrying of the new
pole into the town being accompanied by crowds in holiday attire, who
kept up a continual singing and clapping of hands with whirling and
dancing. The object of the custom undoubtedly was to bring in the
fructifying spirit of vegetation newly awakened, and for this purpose a
newly cut pole and freshly gathered flowers were necessary. As the
ancient Druidical sacrifices were abolished under the influence of an
advancing conception of divinity, the festivals remained, merely
changing their outward form and expression. What was stern reality
became a pleasant pastime, and so came to be continued through the
centuries, after men had forgotten the object served by them in a ruder
age. And this affords an illustration of how among a savage people
customs change so slowly. Two or three generations of literature do more
to change thought and obliterate myth than thousands of years of
tradition. Hence it is that in Africa, Australia, parts of India, and
the South Sea Islands, we have at present time conditions similar to
what obtained in Europe long before the rise of the Greek Republic. From
this long digression we must now return to the consideration of African
sacrifices, substitutionary and propitiatory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[36:\*](ram05.htm#fr_38.md) J. G. Frazer, Golden
Bough.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[38:\*](ram05.htm#fr_39.md) Livingstone.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[39:\*](ram05.htm#fr_40.md) A lady living in the
highlands of Scotland a few years ago had a cock that crowed in the
evening. Her peasant neighbours urged her to kill it. She consulted a
local gentleman, who replied to her question: "No, no, Mrs. Brown, there
is no harm in the creature, none whatever: but I will tell you what, if
I were in your place I would wring that cock's neck."

<span id="fn_41"></span>[39:†](ram05.htm#fr_41.md) Krapf.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[40:\*](ram05.htm#fr_42.md) Krapf.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[40:†](ram05.htm#fr_43.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[41:\*](ram05.htm#fr_44.md) Krapf.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[41:†](ram05.htm#fr_45.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[41:‡](ram05.htm#fr_46.md) Dalton.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[41:§](ram05.htm#fr_47.md) Monnier.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[42:\*](ram05.htm#fr_48.md) Krapf.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[43:\*](ram05.htm#fr_49.md) Krapf.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[47:\*](ram05.htm#fr_50.md) Rowley, *Africa
Unveiled*.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[49:\*](ram05.htm#fr_51.md) Rowley.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[49:†](ram05.htm#fr_52.md) Winterbotham.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[50:\*](ram05.htm#fr_53.md) Rowley.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[50:†](ram05.htm#fr_54.md) Schweinfurth.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[50:‡](ram05.htm#fr_55.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[50:§](ram05.htm#fr_56.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[50:\*\*](ram05.htm#fr_57.md) Mackay.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[52:\*](ram05.htm#fr_58.md) MacPherson.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[55:\*](ram05.htm#fr_59.md) Campbell.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[57:\*](ram05.htm#fr_60.md) J. G. Frazer.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[57:†](ram05.htm#fr_61.md) Rev. A. Gunn, MS. Notes.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[59:\*](ram05.htm#fr_62.md) Martin.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[59:†](ram05.htm#fr_63.md) J. G. Frazer, quoting
Mannhardt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Sacrifice](ram06.md)
