[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ram11)  [Next](ram13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0837115507/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Religion and Myth*, by James Macdonald, \[1883\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### CHAPTER X

##### SOCIAL USAGES

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> may at first appear as if there were
no connection between the religion of primitive peoples and their social
usages. The latter, according to European ideas, have so little of the
nature of religious rites that they are seldom associated with piety and
devotion to the gods. Some men spend their lives among savages and never
look below the surface, nor do they suspect that those whom they daily
meet have any forms of religious observance. I was once told by a
missionary of twenty years’ standing in Africa that certain ceremonial
acts performed by natives had no religious significance. In fact, he
went so far as to say, "These people have no religion; they live a
purely animal existence; whatever they do is just custom." How the
worthy man, for he was a truly pious soul, could ever get into sympathy
with them, or make any impression upon their minds, I have often
wondered. I have long ceased to wonder how a man of such unblemished
life and absolute devotion to duty, but so totally blind to the facts of
savage life, should have to confess with a sigh and the shadow of a
life's sorrow, that "the people about here are very hardened; few of
them have come under the influence of the Gospel. It is

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

very sad, and I at times doubt if I should be here, but I try to labour
on in faith." Being at the time a novice in Africa, I accepted both
statements without question. Since then I have learned a good deal, and
among other things, that my aged friend's faith must have often been
sorely tried as he endeavoured to do his duty in a sphere that never
could have been congenial, but having made the mistake of becoming a
missionary, he heroically stuck to the guns he had not learned the art
of using. To gain any influence over savages one must first of all
master their system of thought, and learn how to connect the most
trivial acts with their philosophy, and such conceptions as they have of
the supernatural. It is impossible to know what an act of devotion is
till one has learned something of social usage and myth. To illustrate.

When a Dongolowa belle is to be married the eligible young men assemble,
each armed with a kurbach or slave-whip. The elders of the tribe and a
number of women gather as spectators and judges of the contest that is
to follow. The young men, stripped stark naked, begin a mutual process
of flogging, and he who stands this ordeal best is the successful
wooer. <span id="fr_168"></span>[\*](#fn_168.md) No other consideration or
feeling is allowed to interfere with custom, as that would be
displeasing to the gods. Should a woman marry without such a contest,
her prospects would be poor indeed, having despised an ordinance of
heaven. At times there is a tie between two young men in the flogging
match, and in that case the girl has to

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

decide the matter, between them. This she does, not by choosing one, for
that would be to despise another equally worthy suitor whose hide in the
end might prove the toughest. The matter must be decided in a more
excellent way. It is done thus:—The coy maiden straps a knife to each of
her arms, the blades projecting an inch or two below her elbows. She
then sits down on a log, a suitor on either side sitting close beside
her. At a given signal she raises her arms from the elbows, and leaning
slowly forward rests her weight upon the young men's thighs, into which
she steadily presses the knife blades. He who does not wince, or winces
least under the ordeal, wins the bride and carries her off triumphant.

In Unyoro, the relatives of the late king fight for the throne. Here,
too, it is a case of the toughest skin, but it is no vulgar contest, but
a sacred function conformable to the will of the gods who delight in
manly vigour. A Mitto chief warns those entering his country of war
being made upon them, should they persist, by displaying on a tree near
the path, an ear of corn, a feather and an arrow. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[\*](#fn_169.md) He who touches corn or cock will
receive an arrow. In that country, too, a man wishing to marry applies
to his chief for a wife. If thought worthy one is bestowed upon him, as
all persons and property within the territory belong to the king. Both
Mitto and Niam-Niam bury their dead, with strict regard to the points of
the compass; men being buried with the face towards the east; women
looking to the west. <span id="fr_170"></span>[†](#fn_170.md)

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is
conformable to the rule that women must eat alone, and not come near men
at meals, unless it be to attend upon them. When a Waneka arrives at the
age of puberty, he is smeared with white clay and decorated, after which
he betakes himself to the woods, either alone or in company with others
of his own age. There they must remain till they meet and kill a man,
after which they wash off their clay and return home to be feasted and
honoured. <span id="fr_171"></span>[\*](#fn_171.md) They are now men, not
boys. A Waneka prophetess begins operations at midnight by frantic
screams. When all are astir she declares, "Roma, *i.e.*, spirit or the
god, is here, and demands the sacrifice of a black ox." This is at once
provided, and men heave a sigh of relief to find it is not a more costly
victim.

The men of Jagga spit on a departing guest as an act of courtesy, and to
bid him God speed. By so doing, they bestow on him their highest mark of
honour, for it is a religious act. A Wakamba must carry away his bride
by strategy, and for this purpose may have to lie in wait for months.
Before he begins his vigil he pays the parents the dower. Hottentots
preserve a certain membrane at birth, a bit of which is worn through
life. Its loss would entail evil here and hereafter. <span
id="fr_172"></span>[†](#fn_172.md) Common people in Dahomey may not grow
grain except for domestic purposes, as all property belongs to the king.
So, too, the persons of his subjects. At certain annual festivals he
holds a sale of marriageable young women. <span
id="fr_173"></span>[‡](#fn_173.md) Court favourites receive wives free, but
all others pay. Unlawful wounding is an injury done

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

to the king's person in that of his subject. All things merge in him as
the head of the State and the object of reverence. To his people he is
divine.

The house of the Bodio or high priest of the Kroomen is a sanctuary to
which criminals may flee for refuge. From it they cannot be removed
except by his orders, and, as he gives no reason for his decision, he
shelters a large number of ruffians, who, more secure under his
protection than ever Jew was in a city of refuge, live and enjoy
themselves, doing-all the dirty work and throat-cutting for the Bodio in
their nightly prowlings. A Manganga magician, or even wizard, can soar
aloft on the wings of the wind like a Highland beldam on her broomstick.
The prophet among the same people can discover a criminal in the
following manner. He calls a muster of the tribe, and then taking a
bundle of reeds in his hand rushes round the circle of the assembled
tribesmen. If the criminal is among them, one of the reeds flies out of
his hand as he approaches him. This reed he picks up, as the magic reed,
and lays the bundle aside. He then presses it against the man indicated,
when, if he is guilty, the rod revolves in his hand. <span
id="fr_174"></span>[\*](#fn_174.md) When an earthquake occurred at Accra,
the king issued a proclamation that his father's spirit was giving the
earth a shake, because the children were not obeying the customs, and
giving due reverence to the reigning monarch. After this, he called for
three of his principal chiefs, gave each a drink of rum, delivered to
them a message for his father to the effect that his wishes would be
attended

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

to, and then had them beheaded. Thirty-four others were enclosed in
jar-like baskets, their heads projecting from the neck. These were
brought in one by one and promptly beheaded, to go as an escort with the
chiefs who carried the king's dutiful message. He then retired to his
gardens, satisfied he had done an act of most reverent devotion. His
conduct will not seem so strange and horrible as at first sight appears,
when it is borne in mind that as late as 1230 human sacrifices were
offered in Prussia in honour of the goddess of corn and fruits. <span
id="fr_175"></span>[\*](#fn_175.md)

When old King Chop of Calabar drank, a chief held his great toe. The
chief of Old Town kept his soul in a sacred grove near a spring of
water. Some Europeans, in frolic or ignorance, cut down part of the
grove, to the intense indignation of the spirit, who, according to the
king, would visit them with all manner of evil. <span
id="fr_176"></span>[†](#fn_176.md) A successor is not chosen till the king
is buried and all the ceremonies completed. These are elaborate and
protracted. What becomes of the soul in the grove I do not know;
probably it enters the new king, who in turn deposits it in the wood for
safe keeping. For, after all, this is the great object of savage man in
guarding divinity, and if a perfectly safe place could be found for the
purpose of depositing the soul there, he would be supremely happy. But
as love laughs at locksmiths, so do wizards at man's arts in concealing
the whereabouts of souls. To enter the council of government among the
Waneka, the candidate is placed in an enclosure where he lies down as if
stone dead. His head is

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

then covered with a thick layer of mud. A mixture of clay and hair is
spread over his face. Horns are mounted over his eyes, and his body
decked with feathers. He is then led to the edge of the forest, where he
wanders till he has killed a man, after which he returns and has a ring
of rhinoceros hide placed upon his arm as a badge of office and to
indicate that he is now a sacred person. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[\*](#fn_177.md) Some tribes regard twins as the
greatest good luck, others as monsters to be killed—the harbingers of
calamity. Most, if not all Africans have some sacred animal which they
do not kill, and with which their lives are in some way bound up. This
is in reality fetish, totem or clan badge, according to the stage of
civilization at which a people has arrived. Among the Majame strangers
are received in the following manner:—A goat is brought forward by the
tribal priest, which the chief takes by the horns and spits on its
forehead, saying, "As this stranger has come into our land, and says he
is our friend; if he lies may he perish, he and all his caravan." The
stranger then takes the goat, and doing as the chief has done, says, "If
I practise any evil against Maganine, him or his people, his cattle or
his lands, may I utterly perish, and this caravan." <span
id="fr_178"></span>[†](#fn_178.md) The goat's head is then cut off "that
blood and saliva may mingle." The skin of its forehead is divided into
two parts and one given to each of the parties to the contract. A small
slit is made in this and worn as a ring on the middle finger in token of
brotherhood. The Wagorengo of the same region practise blood brotherhood
to

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

cement friendship. <span id="fr_179"></span>[\*](#fn_179.md) The people of
Kiwendo never sacrifice a goat, but at their great religious meetings
they turn one adrift to wander where it will. The animal has a collar of
cowries tied round its neck, by which it is distinguished from a strayed
animal. <span id="fr_180"></span>[†](#fn_180.md) This is the only approach
to the idea of a scapegoat, as understood by the Jews, I know of in
Africa. The goat is devoted to Lubare. Of old, when a Scottish king gave
an unjust judgment his neck took a twist, and so remained till justice
was done. African chiefs have boils <span
id="fr_181"></span>[‡](#fn_181.md) in such a case as this.

These customs I have set down at random, selecting them from the
observances of peoples widely apart. My object is not to trace the
development of any idea, but to show that all these are in the savage
mind associated with religion and the worship of the gods. This will be
better understood if we now consider acts of devotion, and the object
aimed at. by the performance of these acts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[174:\*](ram12.htm#fr_168.md) Felkin.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[175:\*](ram12.htm#fr_169.md) Schweinfurth.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[175:†](ram12.htm#fr_170.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[176:\*](ram12.htm#fr_171.md) Krapf.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[176:†](ram12.htm#fr_172.md) Moody.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[176:‡](ram12.htm#fr_173.md) Rowley.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[177:\*](ram12.htm#fr_174.md) Elmslie, Krapf,
Perry.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[178:\*](ram12.htm#fr_175.md) Dr. Maclear.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[178:†](ram12.htm#fr_176.md) New.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[179:\*](ram12.htm#fr_177.md) New.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179:†](ram12.htm#fr_178.md) Myer.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180:\*](ram12.htm#fr_179.md) Ashe.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[180:†](ram12.htm#fr_180.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[180:‡](ram12.htm#fr_181.md) Stewart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Acts of Devotion—Myths](ram13.md)
