[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ram10)  [Next](ram12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0837115507/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Religion and Myth*, by James Macdonald, \[1883\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

### CHAPTER IX

##### PROPHECY

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> office of magician is to primitive
man what that of prophet is to a more advanced people. He is the teacher
of the ignorant; he delivers to men the oracles of the gods; he
foretells events, and explains what is mysterious. The term magician, as
that is ordinarily understood, does not cover the idea savage man has
regarding his religious teachers. His conception is that of one
possessed of supernatural knowledge, wisdom, and power; power which he
has in virtue of his office, and which he can exercise in the discharge
of it. He is in reality what the prophets of Israel were to the Jews; so
I adopt the terms prophet and prophecy rather than magician and magic.

Under witchcraft frequent reference was made to magicians and recognised
diviners. These magicians, or prophets as we shall call them, are among
primitive men a distinct class, who, dating their origin from the very
beginnings of society, developed into guilds or colleges with the growth
of thought and early human institutions. As man's conceptions of deity
and the physical facts around him expanded, the necessity of special
insight into the spiritual sphere was felt. The king was no longer the
only god; he had ceased to be god at all; his father, and the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

fathers of countless thousands, passed in long array before the
worshipper's imagination as objects of worship; true divinities, whom he
was bound to honour and obey on pain of dire physical calamity. But
while under the necessity of doing homage to departed ancestors, he knew
nothing of their condition, could hold no converse with them, nor
ascertain their wants and wishes. The more he longed for a glimpse
beyond the portals of this mortal life, the denser the darkness closed
around him. The king, content with temporal power and a more secure
tenure of office than in former days, left such matters to those who
might find it more easy to quit the upper air, should the gods call. In
any case, it was more convenient for him that they should enter the home
of the gods, than that he himself should be compelled to change
substantial and tangible honours, even if necessarily temporary, for
those shadowy if permanent glories of which he knew little and
understood less.

The circumstances demanded men of boldness of conception and clearness
of vision. The necessities of the case were urgent, and could not be met
by half measures or halting compromises. Men must know something of the
unseen, and if their just aspirations were to be met, a new departure
was the only alternative to the collapse of all institutions and the
overthrow of the physical universe. This being the condition of society
in those far-away times of transition, there is no doubt but the earlier
prophets were simply men who could see farther than their fellows, and
who, piecing together the meagre

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

philosophies of the past, boldly struck out a new system, and appealed
to men as the interpreters of all that was essential and permanent in
the past. The temporary and passing they abolished, as they understood
it, while they retained what was truth and permanent. At first their
efforts would be wholly devoted to giving an explanation of the facts of
life and natural phenomena as these from time to time presented
themselves. An attempt would be made to reconcile man's original
conception of deity and providence with the changed conditions and more
advanced thought. For a time this would be sufficient, and the religious
teachers would flatter themselves, as has so often been done in the
history of the church, that they had arrived at a complete and final
solution of all questions regarding both gods and men. But this could
not be. Fresh complications would arise, and each, as it pressed on
men's minds, necessitated fresh explanations. The successive oracles
needed to be consistent with fact and with one another, which, as they
accumulated, they were not. The prophets themselves needed to be
interpreted as well as the facts they sought to explain.

Besides, new claimants would arise, outbidding the old for popular
favour and official recognition. The office, at first hereditary, or at
least confined to a close guild or college, would become vulgarised as
dishonest or ignorant men found their way into office. Apart from this,
daring and speculative spirits among the community would not be
permanently silenced. Sooner or later their conclusions would reach the
multitude, and the new thoughts,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

struggling for recognition, would compel the prophets to adjust their
system to that which men had discovered independently of their order.
Should the oracles delivered by two persons claiming the prophetic gift
differ, the bolder or less scrupulous of the two would naturally assert
that he had held communication with the gods, and that his oracle must
be accepted as final. But this would establish a dangerous precedent,
and the next time a difficulty arose his rival would be prepared with a
revelation at the initial stage. Here we have two elements which would
of necessity lead to a vast extension of the order in point of numbers,
and a great widening of the scope of prophecy itself, tending to convert
what began as a philosophy into an occult art. This in process of time
would lead to a subdivision of function; one would become the prophet or
doctor of war; another of rain; a third of witchcraft; a fourth of
lightning. The multiplication of offices and prophets to fill them would
be regulated by man's necessities on the one hand, and his ability to
support such an army of ghostly councillors on the other; these being
periodically thinned out, when, as in the case of the King of Babylon's
vision, it was made abundantly plain that the whole college was a huge
imposition and fraud.

If this is a correct or even probable explanation of the origin and
development of the office, it would be natural to infer a steady and
sustained deterioration or degradation of the order both in character
and influence. And this is what we do find. For while among those tribes
farthest removed from civilisation

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

the prophet is sacred, and his every word received as the oracle of
heaven, among those who have advanced in their philosophy a chief has
been known to sacrifice his whole college in one holocaust. The King of
Moreo, referred to in an earlier chapter, is a case in point.
Nebuchadnezzar would have been another but for the timely intervention
of Daniel; while we have recent examples in Zululand and in the country
of Moselekatse of the same thing.

Nor is the explanation offered inconsistent with the history of the
Jewish prophetic order as given in the sacred books of the Hebrews
themselves. The older prophets are giants, men both before and above
their time, and who left the impress of their own character on the life
and institutions of their country. The later prophets, like the later
judges, mark a fatal deterioration. Whole schools of them fell from
their own standard of office, and sought to bear the name of prophet
when everything but the name had perished. Those the sacred writers
describe uniformly as "false prophets." They were men who sought office
not because they had a message for men, but because they could calculate
on the ignorance and credulity of the people for gain. To such prophets
it is said: "Will ye pollute Me among My people for handfuls of barley
and pieces of bread?" <span id="fr_143"></span>[\*](#fn_143.md) Not content
with such imposition as false prophecy, as understood in their own day,
they fell back on older superstitions, and appealed to lingering beliefs
which had long passed away. They revived the primitive doctrines
regarding human souls and the power of divine or sacred

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

persons over these; for it is made clear that, like their ancestors in
the primeval jungle, they professed to catch and retain souls. "Woe to
the women that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the
head of every stature to hunt souls. Will ye hunt the souls of My
people, and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?" <span
id="fr_144"></span>[\*](#fn_144.md) Compare this with the following account
of a common custom in the South Seas; "Two young wizards were passing a
house where a chief lay very sick; they saw a company of gods from the
mountains sitting in the doorway. They were handing from one to another
the soul of the dying chief. It was wrapped in a leaf; and had been
passed from the gods inside the house to those at the doorway. One of
the gods handed the soul to one of the wizards, taking him for a god in
the dark, for it was night. Then all the gods rose up and went away; but
the wizard kept the chief's soul. In the morning some women went with a
present of very fine mats to fetch a famous physician. The wizards were
sitting on the shore as the women passed, and they said to the women;
'Give us the mats, and we will heal him.' So they went to the chief's
house. He was very ill; his jaw hung down and his end seemed very near.
But the wizards undid the leaf, and let the soul into him again, and
forthwith he brightened up again and lived." <span
id="fr_145"></span>[†](#fn_145.md)

The false Hebrew prophets thus carry us back to a practice which existed
in early days—for wizards could steal as well as restore—when souls were

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

hunted and caught; a clear proof that the office had fallen so low that
its original conception was lost or forgotten. Of this we shall see
farther illustration when considering the duties of prophets among
primitive men, and how these were performed at various stages of culture
during the world's progress.

Every prophet claims to hold converse with the world of spirits, and to
act in discharge of his sacred functions only in obedience to the will
of the gods. Does he carry the soul of a sick person back to the
invalid's bedside? <span id="fr_146"></span>[\*](#fn_146.md) It is because
the gods reveal to him that the sick is to recover. Does he offer
sacrifice for rain? He does it to appease the wrath of the offended
ancestors, or because they are hungry and are crying out for food. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[†](#fn_147.md) When he, by his arts, secures places and
persons against the thunderbolt, after being struck by lightning, he
assuages the anger of the gods, who have visited their children with
affliction because of some neglect of filial duty. Should the prophet be
called upon to discover a witch or wizard, he "smells them out"; but it
is the gods who reveal to him who they are, a knowledge which they deny
to all others.

The subject of prophecy and magic is too wide for full discussion in a
single chapter, and can be best illustrated by selecting one or two
particulars, as the treatment of the sick and the methods adopted to
detect crime. We have already seen the methods by which wizards are
detected when considering the subject of witchcraft. Other criminals are

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

discovered by means of a magic horn. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[\*](#fn_148.md) This may be the horn of a domestic
sheep or that of an antelope, and the prophet, by looking into it and
examining its contents, can discover a thief or murderer. By the same
means he is supposed to know the whereabouts of the stolen property, if
not removed beyond the tribal boundaries—a necessary qualification in
this branch of the profession. Readers of Highland traditions will
recognise in this the well-known "second sight" of Celtic legend. Those
possessing this gift could foretell events, especially deaths and
calamity, and in doing so used the shoulder-blade of a sheep, through
which they looked, and saw the future in panorama before them. I once
met, at Paible, North Uist, a man who was said to "see things." The old
man, who derived his living, partly at least, from propitiatory gifts,
had quite a reputation for prophecy, and if he suggested to any one by a
dark hint that he had seen a shroud, that family was plunged into grief,
knowing that he referred to one of their number, though no name was
mentioned.

The prophet, among savage men, explains the cause of drought and floods,
and must devise a remedy for these visitations. Among the Zulu tribes,
if the spring rains are late, a black ox is sent to the doctor, who
being warned of the approaching visit, sits in his hut covered with a
thick layer of mud. If there are no indications of rain, he may direct
them to come after the lapse of a few days; but if things are
propitious, he at once orders a muster of the tribe. There is much
feasting and dancing, mystic ceremonies are performed, sacrifices

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

are offered, and then the prophet announces that before a given day rain
will fall. Should the prediction prove correct, well; if not, the
prophet must account for his failure. This he does by charging some one
high in authority, as the chief's principal wife, with working against
him, and raising a dry wind which drives the clouds away. This she does
by exposing her posterior to the skies.

In time of war the prophet has to perform rites to ensure victory. Among
the Waganda, when the case is urgent, a child is flayed and placed on
the path, and the warriors made to step over it, <span
id="fr_149"></span>[\*](#fn_149.md) or a child and a fowl are placed on a
grating over a pot with water in it. Another pot, inverted, is used as a
cover, and a fire kindled to heat the water. After a given time the
contents are examined, and if found dead the war must be delayed as the
omen is against the expedition. <span id="fr_150"></span>[†](#fn_150.md)

But the prophet's services are not confined to the living; they extend
to the dead. In Akra when a young person dies the body is placed on a
bier. This is raised on two men's heads, and carried to a place
indicated by the prophet, who accompanies the procession. Arrived at the
spot, he takes his stand in front of the corpse. He holds in his hand a
magic reed, which he shakes over the body, and at the same time asks the
question, "Was your death caused by age and infirmities?" If this is
answered in the affirmative by the body impelling the bearers forward,
no more is said, and the funeral proceeds; if not, the prophet
continues: "Was it caused by your bad actions?" Corpse answers

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "No" by remaining
perfectly still. "By whose witch was it caused, so and so, or so and
so?" naming the head men of the district. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[\*](#fn_151.md) When the right name is mentioned the
dead impels the bearers forward. It is the duty of the head man
indicated, or rather his magicians, to discover the culprit by the
approved methods.

The dangers to the dead are not over when the soul has left the body,
and the Angoni prophet must see to it that the devil, to use a Highland
phrase, is cheated of his own. Did evil spirits know a man's grave in
that unhappy land, they would undoubtedly steal his soul to be educated
in their own evil college. So every precaution must be taken for the
repose of the departed. Till burial the soul of an Angoni hovers near
the body, seeking an opportunity to re-enter its former abode. A soul
does not at first know death. To it death is sleep. "Death and sleep,"
said a Kaffir once to me, "are one word." This being the case, a lay
figure is made before the funeral. At the hour announced this figure is
carried out, followed by a great concourse of people, who weep and wail,
mourning for the dead. As soon as the cortége leaves the house drums are
beat, horns blown, and guns fired to drive away evil spirits. These,
kept back by the noise, hover about the outskirts of the crowd, lured on
by the signs of mourning, till the grave is reached. There the figure is
buried with all the respect and honour due to the departed, and as the
crowd disperse the devils swoop down upon the grave to snatch away the
soul, but only to find they have been outwitted and betrayed.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Meantime the
corpse has been quietly and expeditiously buried without beat of drum or
sound of horn. <span id="fr_152"></span>[\*](#fn_152.md) By using such
precautions the prophets outwit the devil, and do an important service
to the dead and the ancestral spirits, who wait the arrival of their
brother spirit with much anxiety.

When a Wahunga chief dies, his prime minister is killed and buried with
him, to be his councillor in the dangers of the passage. All his wives
are also killed except one. For her a pit is dug in the ground, just
large enough to hold her. In this she is placed and covered over with
earth, a small breathing aperture being left. A spear is passed down
this hole, which she holds in her hand; if at the end of the second day
she is alive and holds the spear, she is taken out and allowed to live.
If her fingers are too nerveless to grasp the spear, no farther ceremony
is needed; she is buried already. <span id="fr_153"></span>[†](#fn_153.md)

The Congo natives keep the bodies of their chiefs for years, wrapping
them in successive layers of cloth till the mass is so heavy as to be
hardly portable. The same was done in the case of the queen-mother of
Uganda, for whom Mackay made the famous copper coffin, and with whom,
within and around her three coffins, £1500 worth of cloth and copper was
buried; a fact which proves that the Waganda do not wish royal
personages to be restricted in the matter of apparel in ghostland.

When King Eyambo (Congo) died, the prophets ordered thirty of his wives
to be burned the first day, <span id="fr_154"></span>[‡](#fn_154.md) and
before the funeral rites were over several

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

hundreds were sent to accompany him. Should he have gone without a
respectable following, or with only a few, the spirits would ask, "What
poor slave is this who is coming alone?" and on the discovery that it
was a king, his people would be visited with every form of calamity for
having allowed their monarch to go from them like an unknown waif.

Prophets regulate functions of government, and in some cases determine
the succession to the throne. In Uganda three chiefs or councillors, who
are magicians or semi-divine, elect the new king from among the late
monarch's sons, and generally select a young son—if an infant so much
the better—for the regency is theirs, and the younger the king the
longer will be their term of office. The elder sons are kept in
confinement till the heir is of age, and then burned, except two or
three reserved with the view of keeping up the succession should the
young king die without issue. <span id="fr_155"></span>[\*](#fn_155.md)
This, though in theory an excellent system to prevent disputes, was apt
to lead to awkward consequences for the three who held the regency. A
son, when his father fell sick, might retire to another tribe, and,
returning suddenly seize supreme power and send the regents to join
their late master. This was done by the Batetwa chief Dingiswayo, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[†](#fn_156.md) who fled to the Cape Colony, to return
in a few years to claim his rights with direst results to his rival's
patrons.

Prophets experiencing such vengeance now and then, sought to secure
their order against untimely accidents by organising guilds or colleges,
the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

members of which were regarded as sacred in virtue of their office.
Under such a system a king might be slain by a rival, but the magicians
were sacred, and their divinity would be respected. The rules of their
order permitted them to be the supporters of the *de facto* king, apart
from oaths of allegiance to one who might be a fugitive. Thus the
Bulloms have an institution binding its members to keep the sacred
mysteries secret for ever, and to yield prompt and unquestioning
obedience to the superior of the order; <span
id="fr_157"></span>[\*](#fn_157.md) rules which raise a doubt as to whether
Loyola's conceptions were marked with that degree of originality which
is generally attributed to them. New members are admitted after a long
novitiate, during which the most severe tests are put upon their loyalty
and resolution. Even then they cannot be admitted till friends of
theirs, already members, bind themselves by an oath to put the novice to
death instanter, should he make known any forbidden secret. The manner
of execution is as secret as it is expeditious and effective. There is
no escaping the ordeal of the guild. Similar institutions, with local
modifications, exist among the Soosoms, Timmanes, Basutos, and many
other tribes. Among the Timmanes a woman prophetess is general of the
order, and a kind of inquisition or confessional exists among them. To
the care of this hag fathers and husbands confide their daughters and
wives, and the methods pursued by her and her college is highly
characteristic. When a penitent appears she is smeared with white clay,
and asked

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

to confess, on pain of death. If her confession is deemed satisfactory
she is dismissed with an admonition, and injunctions to perform certain
acts, unless her sin is witchcraft, in which case she is sold into
slavery. If any one refuse to confess, nothing more is heard of her.
Should the confession be unsatisfactory in itself, a decoction is given
to force a fuller statement from the penitent. This, if the confession
was not full, causes intolerable pains which can only be relieved by the
priestess. If pains follow, she proceeds to discover the concealed crime
by means of divination. The penitent is then charged with it, and asked
to plead. If she deny the crime, she is sold; if she refuse to plead,
she is poisoned. <span id="fr_158"></span>[\*](#fn_158.md)

These guilds exist wherever religion has developed into a system. The
chief priest assumes functions to himself which belong to royalty, and
so reduces the kingly office to a shadow. This is the case with the Egbo
of Calabar, <span id="fr_159"></span>[†](#fn_159.md) the Lubare of
Uganda, <span id="fr_160"></span>[‡](#fn_160.md) and the Moro of the
Waneka. <span id="fr_161"></span>[§](#fn_161.md) The same abnormal
development of the power of the priestly office took place in Europe
during the Middle Ages. The temptation and danger of all religious
systems is to claim power and authority over men's lives and actions
outside its own proper sphere. The result in such cases has always been
a degrading of the sacred office, and ultimate disaster to the system
itself.

But there is another permanent function of prophecy, important in
itself, and universal among savage men, which has been touched upon only

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

incidentally, and that is foretelling the future. When a tribe goes to
war a great many details cannot be arranged by the chief and his
councillors; they must be determined by augury. Such details seem to us
to be of the very essence of practical affairs, to be decided by
generals, but to savage men the case presents itself in an entirely
different aspect. The prophet must decide the strength of the
expedition, the clans who are to send their contingents, the sacred
place where the army is to be charmed, and the route that is to be
taken. Nor can a general go into action, even against a handful, should
the oracles be unfavourable. In 1879, during a period of disturbance in
South Africa, a chief, Umhlonhlo, was marching leisurely across country
with his whole army. The day was hot, and not a cloud could be seen.
Presently the magicians, ever on the alert for omens, noticed a
peculiarly shaped cloud on the horizon. It rose rapidly in one mass, and
was observed "to roll upon itself." Its progress was intently watched
till it reached the zenith and passed over the sun. This was an evil
omen. The spirits were offended, and had passed in shadow over the chief
and his army. Their backs were turned upon their children. There was,
however, no immediate danger, for their scouts had reported that no
soldiers were within many miles of their line of march, and they could
retire to some sacred spot to have their warriors re-charmed. While they
were discussing which place to resort to, the van of a small column of
cavalry appeared unexpectedly over a rising ground. Dismay was

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

written on every countenance; black fear was in every heart. The war
minister, one of the bravest of men, urged the troops to form into order
of battle. No one answered his summons. A fatal paralysis had crept over
chief and people. He did his best to organise an orderly retreat, but in
vain; not a blow was struck; every man took to his heels, and the army
never reassembled.

On another occasion a chief, Oba, led an army against. some people of
the Fingoe tribe. He knew their place of encampment, and sent a trusted
spy to find out all he could and report. This man crept up close to
their camp fires, and there saw a diviner pronouncing an incantation
against Oba and his army. This was reported to the chief who paid no
regard to it. But on the following morning two ospreys flew over the
army uttering piercing cries. This the prophets declared to be an evil
omen which boded defeat, but Oba was not to be frightened by Fingoe
curses or the screams of birds, and advanced boldly. From the crest of a
hill they saw the Fingoe camp, and a number of cattle grazing between.
Six men tended the herd, and these advanced shouting "Basolieve,"
meaning "they are cursed." Qwarana was ordered to advance, which he did
at the head of his men. When quite near the Fingoes fired a volley,
shooting Qwarana through the body. This was enough; the army turned and
fled. Oba did his best to stay the panic; he begged his soldiers to act
like men, he called them cowards and women. It was in vain. They had
been warned by the ospreys, and now a

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

body of nearly two thousand warriors fled in panic before six cowherds.

But the future cannot be left to such accidents as a midday shadow, or
the flight of eagles. Methods that can be resorted to at any time must
be found. These differ among most tribes, but the following may be taken
as illustrative. The Bongo consult the oracle thus:—A stool of a
particular wood is made, the surface of which is rubbed perfectly
smooth, a block of the same wood is then prepared to lie flat on the
stool. When a response is wanted a few drops of water are placed between
the stool and the block, the latter is then moved backwards and
forwards. If it moves easily, and begins to glide without friction, the
oracle is favourable; if not, the undertaking proposed cannot prosper.
Or an oily fluid from the bengeye-tree is given to a hen. If the bird
dies there will be misfortune; if not, success. <span
id="fr_162"></span>[\*](#fn_162.md) Another method, which the same observer
records, is to dip a cock again and again in water till it is senseless.
It is then left in the sun, and should it revive the augury is
favourable. By such means men determine war and peace, as well as the
guilt or innocence of accused persons.

The Bullom tribes determine the future by "casting the sand." <span
id="fr_163"></span>[†](#fn_163.md) This may be to discover if a sick person
is to recover or not. The diviner takes a goatskin on which he carefully
spreads a layer of fine dry sand; he then shuts his eyes, and with the
three first fingers of his right hand makes lines and dots in the sand.
According to the position of these, the

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

patient will live or die. The same result may be obtained by taking a
number of palm nuts, and arranging them in groups with the eyes closed.
Gallas divine from the appearance of the entrails of slaughtered
animals, <span id="fr_164"></span>[\*](#fn_164.md) while almost every
action a Basuto or Baralong performs is determined by the fall of dice.
So it happens, that when a man goes to commit a crime, he lays aside his
fetish, and does not consult the oracle, as he could not in that case
obtain a favourable response. He covers his god with a cloth, that he
may not know what the worshipper is doing. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[†](#fn_165.md) The Wayao determine the future by a
flour cone. When a man has determined on an undertaking, as a journey,
his magician takes a quantity of flour, and lets it fall in a steady
stream at the head of his bed. If it forms a perfect cone as it falls,
the omen is good; if not, that is an end of the matter by the flour-cone
test. Should the cone be perfect, it is covered by an inverted pot and
left for the night. In the morning, when the pot is removed, the cone is
examined, and if found perfect, there is nothing further needed beyond
offering the customary sacrifice. But if there has been a falling down
of the flour, even a small slip, it is a sign not to be disregarded. An
equally effective method is to pour out beer on the ground, which if it
sinks at one spot is a good omen, but if it runs along the ground,
bad. <span id="fr_166"></span>[‡](#fn_166.md) Three bits of stick may be
laid on the ground, two parallel and one across. If found, after an
interval of some hours, in position as left, the oracle has granted the
worshipper's prayer.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

When prophecy descended to such trivialities as those represented by the
auguries and observances referred to, it was doomed as a system. While
it contented itself with exposition, purgation of demons, expanding
philosophic conceptions and the enunciation of principles in an abstruse
form, it commanded men's respect, and the prophet was regarded as a
divinely commissioned messenger. But when it descended to the petty
details of village life, it could not escape the fate of any great
institution which is hopelessly vulgarised. When the prophet became
little better than the court fool he could only receive a fool's
treatment. When a man who hurt his toe against a stump could command the
services of the expounders of the supernatural to explain the fact, it
was not surprising that other men, despising at once tree stumps and
prophets, should introduce a new and more vigorous, if less reverent,
form of government.

As men's conception of divinity expanded from the crude unformed idea of
a divine king to local deities, reaching gradually towards one supreme
god, the world needed a philosophy to correspond with the new-born
faith. This, prophecy did not as a system supply. Instead of advancing
with the growth of thought to a higher and truer conception of life, it
pursued a course which could only lead to deterioration and final
extinction. But though prophecy as a system became moribund, and so
continues among savage men, it was from it the new philosophy took its
rise. This philosophy springing out of what was once a system in advance
of current

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

thought, led to the development of the great religious systems which at
different periods became world wide. While the old-world prophet "cast
the sand," or fumbled among the entrails of an expiring cock, there were
men among his disciples who conceived bolder notions, and only waited
for a favourable opportunity to give practical effect to their thoughts.
They had to wait many weary years, generations, centuries, but their
opportunity came at last. Such men in the early days could do little
beyond raising a protest against the most glaring abuses among their own
order and in society. Even in this they would meet with treatment
similar to that experienced by the Hebrew prophet Jeremiah, and many of
them would share the fate of all bold reformers—the gallows or the fire.
One after another would quietly disappear as unworthy of their office
and subverters of the faith of men. But the ashes of such men do more to
fertilise the soil of human thought than their wisdom while they live.
Like the dragon's teeth, they produce a fresh and ever-increasing number
of souls with like thoughts and aspirations. The words of such men are
treasured by a few. They are pondered, digested, made fruitful of new
thoughts. As the years pass, and the angry passions raised by the
heretic's teaching die away, men first view him as one who meant well,
next as a true prophet, and finally as a sacred being whose memory is
cherished as a divine heritage. Posterity places him among the gods. He
was incarnate.

No sooner is the popular mind led to regard such

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

men as saints and martyrs, than a web of romance is woven round their
lives, and the philosophy they taught becomes a new religion. Those of
their successors who cherish their memories and keep their teaching
alive, seize the opportunity, and boldly claim divine sanction for their
doctrine. This is one way. There is another. All such reformers do not
share the martyr's fate. A powerful king, weary of the inanities taught
and practised by his college of magicians; weary too of the endless
sacrifices and the ever-deepening stream of human blood; blood it may
be, as in the case of a king of Ashantee, in which to float the royal
canoe, <span id="fr_167"></span>[\*](#fn_167.md) throws the protection of
his strong arm over the reformer, as the king of Babylon did to Daniel,
and so encourages the movement. Or, it may be, the reformer, finding the
current too strong, retires to a lonely place where he lives a life of
meditation and privation. Such a man, especially after the invention of
writing, formulates doctrines into aphorisms. These, brief, wise,
practical, as they must be in his circumstances, he communicates to the
few faithful disciples admitted to his sanctuary and confidence. They
carry them from hamlet to hamlet, thence from house to house, where they
pass into the current language of the people. These, when received with
favour, the popular imagination connect with a direct revelation from
the gods; ultimately it deifies the man who utters them.

Such a life as this would lead a man to introspection and a comparison
between himself, with his

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

half-uttered wisdom, and the folly of popular beliefs. There was nothing
more natural than for him to conclude that he was god-possessed, and
that his words and actions were those of the god. When this was asserted
and boldly proclaimed, men in a primitive age, when the old order and
the worship of ancestral spirits was discredited, and the new still
unsettled and fluctuating, would readily seize upon the idea as giving a
clue to the solution of the perplexities with which they were
surrounded. The very multiplicity of ancestral gods complicated the
situation. The presence of demons, as powerful and more subtle than the
gods themselves, made matters worse. The great, or one god, was too
shadowy and remote to be approached, and his existence, if he did exist,
gave no relief to the pious. Thus the incarnation of divinity, in the
person of a prophet, would be hailed as giving a hope that the mysteries
of the spirit world would at length be solved.

But we are now approaching a stage of development which carries its
beyond the bounds of our inquiry. In Africa there has been no great
incarnation of deity as in Brahmanism and in Buddhism. An examination of
these, however brief, would lead to the discussion of Vedic religion,
which is foreign to my present purpose. The fact to be noted is, that
earlier forms led to the incarnation of the founders of the respective
systems, and that myth surrounded them with a halo which makes it
impossible to distinguish the true from the false, so as to get at the
man and the philosophy he taught in its simplicity

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

and truth. For it is the truth which those systems contained that has
given them vitality to exist through so many thousands of years.

Thus, from the rude conception of a divine king who ruled nature,
thought advanced to a doctrine of souls, thence to separate and personal
divinities, slowly gravitating towards the idea of one supreme god,
unknown and unknowable. Pursuing its inquiries, never resting for a
moment, the human mind reached the conception of the one god becoming
incarnate in time. And here it is curious to note, that those in whom
deity became incarnate, so far as we can discover, put forward
comparatively modest claims, and that these were expanded by their
disciples into a cumbrous mass of doctrinal teaching which, in some
cases, fell to pieces by the very weight of its ritual and ordinances.
Men could not bear the burden.

In Africa, always excepting ancient Egypt and the countries bordering
upon it, there is nothing which corresponds with the Asiatic development
of religion. The art of writing being unknown would, apart from other
causes, have made that impossible. But our inquiries have, so far,
tended in the direction of a development not unlike that through which
the great systems of the east must have passed. Tradition does not
preserve the words of wise men, as is done where there is a literature.
The words may be said to remain, or a faint echo of them, but tradition
gives them a local setting and myth adapts them to local circumstances.
Still, the position occupied by the God of the Wayao, as the God of the
original

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

inhabitants, and his reputation as a beneficent and powerful deity,
points to a deification of a prophet whose soul was developed into a
principal god. Mlungu is doubtless such another. A great man whose
memory has waxed dim, and whose words cannot be recalled as those of
Brahma may. Myth itself has almost died away in the course of ages, yet
Mlungu lives as a faded memory though the traditions of his life have
perished.

The sketch attempted of the growth and decay of the prophetic order is
consistent with what we are familiar with. In a highly developed state
of society the prophetic function ceases to be exercised as we meet with
it in primitive times. But it is still present. The wise men of a nation
are its prophets. Its poets, philosophers, preachers, reformers,
scientists, and discoverers, are as truly the guides of men's thoughts
and actions as were the magicians of Ancient Egypt or Chaldea. They are
the descendants of humble ancestors who determined" the fate of
individuals and nations by casting the sand, or by the spots found on
the entrails of a decapitated cock. Men may imagine themselves
independent of all external circumstances, but we are the creatures of
our surroundings as were those who sacrificed their god that his spirit
might enter his successor. We may make it our boast that we have freed
ourselves from the thraldom of superstition, but there are still curious
survivals among us. And of these, one of the most remarkable is the
suspicion with which religious teachers are regarded in popular
imagination.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

There is a deeply rooted prejudice against religious teachers among the
peasantry of Europe, and not unfrequently those who are most devout in
the discharge of their own religious duties, have the most pronounced
superstitions regarding clergymen. Fishermen will not go to sea with a
minister on board, as in that case no success would attend their
labours; they will not even have one enter their boats, if possible, as
that is apt to take the boat's luck away. Skippers fear to have them as
passengers, and voyagers expect contrary winds if a priest should happen
to be among their fellow voyagers. I remember one, Rob MacLauchlin, the
owner of a smack that plied between Oban and Morven, having on one
occasion a very boisterous passage, to the intense alarm of his
passengers. On his arrival one of the villagers remarked on the state of
the weather and how suddenly the storm had sprung up. Rob, who had had a
sail carried away and was in no good humour, replied, garnishing his
sentences with expletives which I shall omit, "How could we escape wind
with three ministers on board." These worthies were on their way to a
local meeting of Presbytery. One of them, ignorant of seamen and their
ways, offered a remonstrance, and tried to enlighten the skipper, but
had to beat a hasty retreat. Rob knew all about it by long experience,
and all his predecessors, from the days of Jonah at least, had been
conversant of the fact. That was final and admitted of no appeal, and
the villagers to a man sympathised with the skipper who was compelled to
carry such cargo.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Nor is this fear confined to traditions of the sea. The minister is
feared because he can bless or ban, and village children regard him as a
being to be avoided when that is possible. When at play, if he happens
to pass, there is a hurried and fearful whisper of "There's the
minister," and play ceases till he is well out of reach. If they must
present themselves before this august presence, they cease to be
children as by instinct, and a word or movement becoming the age of five
or six meets with the awful maternal reproof, "Do ye no ken that's the
minister?" Clergymen themselves are, perhaps, largely to blame. The
Church has played so many parts on the stage of European politics and
social life that much of the present suspicion may be owing to her
arrogance and avarice. But this is not all. Like our harvest customs,
this superstitious reverence and fear, is doubtless a survival from
primitive times, when the magician was a being to be at once feared and
honoured. The primitive man who offended one of those powerful beings
who directed all his life's actions, might expect to be the next victim
when a case of witchcraft had to be disposed of, or, if no case cropped
up the gods might require his presence among them, and so demand him as
a sacrifice. And so it is that in spite of respectability, unblemished
reputation, great services to mankind, honour, place and influence,
religious teachers have never been able to free themselves from the
suspicion and fear with which their humble ancestors, the priests of the
jungle, were regarded in popular imagination.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

This is perhaps an extreme instance of the persistency of early beliefs,
but it goes to show how slowly the human mind parts with ideas once
universal, and the vast intervals that must elapse before a complete
revolution in thought is possible under the most favourable
circumstances. There could be no condition more likely to obliterate the
past than that created by Christianity, and yet these customs, myths,
and superstitious fears have lived through millenniums of literature and
careful oral teaching. The process has been slow, and is not yet
completed. And what has taken Europe from the dawn of history to
accomplish, with the aid of literature, philosophy and Christianity,
could not be done by the African groping his way through oral tradition
and universal usage through many thousands of years. The customs which
we study to-day, and which at first sight appear to be local or tribal,
carry us back in their original form to a period long anterior to the
first dawn of traditional history in the East. They bring us into
contact with the condition of the world before the families of men began
to scatter themselves hither and thither over the face of the earth.
They are our only record of the condition of the world when it was
young, and of man in his first struggles with the problems with which he
found himself surrounded as he began to look out upon the works of
nature as these could be seen in his immediate locality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_143"></span>[150:\*](ram11.htm#fr_143.md) Ezek. xiii. 19.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[151:\*](ram11.htm#fr_144.md) Ezek. xiii.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[151:†](ram11.htm#fr_145.md) J. G. Frazer, quoting
G. Turner: *Samoa*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[152:\*](ram11.htm#fr_146.md) Gill: *Myths and
Songs of the South Pacific*.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[152:†](ram11.htm#fr_147.md) Hon. C. Brownlee, MS.
Notes.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[153:\*](ram11.htm#fr_148.md) Speke.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[154:\*](ram11.htm#fr_149.md) Speke.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[154:†](ram11.htm#fr_150.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[155:\*](ram11.htm#fr_151.md) Winterbotham.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[156:\*](ram11.htm#fr_152.md) Dr. Elmslie, MS.
notes.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[156:†](ram11.htm#fr_153.md) J. Thomson, *Through
Masai Land*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[156:‡](ram11.htm#fr_154.md) Waddell.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[157:\*](ram11.htm#fr_155.md) Wilson.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157:†](ram11.htm#fr_156.md) G. M. Theal, *Boers
and Bantu*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158:\*](ram11.htm#fr_157.md) Winterbotham.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159:\*](ram11.htm#fr_158.md) Winterbotham.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[159:†](ram11.htm#fr_159.md) Waddell.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[159:‡](ram11.htm#fr_160.md) Mackay.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[159:§](ram11.htm#fr_161.md) New.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[162:\*](ram11.htm#fr_162.md) Schweinfurth.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[162:†](ram11.htm#fr_163.md) Winterbotham.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[163:\*](ram11.htm#fr_164.md) Krapf.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[163:†](ram11.htm#fr_165.md) Tucker.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[163:‡](ram11.htm#fr_166.md) Duff Macdonald.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[166:\*](ram11.htm#fr_167.md) Kühne.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Social Usages](ram12.md)
