[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ibr05)  [Next](ibr07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

## CHAPTER V.

### THE CONDOLENCE AND THE INSTALLATION.

With the arrival at the Council House the "opening ceremony" is
concluded. In the house the members of the Council were seated in the
usual array, on opposite sides of the house. On one side were the three
elder nations, the Caniengas, Onondagas, and Senecas, and on the other
the younger, who were deemed, and styled in Council, the offspring of
the former. These younger members, originally two in number, the Oneidas
and Cayugas, had afterwards an important accession in the Tuscarora
nation; and in later years several smaller tribes, or, as they were
styled, additional braces of the Extended House, were
received,--Tuteloes, Nanticokes, Delawares and others. In the Onondaga
portion of the book the younger tribes speak as "we three brothers." The
earliest of the later accessions seems to have taken place about the
year 1753, when the Tuteloes and Nanticokes were admitted. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) These circumstances afford additional
evidence that the Book was originally written prior to that date and
subsequent to the year 1714, when the Tuscaroras were received into the
League.

If the deceased chief belonged to one of the three older nations, the
duty of conducting the condoling ceremony which followed was performed
by the younger nations, who mourned for him as for a father or an uncle.
If he were a chief of one of the younger nations, the others lamented
him as a son or a nephew. The mourning nations selected as their
representative a high chief, usually a distinguished orator, familiar
with the usages and laws of the League, to conduct

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

these ceremonies. The lamentations followed a prescribed routine, each
successive topic of condolence being indicated by a string of wampum,
which, by the arrangement of its beads, recalled the words to the memory
of the officiating chief. In the "Book of Rites" we have these addresses
of condolence in a twofold form. The Canienga book gives us the form
used by the elder nations; and the Onondaga supplement adds the form
employed by the younger brothers. The former is more ancient, and
apparently more dignified and formal. The speaker addresses the mourners
as his children (*konyennetaghkwen*, "my offspring,") and recites each
commonplace of condolence in a curt and perfunctory style. He wipes away
their tears that they may see clearly; he opens their ears that they may
hear readily. He removes from their throats the obstruction with which
their grief is choking them, so that they may ease their burdened minds
by speaking freely to their friends. And finally, as the loss of their
lamented chief may have occurred in war--and at all events many of their
friends have thus perished--he cleans the mats on which they are sitting
from the figurative bloodstains, so that they may for a time cease to be
reminded of their losses, and may regain their former cheerfulness.

The condolence of the younger brothers, expressed in the Onondaga book,
is more expansive and more sympathetic. Though apparently disfigured and
mutilated by repeated transcriptions, it bears marks of having been
originally the composition of a superior mind. All such topics of
consolation as would occur to a speaker ignorant or regardless of a
future life are skillfully presented, and the. whole address is imbued
with a sentiment of cordial tenderness and affection. Those who have
been accustomed to regard the Indians as a cold-hearted people will find
it difficult to reconcile that view of their character with the contrary
evidence afforded by this genuine expression of their feelings, and,
indeed, by the whole tenor of the Book.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

This address concludes with the emphatic words, "I have finished; now
point me the man;" or, as the words were paraphrased by the interpreter,
"Now show me the warrior who is to be the new chief." The candidate for
senatorial honors, who is to take the place and name of the deceased
councillor, is then brought forward by his nation. His admission by the
assembled Council, at this stage of the proceedings, is a matter of
course; for his nation had taken care to ascertain, before the meeting,
that the object of their choice would be acceptable to the councillors
of the other nations. The ceremony of induction consisted in the formal
bestowal of the new name by which he was henceforth to be known. A chief
placed himself on each side of the candidate, and, grasping his arms,
marched him to and fro in the Council house, between the lines of the
assembled senators. As they walked they proclaimed his new name and
office, and recited, in a measured chant, the duties to which he was now
called, the audience responding at every pause with the usual chorus of
assent.

When this ceremony was finished, and the new councillor had taken his
proper seat among the nobles of his nation, the wampum belts, which
comprised the historical records of the federation, were produced, and
the officiating chief proceeded to explain them, one by one, to the
assemblage. This was called "reading the archives." In this way a
knowledge of the events signified by the wampum was fastened, by
repeated iteration, in the minds of the listeners. Those who doubt
whether events which occurred four centuries ago can be remembered as
clearly and minutely as they are now recited, will probably have their
doubts removed when, they consider the necessary operation of this
custom. The orator's narrative is repeated in the presence of many
auditors who have often heard it before, and who would be prompt to
remark and to correct any departure from the well-known history.

This narrative is not recorded in the Book of Rites. At

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the time when that was written, the annals of the confederacy were
doubtless supposed to be sufficiently preserved by the wampum records.
The speeches and ceremonies which followed, and which were of equal, if
not greater importance, had no such evidences to recall them. From this
statement, however, the "hymn" should be excepted; to each line of it,
except the last, a wampum string was devoted. With this exception, all
was left to the memory of the orator. The Homeric poems, the hymns of
the Vedas, the Kalewala, the Polynesian genealogies, and many other
examples, show the exactness with which a composition that interests a
whole nation may be handed down; but it is not surprising that when the
chiefs became aware of the superior advantages of a written record, they
should have had recourse to it. We need not doubt that Chief David of
Schoharie, or whoever else was the scribe appointed to this duty, has
faithfully preserved the substance, and, for the most part, the very
words, of the speeches and chants which he had often heard under such
impressive circumstances.

The hymn, or *karenna*, deserves a special notice. In every important
council of the Iroquois a song or chant is considered a proper and
almost essential part of the proceedings. Such official songs are
mentioned in many reports of treaty councils held with them by the
French and English authorities. In this greatest of all councils the
song must, of course, have a distinguished place. It follows immediately
upon the address of greeting and condolence, and is, in fact, regarded
as the completion of it, and the introduction to the equally important
ceremony which is to follow, viz., the repetition of the ancient laws of
the confederacy. This particular hymn is of great antiquity. Some of the
chiefs expressed to me the opinion that it was composed by Dekanawidah
or Hiawatha. Its tenor, however, as well as that of the whole book,
shows that it belongs to a later period. The ceremonies of the council
were doubtless prescribed by the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

founders of the League; but the speeches of the Book, and this hymn, all
refer to the League as the work of a past age. The speakers appeal to
the wisdom of their forefathers (literally, their grandsires), and
lament the degeneracy of the later times. They expressly declare that
those who established the "great peace" were in their graves, and had
taken their work with them and placed it as a pillow under them. This is
the language of men who remembered the founders, and to whom the burial
of the last of them was a comparatively recent event. If the League was
formed, as seems probable, about the year 1450, the speeches and hymn,
in their present form, may reasonably be referred to the early part of
the next century. There is reason to believe that the formation of the
confederacy was followed by wars with the Hurons and Algonkin tribes, in
which, as usual, many changes of fortune took place. If the Hurons, as
has been shown, were expelled from their abode on the northern shore of
the St. Lawrence, the Mohegans, on the other hand, inflicted some
serious blows upon the eastern nations of the confederacy. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) The Delawares were not conquered and
reduced to subjection without a long and sanguinary struggle. In a
Condoling Council we might expect that the tone of feeling would be
lugubrious; but the sense of loss and of danger is too marked in all the
speeches of the Canienga Book to be merely a formal utterance. It does
not appear in those of the Onondaga Book, which is seemingly of later
composition.

The "karenna," or chant of the Condoling Council, may be styled the
National Hymn of the Iroquois. A comparison between it and other
national hymns, whose chief characteristics are self-glorification and
defiance, might afford room for some instructive inferences. This hymn,
it should be remarked, brief as it is, is regarded by the Indians as a
collection of songs. Each line, in fact, is, in their view, a song by
itself, and is brought to mind by its own special wampum

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

string, In singing, each line is twice repeated, and is introduced and
followed by many long-drawn repetitions of the exclamation *aihaigh* (or
rather *haihaih*) which is rendered "hail!" and from which the hymn
derives its designation. In the first line the speaker salutes the
"Peace," or the league, whose blessings they enjoy. In the next he
greets the kindred of the deceased chief, who are the special objects of
the public sympathy. Then he salutes the *oyenkondonh*, a term which has
been rendered "warriors." This rendering, however, may have a misleading
effect. The word has nothing to do with war, unless in the sense that
every grown man in an Indian community is supposed to be a soldier.
Except in this hymn, the word in question is now disused. An elderly
chief assured me that he had sung it for years without knowing its
precise meaning. Some of his fellow-councillors were better informed.
The word is apparently derived from *onkwe*, man, which in the Onondaga
dialect becomes *yenkwe*. It comprises all the men (the "manhood" or
mankind) of the nation--as, in the following verse, the word *wakonnyh*,
which is also obsolete, signifies the "womanhood," or all the women of
the people with whom the singer condoles. In the next line he invokes
the laws which their forefathers established; and he concludes by
calling upon his hearers to listen to the wisdom of their forefathers,
which he is about to recite. As a whole, the hymn may be described as an
expression of reverence for the laws and for the dead, and of sympathy
with the living. Such is the "national anthem,"--the Marseillaise,---of
the ferocious Iroquois.

The regard for women which is apparent in this hymn, and in other
passages of the Book, is deserving of notice. The common notion that
women among the Indians were treated as inferiors, and made "beasts of
burden," is unfounded so far as the Iroquois are concerned, and among
all other tribes of which I have any knowledge. With them, as with
civilized

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

nations, the work of the community and the cares of the family are
fairly divided. Among the Iroquois the hunting and fishing, the
house-building and canoe-making, fell to the men. The women cooked, made
the dresses, scratched the ground with their light hoes, planted and
gathered the crops, and took care of the children. The household goods
belonged to the woman. On her death, her relatives, and not her husband,
claimed them. The children were also hers; they belonged to her clan,
and in case of a separation they went with her. She was really the head
of the household; and in this capacity her right, when she chanced to be
the oldest matron of a noble family, to select the successor of a
deceased chief of that family, was recognized by the highest law of the
confederacy. That this rank and position were greatly prized is shown by
a remarkable passage in the Jesuit Relations. A Canienga matron,
becoming a Christian, left her country, with two of her children, to
enjoy greater freedom in her devotions among the French. The act, writes
the missionary, so offended her family that, in a public meeting of the
town, "they degraded her from the rank of the nobility, and took from
her the title of Oyander, that is, honorable (*considérable*)--a title
which they esteem highly, and which she had inherited from her
ancestors, and deserved by her good judgment, her prudence, and her
excellent conduct and at the same time they installed another in her
place." <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md)

The complete equality of the sexes in social estimation and influence is
apparent in all the narratives of the early missionaries, who were the
best possible judges on this point. Casual observers have been misled by
the absence of those artificial expressions of courtesy which have
descended to us from the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

time of chivalry, and which, however gracious and pleasing to witness,
are, after all, merely signs of condescension and protection from the
strong to the weak. The Iroquois does not give up his seat to a woman,
or yield her precedence on leaving a room; but he secures her in the
possession of her property, he recognizes her right to the children she
has borne, and he submits to her decision the choice of his future
rulers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[59:1](ibr06.htm#fr_30.md) N.Y. Hist. Col., Vol. 6,
p. 811. Stone's Life of Sir William Johnson, p. 414.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[63:1](ibr06.htm#fr_31.md) See the *Jesuit
Relation* for 1660, p. 6.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[65:1](ibr06.htm#fr_32.md) Relation of 1671, p. 6.
The word *oyander* in modern pronunciation becomes *oyaner*. It is
derived from the root *yaner*, noble, and is the feminine form of the
word *royaner*, lord, or nobleman,---the title applied to the members of
the federal council.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: The Laws of the League](ibr07.md)
