[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ibr10)  [Next](ibr12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

## CHAPTER X.

### THE IROQUOIS LANGUAGE.

As the mental faculties of a people are reflected in their speech, we
should naturally expect that the language of a race manifesting such
unusual powers as the Iroquois nations have displayed would be of a
remarkable character. In this expectation we are not disappointed. The
languages of the Huron-Iroquois family belong to what has been termed
the polysynthetic class, and are distinguished, even in that class, by a
more than ordinary endowment of that variety of forms and fullness of
expression for which languages of that type are noted. The
best-qualified judges have been the most struck with this peculiar
excellence. "The variety of compounds," wrote the accomplished
missionary, Brebeuf, concerning the Huron tongue, "is very great; it is
the key to the secret of their language. They have as many genders as
ourselves, as many numbers as the Greeks." Recurring to the same
comparison, he remarks of the Huron verb that it has as many tenses and
numbers as the Greek, with certain discriminations which the latter did
not possess. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) A great living
authority has added the weight of his name to these opinions of the
scholarly Jesuit. Professor Max Müller, who took the opportunity
afforded by the presence of a Mohawk undergraduate at Oxford to study
his language, writes of it in emphatic terms: "To my mind the structure
of such a language as the Mohawk is quite sufficient evidence that those
who worked out such a work of art were powerful reasoners; and accurate
classifiers." <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

It is a fact somewhat surprising, as well as unfortunate, that no
complete grammar of any language of the Huron-Iroquois stock has ever
been published. Many learned and zealous missionaries, Catholic and
Protestant, have labored among the tribes of this stock for more than
two centuries. Portions of the Scriptures, as well as some other works,
have been translated into several of these languages. Some small books,
including biographies and hymn-books, have been composed and printed in
two of them; and the late devoted and indefatigable missionary among the
Senecas, the Rev. Asher Wright, conducted for several years a
periodical, the "Mental Elevator" (*Ne Jaguhnigoageswatha*), in their
language. Several grammars are known to have been composed, but none
have as yet been printed in a complete form. One reason of this
unwillingness to publish was, undoubtedly, the sense which the compilers
felt of the insufficiency of their work. Such is the extraordinary
complexity of the language, such the multiplicity of its forms and the
subtlety of its distinctions, that years of study are required to master
it; and indeed it may be said that the abler the investigator and the
more careful his study, the more likely he is to be dissatisfied with
his success. This dissatisfaction was frankly expressed and practically
exhibited by Mr. Wright himself, certainly one of the best endowed and
most industrious of these inquirers. After residing for several years
among the Senecas, forming an alphabet remarkable for its precise

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

discrimination of sounds, and even publishing several translations in
their language, he undertook to give some account of its grammatical
forms. A little work printed in 1842, with the modest title of "*A
Spelling-book of the Seneca Language*," comprises the variations of
nouns, adjectives and pronouns, given with much minuteness. Those of the
verbs are promised, but the book closes abruptly without them, for the
reason--as the author afterwards explained to a correspondent--that he
had not as yet been able to obtain such a complete knowledge of them as
he desired. This difficulty is further exemplified by a work purporting
to be a "*Grammar of the Huron Language, by a Missionary of the Village
of Huron Indians near Quebec, found amongst the papers of the Mission,
and translated from the Latin, by the Rev. John Wilkie.*" This
translation is published in the "*Transactions of the Literary and
Historical Society of Quebec,*" for 1831, and fills more than a hundred
octavo pages. It is a work evidently of great labor, and is devoted
chiefly to the variations of the verbs; yet its lack of completeness may
be judged from the single fact that the "transitions," or in other
words, the combinations of the double pronouns, nominative and
objective, with the transitive verb, which form such an important
feature of the language, are hardly noticed; and, it may be added,
though the conjugations are mentioned, they are not explained. The work,
indeed, would rather perplex than aid an investigator, and gives no
proper idea of the character and richness of the language. The same may
be said of the grammatical notices comprised in the Latin "Proemium" to
Bruyas' Iroquois dictionary. These notices are apparently modeled to
some extent on this anonymous grammar of the Huron language,--unless,
indeed, the latter may have been copied from Bruyas; the rules which
they give being in several instances couched in the same words.

Some useful grammatical explanations are found in the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

anonymous Onondaga dictionary of the seventeenth century, published by
Dr. Shea in his "*Library of American linguistics.*" But by far the most
valuable contribution to our knowledge of the structure of this
remarkable group of languages is found in the works of a distinguished
writer of our own day, the Rev. J. A. Cuoq, of Montreal, eminent both as
a missionary and as a philologist. After twenty years of labor among the
Iroquois and Algonkin tribes in the Province of Quebec, M. Cuoq was led
to appear as an author by his desire to defend his charges against the
injurious effect of a judgment which had been pronounced by a noted
authority. M. Renan had put forth, among the many theories which
distinguish his celebrated work on the Semitic languages, one which
seemed to M. Cuoq as mischievous as it was unfounded. M. Renan held that
no races were capable of civilization except such as have now attained
it; and that these comprised only the Aryan, the Semitic, and the
Chinese. This opinion was enforced by a reference to the languages
spoken by the members of those races. "To imagine a barbarous race
speaking a Semitic or an Indo-European language is," he declares, "an
impossible supposition (*une fiction contradiaoire*), which no person
can entertain who is familiar with the laws of comparative philology,
and with the general theory of the human intellect." To one who
remembers that every nation of the Indo-European race traces its descent
from a barbarous ancestry, and especially that the Germans in the days
of Tacitus were in precisely the same social stage as that of the
Iroquois in the days of Champlain, this opinion of the brilliant French
philologist and historian will seem erratic and unaccountable. M. Cuoq
sought to refute it, not merely by argument, but by the logic of facts.
In two works, published successively in 1864 and 1866, he showed, by
many and various examples, that the Iroquois and Algonkin languages
possessed all the excellences which M. Renan admired in the
Indo-European languages, and surpassed in

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

almost every respect the Semitic and Chinese tongues. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) The resemblances of these Indian languages
to the Greek struck him, as it had struck his illustrious predecessor,
the martyred Brebeuf, two hundred years before. M. Cuoq is also the
author of a valuable Iroquois lexicon, with notes and appendices, in
which he discusses some interesting points in the philology of the
language. This lexicon is important, also, for comparison with that of
the Jesuit missionary, Bruyas, as showing how little the language has
varied in the course of two centuries. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) The following particulars respecting the
Iroquois tongues are mainly derived from the works of M. Cuoq, of
Bruyas, and of Mr. Wright, supplemented by the researches of the author,
pursued at intervals during several years, among the tribes of Western
Canada and New York. Only a very brief sketch of the subject can here be
given. It is not too much to say that a complete grammar of any Iroquois
language would be at least as extensive as the best Greek or Sanscrit
grammar. For such a work neither the writer, nor perhaps any other
person now living, except M. Cuoq himself, would be competent.

The phonology of the language is at once simple and perplexing.
According to M. Cuoq, twelve letters suffice to represent it: *a, e, f,
h, i, k, n, o, r, s, t, w*. Mr. Wright employs for the Seneca seventeen,
with diacritical marks,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

which raise the number to twenty-one. The English missionaries among the
Mohawks found sixteen letters sufficient, *a, d, e, g, h, i, j, k, n, o,
r, s, t, u, w, y*. There are no labial sounds, unless the *f*, which
rarely occurs, and appears to be merely an aspirated *w*, may be
considered one. No definite distinction is maintained between the vowel
sounds *o* and *u*, and one of these letters may be dispensed with. The
distinction between hard and soft (or surd and sonant) mutes is not
preserved. The sounds of *d* and *t*, and those of *k* and *g*, are
interchangeable. So also are those of *l* and *r*, the former sound
being heard more frequently in the Oneida dialect and the latter in the
Canienga. From the Western dialects,--the Onondaga, Cayuga and
Seneca,--this *l* or *r* sound has, in modern times, disappeared
altogether. The Canienga *konoronkwa*, I esteem him (in Oneida usually
sounded *konolonkwa*), has become *konoenkwa* in Onondaga, and in Cayuga
and Seneca is contracted to *kononkwa*. Aspirates and aspirated
gutturals abound, and have been variously represented by *h*, *hh*,
*kh*, and *gh*, and sometimes (in the works of the early French
missionaries) by the Greek *chi* and the spiritus asper. Yet no
permanent distinction appears to be maintained among the sounds thus
represented, and M. Cuoq reduces them all to the simple *h*. The French
nasal sound abounds. M. Cuoq and the earlier English missionaries have
expressed it, as in French, simply by the *n* when terminating a
syllable. When it does not close a syllable, a diæresis above the *n*,
or else the Spanish tilde (ñ) indicates the sound. Mr. Wright denotes it
by a line under the vowel. The later English missionaries express it by
a diphthong: *ken* becomes *kea*; *nonwa* becomes *noewa*; *onghwentsya*
is written *oughweatsya*.

A strict analysis would probably reduce the sounds of the Canienga
language to seven consonants, *h, k, n. r, s, t,* and *w*, and four
vowels, *a, e, i*, and *o*, of which three, *a, e,* and *o*, may receive
a nasal sound. This nasalizing makes them, in

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

fact, distinct elements; and the primary sounds of the language may
therefore be reckoned at fourteen. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60)
The absence of labials and the frequent aspirated gutturals give to the
utterance of the best speakers a deep and sonorous character which
reminds the hearer of the stately Castilian speech.

The "Book of Rites," or, rather, the Canienga portion of it, is written
in the orthography first employed by the English missionaries. The *d*
is frequently used, and must be regarded merely as a variant of the *t*
sound. The *g* is sometimes, though rarely, employed as a variant of the
*k*. The digraph *gh* is common and represents the guttural aspirate,
which in German is indicated by *ch* and in Spanish by *j*. The French
missionaries write it now simply *h*, and consider it merely a harsh
pronunciation of the aspirate. The *j* is sounded as in English; it
usually represents a complex sound, which might be analysed into *ts* or
*tsï*; *jathondek* is properly *tsïatontek*. The *x*, which occasionally
appears, is to be pronounced *ks*, as in English. *An*, *en*, *on*, when
not followed by a vowel, have a nasal sound, as in French. This sound is
heard even when those syllables are followed by another *n*. Thus
*Kanonsionni* is pronounced as if written *Kanoñsioñni* and *yondennase*
as if written *yoñdeñnase*. The vowels have usually the same sound as in
German and Italian; but in the nasal *en* the vowel has an obscure
sound, nearly like that of the short *u* in *but*. Thus *yondennase*
sounds almost as if written *yoñduñnase*, and *kanienke* is pronounced
nearly like *kaniuñke*.

The nouns in Iroquois are varied, but with accidence differing from the
Aryan and Semitic variations, some of the distinctions being more
subtle, and, so to speak, metaphysical. The dual is expressed by
prefixing the particle *te*, and suffixing *ke* to the noun; thus., from
*kanonsa*, house, we have

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

tekanonsake, two houses. These syllables, or at least the first, are
supposed to be derived from *tekeni*, two. The plural, when it follows
an adjective expressive of number, is indicated by the syllable *ni*
prefixed to the noun, and *ke* suffixed; as, *eso nikanonsake*, many
houses. In other cases the plural is sometimes expressed by one of the
words *okon* (or *hokon*) *okonha*, *son* and *sonha*, following the
noun. In general, however, the plural significance of nouns is left to
be inferred from the context, the verb always and the adjective
frequently indicating it.

All beings are divided into two classes, which do not correspond either
with the Aryan genders or with the distinctions of animate and inanimate
which prevail in the Algonkin tongues. These classes have been styled
noble and common. To the noble belong male human beings and deities. The
other class comprises women and all other objects. It seems probable,
however, that the distinction in the first instance was merely that of
sex,--that it was, in fact, a true gender. Deities, being regarded as
male, were included in the masculine gender. There being no neuter form,
the feminine gender was extended, and made to comprise all other beings.
These classes, however, are not indicated by any change in the noun, but
merely by the forms of the pronoun and the verb.

The local relations of nouns are expressed by affixed particles, such as
*ke*, *ne*, *kon*, *akon*, *akta*. Thus, from *onónta* mountain, we have
*onontáke*, at (or to) the mountain; from *akérat*, dish, akehrátne, in
(or on) the dish; from *kanónsa*, house, *kanonsákon*, or *kanónskon*,
in the house, *kanonsákon*, under the house, and *kanonsákta*, near the
house. These locative particles, it will be seen, usually, though not
always, draw the accent towards them.

The most peculiar and perplexing variation is that made by what is
termed the "crement," affixed to many (though not all) nouns. This
crement in the Canienga takes various

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

forms, *ta, sera, tsera, kwa*. *Onkwe*, man, becomes *onkwéta*; *otkon*,
spirit, *otkónsera*; *akáwe*, oar, *akawétsera*; *ahta*, shoe,
*ahhtákwa*. The crement is employed when the noun is used with numeral
adjectives, when it has adjective or other affixes, and generally when
it enters into composition with other words. Thus *onkwe*, man, combined
with the adjective termination *iyo* (from the obsolete *wiyo*, good)
becomes *onkwetiyo*, good man. *Wenni*, day, becomes in the plural
*niate niwenniserake*, many days, etc. The change, however, is not
grammatical merely, but conveys a peculiar shade of meaning difficult to
define. The noun, according to M. Cuoq, passes from a general and
determinate to a special and restricted sense. Onkwe means man in
general; *asen nionkwetake*, three men (in particular.) One interpreter
rendered *akawétsera*, "the oar itself." The affix *sera* or *tsera*
seems to be employed to form what we should term abstract nouns, though
to the Iroquois mind they apparently present themselves as possessing a
restricted or specialized sense. Thus from *iotarihen*, it is warm, we
have *otarihénsera*, heat; from *wakeriat*, to be brave,
*ateriatítsera*, courage. So *kakweniátsera*, authority; *kanaiésera*,
pride; *kanakwénsera*, anger. Words of this class abound in the
Iroquois; so little ground is there for the common opinion that the
language is destitute of abstract nouns. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61)

The adjective, when employed in an isolated form, follows the
substantive; as *kanonsa kowa*, large house; *onkwe honwe* (or *onwe*) a
real man. But, in general, the substantive and the adjective coalesce in
one word. *Ase* signifies new, and added to *kanonsa* gives us
*kanonsáse*, new house. *Karonta*, tree, and *kowa*, or *kowanen*,
great, make together *karontowánen*, great tree. Frequently the affixed
adjective is never employed as an isolated word, The termination *iyo*
(or *iio*)

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

expresses good or beautiful, and *aksen*, bad or ugly; thus *kanonsíyo*,
fine house, *kanonsáksen*, ugly house. These compound forms frequently
make their plural by adding *s*, as *kanonsíyos*, *kanonaksens*.

The pronouns are more numerous than in any European language, and show
clearer distinctions in meaning. Thus, in the singular, besides the
ordinary pronouns, I, thou, he and she, the language possesses an
indeterminate form, which answers very nearly to the French *on*. The
first person of the dual has two forms, the one including, the other
excluding, the person addressed, and signifying, therefore,
respectively,--"thou and I," and "he and I." The first person plural has
the same twofold form. The third persons dual and plural have masculine
and feminine forms. Thus the language has fifteen personal pronouns, all
in common use, and all, it may be added, useful in expressing
distinctions which the English can only indicate by circumlocutions.
These pronouns are best shown in the form in which they are prefixed to
a verb. The following are examples of the verb *katkahtos*, I see (root
*atkahto*) and *kenonwes*, I love (root *nonwe*), as conjugated in the
present tense:--

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="7" width="638">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p><em>katkahtos</em>, I see.<br />
<em>satkahtos</em>, thou seest.<br />
<em>ratkahtos</em>, he sees.<br />
<em>watkahtos</em>, she sees.<br />
<em>iontkahtos</em>, one sees.<br />
<em>tiatkahtos</em>, we two see (thou and I.)<br />
<em>iakiatkahtos</em>, we two see (he and I.)<br />
<em>tsiatkahtos</em>, ye two see.<br />
<em>hiatkahtos</em>, they two see (masc.)<br />
<em>kiatkahtos</em>, they two see (fem.)<br />
<em>tewatkahtos</em>, we see (ye and I.)<br />
<em>iakwatkahtos</em>, we see (they and I.)<br />
<em>sewatkahtos</em>, ye see.<br />
<em>rontkahtos</em>, they see (masc.)<br />
<em>kontkahtos</em>, they see (fem.)</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>kenonwes, I love.<br />
<em>senonwes</em>, thou lovest.<br />
<em>rononwes</em>, he loves.<br />
<em>kanonwes</em>, she loves.<br />
<em>ienonwes</em>, one loves.<br />
<em>teninonwes</em>, we two love (thou and I)<br />
<em>iakeninonwes</em>, we two love (he and I)<br />
<em>seninonwes</em>, ye two love.<br />
<em>hninonwes</em>, they two love (masc.)<br />
<em>keninonwes</em>, they two love (fem.)<br />
<em>tewanonwes</em>, we love (ye and I.)<br />
<em>iakwanonwes</em>, we love (they and I.)<br />
<em>sewanonwes</em>, ye love.<br />
<em>ratinonwes</em>, they love (masc.)<br />
<em>kontinonwes</em>, they love (fem.)</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

It will be observed that in these examples the prefixed pronouns differ
considerably in some cases. These differences determine (or are
determined by) the conjugation of the verbs. *Katkahtos* belongs to the
first conjugation, and *kenonwes* to the second. There are three other
conjugations, each of which shows some peculiarity in the prefixed
pronouns, though, in the main, a general resemblance runs through them
all. There are other variations of the pronouns, according to the
"paradigm," as it is called, to which the verb belongs. Of these
paradigms there are two, named in the modern Iroquois grammars paradigms
K and A, from the first or characteristic letter of the first personal
pronoun. The particular conjugation and paradigm to which any verb
belongs can only be learned by practice, or from the dictionaries.

The same prefixed pronouns are used, with some slight variations, as
possessives, when prefixed to a substantive; as, from *sita*, foot, we
have (in Paradigm A) *akasita*, my foot, *sasita*, thy foot, *raosita*,
his foot. Thus nouns, like verbs, have the five conjugations and the two
paradigms.

Iroquois verbs have three moods, indicative, imperative, and
subjunctive; and they have, in the indicative, seven tenses, the
present, imperfect, perfect, pluperfect, aorist, future and paulo-post
future. These moods and tenses are indicated either by changes of
termination, or by prefixed particles, or by both conjoined. One
authority makes six other tenses, but M. Cuoq prefers to include them
among the special forms of the verb, of which mention will presently be
made.

To give examples of these tenses, and the rules for their formation,
would require more space than can be devoted to the subject in the
present volume. The reader who desires to pursue the study is referred
to the works of M. Cuoq already mentioned.

The verb takes a passive form by inserting the syllable

at

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

between the prefixed pronoun and the verb; and a reciprocal sense by
inserting *atat*. Thus, *kiatatas*, I put in, *katiatatas*, I am put in;
*katatiatatas*, I put myself in; *konnis*, I make; *katonnis*, I am
made; *katatonnis*, I make myself. This syllable at is probably derived
from the word *oyata*, body, which is used in the sense of "self," like
the corresponding word *hakey* in the Delaware language.

The "transitions," or the pronominal forms which indicate the passage of
the action of a transitive verb from the agent to the object, play an
important part in the Iroquois language. In the Algonkin tongues these
transitions are indicated partly by prefixed pronouns, and partly by
terminal inflections. In the Iroquois the subjective and objective
pronouns are both prefixed, as in French. In that language "*il me
voit*" corresponds precisely with RAKA*tkatos*, "he-me-sees." Here the
pronouns, *ra*, of the third person, and *ka* of the first, are evident
enough. In other cases the two pronouns have been combined in a form
which shows no clear trace of either of the simple pronouns; as in
*hetsenonwes*, thou lovest him, and *hianonwes*, he loves thee. These
combined pronouns are very numerous, and vary, like the simple pronouns,
in the five conjugations.

The peculiar forms of the verb, analogous to the Semitic conjugations
are very numerous. Much of the force and richness of the language
depends on them. M. Cuoq enumerates-

1\. The diminutive form, which affixes *ha*; as *knekirha*HA, I drink a
little; *konkwe*HA (from onkwe, man), I am a man, but hardly one
(*i.e.*, I am a little of a man).

2\. The augmentative, of which *tsi* is the affixed sign; as,
*knekirha*TSI, I drink much. This is sometimes lengthened to *tsihon*;
as *wakatonte*TSIHON, I understand perfectly.

3 and 4. The cislocative, expressing motion towards the speaker, and the
translocative, indicating motion tending

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

from him. The former has *t*, the latter *ie* or *ia*, before the verb,
as *tasataweiat*, come in; *iasataweiat*, go in.

5\. The duplicative, which prefixes *te*, expresses an action which
affects two or more agents or objects, as in betting, marrying, joining,
separating. Thus, from *ikiaks*, I cut, we have *tekiaks*, I cut in two,
where the prefix le corresponds to the Latin *bi* in "bisect." The same
form is used in speaking of acts done by those organs of the body, such
as the eyes and the hands, which nature has made double. Thus
*tekasenthos*, I weep, is never used except in this form.

6\. The reiterative is expressed by the sound of *s* prefixed to the
verb. It sometimes replaces the cislocative sign; thus, *tkahtenties*, I
come from yonder; *skahtenties*, I come again.

7\. The motional is a form which by some is considered a special future
tense. Thus, from *khiatons*, I write, we have *khiatonnes*, I am going
to write; from *katerios*, I fight, *katerioseres*, I am going to the
war; from *kesaks*, I seek, *kesakhes*, I am going to seek. These forms
are irregular, and can only be learned by practice.

8\. The causative suffix is *tha*; as from *k'kowanen*, I am great, we
have *k'kowana*THA, I make great, I aggrandize. With *at* inserted we
have a simulative or pretentious form, as *katkowana*THA, I make myself
great, I pretend to be great. The same affix is used to give an
instrumental sense; as from *keriios*, I kill, we have *keriioh*THA, I
kill him with such a weapon or instrument.

9\. The progressive, which ends in *tie* (sometimes taking the forms
*atie*, *hatie*, *tatie*), is much used to give the sense of becoming,
proceeding, continuing, and the like; as *wakhiatontie*, I go on
writing; *wakatrorihatie*, I keep on talking; *wakeriwaientatie*, I am
attending to the business. The addition of an s to this form adds the
idea of plurality or diversity of acts; thus, *wakhiatonties*, I go on
writing at different times and places; *wakatrorihaties*, I keep on
telling the thing, *i.e.*, going from house to house.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

10\. The attributive has various forms, which can only be learned by
practice or from the dictionaries. It expresses an action done for some
other person; as, from *wakiote*, I work, we have *kiotense*, I work for
some one; from *katatis*, I speak, *katatiase*, I speak in favor of some
one.

11\. The habitual ends in *kon*. From *katontats*, I hear, I consent, we
have *wakatontatskon*, I am docile; from *katatis*, I speak,
*wakatatiatskon*, I am talkative.

12\. The frequentative has many forms, but usually ends in *on*, or
*ons*. From *khiatons*, I write, we have in this form *khiatonnions*, I
write many things; from *katkahtos*, I look, *katkahtonnions*, I look on
all sides.

These are not all the forms of the Iroquois verb; but enough have been
enumerated to give some idea of the wealth of the language in such
derivatives, and the power of varied expression which it derives from
this source.

The Iroquois has many particles which, like those of the Greek and
French languages, help to give clearness to the style, though their
precise meaning cannot always be gathered by one not perfectly familiar
with the language. *Ne* and *nene* are frequently used as substitutes
for the article and the relative pronouns. *Onenh*, now; *kati*, then,
therefore; *ok*, *nok*, and *neok*, and; *oni* and *neoni*, also; *toka*
and *tokat*, if, perhaps; *tsi*, when; *kento*, here; *akwah*, indeed,
very; *etho*, thus, so; are, sometimes, again; *ken*, an interrogative
particle, like the Latin *ne*--these and some others will be found in
the Book of Rites, employed in the manner in which they are still used
by the best speakers.

It must be understood that the foregoing sketch affords only the barest
outline of the formation of the Iroquois language. As has been before
remarked, a complete grammar of this speech, as full and minute as the
best Sanscrit or Greek grammars, would probably equal and perhaps
surpass those grammars in extent. The unconscious forces of memory and
of discrimination required to maintain this complicated

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

intellectual machine, and to preserve it constantly exact and in good
working order, must be prodigious. Yet a comparison of Bruyas' work with
the language of the present day shows that this purpose has been
accomplished; and, what is still more remarkable, a comparison of the
Iroquois with the Huron grammar shows that after a separation which must
have exceeded five hundred years, and has probably covered twice that
term, the two languages differ less from one another than the French of
the twelfth century differed from the Italian, or than the Anglo-Saxon
of King Alfred differed from the contemporary Low German speech. The
forms of the Huron-Iroquois languages, numerous and complicated as they
are, appear to be certainly not less persistent, and probably better
maintained, than those of the written Aryan tongues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[99:1](ibr11.htm#fr_56) Relation of 1636, pp.
99, 100.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[99:2](ibr11.htm#fr_57) in a letter to the
author, dated Feb. 14, 1882. in a subsequent letter Prof. Müller writes,
in regard to the study of the aboriginal languages of this continent:
"It has long been a puzzle to me why this most tempting <span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> and promising field of philological research
has been allowed to lie almost fallow in America,--as if these languages
could not tell us quite as much of the growth of the human mind as
Chinese, or Hebrew, or Sanscrit." I have Prof. Max Müller's permission
to publish these extracts, and gladly do so, in the hope that they may
serve to stimulate that growing interest which the efforts of scholars
like Trumbull, Shea, Cuoq, Brinton, and, more recently, Major Powell and
his able collaborators of the Ethnological Bureau, are at length
beginning to awaken among us, in the investigation of this important and
almost unexplored province of linguistic science.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[103:1](ibr11.htm#fr_58) See Jugement Erroné de
M. Ernest Renan sur les Langues Sauvages: (2d edit.) Dawson Brothers,
Montreal: 1870; and Études Philologiques sur quelques Langues Sauvages
de l'Amérique. Par N. O., Ancien Missionaire. Ibid: 1866. Also Lexique
de la Langue Iroquoise, avec notes et appendices. Par J. A. Cuoq, Prêtre
de St. Sulpice. J. Chapleau & Fils, Montreal: 1882. These are all works
indispensable to the student of Indian languages.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[103:2](ibr11.htm#fr_59) Radices Verborum
Iroquæorum. Auctore R. p. Jacopo Bruyas, Societatis Jesu. Published in
Shea's "Library of American Linguistics." For the works in this
invaluable Library, American scholars owe a debt of gratitude to Dr.
Shea's enlightened zeal in the cause of science and humanity.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[105:1](ibr11.htm#fr_60) A dental *t*,--which
the French missionaries represent sometimes by the Greek *theta* and
sometimes by *th*, and which the English have also occasionally
expressed by the latter method, may possibly furnish an additional
element. The Greek *8* of the former is simply the English *w*.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[107:1](ibr11.htm#fr_61) See, on this point, the
remarks of Dr. Brinton to the same effect, in regard to the Aztec,
Qquichua, and other languages, with interesting illustrations, in his
"American Hero Myths," p. 25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ancient Rites of the Condoling Council](ibr12)
