[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ibr17)  [Next](ibr19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### NOTE C.

#### THE ERA OF THE CONFEDERACY.

Mr. Morgan, in his work on "Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the
Human Family" (p. 151), fixes the date of the formation of the Iroquois
league at about the middle of the fifteenth century. He says: "As near
as can now be ascertained, the league had been established about one
hundred and fifty years when Champlain, in 1609, first encountered the
Mohawks within their own territories, on the west coast of Lake George.
This would place the epoch of its formation about A. D., 1459." Mr.
Morgan, as he informed me, deduced this conclusion from the testimony of
the most intelligent Indians whom he had consulted on the subject. His
informants belonged chiefly to the Seneca and Tuscarora nations. Their
statements are entirely confirmed by those of the Onondaga
record-keepers, both on the Syracuse Reservation and in Canada. When the
chiefs at Onondaga Castle, who, in October, 1875, met to explain to me
their wampum records, were asked how long it had been since their league
was made, they replied (as I find the answer recorded in my notes)

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

that "it was their belief that the confederacy was formed about six
generations before the white people came to these parts." Hudson
ascended the river to which he gave his name in September, 1609. A boat
from his ship advanced beyond Albany, and consequently into the
territories of the League. "Frequent intercourse," says Bancroft, in his
account of this exploration, "was held with the astonished natives of
the Algonquin race; and the strangers were welcomed by a deputation from
the Mohawks." If we allow twenty-five years to a generation, the era of
the confederacy is carried back to a period a hundred and fifty years
before the date of Hudson's discovery,--or to the year 1459. This
statement of the Onondaga chiefs harmonizes, therefore, closely with
that which Mr. Morgan had heard among the other nations.

I afterwards (in 1882) put the same question to my friend, Chief John
Buck, the keeper of the wampum-records of the Canadian Iroquois. He
thought it was then "about four hundred years" since the League was
formed. He was confident that it was before any white people had been
heard of by his nation. This opinion accords sufficiently with the more
definite statement of the New York Onondagas to be deemed a confirmation
of that statement.

There are two authorities whose opinions differ widely, in opposite
directions, from the information thus obtained by Mr. Morgan and myself.
David Cusick, in his "*Sketches of Ancient History of the Six Nations*,"
supposes that the League was formed "perhaps 1000 years before Columbus
discovered America." His reasons for this supposition, however, do not
bear examination. He makes Atotarho the hereditary title of a monarch,
like Pharaoh or Cæsar, and states that thirteen potentates bearing that
title had "reigned" between the formation of the confederacy and the
discovery of America by Columbus. The duration of each of these reigns
he computes, absurdly enough, at exactly fifty years, which, however,
would give altogether a term of only six hundred and fifty years. He
supposes the discovery of America to have taken place during the reign
of the thirteenth Atotarho; and he adds that the conquest and dispersion
of the Eries occurred "about this time." The latter event, as we know,
took place in 1656. It is evident that Cusick's chronology is totally at
fault. As an Iroquois chief was never succeeded by his son, but often by
his brother, it is by no means improbable that thirteen persons may

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

have held successively the title of Atotarho in the term of nearly two
centuries, between the years 1459 and 1656.

On the other hand, Heckewelder, in his well-known work on the "History,
Manners and Customs of the Indian Nations," cites a passage from a
manuscript book of his predecessor, the Rev. C. Pyrlæus, formerly
missionary among the Mohawks, from which a comparatively recent date
would be inferred for the confederation. The inference, however, is
probably due to a mistake of Heckewelder himself. The passage, as it
stands in his volume, <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) is as
follows:--

"The Rev. C. Pyrlæus, in his manuscript book, p. 234, says: 'The
alliance or confederacy of the Five Nations was established, as near as
can be conjectured, one age (or the length of a man's life) before the
white people (the Dutch) came into the country. Thannawage was the name
of the aged Indian, a Mohawk, who first proposed such an alliance.'"

The words which Heckewelder has here included between parentheses are
apparently explanations which he himself added to the original statement
of Pyrlæus. The first of these glosses, by which an "age" is explained
to be the length of a man's life, is doubtless correct; but the second,
which identifies the "white people" of Pyrlæus with the Dutch, is
probably wrong. The white people who first "came into the country" of
the Huron-Iroquois nations were the French, under Cartier. It was in the
summer of 1535 that the bold Breton navigator, with three vessels
commissioned to establish a colony in Canada, entered the St. Lawrence,
and ascended the great river as far as the sites of Quebec and Montreal.
He spent the subsequent winter at Quebec. The presence of this
expedition, with its soldiers and sailors of strange complexion and
armed with terrible weapons, must have been known to all the tribes
dwelling along the river, and would naturally make an epoch in their
chronology. Assuming the year 1535 as the time when the white people
first "came into the country," and taking "the length of a man's life"
at seventy-five years (or three generations) we should arrive at the
year 1460 as the date of the formation of the Iroquois League. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78.md)

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

The brief period allowed by Heckewelder's version is on many accounts
inadmissible. If, when the Dutch first came among the Iroquois, the
confederacy had existed for only about eighty years, there must have
been many persons then living who had personally known some of its
founders. It is quite inconceivable that the cloud of mythological
legends which has gathered around the names of these founders--of which
Clark, in his "Onondaga," gives only the smaller portion--should have
arisen in so short a term. Nor is it probable that in so brief a period
as has elapsed since the date suggested by Heckewelder, a fourth part of
the names of the fifty chiefs who formed the first council would have
become unintelligible, or at least doubtful in meaning. Schoolcraft, who
was inclined to defer to Heckewelder's authority on this point, did so
with evident doubt and perplexity. "We cannot," he says, "without
rejecting many positive traditions of the Iroquois themselves, refuse to
concede a much earlier period to the first attempts of these interesting
tribes to form a general political association." <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md)

In view of all the facts there seems no reason for withholding credence
from the clear and positive statement of the Iroquois chroniclers, who
place the commencement of their confederate government at about the
middle of the fifteenth century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[179:1](ibr18.htm#fr_77.md) p. 56 of the revised
edition of 1875, published by the Historical Society of Pennsylvania.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[179:2](ibr18.htm#fr_78.md) There is an evident
difference between the expression used by my <span id="page_180">p.
180</span> Onondaga informants and that which is quoted by Heckewelder
from Pyrlæus. The latter speaks of the time before the white people
"came into the country;" the Onondagas referred to the time before they
"came to these parts." The passage cited from Bancroft seems to indicate
that the white men of Hudson's crew presented no novel or startling
aspect to the Mohawks. The French had been "in the country" before them.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[180:1](ibr18.htm#fr_79.md) "Notes on the
Iroquois." p. 75.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note D: The Hiawatha Myths](ibr19.md)
