[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ibr15)  [Next](ibr17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

# APPENDIX.

#### NOTE A.

#### THE NAMES OF THE IROQUOIS NATIONS.

The meaning of the term Kanonsionni, and of the other names by which the
several nations were known in their Council, are fully explained in the
Introduction. But some account should be given of the names, often
inappropriate and generally much corrupted, by which they were known to
their white neighbors. The origin and proper meaning of the word
*Iroquois* are doubtful. All that can be said with certainty is that the
explanation given by Charlevoix cannot possibly be correct. "The name of
Iroquois," he says, "is purely French, and has been formed from the term
*hiro*, 'I have spoken,' a word by which these Indians close all their
speeches, and *koué*, which, when long drawn out, is a cry of sorrow,
and when briefly uttered, is an exclamation of joy." <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) It might be enough to say of this
derivation that no other nation or tribe of which we have any knowledge
has ever borne a name composed in this whimsical fashion. But what is
decisive is the fact that Champlain had learned the name from his Indian
allies before he or any other Frenchman, so far as is known, had ever
seen an Iroquois. It is probable that the origin of the word is to be
sought in the Huron language; yet, as this is similar to the Iroquois
tongue, an attempt may be made to find a solution in the latter.
According to Bruyas, the word *garokwa* meant a pipe, and also a piece
of tobacco,--and, in its verbal form, to smoke. This word is found,
somewhat disguised by aspirates, in the Book of Rites,
*denighroghkwayen*,---let us two smoke together." (*Ante*, [p.
115](ibr12.htm#page_115), Section 2). In the indeterminate form the verb
becomes *ierokwa*, which is certainly very near to "Iroquois." It might
be rendered "they who smoke," or "they who use tobacco," or, briefly,
"the Tobacco People." This name, the Tobacco Nation (*Nation du* 

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

Petun) was given by the French, and probably also by the Algonkins, to
one of the Huron tribes, the Tionontates, noted for the excellent
tobacco which they raised and sold. The Iroquois were equally well known
for their cultivation of this plant, of which they had a choice
variety. <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) It is possible that their
northern neighbors may have given to them also a name derived from this
industry. Another not improbable supposition might connect the name with
that of a leading sept among them, the Bear clan. This clan, at least
among the Caniengas, seems to have been better known than any other to
their neighbors. The Algonkins knew that nation as the Maquas, or Bears.
In the Canienga speech, bear is *ohkwai*,--in Onondaga, the word becomes
*ohkwai*, and in Cayuga, *iakwai*,--which also is not far from Iroquois.
These conjectures--for they are nothing more--may both be wrong; but
they will perhaps serve to show the direction in which the explanation
of this perplexing word is to be sought.

The name of *Mingo* or *Mengwe*, by which the Iroquois were known to the
Delawares and the other southern Algonkins, is said to be a contraction
of the Lenape word *Mahongwi*, meaning the "People of the
Springs." <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74) The Iroquois possessed the
headwaters of the rivers which flowed through the country of the
Delawares,--and this explanation of the name may therefore be accepted
as a probable one.

The first of the Iroquois nations, the "oldest brother" of the
confederacy, has been singularly unfortunate in the designations by
which it has become generally known. The people have a fine, sonorous
name of their own, said to be derived from that of one of their ancient
towns. This name is *Kanienke*, "at the Flint." *Kanien*, in their
language, signifies flint, and the final syllable is the same locative
particle which we find in *Onontake*, "at the mountain." In
pronunciation and spelling, this, like other Indian words, is much
varied, both by the natives themselves and by their white neighbors,
becoming *Kanieke*, *Kanyenke*, *Canyangeh*, and *Canienga*. The latter
form, which accords with the sister

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

names of Onondaga and Cayuga, has been adopted in the present volume.

The Huron frequently drops the initial *k*, or changes it to *y*. The
Canienga people are styled in that speech *Yanyenge*, a word which is
evidently the origin of the name of *Agnier*, by which this nation is
known to the French.

The Dutch learned from the Mohicans (whose name, signifying Wolves, is
supposed to be derived from that of their leading clan) to call the
Kanienke by the corresponding name of *Maqua* (or *Makwa*), the Algonkin
word for Bear. But as the Iroquois, and especially the Caniengas, became
more and more a terror to the surrounding nations, the feelings of
aversion and dread thus awakened found vent in an opprobrious epithet,
which the southern and eastern Algonkins applied to their obnoxious
neighbors. They were styled by these enemies *Mowak*, or *Mowawak*, a
word which has been corrupted to Mohawk. It is the third person plural,
in the sixth "transition," of the Algonkin word mowa, which means "to
eat," but which is only used of food that has had life. Literally it
means "they eat them;" but the force of the verb and of the pronominal
inflection suffices to give to the word, when used as an appellative,
the meaning of "those who eat men," or, in other words, "the Cannibals."
That the English, with whom the Caniengas were always fast friends,
should have adopted this uncouth and spiteful nickname is somewhat
surprising. It is time that science and history should combine to banish
it, and to resume the correct designation. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75)

The name *Oneida*, which in French became *Onneyouth* or *Onneyote*, is
a corruption of a compound word, formed of *onenhia*, or *onenya*,
stone, and *kaniote*, to be upright or elevated. *Onenniote* is rendered
"the projecting stone." It is applied to a large boulder of syennite,
which thrusts its broad shoulder above the earth at the summit of an
eminence near which, in early times, the Oneidas had planted their chief
settlement.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

As has been already stated, *Onondaga* is a softened pronunciation of
*Onontake*, "at the mountain,"--or, perhaps, more exactly, "at the
hill." It is probable that this name was unknown when the confederacy
was formed, as it is not comprised in the list of towns given in the
Book of Rites. It may be supposed to have been first applied to this
nation after their chief town was removed to the site which it occupied
in the year 1654, when the first white visitors of whom we have any
certain account, the Jesuit Father Le Moyne and his party, came among
them,--and also in 1677, when the English explorer, Greenhalgh, passed
through their country. This site was about seven miles east of their
present Reservation. I visited it in September, 1880, in company with my
friend, General John S. Clark, who has been singularly successful in
identifying the positions of the ancient Iroquois towns. The locality is
thus described in my journal: "The site is, for an Indian town,
peculiarly striking and attractive. It stretches about three miles in
length, with a width of half a mile, along the broad back and gently
sloping sides of a great hill, which swells, like a vast oblong cushion,
between two hollows made by branches of a small stream, known as
Limehouse creek. These streams and many springs on the hillside yielded
abundance of water, while the encircling ridges on every side afforded
both firewood and game. In the neighborhood were rich valleys, where--as
well as on the hill itself--the people raised their crops of corn,
beans, pumpkins, and tobacco. There are signs of a large population." In
the fields of stubble which occupied the site of this ancient capital,
the position of the houses could still be traced by the dark patches of
soil; and a search of an hour or two rewarded us with several
wampum-beads, flint chips, and a copper coin of the last century. The
owner of the land, an intelligent farmer, affirmed that "wagon-loads" of
Indian wares,--pottery, hatchets, stone implements, and the like-had
been carried off by curiosity seekers.

The name of the *Cayugas* (in French *Goyogouin*) is variously
pronounced by the Iroquois themselves. I wrote it as I heard it, at
different times, from members of the various tribes,
*Koyu<sup>n</sup>kweñ, Koiu<sup>n</sup>kwe, Kwaiu<sup>n</sup>kweñ,
Kayu<sup>n</sup>kwe*. A Cayuga chief made it *Kayu<sup>n</sup>kwa*,
which is very near the usual English pronunciation of the word. Of its
purport no satisfactory account could be obtained.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

\[paragraph continues\] One interpreter rendered it "the fruit
country;--another "the place where canoes are drawn out." Cusick, the
historian, translates it "a mountain rising from the water." Mr. Morgan
was told that it meant "the mucky land." We can only infer that the
interpreters were seeking, by vague resemblances, to recover a lost
meaning.

The *Senecas*, who were called by the French *Tsonontouan* or
*Sonnontouan*, bore among the Iroquois various names, but all apparently
derived from the words which appear in that appellation,--*ononta*,
hill, and *kowa* or *kowane*, great. The Caniengas called them
*Tsonontowane*; the Oneidas abridged the word to *Tsontowana*; the
Cayugas corrupted it to *Onondewa*; and the Onondagas contracted it yet
farther, to *Nontona*. The Senecas called themselves variously
*Sonontowa, Onontewa, and Nondewa*. *Sonontowane* is probably the most
correct form.

The word *Seneca* is supposed to be of Algonkin origin, and, like
Mohawk, to have been given as an expression of dislike, or rather of
hostility. *Sinako*, in the Delaware tongue, means properly "Stone
Snakes;" but in this conjunction it is understood, according to the
interpretation furnished to Mr. Squier, to signify "Mountain
Snakes." <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) The Delawares, it appears,
were accustomed to term all their enemies "snakes." In this case they
simply translated the native name of the Iroquois tribe (the "Mountain
People"), and added this uncomplimentary epithet. As the name, unlike
the word Mohawk, is readily pronounced by the people to whom it was
given, and as they seem to have in some measure accepted it, there is
not the same reason for objecting to its use as exists in the case of
the latter word,--more especially as there is no absolute certainty that
it is not really an Iroquois word. It bears, in its present form, a
close resemblance to the honorable "Council name" of the
Onondagas,--*Sennakehte*, "the title-givers;" a fact which may perhaps
have made the western nation more willing to adopt it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[171:1](ibr16.htm#fr_72) History of New France,
Vol. i, p. 270.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[172:1](ibr16.htm#fr_73) "The Senecas still
cultivate tobacco. Its name signifies 'the only tobacco,' because they
consider this variety superior to all others."--Morgan: *League of the
Iroquois*, p. 375.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[172:2](ibr16.htm#fr_74) E. G. Squier:
"*Traditions of the Algonquins*," in Beach's Indian Miscellany, p. 28.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[173:1](ibr16.htm#fr_75) William Penn and his
colonists, who probably understood the meaning of the word Mohawk,
forbore to employ it. In the early records of the colony (published by
the Pennsylvania Historical Society) the nation is described in
treaties, laws, and other public acts, by its proper designation, a
little distorted in the spelling,--*Canyingoes, Ganyingoes, Cayinkers,
etc.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[175:1](ibr16.htm#fr_76) "Traditions of the
Algonquins," in Beach's Indian Miscellany, p. 33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note B: Meaning of Ohio, Ontario, Onontio, Rawenniio](ibr17)
