[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Celtic
Fairies](../../celt/index.htm#fairies)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cof08)  [Next](cof10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### CHAPTER VI

### INDEPENDENT EVIDENCE FOR FAIRIES

By a curious coincidence, if it be indeed a coincidence, at the moment
when the evidence for the actual existence of fairies was brought to my
notice, I had just finished an article dealing with the subject, in
which I gave particulars of a number of cases where such creatures were
said to have been seen, and showed how very strong were the reasons for
supposing that some such forms of life exist. I now reproduce this
article, and I add to it another chapter containing fresh evidence which
reached me after the publication of the photographs in the *Strand
Magazine*.

 

We are accustomed to the idea of amphibious creatures who may dwell
unseen and unknown in the depths of the waters, and then some day be
spied sunning themselves

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

upon a sandbank, whence they slip into the unseen once more. If such
appearances were rare, and if it should so happen that some saw them
more clearly than others, then a very pretty controversy would arise,
for the sceptics would say, with -every show of reason, "Our experience
is that only land creatures live on the land, and we utterly refuse to
believe in things which slip in and out of the water; if you will
demonstrate them to us we--will begin to consider the question." Faced
by so reasonable an opposition, the others could only mutter that they
had seen them with their own eyes, but that they could not command their
movements. The sceptics would hold the field.

Something of the sort may exist in our psychic arrangements. One can
well imagine that there is a dividing line, like the water edge, this
line dependiing upon what we vaguely call a higher rate of vibrations.
Taking the vibration theory as a working hypothesis, one could conceive
that by raising or lowering the rate the creatures could move from one
side to the other of this line of material visibility, as the tortoise
moves

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

from the water to the land, returning for refuge to invisibility as the
reptile scuttles back to the surf. This, of course, is supposition, but
intelligent supposition based on the available evidence is the pioneer
of science, and it may be that the actual solution will be found in this
direction. I am alluding now, not to spirit return, where seventy years
of close observation has given us some sort of certain and definite
laws, but rather to those fairy and phantom phenomena which have been
endorsed by so many ages, and still even in these material days seem to
break into some lives in the most unexpected fashion.

Victorian science would have left the world hard and clean and bare,
like a landscape in the moon; but this science is in truth but a little
light in the darkness, and outside that limited circle of definite
knowledge we see the loom and shadow of gigantic and fantastic
possibilities around us, throwing themselves continually across our
consciousness in such ways that it is difficult to ignore them.

There is much curious evidence of varying

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

value concerning these borderland forms, which come or go either in fact
or imagination--the latter most frequently, no doubt. And yet there
remains a residue which, by all human standards, should point to
occasional fact. Lest I should be too diffuse, I limit myself in this
essay to the fairies, and passing all the age-long tradition, which is
so universal and consistent, come down to some modern instances which
make one feel that this world is very much more complex than we had
imagined, and that there may be upon its surface some very strange
neighbours who will open up inconceivable lines of science for our
posterity, especially if it should be made easier for them, by sympathy
or other help, to emerge from the deep and manifest upon the margin.

Taking a large number of cases which lie before me, there are two points
which are common to nearly all of them. One is that children claim to
see these creatures far more frequently than adults. This may possibly
come from greater sensitiveness of apprehension, or it may depend upon
these

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

little entities having less fear of molestation from the children. The
other is, that more cases are recorded in which they have been seen in
the still, shimmering hours of a very hot day than at any other time.
"The action of the sun upon the brain," says the sceptic. Possibly--and
also possibly not. If it were a question of raising the slower
vibrations of our surroundings one could imagine that still, silent heat
would be the very condition which might favour such a change. What is
the mirage of the desert? What is that scene of hills and lakes which a
whole caravan can see while it faces in a direction where for a thousand
miles of desert there is neither hill nor lake, nor any cloud or
moisture to produce refraction? I can ask the question, but I do not
venture to give an answer. It is clearly a phenomenon which is not to be
confused with the erect or often inverted image which is seen in a land
of clouds and of moisture.

If the confidence of children can be gained and they are led to speak
freely, it is surprising how many claim to have seen fairies. My younger
family consists of two little boys

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

and one small girl, very truthful children, each of whom tells with
detail the exact circumstances and appearance of the creature. To each
it happened only once, and in each case it was a single little figure,
twice in the garden, once in the nursery. Inquiry among friends shows
that many children have had the same experience, but they close up at
once when met by ridicule and incredulity. Sometimes the shapes are
unlike those which they would have gathered from picture-books. "Fairies
are like nuts and moss," says one child in Lady Glenconner's charming
study of family life. My own children differ in the height of the
creatures, which may well vary, but in their dress they are certainly
not unlike the conventional idea, which, after all, may also be the true
one.

There are many people who have a recollection of these experiences of
their youth, and try afterwards to explain them away on material grounds
which do not seem adequate or reasonable. Thus in his excellent book on
folk-lore, the Rev. S. Baring-Gould gives us a personal experience which
illustrates

 

<span id="img_12800"></span>

[![A VIEW OF THE BECK IN 1921](tn/12800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12800.jpg)  
A VIEW OF THE BECK IN 1921  

<span id="img_12900"></span>

[![THE TWO GIRLS NEAR THE SPOT WHERE THE LEAPING FAIRY WAS TAKEN IN
1920](tn/12900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12900.jpg)  
THE TWO GIRLS NEAR THE SPOT WHERE THE LEAPING FAIRY WAS TAKEN IN 1920  

 

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

several of the points already mentioned. "In the year 1838," he says,
"when I was a small boy of four years old, we were driving to Montpelier
on a hot summer day over the long straight road that traverses a
pebble-and-rubble-strewn plain, on which grows nothing save a few
aromatic herbs. I was sitting on the box with my father when, to my
great surprise, I saw legions of dwarfs of about two feet high running
along beside the horses; some sat laughing on the pole, some were
scrambling up the harness to get on the backs of the horses. I remarked
to my father what I saw, when he abruptly stopped the carriage and put
me inside beside my mother, where, the conveyance being closed, I was
out of the sun. The effect was that, little by little, the host of imps
diminished in number till they disappeared altogether."

Here, certainly, the advocates of sunstroke have a strong, though by no
means a final, case. Mr. Baring-Gould's next illustration is a sounder
one.

"When my wife was a girl of fifteen," he says, "she was walking down a
lane in Yorkshire,

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

between green hedges, when she saw seated in one of the privet hedges a
little green man, perfectly well made, who looked at her with his beady
black eyes. He was about a foot or fifteen inches high. She was so
frightened that she ran home. She remembers that it was a summer day."

A girl of fifteen is old enough to be a good witness, and her flight and
the clear detail of her memory point to a real experience. Again we have
the suggestion of a hot day.

Baring-Gould has yet a third case. "One day a son of mine," he says,
"was sent into the garden to pick pea-pods for the cook to shell for
dinner. Presently he rushed into the house as white as chalk to say that
while he was thus engaged, and standing between the rows of peas, he saw
a little man wearing a red cap, a green jacket, and brown knee-breeches,
whose face was old and wan, and who had a grey beard and eyes as black
and hard as sloes. He stared so intently at the boy that the latter took
to his heels."

Here, again, the pea-pods show that it was summer, and probably in the
heat of the day. Once again the detail is very exact

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

and corresponds closely, as I shall presently show, to some independent
accounts. Mr. Baring-Gould is inclined to put all these down to the heat
conjuring up the familiar pictures of fairy books, but some further
evidence may cause the reader to doubt this explanation.

Let us compare with these stories the very direct evidence of Mrs.
Violet Tweedale, whose courage in making public the result of her own
remarkable psychic faculties should meet with recognition from every
student of the subject. Our descendants will hardly realize the
difficulty which now exists of getting first-hand evidence with names
attached, for they will have outgrown the state when the cry of "fake"
and "fraud" and "dupe" is raised at once against any observer, however
honourable and moderate, by people who know little or nothing of the
subject. Mrs. Tweedale says:

"I had a wonderful little experience some five years ago which proved to
me the existence of fairies. One summer afternoon I was walking alone
along the avenue of Lupton

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

\[paragraph continues\] House, Devonshire. It was an absolutely still
day--not a leaf moving, and all Nature seemed to sleep in the hot
sunshine. A few yards in front of me my eye was attracted by the violent
movements of a single long blade-like leaf of a wild iris. This leaf was
swinging and bending energetically, while the rest of the plant was
motionless. Expecting to see a field-mouse astride it, I stepped very
softly up to it. What was my delight to see a tiny green man. He was
about five inches long, and was swinging back-downwards. His tiny green
feet, which appeared to be green-booted, were crossed over the leaf, and
his hands, raised behind his head, also held the blade. I had a vision
of a merry little face and something red in the form of a cap on the
Lead. For a full minute he remained in view, swinging on the leaf. Then
he vanished. Since then I have several times seen a single leaf moving
violently while the rest of the plant remained motionless, but I have
never again been able to see the cause of the movement."

Here the dress of the fairy, green jacket and red cap, is exactly the
same as was

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

described independently by Baring-Gould's son, and again we have the
elements of heat and stillness. It may be fairly answered that many
artists have drawn the fairies in such a dress, and that the colours may
in this way have been impressed upon the minds of both observers. In the
bending iris we have something objective, however, which cannot easily
be explained away as a cerebral hallucination, and the whole incident
seems to me an impressive piece of evidence.

A lady with whom I have corresponded, Mrs. H., who is engaged in
organizing work of the most responsible kind, has had an experience
which resembles that of Mrs. Tweedale. "My only sight of a fairy," she
says, "was in a large wood in West Sussex, about nine years ago. He was
a little creature about half a foot high, dressed in leaves. The
remarkable thing about his face was that no soul looked through his
eyes. He was playing about in long grass and flowers in an open space."
Once again summer is indicated. The length and colour of the creature
correspond with Mrs. Tweedale's

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

account, while the lack of soul in the eyes may be compared with the
"hard" eyes described by young Baring-Gould.

One of the most gifted clairvoyants in England was the late Mr. Turvey,
of Bournemouth, whose book, *The Beginnings of Seership*, should be in
the library of every student. Mr. Lonsdale, of Bournemouth, is also a
well-known sensitive. The latter has given me the following account of
an incident which he observed some years ago in the presence of Mr.
Turvey.

"I was sitting," says Mr. Lonsdale, "in his company in his garden at
Branksome Park. We sat in a hut which had an open front looking on to
the lawn. We had been perfectly quiet for some time, neither talking nor
moving, as was often our habit. Suddenly I was conscious of a movement
on the edge of the lawn, which on that side went up to a grove of pine
trees. Looking closely, I saw several little figures dressed in brown
peering through the bushes. They remained quiet for a few minutes and
then disappeared. In a few seconds a dozen or more small people, about
two feet in height, in

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

bright clothes and with radiant faces, ran on to the lawn, dancing
hither and thither. I glanced at Turvey to see if he saw anything, and
whispered, 'Do you see them?' He nodded. These fairies played about,
gradually approaching the hut. One little fellow, bolder than the
others, came to a croquet hoop close to the hut and, using the hoop as a
horizontal bar, turned round and round it, much to our amusement. Some
of the others watched him, while others danced about, not in any set
dance, but seemingly moving in sheer joy. This continued for four or
five minutes, when suddenly, evidently in response to some signal or
warning from those dressed in brown, who had remained at the edge of the
lawn, they all ran into the wood. Just then a maid appeared coming from
the house with tea. Never was tea so unwelcome, as evidently its
appearance was the cause of the disappearance of our little visitors."
Mr. Lonsdale adds, "I have seen fairies several times in the New Forest,
but never so clearly as this." Here also the scene is laid in the heat
of a summer day, and the division of the fairies into two different
sorts<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

is remarkably borne out by the general descriptions.

Knowing Mr. Lonsdale as I do to be a responsible, well-balanced, and
honourable man, I find such evidence as this very hard to put to one
side. Here at least the sunstroke hypothesis is negatived, since both
men sat in the shade of the hut and corroborated the observation of the
other. On the other hand, each of the men, like Mrs. Tweedale, was
supernormal in psychic development, so that it might well happen that
the maid, for example, would not have seen the fairies, even if she had
arrived earlier upon the scene.

I know a gentleman belonging to one of the learned professions whose
career as, let us say, a surgeon would not be helped if this article
were to connect him with fairy lore. As a matter of fact, in spite of
his solemn avocations and his practical and virile character, he seems
to be endowed with that faculty--let us call it the appreciation of
higher vibrations--which opens up so wonderful a door to its possessor.
He claims, or rather he admits, for he is reticent upon

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

the subject, that he has carried this power of perception on from
childhood, and his surprise is not so much at what he sees as at the
failure of others to see the same thing. To show that it is not
subjective, he tells the story that on one occasion, while traversing a
field, he saw a little creature which beckoned eagerly that he should
follow. He did so, and presently saw his guide pointing with an air of
importance to the ground. There, between the furrows, lay a flint
arrow-head which he carried home with him as a souvenir of the
adventure.

Another friend of mine who claims to have the power of seeing fairies is
Mr. Tom Tyrrell, the famous medium, whose clairvoyance and general
psychic, gifts are of the strongest character. I cannot easily forget
how one evening in a Yorkshire hotel a storm of raps, sounding very much
as if someone were cracking their fingers and thumb, broke out around
his head, and how with his coffee-cup in one hand he flapped vigorously
with the other to warn off his inopportune visitors. In answer to my
question about fairies he says, "Yes, I do see these little pixies or

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

fairies. I have seen them scores of times. But only in the woods and
when I do a little fasting. They are a very real presence to me. What
are they? I cannot say. I can never get nearer to the beggars than four
or five yards. They seem afraid of me, and then scamper off up the trees
like squirrels. I dare say if I were to go in the woods oftener I would
perhaps gain their confidence more. They are certainly like human
beings, only very small, say about twelve or fifteen inches high. I have
noticed they are brown in colour, with fairly large heads and
standing-up ears, out of proportion to the size of their bodies, and
bandy legs. I am speaking of what I see. I have never come across any
other clairvoyant who has seen them, though I have read that many do so.
Probably they have something to do with Nature processes. The males have
very short hair, and the females have rather long, straight hair."

The idea that these little creatures are occupied in consciously
furthering Nature's projects--very much, I suppose, as the bee carries
pollen--is repeated by the learned

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Dr. Vanstone, who combines great knowledge of
theory with some considerable experience, though a high development of
intellect is, in spite of Swedenborg's example, a bar to psychic
perception. This would show, if it is correct, that we may have to
return to the classical conception of something in the nature of naiads
and fauns and spirits of the trees and groves. Dr. Vanstone, whose
experiences are on the borderland between what is objective and what is
sensed without being actually seen, writes to me: "I have been
distinctly aware of minute intelligent beings in connection with the
evolution of plant forces, particularly in certain localities; for
instance, in Ecclesbourne Glen. Pond life yields to me the largest and
best sense of fairy life, and not the floral world. I may be only
clothing my subjective consciousness with unreal objective imaginations,
but they are real to me as sentient, intelligent beings, able to
communicate with us in varying distinctness. I am inclined to think that
elemental beings are engaged, like factory hands, in facilitating the
operation of Nature's laws."

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

Another gentleman who claims to have this most remarkable gift is Mr.
Tom Charman, who builds for himself a shelter in the New Forest and
hunts for fairies as an entomologist would for butterflies. In answer to
my inquiries, he tells me that the power of vision came to him in
childhood, but left him for many years, varying in proportion with his
own nearness to Nature. According to this seer, the creatures are of
many sizes, varying from a few inches to several feet. They are male,
female, and children. He has not heard them utter sounds, but believes
that they do so, of finer quality than we can hear. They are visible by
night as well as by day, and show small lights about the same size as
glow-worms. They dress in all sorts of ways. Such is Mr. Charman's
account.

It is, of course, easy for us who respond only to the more material
vibrations to declare that all these seers are self-deluded, or are the
victims of some mental twist. It is difficult for them to defend
themselves from such a charge. It is, however, to be urged upon the
other side that these numerous testimonies come from people who are very

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

solid and practical and successful in the affairs of life. One is a
distinguished writer, another an ophthalmic authority, a third a
successful professional man, a fourth a lady engaged on public service,
and so on. To waive aside the evidence of such people on the ground that
it does not correspond with our own experience is an act of mental
arrogance which no wise man will commit.

It is interesting to compare these various contemporary and first-hand
accounts of the impressions which all these witnesses have received. I
have already pointed out that the higher vibrations which we associate
with hot sunshine, and which we actually seem to see in the shimmer of
noontide, is associated with many of the episodes. Apart from this it
must be admitted that the evidence is on the whole irregular. We have
creatures described which range from five inches to two and a half feet.
An advocate of the fairies might say that, since the tradition has
always been that they procreate as human beings do, we are dealing with
them in every stage of growth, which accounts for the varying size.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

It seems to me, however, that a better case could be made out if it were
pleaded that there have always been many different races of fairyland,
and that samples of these races may greatly differ from each other, and
may inhabit varying spots; so that an observer like Mr. Tyrrell, for
example, may always have seen woodland elves, which bear no resemblance
to gnomes or goblins. The monkey-like, brown-clad creatures of my
professional friend, which were over two feet high, compare very closely
with the creatures which little Baring-Gould saw climbing on to the
horses. In both cases these taller fairies were reported from flat,
plain-like locations; while the little old-man type varies completely
from the dancing little feminine elf so beloved by Shakespeare. In the
experience of Mr. Turvey and Mr. Lonsdale, two different types engaged
in different tasks were actually seen at the same moment, the one being
bright-coloured dancing elves, while the other were the brown-coloured
attendants who guarded them.

The claim that the fairy rings so often seen in meadow or marshland are
caused by

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

the beat of fairy feet is certainly untenable, as they unquestionably
come from fungi such as *Agaricus gambosus* or *Marasmius oreades*,
which grow from a centre, continually deserting the exhausted ground,
and spreading to that which is fresh. In this way a complete circle is
formed, which may be quite small or may be of twelve-foot diameter.
These circles appear just as often in woods from the same cause, but are
smothered over by the decayed leaves among which the fungi grow. But
though the fairies most certainly do not produce the rings, it might be
asserted, and could not be denied, that the rings once formed, whatever
their cause, would offer a very charming course for a circular
ring-a-ring dance. Certainly from all time these circles have been
associated with the gambols of the little people.

After these modern instances one is inclined to read with a little more
gravity the account which our ancestors gave of these creatures; for,
however fanciful in parts, it still may have had some core of truth. I
say "our ancestors," but as a matter of fact

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

there are shepherds on the South Downs to this day who will throw a bit
of their bread and cheese over their shoulders at dinnertime for the
little folks to consume. All over the United Kingdom, and especially in
Wales and Ireland, the belief is largely held among those folks who are
nearest to Nature. First of all it was always supposed that they lived
within the earth. This was natural enough, since a sudden disappearance
of a solid body could only be understood in that way. On the whole,
their description was not grotesque, and fits easily into its place amid
the examples already given. "They were of small stature," says one Welsh
authority, quoted in Mrs. Lewes's *Stranger than Fiction*, "towards two
feet in height, and their horses of the size of hares. Their clothes
were generally white, but on certain occasions they have been seen
dressed in green. Their gait was lively, and ardent and loving was their
glance. . . . They were peaceful and kindly among themselves, diverting
in their tricks, and charming in their walk and dancing. " This mention
of horses is somewhat out of the picture,

 

<span id="img_14400"></span>

[![THE PHOTOGRAPH FROM CANADA](tn/14400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14400.jpg)  
THE PHOTOGRAPH FROM CANADA  

 

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

but all the rest seems corroborative of what has already been stated.

One of the best of the ancient accounts is that of the Rev. R. Kirk, who
occupied a parish at Monteith, on the edge of the Highlands, and wrote a
pamphlet called *The Secret Commonwealth*, about the year 1680. He had
very clear and definite ideas about these little creatures, and he was
by no means a visionary, but a man of considerable parts, who was chosen
afterwards to translate the Bible into Erse. His information about
fairies tallies very well with that of the Welshman quoted above. He
slips up in imagining that flint arrow-heads are indeed "fairy-bolts,"
but otherwise his contentions agree very well with our modern instances.
They have tribes and orders, according to this Scottish clergyman. They
eat. They converse in a thin, whistling sort of language. They have
children, deaths, and burials. They are fond of frolic dancing. They
have a regular state and polity, with rulers, laws, quarrels, and even
battles. They are irresponsible creatures, not hostile to the human race
unless they have reason

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

to be angry, but even inclined to be helpful, since some of them, the
brownies, are, by universal tradition, ready to aid in the household
work if the family has known how to engage their affection.

An exactly similar account comes from Ireland, though the little folk
seem to have imbibed the spirit of the island to the extent of being
more mercurial and irascible. There are many cases on record where they
are claimed to have shown their power, and to have taken revenge for
some slight. In the *Larne Reporter* of March 31, 1866, as quoted in
*True Irish Ghost Stories*, there is an account of how a stone which the
fairies claimed having been built into a house, the inhabitants were
bombarded with stones by invisible assailants by day and night, the
missiles hurting no one, but causing great annoyance. These stories of
stone-throwing are so common, and present such similar well-attested
features in cases coming from every part of the world, that they may be
accepted as a recognized preternatural phenomenon, whether it be the
fairies or some other form of mischievous psychic

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

force which caused the bombardment. The volume already quoted gives
another remarkable case, where a farmer, having built a house upon what
was really a fairy right-of-way between two "raths" or fairy mounds, was
exposed to such persecution by noises and other disturbances that his
family was at last driven out, and had to take refuge in the smaller
house which they had previously occupied. This story is narrated by a
correspondent from Wexford, who says that he examined the facts himself,
examined the deserted house, cross-examined the owner, and satisfied
himself that there were two raths in the vicinity, and that the house
was in a dead-line between them.

I have particulars of a case in West Sussex which is analogous, and
which I have been able to trace to the very lady to whom it happened.
This lady desired to make a rock-garden, and for this purpose got some
large boulders from a field hard by, which had always been known as the
pixie stones, and built them into her new rockery. One summer evening
this lady saw a tiny grey woman sitting on one of the boulders. The

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

little creature slipped away when she knew that she had been observed.
Several times she appeared upon the stones. Later the people in the
village asked if the stones might be moved back to the field, "as," they
said, "they are the pixie stones, and if they are removed from their
place, misfortunes will happen to the village." The stones were
restored.

But supposing that they actually do exist, what *are* these creatures?
That is a subject upon which we can speculate only with more or less
plausibility. Mr. David Gow, editor of *Light*, and a considerable
authority upon psychic matters, had first formed the opinion that they
were simply ordinary human spirits, seen, as it were, at the wrong end
of a clairvoyant telescope, and therefore very minute. A study of the
detailed accounts of their varied experience caused him to alter his
view, and to conclude that they are really life forms which have
developed along some separate line of evolution, and which for some
morphological reason have assumed human shape in the strange way in
which Nature reproduces her types like the figures

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

on the mandrake root or the frost ferns upon the window.

In a remarkable book, *A Wanderer in the Spirit Lands*, published in
1896, the author, Mr. Farnese, under inspiration gives an account of
many mysteries, including that of fairies. What he says fits in very
closely with the facts that have been put forward, and goes beyond them.
He says, speaking of elementals: "Some are in appearance like the gnomes
and elves who are said to inhabit mountain caverns. Such, too, are the
fairies whom men have seen in lonely and secluded places. Some of these
beings are of a very low order of life, almost like the higher order of
plants, save that they possess independent motion. Others are very
lively and full of grotesque, unmeaning tricks. . . . As nations advance
and grow more spiritual these lower forms of life die out from the
astral plane of that earth's sphere, and succeeding generations begin at
first to doubt and then to deny that they ever had any existence. " This
is one plausible way of explaining the disappearance of the faun, the
dryad, the naiad, and all the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

creatures which are alluded to with such familiarity in the classics of
Greece and Rome.

One may well ask what connection has this fairy-lore with the general
scheme of psychic philosophy? The connection is slight and indirect,
consisting only in the fact that anything which widens our conceptions
of the possible, and shakes us out of our time-rutted lines of thought,
helps us to regain our elasticity of mind, and thus to be more open to
new philosophies. The fairy question is infinitely small and unimportant
compared to the question of our own fate and that of the whole human
race. The evidence also is very much less impressive, though, as I trust
I have shown, it is not entirely negligible. These creatures are in any
case remote from us, and their existence is of little more real
importance than that of strange animals or plants. At the same time, the
perennial mystery why so many "flowers are born to blush unseen," and
why Nature should be so lavish with gifts which human beings cannot use,
would be solved if we understood that there were other orders of being

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

which used the same earth and shared its blessings. It is at the lowest
an interesting speculation which gives an added charm to the silence of
the woods and the wilderness of the moorland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Some Subsequent Cases](cof10)
