[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Celtic
Fairies](../../celt/index.htm#fairies)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cof05)  [Next](cof07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### CHAPTER III

### RECEPTION OF THE FIRST PHOTOGRAPHS

Though I was out of England at the time, I was able, even in Australia,
to realize that the appearance of the first photographs in the *Strand
Magazine* had caused very great interest. The press comments were as a
rule cautious but not unsympathetic. The old cry of "Fake! " was less
conspicuous than I had expected, but for some years the press has been
slowly widening its views upon psychic matters, and is not so inclined
as of old to attribute every new manifestation to fraud. Some of the
Yorkshire papers had made elaborate inquiries, and I am told that
photographers for a considerable radius from the house were
cross-questioned to find if they were accomplices. *Truth*, which is
obsessed by the idea that the whole spiritualistic movement and
everything connected

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

with it is one huge, senseless conspiracy to deceive, concocted by
knaves and accepted by fools, had the usual contemptuous and
contemptible articles, which ended by a prayer to, Elsie that she should
finish her fun and let the public know how it really was done. The best
of the critical attacks was in the *Westminster Gazette*, who sent a
special commissioner to unravel the mystery, and published the result on
January 12, 1921. By kind permission I reproduce the article:

DO FAIRIES EXIST?

INVESTIGATION IN A YORKSHIRE VALLEY

COTTINGLEY'S MYSTERY

STORY OF THE GIRL WHO TOOK THE SNAPSHOT

The publication of photographs of fairies --or, to be more explicit, one
photograph of fairies and another of a gnome--playing round children has
aroused considerable interest, not only in Yorkshire, where the beings
are said to exist, but throughout the country.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

The story, mysterious as it was when first told, became even more
enigmatical by reason of the fact that Sir A. Conan Doyle made use of
fictitious names in his narrative in the *Strand Magazine* in order, as
he says, to prevent the lives of the people concerned being interrupted
by callers and correspondence. That he has failed to do. I am afraid Sir
Conan does not know Yorkshire people, particularly those of the dales,
because any attempt to hide identity immediately arouses their
suspicions, if it does not go so far as to condemn the writer for his
lack of frankness.

It is not surprising, therefore, that his story is accepted with
reserve. Each person to whom I spoke of the subject during my brief
sojourn in Yorkshire dismissed the matter curtly as being untrue. It has
been the principal topic of conversation for weeks, mainly because
identity had been discovered.

My mission to Yorkshire was to secure evidence, if possible, which would
prove or disprove the claim that fairies existed. I frankly confess that
I failed.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

The particular fairyland is a picturesque little spot off the beaten
track, two or three miles from Bingley. Here is a small village called
Cottingley, almost hidden in a break in the upland, through which
tumbles a tiny stream, known as Cottingley Beck, on its way to the Aire,
less than a mile away. The "heroine" of Sir Conan Doyle's story is Miss
Elsie Wright, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) who resides with her
parents at 31 Lynwood Terrace. The little stream runs past the back of
the house, and the photographs were taken not more than a hundred yards
away. When Miss Wright made the acquaintance of the fairies she was
accompanied by her cousin, Frances Griffiths, who resides at Dean Road,
Scarborough.

One photograph, taken by Miss Wright in the summer of 1917, when she was
sixteen, shows her cousin, then a child of ten, with a group of four
fairies dancing in the air before her, and in the other, taken some
months afterwards, Elsie, seated on the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

grass, has a quaint gnome dancing beside her.

There are certain facts which stand out clearly and which none of the
evidence I was able to obtain could shake. No other people have seen the
fairies, though everybody in the little village knew of their alleged
existence; when Elsie took the photograph she was unacquainted with the
use of a camera, and succeeded at the first attempt; the girls did not
invite a third person to see the wonderful visitors, and no attempt was
made to make the discovery public.

First I interviewed Mrs. Wright, who, without hesitation, narrated the
whole of the circumstances without adding any comment. The girls, she
said, would spend the whole of the day in the narrow valley, even taking
their lunch with them, though they were within a stone's throw of the
house. Elsie was not robust, and did not work during the summer months,
so that she could derive as much benefit as possible from playing in the
open. She had often talked about seeing the fairies, but her parents
considered it was

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

nothing more than childish fancy, and let it pass. Mr. Wright came into
possession of a small camera in 1917, and one Saturday afternoon yielded
to the persistent entreaties of his daughter and allowed her to take it
out. He placed one plate in position, and explained to her how to take a
"snap." The children went away in high glee and returned in less than an
hour, requesting Mr. Wright to develop the plate. While this was being
done Elsie noticed that the fairies were beginning to show, and
exclaimed in an excited tone to her cousin, "Oh, Frances, the fairies
are on the plate!" The second photograph was equally successful, and a
few prints from each plate were given to friends as curiosities about a
year ago. They evidently attracted little notice until one was shown to
some of the delegates at a Theosophical Congress in Harrogate last
summer.

Mrs. Wright certainly gave me the impression that she had no desire to
keep anything back, and answered my questions quite frankly. She told me
that Elsie had always been a truthful girl, and there were

 

<span id="img_06400"></span>

[![ELSIE SEATED ON THE BANK ON WHICH THE FAIRIES WERE DANCING IN 1917
(PHOTO 1920)](tn/06400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06400.jpg)  
ELSIE SEATED ON THE BANK ON WHICH THE FAIRIES WERE DANCING IN 1917
(PHOTO 1920)  

<span id="img_06401"></span>

[![THE FALL OF WATER JUST ABOVE THE SITE OF LAST
PHOTOGRAPH](tn/06401.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06401.jpg)  
THE FALL OF WATER JUST ABOVE THE SITE OF LAST PHOTOGRAPH  

<span id="img_06500"></span>

[![C. FRANCES AND THE LEAPING FAIRY](tn/06500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06500.jpg)  
C. FRANCES AND THE LEAPING FAIRY  

Photograph taken by Elsie in August, 1920. "Cameo" camera. Distance, 3
ft. Time, 1/50th sec. This negative and the two following (D and E) have
been as strictly examined as the earlier ones, and similarly disclose no
trace of being other than perfectly genuine photographs. Also they
proved to have been taken from the packet given them, each plate having
been privately marked unknown to the girls.

 

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

neighbours who accepted the story of the fairies simply on the strength
of their knowledge of her. I asked about Elsie's career, and her mother
said that after she left school she worked a few months for a
photographer in Manningham Lane, Bradford, but did not care for running
errands most of the day. The only other work she did there was
"spotting." Neither occupation was likely to teach a fourteen-year-old
girl how to "fake" a plate. From there she went to a jeweller's shop,
but her stay there was not prolonged. For many months immediately prior
to taking the first photograph she was at home and did not associate
with anyone who possessed a camera.

At that time her father knew little of photography, "only what he had
picked up by dodging about with the camera," as he put it, and any
suggestion that he had faked the plate must be dismissed.

When he came home from the neighbouring mill, and was told the nature of
my errand, he said he was "fed up" with the whole business, and had
nothing else to tell. However, he detailed the story I had already

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

heard from his wife, agreeing in every particular, and Elsie's account,
given to me in Bradford, added nothing. Thus I had the information from
the three members of the family at different times, and without
variation. The parents confessed they had some difficulty in accepting
the photographs as genuine and even questioned the girls as to how they
faked them. The children persisted in their story, and denied any act of
dishonesty. Then they "let it go at that." Even now their belief in the
existence of the fairies is merely an acceptance of the statements of
their daughter and her cousin.

I ascertained that Elsie was described by her late schoolmaster as being
"dreamy," and her mother said that anything imaginative appealed to her.
As to whether she could have drawn the fairies when she was sixteen I am
doubtful. Lately she has taken up water-colour drawing, and her work,
which I carefully examined, does not reveal that ability in a marked
degree, though she possesses a remarkable knowledge of colour for an
untrained artist.

Sir A. Conan Doyle says that at first he

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

was not convinced that the fairies were not thought-forms conjured up by
the imagination or expectation of the seers. Mr. E. L. Gardner, a member
of the Executive Committee of the Theosophical Society, who made an
investigation on the spot and also interviewed all the members of the
family, records his opinion that the photographs are genuine.

Later in the day I went to Bradford, and at Sharpe's Christmas Card
Manufactory saw Miss Wright. She was working in an upper room, and at
first refused to see me, sending a message to the effect that she did
not desire to be interviewed. A second request was successful, and she
appeared at a small counter at the entrance to the works.

She is a tall, slim girl, with a wealth of auburn hair, through which a
narrow gold band, circling her head, was entwined.

Like her parents, she just said she had nothing to say about the
photographs, and, singularly enough, used the same expression as her
father and mother--"I am 'fed up' with the thing."

She gradually became communicative, and

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

told me how she came to take the first photograph.

Asked where the fairies came from, she replied that she did not know.

"Did you see them come?" I asked; and on receiving an affirmative reply,
suggested that she must have noticed where they came from.

Miss Wright hesitated, and laughingly answered, "I can't say." She was
equally at a loss to explain where they went after dancing near her, and
was embarrassed when I pressed for a fuller explanation. Two or three
questions went unanswered, and my suggestion that they must have "simply
vanished into the air" drew the monosyllabic reply, "Yes." They did not
speak to her, she said, nor did she speak to them.

When she had been with her cousin she had often seen them before. They
were only kiddies when they first saw them, she remarked, and did not
tell anybody.

"But," I went on, "it is natural to expect that a child, seeing fairies
for the first time, would tell its mother." Her answer was to

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

repeat that she did not tell anybody. The first occasion on which
fairies were seen, it transpired, was in 1915.

In reply to further questions, Miss Wright said she had seen them since,
and had photographed them, and the plates were in the possession of Mr.
Gardner. Even after several prints of the first lot of fairies had been
given to friends, she did not inform anybody that she had seen them
again. The fact that nobody else in the village had seen them gave her
no surprise. She firmly believed that she and her cousin were the only
persons who had been so fortunate, and was equally convinced that nobody
else would be. "If anybody else were there," she said, "the fairies
would not come out."

Further questions put with the object of eliciting a reason for that
statement were only answered with smiles and a final significant remark,
"You don't understand."

Miss Wright still believes in the existence of the fairies, and is
looking forward to seeing them again in the coming summer.

The fairies of Cottingley, as they appeared to the two girls, are
fine-weather

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

elves, as Miss Wright said they appeared only when it was bright and
sunny; never when the weather was dull or wet.

The strangest part of the girl's story was her statement that in their
more recent appearances the fairies were more "transparent" than in 1916
and 1917, when they were "rather hard." Then she added the
qualification, "You see, we were young then." This she did not amplify,
though pressed to do so.

The hitherto obscure village promises to be the scene of many
pilgrimages during the coming summer. There is an old saying in
Yorkshire: "Ah'll believe what Ah see," which is still maintained as a
valuable maxim.

 

The general tone of this article makes it clear that the Commissioner
would very naturally have been well pleased to effect a *coup* by
showing up the whole concern. He was, however, a fair-minded and
intelligent man, and has easily exchanged the rôle of Counsel for the
Prosecution to that of a tolerant judge. It will be observed that he

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

brought out no new fact which had not already appeared in my article,
save the interesting point that this was absolutely the first photograph
which the children had ever taken in their lives. Is it conceivable that
under such circumstances they could have produced a picture which was
fraudulent and yet defied the examination of so many experts? Granting
the honesty of the father, which no one has ever impugned, Elsie could
only have done it by cut-out images, which must have been of exquisite
beauty, of many different models, fashioned and kept without the
knowledge of her parents, and capable of giving the impression of motion
when carefully examined by an expert. Surely this is a large order!

In the *Westminster* article it is clear that the writer has not had
much acquaintance with psychic research. His surprise that a young girl
should not know whence appearances come or whither they go, when they
are psychic forms materializing in her own peculiar aura, does not seem
reasonable. It is a familiar fact also that psychic phenomena are always
more active in warm

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

sunny weather than in damp or cold. Finally, the girl's remark that the
shapes were getting more diaphanous was a very suggestive one, for it is
with childhood that certain forms of mediumship are associated, and
there is always the tendency that, as the child becomes the woman, and
as the mind becomes more sophisticated and commonplace, the phase will
pass. The refining process can be observed in the second series of
pictures, especially in the little figure which is holding out the
flower. We fear that it has now completed itself, and that we shall have
no more demonstrations of fairy life from this particular source.

One line of attack upon the genuine character of the photographs was the
production of a fake, and the argument: "There, you see how good that
is, and yet it is an admitted fake. How can you be sure that yours are
not so also?" The fallacy of this reasoning lay in the fact that these
imitations were done by skilled performers, while the originals were by
untrained children. It is a repetition of the stale and rotten argument
by which the world has been befooled

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

so long, that because a conjurer under his own conditions can imitate
certain effects, therefore the effects themselves never existed.

It must be admitted that some of these attempts were very well done,
though none of them passed the scrutiny of Mr. Gardner or myself. The
best of them was by a lady photographer connected with the Bradford
Institute, Miss Ina Inman, whose production was so good that it caused
us for some weeks to regard it with an open mind. There was also a weird
but effective arrangement by Judge Docker, of Australia. In the case of
Miss Inman's elves, clever as they were, there was nothing of the
natural grace and freedom of movement which characterize the wonderful
Cottingley fairy group.

Among the more remarkable comments in the press was one from Mr. George
A. Wade in the *London Evening News* of December 8, 1920. It told of a
curious sequence of events in Yorkshire, and ran as follows:

 

Are there real fairies in the land to-day?

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The question has been raised by Sir Arthur Conan
Doyle, and there have been submitted photographs which purport to be
those of actual 'little people.'

"Experiences which have come within my own knowledge may help to throw a
little light on this question as to whether there are real fairies,
actual elves and gnomes, yet to be met with in the dales of Yorkshire,
where the photographs are asserted to have been taken.

"Whilst spending a day last year with my friend, Mr. Halliwell
Sutcliffe, the well-known novelist, who lives in that district, he told
me, to my intense surprise, that he personally knew a schoolmaster not
far from his home who had again and again insisted that he had seen,
talked with, and had played with real fairies in some meadows not far
away! The novelist mentioned this to me as an actual curious fact, for
which he, himself, had no explanation. But he said that the man was one
whose education, personality, and character made him worthy of
credence--a man not likely to harbour a delusion or to wish to deceive
others.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

"Whilst in the same district I was informed by a man whom I knew to be
thoroughly reliable that a young lady living in Skipton had mentioned to
him more than once that she often went up to ------ (a spot in the dales
the name of which he gave) to 'play and dance with the fairies!' When he
expressed astonishment at the statement she repeated it, and averred
that it was really true!

"In chatting about the matter with my friend, Mr. William Riley, the
author of *Windyridge*, *Netherleigh*, and *Jerry and Ben*, a writer who
knows the Yorkshire moors and dales intimately, Mr. Riley asserted that
though he had never seen actual fairies there, yet he knew several
trustworthy moorland people whose belief in them was unshakable and who
persisted against all contradiction that they themselves had many times
seen pixies at certain favoured spots in Upper Airedale and Wharfedale.

"When some time later an article of mine anent these things was
published in a Yorkshire newspaper, there came a letter from a

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

lady at a distance who stated that the account confirmed a strange
experience which she had when on holiday in the same dale up above
Skipton.

"She stated that one evening, when walking alone on the higher portion
of a slope of the hills, to her intense astonishment she saw in a meadow
close below her fairies and sprites playing and dancing in large
numbers. She imagined that she must be dreaming, or under some
hallucination, so she pinched herself and rubbed her eyes to make sure
that she was really awake. Convinced of this, she looked again, and
still unmistakably saw the 'little people.' She gave a full account of
how they played, of the long time she watched them, and how at length
they vanished. Without a doubt she was convinced of the truth of her
statement.

"What can we make of it all? My own mind is open, but it is difficult to
believe that so many persons, unknown to one another, should have
conspired to state what is false. It is a remarkable coincidence, if
nothing more, that the girls in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's account, the
schoolmaster mentioned

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

by Mr. Sutcliffe, the young woman who came from Skipton, and the lady
who wrote to the Yorkshire newspaper should all put the spot where the
fairies are to be seen almost within a mile or two of one another.

"Are there real fairies to be met with there?"

 

The most severe attack upon the fairy pictures seems to have been that
of Major Hall-Edwards, the famous authority upon radium, in the
*Birmingham Weekly Post*. He said:

 

"Sir Arthur Conan Doyle takes it for granted that these photographs are
real photographs of fairies, notwithstanding the fact that no evidence
has so far been put forward to show exactly how they were produced.
Anyone who has studied the extraordinary effects which have from time to
time been obtained by cinema operators must be aware that it is
possible, given time and opportunity, to produce by means of faked
photographs almost anything that can be imagined.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

"It is well to point out that the elder of the two girls has been
described by her mother as a most imaginative child, who has been in the
habit of drawing fairies for years, and who for a time was apprenticed
to a firm of photographers. In addition to this she has access to some
of the most beautiful dales and valleys, where the imagination of a
young person is easily quickened.

"One of the pictures represents the younger child leaning on her elbow
upon a bank, while a number of fairies are shown dancing around her. The
child does not look at the fairies, but is posing for the photograph in
the ordinary way. The reason given for her apparent disinterestedness in
the frolicsome elves is that she is used to the fairies, and was merely
interested in the camera.

"The picture in question could be 'faked' in two ways. Either the little
figures of the fairies were stuck upon a cardboard, cut out and placed
close to the sitter, when, of course, she would not be able to see them,
and the whole photograph produced on a marked plate; or the original
photograph,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

without 'fairies,' may have had stuck on it the figures of fairies cut
from some publication. This would then be rephotographed, and, if well
done, no photographer could swear that the second negative was not the
original one.

"Major Hall-Edwards went on to remark that great weight had been placed
upon the fact that the fairies in the photograph had transparent wings,
but that a tricky photographer could very easily reproduce such an
effect.

"'It is quite possible,' he observed, 'to cut off the transparent wings
of insects and paste them on a picture of fairies. It is easy to add the
transparent wings of large flies and so arrange them that portions of
the photograph can be viewed through the wings and thus obtain a very
realistic effect.'

"It has been pointed out that although the 'fairies' are represented as
if they were dancing--in fact they are definitely stated to be
dancing--there is no evidence of movement in the photographs. An
explanation of this has been given by the photographer

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

herself, who has told us that the movements of the fairies are
exceedingly slow and might be compared to the retarded-movement films
shown in the cinemas. This proves that the young lady possesses a very
considerable knowledge of photography.

"Millions of photographs have been taken by operators of different
ages--children and grown-ups--of country scenes and places which, we
have been taught, are the habitats of nymphs and elves; yet until the
arrival upon the scene of these two wonderful children the image of a
fairy has never been produced on a photographic plate. On the evidence I
have no hesitation in saying that these photographs could have been
'faked.' I criticize the attitude of those who declared there is
something supernatural in the circumstances attending the taking of
these pictures because, as a medical man, I believe that the inculcation
of such absurd ideas into the minds of children will result in later
life in manifestations of nervous disorder and mental disturbances.
Surely young children can be brought up to appreciate the beauties of
Nature without

 

<span id="img_08000"></span>

[![D. FAIRY OFFERING POSY OF HARE-BELLS TO ELSIE](tn/08000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08000.jpg)  
D. FAIRY OFFERING POSY OF HARE-BELLS TO ELSIE  

The fairy is standing almost still, poised on the bush leaves. The wings
are shot with yellow, and upper part of dress is very pale pink.

<span id="img_08100"></span>

[![E. FAIRIES AND THEIR SUN-BATH](tn/08100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08100.jpg)  
E. FAIRIES AND THEIR SUN-BATH  

This contains a feature that was quite unknown to the girls. The sheath
or cocoon appearing in the midst of the grasses had never been seen by
them before, and they had no idea of what it was. Fairy lovers and
observers describe it as a magnetic bath, woven very quickly by the
fairies, and used after dull weather and in the autumn especially.

 

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

their imagination being filled with exaggerated, if picturesque,
nonsense and misplaced sentiment."

 

To this Mr. Gardner answered:

"Major Hall-Edwards says 'no evidence has been put forward to show how
they were produced.' The least a would-be critic should do is surely to
read the report of the case. Sir A. Conan Doyle is asserted to have
taken it 'for granted that these photographs are real and genuine.' It
would be difficult to misrepresent the case more completely. The
negatives and contact prints were submitted to the most searching tests
known to photographic science by experts, many of whom were frankly
sceptical. They emerged as being unquestionably single-exposure plates
and, further, as bearing no evidence whatever in themselves of any trace
of the innumerable faking devices known. This did not clear them
entirely, for, as I have always remarked in my description of the
investigation, it is held possible by employing highly artistic and
skilled processes to produce similar negatives. Personally,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

should very much like to see this attempted seriously. The few that have
been done, though very much better than the crude examples Major
Hall-Edwards submits, break down hopelessly on simple analysis.

"The case resolved itself at an early stage into the examination of the
personal element and the motive for faked work. It was this that
occupied us so strenuously, for we fully realized the imperative need of
overwhelmingly satisfying proof of personal integrity before accepting
the photographs as genuine. This was carried through, and its
thoroughness may be estimated by the fact that, notwithstanding the
searching nature of the investigation that has followed the publication
of the village, names, etc., nothing even modifies my first report. I
need hardly point out that the strength of the case lies in its amazing
simplicity and the integrity of the family concerned. It is on the
photographic plus the personal evidence that the case stands.

"Into part of the criticism advanced by Major Hall-Edwards it will be
kinder, perhaps, not to enter. Seriously to suggest that

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

a visit to a cinema show and the use of an apt illustration implies 'a
very considerable knowledge of photography' is on a par with the
supposition that to be employed as an errand girl and help in a shop
indicates a high degree of skill in that profession! We are not quite so
credulous as that, nor were we able to believe that two children, alone
and unaided, could produce in half an hour a faked photograph of the
type of 'Alice and the Fairies.'"

 

In addition to this criticism by Major Hall-Edwards there came an attack
in *John o' London* from the distinguished writer Mr. Maurice Hewlett,
who raises some objections which were answered in Mr. Gardner's
subsequent reply. Mr. Hewlett's contention was as follows:

 

"The stage which Sir A. Conan Doyle has reached at present is one of
belief in the genuineness of what one may call the Carpenter
photographs, which showed the other day to the readers of the *Strand
Magazine* two ordinary girls in familiar intercourse

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

with winged beings, as near as can judge, about eighteen inches high. If
he believes in the photographs two inferences can be made, so to speak,
to stand up: one, that he must believe also in the existence of the
beings; two, that a mechanical operation, where human agency has done
nothing but prepare a plate, focus an object, press a button, and print
a picture, has rendered visible something which is not otherwise visible
to the common naked eye. That is really all Sir Arthur has to tell us.
He believes the photographs to be genuine. The rest follows. But why
does he believe it? Because the young ladies tell him that they are
genuine. Alas!

"Sir Arthur cannot, he tells us, go into Yorkshire himself to
cross-examine the young ladies, even if he wishes to cross-examine them,
which does not appear. However, he sends in his place a friend, Mr. E.
L. Gardner, also of hospitable mind, with settled opinions upon
theosophy and kindred subjects, but deficient, it would seem, in logical
faculty. Mr. Gardner has himself photographed in the place where the
young

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

ladies photographed each other, or thereabouts. No winged beings circled
about him, and one wonders why Mr. Gardner (*a*) was photographed, (*b*)
reproduced the photograph in the *Strand Magazine*.

"The only answer I can find is suggested to me by the appearance of the
Virgin and Child to certain shepherds in a peach-orchard at Verona. The
shepherds told their parish priest that the Virgin Mary had indeed
appeared to them on a moonlit night, had accepted a bowl of milk from
them, had then picked a peach from one of the trees and eaten it. The
priest visited the spot in their company, and in due course picked up a
peach-stone. That settled it. Obviously the Madonna had been really
there, for here was the peach-stone to prove it.

"I am driven to the conclusion that Mr. Gardner had himself photographed
on a particular spot in order to prove the genuineness of former
photographs taken there. The argument would run: The photographs were
taken on a certain spot; but I have been myself photographed on that
spot; therefore the photographs were genuine.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

\[paragraph continues\] There is a fallacy lurking, but it is a
hospitable fallacy; and luckily it doesn't very much matter.

"The line to take about a question of the sort is undoubtedly that of
least resistance. Which is the harder of belief, the faking of a
photograph or the objective existence of winged beings eighteen inches
high? Undoubtedly, to a plain man, the latter; but assume the former. If
such beings exist, if they are occasionally visible, and if a camera is
capable of revealing to all the world what is hidden from most people in
it, we are not yet able to say that the Carpenter photographs are
photographs of such beings. For we, observe, have not seen such beings.
True: but we have all seen photographs of beings in rapid motion-horses
racing, greyhounds coursing a hare, men running over a field, and so on.
We have seen pictures of these things, and we have seen photographs of
them; and the odd thing is that never, never by any chance does the
photograph of a running object in the least resemble a picture of it.

"The horse, dog, or main, in fact, in the

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

photograph does not look to be in motion at all. And rightly so, because
in the instant of being photographed *it was not in motion*. So
infinitely rapid is the action of light on the plate that it is possible
to isolate a fraction of time in a rapid flight and to record it.
Directly you combine a series of photographs in sequence, and set them
moving, you have a semblance of motion exactly like that which you have
in a picture.

"Now, the beings circling round a girl's head and shoulders in the
Carpenter photograph are in *picture flight*, and not in photographic
flight. That is certain. They are in the approved pictorial, or plastic,
convention of dancing. They are not well rendered by any means. They are
stiff compared with, let us say, the whirling gnomes on the outside
wrapper of *Punch*. They have very little of the wild, irresponsible
vagary of a butterfly. But they are an attempt to render an aerial
dance--pretty enough in a small way. The photographs are too small to
enable me to decide whether they are painted on cardboard or modelled in
the round; *but the figures are not moving*.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

"One other point, which may be called a small one--but in a matter of
the sort no point is a small one. I regard it as a certainty, as the
other plainly is. If the dancing figures had been dancing beings, really
there, the child in the photograph would have been looking at them, not
at the camera. I know children.

"And knowing children, and knowing that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle has legs,
I decide that the Miss Carpenters have pulled one of them. Meantime I
suggest to him that epochs are born, not made."

 

To which Mr. Gardner replied in the following issue:

"I could have wished that Mr. Maurice Hewlett's somewhat playful
criticism of the genuineness of the photographs of fairies appearing in
the *Strand Magazine* Christmas number had been more clearly defined.
The only serious point raised is the difference between photographic and
pictorial representation of motion--Mr. Hewlett maintaining that the
latter is in evidence in the photographs.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

"With regard to the separate photographs of the sites, surely the reason
for their inclusion is obvious. Photographic experts had stated that
though the two negatives revealed no trace of any faking process (such
as double exposure, painted figures on enlargements rephotographed,
set-up models in card or other material), still it could not be held to
be impossible to obtain the same class of result by very clever studio
work. Also, certain points that needed elucidation were the haze above
and at the side of the child's head, and the blurred appearance of the
waterfall as compared with the clarity of the figures, etc. An
inspection of the spots and photographs of their surroundings was surely
the only way to clear up some of these. As a matter of fact, the
waterfall proved to be about twenty feet behind the child, and hence out
of focus, and some large rocks at the same distance in the rear, at the
side of the fall, were found to be the cause of the haziness. The
separate photographs, of which only one is published of each place,
confirm entirely the genuineness

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

of the sites--not the genuineness of the fairies.

"In commenting on the photography of a moving object, Mr. Hewlett makes
the astonishing statement that at the instant of being photographed *it
is not in motion* (Mr. H.'s italics). I wonder when it is, and what
would happen if a camera was exposed then! Of course the moving object
is in motion during exposure, no matter whether the time be a fiftieth
or a millionth part of a second, though Mr. Hewlett is by no means the
only one to fall into this error. And each of the fairy figures in the
negative discloses signs of movement. This was one of the first points
determined.

"I admit at once, of course, that this does not meet the criticism that
the fairies display much more grace in action than is to be found in the
ordinary snapshot of a moving horse or man. But if we are here dealing
with fairies whose bodies must be presumed to be of a purely ethereal
and plastic nature, and not with skeleton-framed mammals at all, is it
such a very illogical mind that accepts the exquisite grace therein

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

found as a natural quality that is never absent? In view of the
overwhelming evidence of genuineness now in hand this seems to be the
truth.

"With regard to the last query raised--the child looking at the camera
instead of at the fairies--Alice was entirely unsophisticated respecting
the proper photographic attitude. For her, cameras were much more novel
than fairies, and never before had she seen one used so close to her.
Strange to us as it may seem, at the moment it interested her the most.
Apropos, would a faker, clever enough to produce such a photograph,
commit the elementary blunder of not posing his subject?"

Among other interesting and weighty opinions, which were in general
agreement with our contentions, was one by Mr. H. A. Staddon of
Goodmayes, a gentleman who had made a particular hobby of fakes in
photography. His report is too long and too technical for inclusion,
but, under the various headings of composition, dress, development,
density, lighting, poise, texture, plate, atmosphere, focus, halation,
he goes very

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

completely into the evidence, coming to the final conclusion that when
tried by all these tests the chances are not less than 80 per cent. in
favour of authenticity.

It may be added that in the course of exhibiting these photographs (in
the interests of the Theosophical bodies with which Mr. Gardner is
connected), it has sometimes occurred that the plates have been
enormously magnified upon the screen. In one instance, at Wakefield, the
powerful lantern used threw an exceptionally large picture on a huge
sheet. The operator, a very intelligent man who had taken a sceptical
attitude, was entirely converted to the truth of the photographs, for,
as he pointed out, such an enlargement would show the least trace of a
scissors irregularity or of any artificial detail, and would make it
absurd to suppose that a dummy figure could remain undetected. The lines
were always beautifully fine and unbroken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[62:1](cof06.htm#fr_0) From this time onwards the
real name Wright is used instead of Carpenter as in the original
article--the family having withdrawn their objection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Second Series](cof07)
