[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### TEXT ON FRONT COVER OF DUST JACKET

##### BOOKS OF POWER AND PROGRESS

IT is only a few years, not more than a quarter of a century, since
modern psychology began to proclaim the new science of human thought and
action, so that we have had but a short time to demonstrate what a more
intelligent application of our energies and forces can accomplish. But
already the evidence is coming in from all sources, revealing results
that frequently border upon the extraordinary. Man can do far more with
himself and his life than he has been doing in the past; he can call
into action, and successfully apply, far more ability, energy and worth
than his forefathers ever imagined.

It is the purpose of these books not only to discuss these greater
powers and possibilities in man, but also to present practical methods
through which they may be applied, and to encourage as many as possible
to study and apply these greater powers within them so that they may not
only become greater and richer and more worthy as individuals, but may
also become the forerunners of that higher and more wonderful race of
which we all have so fondly dreamed.

##### WHAT READERS SAY

"A great help and inspiration to me." *Montpelier, Miss*.

"The best books I have ever read. I am sorry I did not become interested
in your books years ago." *Los Angeles, Calif*.

"I recommend your writings to the whole human family. They are, indeed,
great." *New Orleans, La*.

"Such literature is doing great good in the world, truly an Emancipator
of the race from the old creeds and dogmas." *Los Angeles, Calif*.

"You are king of New Thought writers. Your works contain more
inspiration than all the others." *Memphis, Tenn*.

"I could not exchange them for all the other books in the house"
*Bridgeport, O*.

##### READ THE LARSON BOOKS

#### TEX ON FRONT DUST JACKET FLAP

##### My Ideal of Marriage

By CHRISTIAN D. LARSON, author of "Poise and Power," etc. 16mo, net 50c.
(postage extra).

When one undertakes to write something new about an institution so old
as marriage, one must, at least, have the courage of one's
convictions—plus something to say. The many readers of the Larson books
will be assured at the outset of these two assets. Their chief curiosity
will he as to how gently he will deal with this sacred theme. Mr. Larson
has taught in all his books that progress is the inevitable law of life,
and all that does not progress must be thrust aside. We are not
surprised, therefore, to find him stating that "among the many
institutions that will be affected directly and immediately by the great
changes that are rapidly coming over the world, the institution of
marriage is by no means the least important." Again he says, "Marriage
today does not measure up to .the new ideals of life; and the modern
home, with a few noble exceptions, does not possess those finer elements
that alone can lift the race to a higher level of conduct and existence.
A decided change, therefore, must come, both in the ideals of the home
and in the ideals of the marital state; but we must understand the
psychology of sex before we can proceed to bring about the change
required." The author, however, is not iconoclastic in the present book.
His .criticism is constructive, and as it is presented by a series of
logical steps it is hardly fair to make brief excerpts. Instead, the
reader is invited to follow for himself the arguments through which the
author reaches his "ideal." Whether or not one agrees, the book will
provide abundant food for thought.

Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York

TEX ON BACK DUST JACKET FLAP

##### In the Light of the Spirit

By CHRISTIAN D. LARSON, author of "Your Forces and How to Use Them,"
etc. 195 pages, 8vo, net $1.00 (postage extra).

With his accustomed sane and broad theology, Mr. Larson here presents' a
series of talks upon the spiritual life. He is especially interested in
the life of the hereafter, which, he points out, is bound up with the
now. "The true pathway of life is the eternal path of an endless
ascension—the soul rising ever and ever into higher and higher states of
existence. It is the path of wisdom and light, the path of freedom and
truth—the straight and narrow path—the path leading directly toward the
spiritual heights; but it is not a path of suffering. There is neither
suffering nor bondage upon this path. It is when we step outside this
path that we suffer."

The author divides his discussion into eighteen chapters: "Leave it to
God," "The Highest Prayer," "The Religion of the Soul," "The Secret of
Spiritual Power," and "Regions of Infinite Repose," are among suggestive
captions. To read the Larson books is to get a refreshing, common-sense
view of life's larger questions. He is not concerned with creeds and
isms. He pictures the soul as constantly expanding and therefore
requiring the broadest limits in its search for the truth. The final
life is the spiritual. When, therefore, "the human entity begins to
realize that the spiritual side is more real than the physical side,
consciousness will begin to function more definitely upon the spiritual
side; that is, life will he lived, not from the body, but from the soul;
and when we live in the soul, and from the soul, we will give expression
to an ever-increasing measure of life. wisdom and power."

Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York

### TEX ON BACK COVER OF JACKET FLAP

The following is a catalog of Larson's books which appeared on the back
cover of the dust jacket of the original 1912 edition. It is included
for completeness.—JBH

#### BOOKS BY CHRISTIAN D. LARSON

YOUR FORCES AND HOW TO USE THEM

This book will help you to think with your whole mind. $1.25 Net.

BRAINS AND HOW TO GET THEM

Declared by experts to be truly a remarkable book. $1.25 Net.

THE PATHWAY OF ROSES

Twenty-eight inspiring chapters on the finer things in human life. $1.25
Net.

HOW TO STAY WELL

On how to secure perfect health through the use of the higher powers.
$1.25

HOW TO STAY YOUNG

Learn to stay young; there is so much to learn, so much to live for.
$1.00 Net.

THE IDEAL MADE REAL

or Applied Metaphysics For Beginners. Chapters of instruction,
inspiration and power. $1.00 Net.

WHAT IS TRUTH

A book that will give to everybody a higher and a finer vision of real
truth. $1.00

HOW THE MIND WORKS

This is something we all must understand. Twenty chapters of invaluable
information $1.00 Net.

BUSINESS PSYCHOLOGY

A subject in which all wide-awake business men have become deeply
interested. $1.00 Net.

THINKING FOR RESULTS

How to use the wonderful powers of the mind for practical results in
every day 50c Net.

POISE AND POWER

Methods that will cure all nervousness, and increase your working
capacity. 50c Net.

THE GREAT WITHIN

The best book on the subconscious mind ever published. 50c Net.

THE HIDDEN SECRET

Something new on the wonderful power of faith—the faith that moves
mountains. 50c Net.

MASTERY OF FATE

We can change fate and control circumstances. This book explains how.
50c Net.

HOW GREAT MEN SUCCEED

A book that should be in the hands of every ambitious man or woman. 50c
Net.

SCIENTIFIC TRAINING OF CHILDREN

Invaluable information on a great and vital subject. 50c Net.

MASTERY OF SELF

The man who masters himself can master his destiny. 50c Net.

THE MIND CURE

The book you want if you want a strong mind, a well-balanced mind. 50c
Net.

PERFECT HEALTH

A scientific treatise on "The Highest Curative Power In Man." 50c Net.

ON THE HEIGHTS

For those who yearn for the lofty, the beautiful, the sublime. 50c Net.

JUST BE GLAD

If you want sunshine and gladness, this book will give you the secret.
50c Net.

NOTHING SUCCEEDS LIKE SUCCESS

A thoughtful exposition of the mainsprings of success. 16mo. 50c Net.

IN THE LIGHT OF THE SPIRIT

The answer to questions being asked by almost every one at the present
time. $1.00 Net.

MY IDEAL OF MARRIAGE

An elevating book. Should be in every family. 50c Net.

 

 

 
