[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu02)  [Next](yfhu04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# YOUR FORCES AND HOW TO USE THEM

### CHAPTER I

#### THE RULING PRINCIPLE IN MAN

The purpose of the following pages will be to work out the subject
chosen in the most thorough and practical manner; in brief, to analyze
the whole nature of man, find all the forces in his possession, whether
they be apparent or hidden, active or dormant, and to present methods
through which all those forces can be applied in making the life of each
individual richer, greater and better. To make every phase of this work
as useful as possible to the greatest number possible, not a single
statement will be made that all cannot understand, and not a single idea
will be presented that any one cannot apply to every-day life.

We all want to know what we actually possess both in the physical, the
mental and the spiritual, and we want to know how the elements and
forces within us can be applied in the most successful manner. It is
results in practical life that we want, and we are not

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

true to ourselves or the race until we learn to use the powers within us
so effectively, that the greatest results possible within the
possibilities of human nature are secured.

When we proceed with a scientific study of the subject, we find that the
problem before us is to know what is in us and how to use what is in us.
After much study of the powers in man, both conscious and subconscious,
we have come to the conclusion that if we only knew how to use these
powers, we could accomplish practically anything that we may have in
view, and not only realize our wants to the fullest degree, but also
reach even our highest goal. Though this may seem to be a strong
statement, nevertheless when we examine the whole nature of man, we are
compelled to admit that it is true even in its fullest sense, and that
therefore, not a single individual can fail to realize his wants and
reach his goal, after he has learned how to use the powers that are in
him. This is not mere speculation, nor is it simply a beautiful dream.
The more we study the lives of people who have achieved, and the more we
study our own experience every day, the more convinced we become that
there is no reason whatever why any individual should not realize all
his ambitions and much more..

The basis of this study will naturally be found in the understanding of
the whole nature of man, as we must know what we are, before we can know
and use what we inherently possess. In analyzing human nature,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

a number of methods have been employed, but there are only three in
particular that are of actual value for our present purpose. The first
of these declares that man is composed of ego, consciousness and form,
and though this analysis is the most complete, yet it is also the most
abstract, and is therefore not easily understood. The second analysis,
which is simpler, and which is employed almost exclusively by the
majority, declares that man is body, mind and soul; but as much as this
idea is thought of and spoken of, there are very few who actually
understand it. In fact, the usual conception of man as body, mind and
soul will have to be completely reversed in order to become absolutely
true. The third analysis, which is the simplest and the most
serviceable, declares that man is composed of individuality and
personality, and it is this conception of human nature that will
constitute the phases of our study in this work.

Before we pass to the more practical side of the subject, we shall find
it profitable to examine briefly these various ideas concerning the
nature of man; in fact, every part of our human analysis that refers to
the ego, simply must be understood if we are to learn how to use the
forces we possess, and the reason for this is found in the fact that the
ego is the **“I Am,”** the ruling principle in man, the center and
source of individuality, the originator of everything that takes place
in man, and that primary something

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

to which all other things in human nature are secondary.

When the average person employs the term "ego," he thinks that he is
dealing with something that is hidden so deeply in the abstract, that it
can make but little difference whether we understand it or not. This,
however, does not happen to be true, because it is the ego that must act
before any action can take place anywhere in the human system, and it is
the ego that must originate the new before any step in advance can be
taken. And in addition, it is extremely important to realize that the
power of will to control the forces we possess, depends directly upon
how fully conscious we are of the ego as the ruling principle within us.
We understand therefore, that it is absolutely necessary to associate
all thought, all feeling and all actions of mind or personality with the
ego, or what we shall hereafter speak of as the **“I Am.”**

The first step to be taken in this connection, is to recognize the **“I
Am”** in everything you do, and to think always of the **“I Am,”** as
being you—the supreme you. Whenever you think, realize that it is the
**“I Am”** that originated the thought. Whenever you act, realize that
it is the **“I Am”** that gives initiative to that action, and whenever
you think of yourself or try to be conscious of yourself, realize that
the **“I Am”** occupies the throne of your entire field of
consciousness.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

Another important essential is to affirm silently in your own mind that
you are the **“I Am,”** and as you affirm this statement, or as you
simply declare positively, **“I Am,”** think of the **“I Am”** as being
the ruling principle in your whole world, as being distinct and above
and superior to all else in your being, and as being you, yourself, in
the highest, largest, and most comprehensive sense. You thus lift
yourself up, so to speak, to the mountain top of masterful
individuality; you enthrone yourself; you become true to yourself; you
place yourself where you belong.

Through this practice you not only discover yourself to be the master of
your whole life, but you elevate all your conscious actions to that
lofty state in your consciousness that we may describe as the throne of
your being, or as that center of action within which the ruling **“I
Am”** lives and moves and has its being. If you wish to control and
direct the forces you possess, you must act from the throne of your
being, so to speak; or in other words, from that conscious point in your
mental world wherein all power of control, direction and initiative
proceeds; and this point of action is the center of the **“I Am.”** You
must act, not as a body, not as a personality, not as a mind, but as the
**“I Am,”** and the more fully you recognize the lofty position of the
**“I Am,”** the greater becomes your power to control and direct all
other things that you may possess. In brief, whenever

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

you think or act, you should feel that you stand with the **“I Am,”** at
the apex of mentality on the very heights of your existence, and you
should at the same time, realize that this **“I Am”** is you—the supreme
you. The more you practice these methods, the more you lift yourself up
above the limitations of mind and body, into the realization of your own
true position as a masterful individuality; in fact, you place yourself
where you belong, over and above everything in your organized existence.

When we examine the mind of the average person, we find that he usually
identifies himself with mind or body. He either thinks that he is body
or that he is mind, and therefore he can control neither mind nor body.
The **“I Am”** in his nature is submerged in a bundle of ideas, some of
which are true and some of which are not, and his thought is usually
controlled by those ideas without receiving any direction whatever from
that principle within him that alone was intended to give direction.
Such a man lives in the lower story of human existence but as we can
control life only when we give directions from the upper story, we
discover just why the average person neither understands his forces nor
has the power to use them. He must first elevate himself to the upper
story of the human structure, and the first and most important step to
be taken in this direction is to recognize the **“I Am”** as the ruling
principle, and that the **“I Am”** is you.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

Another method that will be found highly important in this connection is
to take a few moments every day and try to feel that you—the **“I
Am”**—are not only above mind and body, but in a certain sense, distinct
from mind and body; in fact, try to isolate the **“I Am”** for a few
moments every day from the rest of your organized being. This practice
will give you what may be termed a perfect consciousness of your own
individual **“I Am,”** and as you gain that consciousness you will
always think of the supreme **“I Am”** whenever you think of yourself.
Accordingly, all your mental actions will, from that time on, come
directly from the **“I Am;”** and if you will continue to stand above
all such actions at all times, you will be able to control them and
direct them completely.

To examine consciousness and form in this connection is hardly
necessary, except to define briefly their general nature, so that we may
have a clear idea of what we are dealing with in the conscious field as
well as in the field of expression. The **“I Am”** is fundamentally
conscious; that is, the **“I Am”** knows what exists in the human field
or in the human sphere and what is taking place in the human sphere; and
that constitutes consciousness. In brief, you are conscious when you
know that you exist and have some definite idea as to what is taking
place in your sphere of existence. What we speak of as form, is
everything in the organized personality that has shape and

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

that serves in any manner to give expression to the forces within us.

In the exercise of consciousness, we find that the **“I Am”** employs
three fundamental actions. When the **“I Am”** looks out upon life we
have simple consciousness. When the **“I Am”** looks upon its own
position in life we have self consciousness, and when the **“I Am”**
looks up into the vastness of real life we have cosmic consciousness.

In simple consciousness, you are only aware of those things that exist
externally to yourself, but when you begin to become conscious of
yourself as a distinct entity, you begin to develop self consciousness.
When you begin to turn your attention to the great within and begin to
look up into the real source of all things, you become conscious of that
world that seemingly exists within all worlds, and when you enter upon
this experience, you are on the borderland of cosmic consciousness, the
most fascinating subject that has ever been known.

When we come to define body, mind and soul, we must, as previously
stated, reverse the usual definition. In the past, we have constantly
used the expression, "I have a soul," which naturally implies the belief
that "I am a body;" and so deeply has this idea become fixed in the
average mind that nearly everybody thinks of the body whenever the term
"me" or "myself" is employed. But in this attitude of mind the
individual is not above the physical

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

states of thought and feeling; in fact, he is more or less submerged in
what may be called a bundle of physical facts and ideas, of which he has
very little control. You cannot control anything in your life, however,
until you are above it. You cannot control what is in your body until
you realize that you are above your body. You cannot control what is in
your mind until you realize that you are above your mind, and therefore
no one can use the forces within him to any extent so long as he thinks
of himself as being the body, or as being localized exclusively in the
body.

When we examine the whole nature of man, we find that the soul is the
man himself, and that the ego is the central principle of the soul; or
to use another expression, the soul, including the **“I Am,”**
constitutes the individuality, and that visible something through which
individuality finds expression, constitutes the personality.

If you wish to understand your forces, and gain that masterful attitude
necessary to the control of your forces, train yourself to think that
you are a soul, but do not think of the soul as something vague or
mysterious. Think of the soul as being the individual you and all that
that expression can possibly imply. Train yourself to think that you are
master of mind and body, because you are above mind and body, and
possess the power to use everything that is in mind and body.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Man is ever in search of strength. It is the strong man that wins. It
is the man with power that scales the heights. To be strong is to be
great; and it is the privilege of greatness to satisfy every desire,
every aspiration, every need. But strength is not for the few alone; it
is for all, and the way to strength is simple. Proceed this very moment
to the mountain tops of the strength you now possess, and whatever may
happen do not come down. Do not weaken under adversity. Resolve to
remain as strong, as determined and as highly enthused during the
darkest night of adversity as you are during the sunniest day of
prosperity. Do not feel disappointed when things seem disappointing.
Keep the eye single upon the same brilliant future regardless of
circumstances, conditions or events. Do not lose heart when things go
wrong. Continue undisturbed in your original resolve to make all things
go right. To be overcome by adversity and threatening failure is to lose
strength; to always remain in the same lofty, determined mood is to
constantly grow in strength. The man who never weakens when things are
against him will grow stronger and stronger until all things will
delight to be for him. He will finally have all the strength he may
desire or need. Be always strong and you will always be stronger*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. How We Govern the Forces We Possess](yfhu04)
