[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu20)  [Next](yfhu22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

#### THE HIGHER FORCES IN MAN

It is the most powerful among the forces of the human system that we
least understand, and though this may seem unfortunate, it is not
unnatural. All advancement is in the ascending scale. We learn the
simplest things first and the least valuable in the beginning. Later on,
we learn that which is more important. We find therefore the greatest
forces among those that are almost entirely hidden, and for that reason
they are sometimes called the hidden forces, the finer forces, or the
higher forces.

As it is in man, so it is also in nature. We find the most powerful
among natural forces to be practically beyond comprehension. Electricity
is an illustration. There is no greater force known in nature, and yet
no one has thus far been able to determine what this force actually is.
The same is true with regard to other natural forces; the greater they
are and the more powerful they are, the more difficult it is to
understand them. In the human system, there are a number of forces of
exceptional value that we know nothing about; that is, we do not

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

understand their real nature, but we can learn enough about the action,
the purpose and the possibilities of those forces to apply them to
practical life; and it is practical application with which we are most
concerned.

The field of the finer forces in mind may be termed the unconscious
mental field, and the vastness of this field, as well as the
possibilities of its functions, is realized when we learn that the
greater part of our mental world is unconscious. Only a fraction of the
mental world of man is on the surface or up in consciousness; the larger
part is submerged in the depths of what might be called a mental sea of
subconsciousness. All modern psychologists have come to this conclusion,
and it is a fact that any one can demonstrate in his own experience if
he will take the time.

In the conscious field of the human mind, we find those actions of which
we are aware during what may be called our wide-awake state; and they
are seemingly insignificant in comparison with the actions of the vast
unconscious world, though our conscious actions are found to be highly
important when we learn that it is the conscious actions that originate
unconscious actions. And here let us remember that it is our unconscious
actions that determine our own natures, our own capabilities, as well as
our own destiny. In our awakened state we continue to think and act in a
small mental field,

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

but all of those actions are constantly having their effect upon this
vast unconscious field that is found beneath the mental surface.

To realize the existence of this unconscious mental world, and to
realize our power to determine the actions of that world, is to awaken
within us a feeling that we are many times as great and as capable as we
thought we were, and the more we think of this important fact, the
larger becomes our conscious view of life and its possibilities.

To illustrate the importance of the unconscious field and your finer
forces, we will take the force of love. No one understands the nature of
this force, nor has any one been able to discover its real origin or its
actual possibilities; nevertheless, it is a force that is tremendously
important in human life. Its actions are practically hidden, and we do
not know what constitutes the inner nature of those actions, but we do
know how to control those actions in a measure for our own good; and we
have discovered that when we do control and properly direct the actions
of love, its value to everybody concerned is multiplied many times. It
is the same with a number of other forces with which we are familiar.
They act along higher or finer lines of human consciousness, and they
are so far beyond ordinary comprehension that we cannot positively know
what they are. But we do know enough about them to control them and
direct them for our best and greatest good.

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In like manner,
the unconscious mental field, though beyond scientific analysis, is
sufficiently understood as to its modes of action, so that we can
control and direct those actions as we may choose. When we analyze what
comes forth from the unconscious field at any time, we find that it is
invariably the result of something that we caused to be placed in that
field during some past time. This leads up to the discovery of
unconscious mental processes, and it is not difficult to prove the
existence of such processes.

Many a time ideas, desires, feelings or aspirations come to the surface
of thought that we are not aware of having created at any time. We come
to the conclusion, therefore, that they were produced by some
unconscious process, but when we examine those ideas or desires
carefully, we find that they are simply effects corresponding exactly
with certain causes that we previously placed in action in our conscious
world. When we experiment along this line we find that we can produce a
conscious process at any time, and through deep feeling cause it to
enter the unconscious mental world. In that deeper world, it goes to
work and produces according to its nature, the results coming back to
the surface of our conscious mentality days, weeks or months later. The
correspondence between conscious and unconscious mental processes may be
illustrated by a simple movement in physical action. If a physical
movement

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

began at a certain point, and was caused to act with a circular
tendency, it would finally come back to its starting point. It is the
same with every conscious action that is deeply felt. It goes out into
the vastness of the unconscious mental field, and having a circular
tendency, as all mental actions have, it finally comes back to the point
where it began; and in coming back, brings with it the result of every
unconscious experience through which it passed on its circular journey.

To go into this subject deeply, and analyze every phase of it would be
extremely interesting; in fact, it would be more interesting than
fiction. It would require, however, a large book to do it justice. For
this reason, we can simply touch upon the practical side of it, but will
aim to make this brief outline sufficiently clear to enable any one to
direct his unconscious process in such a way as to secure the best
results.

Every mental process, or every mental action, that takes place in our
wide-awake consciousness will, if it has depth of feeling or intensity,
enter the unconscious field, and after it has developed itself according
to the line of its original nature, will return to the conscious side of
the mind. Here we find the secret of character building, and also the
secret of building faculties and talents. Everything that is done in the
conscious field to improve the mind, character, conduct or thought will,
if it has sincerity and

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

depth of feeling, enter the unconscious field; and later will come back
with fully developed qualities, which when in expression, constitutes
character. Many a man, however, after trying for some time to improve
himself and seeing no results, becomes discouraged. He forgets that some
time always intervenes between the period of sowing and the period of
reaping. What he does in the conscious field to improve himself,
constitutes the sowing, when those actions enter the conscious field to
be developed; and when they come back, it may be weeks or months later,
the reaping time has arrived. Many a time, after an individual has given
up self-improvement, he discovers, after a considerable period, that
good qualities are beginning to come to the surface in his nature,
thereby proving conclusively that what he did months ago along that line
was not in vain. The results of past efforts are beginning to appear. We
have all had similar experiences, and if we would carefully analyze such
experiences, we would find that not a single conscious process that is
sufficiently deep or intense to become an unconscious process will fail
to come back finally with its natural results. Many a time ideas come
into our minds that we wanted weeks ago, and could not get them at that
time; but we did place in action certain deep, strong desires for those
ideas, at that particular time, and though our minds were not prepared
to develop those

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

ideas at once, they finally were developed and came to the surface.

The fact that this process never fails indicates the value of giving the
mind something to work out for future need. If we have something that we
want to do months ahead, we should give the mind definite instruction
now and make those instructions so deep, that they will become
unconscious processes. Those unconscious processes will, according to
directions, work out the ideas and plans that we want for that future
work, and in the course of time, will bring results to the surface. To
go into detail along the line of this part of our study would also be
more interesting than fiction, but again, a large book would be required
to do it justice. However, if we make it a practice to place in action
our best thoughts, our best ideas and our best desires now and every
moment of the eternal now, we will be giving the unconscious mental
field something good to work for at all times; and as soon as each
product is finished, or ready to be delivered from the unconscious
world, it will come to the surface, and will enter the conscious mind
ready for use.

Some of the best books that have been written have been worked out
during months of unconscious mental processes; the same is true with
regard to inventions, dramas, musical compositions, business plans, and
in fact, anything and everything of importance that could be mentioned.
Every idea, every

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

thought, every feeling, every desire, every mental action, may, under
certain circumstances, produce an unconscious process corresponding with
itself, and this process will in every instance bring back to
consciousness the result of its work. When we realize this, and realize
the vast possibilities of the unconscious field, we will see the
advantage of placing in action as many good unconscious processes as
possible. Give your unconscious mental world something important to do
every hour. Place a new seed in that field every minute. It may take
weeks or months before that seed brings forth its fruit, but it will
bring forth, after its kind, in due time without fail.

We understand, therefore, how we can build character by sowing seeds of
character in this field, and how we can, in the same way, build
desirable conduct, a different disposition, different mental tendencies,
stronger and greater mental faculties, and more perfect talents along
any line. To direct these unconscious processes, it is necessary to
apply the finer forces of the system, as it is those forces that
invariably determine how those processes are to act. Those forces,
however, are very easily applied, as all that is necessary in the
beginning is to give attention to the way we feel. The way we feel
determines largely what our finer forces are to be and how they are to
act, and there is not an hour when we do not feel certain energies at
work in our system. All the

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

finer forces are controlled by feeling. Try to feel what you want done
either in the conscious or the unconscious mental fields, and you will
place in action forces that correspond to what you want done. Those
forces will enter the unconscious mental world and produce processes
through which the desired results will be created.

Whenever you want to redirect any force that is highly refined, you must
feel the way you want that force to act. To illustrate, we will suppose
you have certain emotions in your mental world that are not agreeable.
To give the energies of those emotions a new and more desirable force of
action, change your emotions by giving your whole attention in trying to
feel such emotions as you may desire. And here let us remember that
every emotion that comes up in the system is teeming with energy; but as
most emotions continue to act without any definite control, we realize
how much energy is wasted through uncurbed emotions. We know from
experience, that whenever we give way to our feelings, we become weak.
The reason is that every uncontrolled feeling wastes energy. A great
many people who are very intense in their feelings, actually become sick
whenever they give way to strong or deep emotions. On the other hand,
emotions that are controlled and properly directed, not only prevent
waste, but will actually increase the strength of mind and body. Here is
a good practice. Whenever you feel the way you do

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

not wish to feel, begin to think deeply and in the most interesting
manner possible, of those things that you wish to accomplish. If you can
throw your whole soul, so to speak, into those new directions, you will
soon find your undesired feelings disappearing completely. Every
individual should train himself to feel the way he wants to feel, and
this is possible if he will always direct his attention to something
desirable whenever undesired feelings come up. Through this practice he
will soon get such full control over his feelings that he can always
feel the way he wants to feel, no matter what the circumstances may be.
He will thus gain the power not only of controlling his emotions and
using constructively all those energies that invariably appear in his
emotions, but he will also have found the secret of continued happiness.
Whenever mental energy moves in a certain direction, it tends to build
up power for good along that line. We realize therefore the value of
directing all our attention upon those things in mind, character and
life that we wish to build and develop.

In building character we find the results to be accumulative; that is,
we make an effort to improve our life or conduct, and thereby produce an
unconscious process, which will later on, give us more strength of
character to be and live the way we wish to be and live. This in turn
will enable us to produce more and stronger unconscious processes along

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

the line of character building, which will finally return with a greater
number of good qualities. The result of this action will be to give us
more power to build for a still greater character, and so this process
may be continued indefinitely.

The same is true with regard to building the mind. The more you build
the mind, the greater becomes your mental power to build a still greater
mind; but in each case, it is the unconscious process that must be
produced in order that the greater character or greater mind may be
developed from within. In this connection, it is well to remember that
the principal reason why so many people fail to improve along any line
is because their desires or efforts for improvement are not sufficiently
deep and strong to become unconscious processes. To illustrate, it is
like placing seed on stony ground. If the seed is not placed in good,
deep soil it will not grow. You may desire self-improvement for days,
but if those desires are weak or superficial, they will not enter the
unconscious field; and no action, however good it may be, if it fails to
enter the unconscious field, will also fail to produce results along the
line of self-improvement.

With regard to the building of character, we must also remember that
character determines in a large measure the line of action of all the
other forces in the human system. If your character is strong and well
developed, every force that you place in action

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

will be constructive; while if your character is weak, practically all
your forces will go astray. This is not true in the moral field alone,
but also in the field of mental achievement. If the character is weak,
your ability will be mostly misdirected no matter how hard you may work,
or how sincere you may be in your effort to do your best. This explains
why a great many people do not realize their ideals. They have paid no
attention to character building, and therefore, nearly every effort that
they may have made in trying to work up towards their ideals, has been
misdirected and sent astray. Whatever our ideals may be therefore, or
how great our desires may be to realize those ideals, we must first have
character; and even though we may be able to place in action the most
powerful forces in the human system, we will not get results until we
have character. It is character alone that can give the powers of man
constructive direction, and it is a well-known fact chat those people
who have a strong, firm, well-developed character easily move from the
good to the better, no matter what the circumstances.

What may be called the higher forces in man act invariably through our
most sublime states of consciousness, and as it is these higher forces
that enable man to become or accomplish more than the average, it is
highly important that we attain the power to enter sublime consciousness
at frequent intervals. No man or woman of any worth was ever

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

known, who did not have experience in these sublime states; in fact, it
is impossible to rise above the ordinary in life or achievement without
drawing, more or less, upon the higher realms of consciousness. People
are sometimes criticised for not being on the earth all the time, but it
is necessary to get above the earth occasionally in order to find
something worth while to live for and work for while upon earth. The
most powerful forces in human life can [be](errata.htm#4) drawn down to
earth for practical use, but to get them we must go to the heights
frequently. No one can write music unless his consciousness touches the
sublime. No one can write real poetry unless he has the same experience.
No one can evolve ideas worth while unless his mind transcends the
so-called practical sphere of action, and no individual can rise in the
world of attainment and achievement unless his mind dwells almost
constantly on the verge of the sublime. Examine the minds of people of
real worth, people who have something in them, people who are beyond the
average, people who are rising in the scale, people whom we truly
admire, people that we look up to, people who occupy high
positions—positions that they have actually won through merit—and we
find in every instance, that their minds touch frequently the sublime
state of consciousness. When we touch that state, our minds are drawn up
above the ordinary, and mental actions are developed and worked out that
are superior to ordinary or average

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

mental actions. It is therefore simply understood that experience in
sublime consciousness if properly employed, will invariably make man
greater and better.

When we look upon a man that we can truthfully say is a real man, we
find that something unusual has been or is being expressed in his
personality; and that something unusual is hidden in every personality.
It is a hidden power, a hidden force, which, when placed in action,
gives man superior worth, both as to character, ability and life. Real
men and real women, people who are real in the true sense of the term,
are always born from the sublime state of consciousness; that is, they
have, through coming in contact with higher regions of thought, evolved
greater worth in their own minds and personalities; and as this
possibility is within reach of every man or woman, we see the importance
of dealing thoroughly with these higher powers in human nature.

Whenever we touch those finer states in the upper regions of the mind,
we invariably feel that we have gained something superior, something
that we did not possess before; and the gaining of that something
invariably makes life stronger as well as finer. The ordinary has been,
in a measure, overcome, and that which is beyond the ordinary is being
gradually evolved. If we would rise in the scale in the fullest and best
sense of the term, we must pay close attention to those higher forces
and make it a practice to

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

enter frequently into close touch with higher states of consciousness;
in fact, we simply must do it, because if we do not, we will continue to
move along a very ordinary level. Then we must also bear in mind that it
is our purpose to use all the forces we possess, not simply those that
we can discern on the outside or that we are aware of in external
consciousness, but also those finer and more powerful forces which we
can control and direct only when we ascend to the heights.

In dealing with these greater powers in man, it will be worth our while
to reconsider briefly the psychological field. As long as the mind acts
on the surface of consciousness, we have very little control of those
finer elements in human life, but when the mind goes into the depths of
feeling, into the depths of realization, or into what is called the
psychological field, then it is that it touches everything that has real
worth or that has the power to evolve, produce or develop still greater
worth. It is the active forces of the psychological field that determine
everything that is to take place in the life of man, both within himself
and in his external destiny. We must therefore learn to act through the
psychological field if we would master ourselves and create our own
future.

The psychological field can be defined as that field of subconscious
action that permeates the entire personality, or that fills, so to
speak, every atom of the

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

physical man on a finer plane. The psychological field is a finer field,
permeating the ordinary tangible physical elements of life, and we enter
this field whenever our feelings are deep and sincere. The fact that the
psychological field determines real worth, as well as the attainment of
greater worth, is easily demonstrated in every day experience. When a
man has anything in him, his nature is always deep. The same is true of
people of refinement or culture; there is depth to their natures, and
the man of character invariably lives in that greater world of life and
power that is back of, or beneath, the surface of consciousness. If
there is something in you, you both live and act through the deeper
realms of your life, and those realms constitute the psychological
field.

Among the many important forces coming directly through emotion or
feeling, one of the most valuable is that of enthusiasm. In the average
mind, enthusiasm runs wild, but we have found that when this force is
properly directed it becomes a great constructive power. When you are
enthusiastic about something, it is always about something new or
something better—something that holds possibilities that you did not
realize before. Your enthusiasm, if properly directed, will naturally
cause your mind to move towards those possibilities, and enthusiasm is
readily directed when you concentrate attention exclusively upon that
something new that inspires enthusiasm.

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> By turning your
attention upon the thing that produces enthusiasm, the mind will move
forward toward those greater possibilities that are discerned. This
forward movement of the mind will tend to renew and enlarge the mind so
that it will gain a still greater conception of those possibilities.
This will increase your enthusiasm, which will in turn impel your mind
to move forward still further in the same direction. Thus a still larger
conception of those possibilities will be secured, which in turn will
increase your enthusiasm and the power of your mind to take a third step
in advance. We thus realize that if enthusiasm is directed upon the
possibilities that originally inspired that enthusiasm, we will not only
continue to be enthused, but we will in that very manner, cause the mind
to move forward steadily and develop steadily, so that in time it will
gain sufficient power to actually work out those possibilities upon
which attention has been directed. In this connection, we must also
remember that we can grow and advance only as we pass into the new. It
is new life, new thought, new states of consciousness that are demanded
if we are to take any steps at all in advance, and as enthusiasm tends
directly to inspire the mind to move towards the new, we see how
important it is to continue, not only to live in the spirit of
enthusiasm, but to direct that spirit upon the goal in view. It is
invariably the enthusiastic

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

mind that moves forward, that does things, and that secures results.

Two other forces of great value, belonging to this group, are
appreciation and gratitude. Whenever you appreciate a certain thing you
become conscious of its real quality, and whenever you become conscious
of the quality of anything, you begin to develop that quality in
yourself. When we appreciate the worth of a person, we tend to impress
the idea of that worth in our own minds, and thereby cause the same
effect to be produced, in a measure, in ourselves. The same is true if
we appreciate our own worth, in a sensible and constructive manner. If
we appreciate what we already are, and are ambitious to become still
more, we focus our minds upon the greater, and employ what we already
possess as stepping stones towards the greater attainment; but when we
do not appreciate ourselves, there are no stepping stones that we can
use in attaining greater things. We thus realize why people that do not
appreciate themselves never accomplish much, and why they finally go
down grade in nearly every instance.

When we appreciate the beautiful in anything, we awaken our minds to a
higher and better understanding of the beautiful. Our minds thus become,
in a measure, more beautiful. The same is true with regard to any
quality. Whatever we appreciate, we tend to develop in ourselves, and
here we find a remarkable aid to the power of concentration, because

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

we always concentrate attention perfectly, naturally and thoroughly upon
those things that we fully appreciate. Thus we understand why it is that
we tend to develop in ourselves the things that we admire in others.

Whenever you feel grateful for anything, you always feel nearer to the
real quality of that particular thing. A person who is ungrateful,
however, always feels that there is a wall between himself and the good
things in life. Usually there is such a wall, though he has produced it
himself through his ingratitude. But the man who is grateful for
everything, places himself in that attitude where he may come in closer
contact with the best things everywhere; and we know very well that the
most grateful people always receive the best attention everywhere. We
all may meet disappointment at some time and not get exactly what we
wanted, but we shall find that the more grateful we are, the less
numerous will those disappointments become. It has been well said that
no one feels inclined to give his best attention to the man who is
always "knocking," and it is literally true. On the other hand, if you
are really grateful and mean it, it is very seldom that yon do not
receive the best attention from everybody wherever you may go.

The most important side of this law, however, is found in the fact that
the more grateful you are for everything good that comes into your life,
the more

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

closely you place your mind in contact with that power in life that can
produce greater good.

Another among the finer forces is that of aspiration. No person should
fail to aspire constantly and aspire to the very highest that he can
possibly awaken in his life. Aspiration always tends to elevate the mind
and tends to lift the mind into larger and greater fields of action. And
when the mind finds itself in this larger field of action, it will
naturally gain power to do greater things. We all realize that so long
as we live down in the lower story, we can not accomplish very much; it
is when we lift our minds to the higher stories of the human structure
that we begin to gain possession of ideas and powers through which
greater things may be achieved.

The same is true of ambition. Ambition not only tends to draw the mind
up into higher and larger fields, but also tends to build up those
faculties through which we are to work. If you are tremendously
ambitious to do a certain thing, the force of that ambition will tend to
increase the power and ability of that faculty through which your
ambition may be realized. To illustrate, if you are ambitious to succeed
in the business world, the force of that ambition, is very strong, will
constantly make your business faculties stronger and more able, so that
finally your business ability will have become sufficiently great to
carry your ambition through. You

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

cannot be too ambitious, provided you are ambitious for something
definite and continue to give your whole life and soul to that which you
expect or desire to accomplish through that ambition. When we know the
power of ambition, and know that anybody can be ambitious, we realize
that any one can move forward. No matter what his position may be, or
where he may be, he can, through the power of ambition begin to gain
ground, and continue to gain ground indefinitely. The average mind,
however, has very little ambition, and makes no effort to arouse this
tremendous force; but we may depend upon the fact that when this force
is fully aroused in any mind, a change for the better must positively
come before long.

The force of an ideal is another among the finer forces that should
receive constant and thorough attention. When you have an ideal and live
for it every second of your existence, you place yourself in the hands
of a drawing power that is immense, and that power will tend to draw out
into action every force, power and faculty that you may possess,
especially those forces and qualities that will have to be developed in
order that you may realize that ideal.

Have an ideal, and the highest that you can picture. Then worship it
every hour with your whole soul. Never come down, and do not neglect it
for a moment. We all know very well that it is the people

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

who actually worship their high ideals with mind and heart and soul that
finally realize those ideals. It is such people who reach the high
places and the reason why is easily explained. Give your attention, or
rather, your whole life to some lofty ideal, and you will tend to draw
into action all the finer and higher forces of your system—those forces
that can create greater ability, greater talent, greater genius—those
forces that can increase your capacity, bring into action all your finer
elements and give you superior power and superior worth in every sense
of the term—those forces which, when aroused, cannot positively fail to
do the work you wish to have done.

A fact well known in this connection is that when the mind is turned
persistently upon a certain ideal, every power that is in you begins to
flow in that direction, and this is the very thing you want. When we can
get all that is in us to work for our ideals and to work towards our
ideals, then we shall positively reach whatever goal we have in view.

Closely connected with our ideals, we find our visions and dreams. The
man without a vision will never be anything but an ordinary man, and the
people who never dream of greater things, will never get beyond ordinary
things. It is our visions and dreams that lift our minds to lofty
realms, that make us feel that there is something greater and better to
work for; and when we become inspired with a desire to work for greater
and better

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

things, we will not only proceed to carry out those desires, but will
finally secure sufficient power to fulfill those desires. "The nation
that has no vision shall perish." This is a great truth that we have
heard a thousand times, and we know the reason why; but the same truth
is applicable to man. If he has no vision, he will go down; but if he
has visions, the highest and most perfect visions he can possibly
imagine, and lives constantly for their realization, he will positively
ascend in the scale. He will become a greater and a greater man, and
those things that were at one time simply dreams, will, in the course of
time, become actual realities.

The power of love is another force in this higher group that is
extremely valuable, and the reason is that it is the tendency of love to
turn attention upon the ideal, the beautiful and the more perfect. When
you love somebody, you do not look for their faults; in fact, you do not
see their faults. Your whole attention is turned upon their good
qualities, and here let us remember that whatever we continue to see in
others, we develop in ourselves. The power of real love always tends to
draw out into expression the finer elements of mind, character and life.
For that reason, we should always love, love much, and love the most
ideal and the most perfect that we can discover in everybody and in
everything that we may meet in life. We have all discovered that when. a
man really loves an ideal woman, or the woman

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

that constitutes his ideal, he invariably becomes stronger in character,
more powerful in personality, and more able in mind. When a woman loves
an ideal man, or her ideal, she invariably becomes more attractive. The
beautiful in her nature comes forth into full expression and many times
the change is so great that we can hardly believe that she is the same
woman. The power of love, if genuine, constant and strong, tends to
improve everything in human life; and as this power is one of the higher
forces in human nature, we readily understand the reason why. We can
therefore without further comment, draw our own conclusions as to how we
will use this power in the future.

The last of these finer forces that we shall mention, and possibly the
strongest, is that of faith; but we must remember if we wish to use this
force, that faith does not constitute a belief or any system of beliefs;
it is a mental action—an action that goes into the very spirit of those
things which we may think of or apply at the time we exercise faith.
When you have faith in yourself you place in action a force that goes
into the very depth of your being and tends to arouse all the greater
powers and finer elements that you may possess. The same is true when
you have faith in a certain faculty or in a certain line of action. The
power of faith goes into the spirit of things and makes alive, so to
speak, the all that is in you. The power of faith also produces perfect

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

concentration. Whenever you have faith along a certain line, you
concentrate perfectly along that line, and you cause all the power that
is in your mind or system to work for the one thing you are trying to
do. It has been discovered that the amount of energy latent in the human
system is nothing less than enormous, and as faith tends to arouse all
this energy, we realize how important and how powerful is faith.

The effect of faith upon yourself therefore is beneficial in the highest
and largest sense, but this is not its only effect. The more faith you
have in yourself, the more faith people will have in you. If you have no
confidence in yourself you will never inspire confidence in anybody; but
if you thoroughly believe in yourself, people will believe in you and in
your work. And when people believe in you, you can accomplish ten times
as much as when they have no confidence in you whatever.

When a man has tremendous faith in himself, he becomes a live wire, so
to speak. It is such a man that becomes a real and vital power wherever
he may live or go. It is such a man who leads the race on and on. It is
such a man who really does things, and it is people of such a type that
we love the best. They invariably inspire others to love the nobler life
and to attempt greater things in life, and for this reason their
presence is of exceptional value to the progress of the race. To go into
details, however,

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

is not necessary. We all know and appreciate the value of faith. We all
know that it is one of the highest and one of the greatest forces that
man can exercise; we therefore realize how important it becomes to train
ourselves to have unbounded faith in everything and in everybody at all
times, and under all circumstances.

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

#### With All Thy Faults I Love Thee Still

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Thus sings the poet, and we call him sentimental; that is, at first
thought we do. But upon second thought we change our minds. We then find
that faults and defects are always in the minority, and that the larger
part of human nature is so wonderful and so beautiful that it needs must
inspire admiration and love in everybody. With all their defects there
is nothing more interesting than human beings; and the reason is that
for every shortcoming in man there are a thousand admirable qualities.
The poet, being inspired by the sublime vision of truth, can see this;
therefore, what can he do but love? Whenever his eyes are lifted and
whenever his thoughts take wings, his soul declares with greater
eloquence than ever before, "What a piece of work is man!" Thus every
moment renews his admiration, and every thought rekindles the fire of
his love*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Greatest Power In Man](yfhu22)
