[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu17)  [Next](yfhu19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

### CHAPTER XVI.

#### THE CREATIVE FORCES IN MAN

The human system may well be termed a living dynamo, as the amount of
energy, especially creative energy, generated in the mind and
personality of man is simply enormous. If we should try to measure the
amount produced in the average healthy person, we should become
overwhelmed with surprise; though we should naturally become even more
surprised after learning how much power nature gives to man, and then
finding that he applies only a fraction of it. We shall soon see the
reason for this, however, and learn exactly why all of this vast amount
of energy is not turned to practical use.

What is called creative energy in its broadest, largest sense, is that
power in man that creates, forms or reproduces anywhere in the human
system, and it divides itself into a number of groups, each one having
its special function. One group creates thought, another brain cells,
another nerve tissues, another muscular tissues, another manufactures
the various juices of the system, another produces ideas, another
creates talent and ability, another reproduces

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

the species, and a number of other groups produce the various chemical
formations in the system. We therefore have all kinds of creative
processes going on in the human system, and corresponding energies with
which these processes are continued.

One of the most interesting facts in connection with this study is that
Nature generates more energy for each group than is required for normal
functioning through its particular channel. In consequence, we find a
great deal of surplus energy throughout the system. Each function
supplies a certain percentage, and as it is not used by the function
itself, the larger part of it naturally goes to waste. And here is where
our subject becomes decidedly important. All kinds of creative energy
are so closely related that they can be transformed and transmuted into
each other. What is wasted in one function can therefore be turned to
actual use in another function. An extra supply can thereby be secured
for the creation of thoughts and ideas if such should be necessary, or
an extra supply can be secured for the manufacture of the different
juices of the system, or for the increase of muscular activity or
functional activity in any one of the vital organs. Each group will
readily change and combine with any other group, thus producing
additional power in any part of the system at any time.

More than half of the energy generated in the human system is surplus
energy, and is not needed

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

for normal functioning, either in mind or body, though there are many
personalities that generate so much energy that fully three-fourths of
the amount generated is surplus. The question is therefore what shall be
done with this surplus energy, and how any amount of it can be applied
through any special function or faculty desired? If a person can
accomplish a great deal, sometimes remarkable things by only using a
fraction of his energy, it is evident that he could accomplish a great
deal more if some means could be found through which he might apply all
of his energy. In fact, if such means were found, his working capacity,
as well as his ability, might be doubled or trebled, and his
achievements increased in proportion. If a certain amount of energy
produces a certain degree of working capacity, twice as much energy
would naturally double that working capacity, and this has been
demonstrated a number of times. A great many people, who have tried to
transmute their creative energies, and direct those energies into some
special faculty, have found that the working capacity of that faculty
has been increased for the time being to a remarkable degree, but this
is not the only result secured. The same process will also increase the
brilliancy of the mind, and here let us remember that genius, in most
instances, is accounted for by the fact that practically all of the
surplus energy of the personality flows

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

naturally into that faculty where genius is in evidence.

To illustrate the idea further, take two men of equal personal power.
Let one of them permit his surplus energy to flow into the different
functions as usual, giving over a part to normal requirements, and the
other to mere waste. We shall not find this man doing anything
extraordinary. But let the other man give over to normal functions only
what is actually required, and then turn the remainder into his mind, or
those parts of his mind that are being applied in his work. We shall
find in this second case that ability will rapidly increase, and that in
the course of time actual genius be developed. That genius could be
developed by this process in every case, has not been demonstrated,
though it is quite probable that it could be demonstrated without a
single exception. However, no individual can turn surplus energy into
any faculty without becoming more able, more efficient and more
competent in that faculty. To learn how this process can be carried out
successfully under any circumstances is therefore thoroughly worth
while.

To proceed, we must first learn how these different groups of creative
energy naturally act; and we find that each group goes, either naturally
or through some habit, into its own part of mind or body; in other
words, we find in the human system, a number of streams of energy
flowing in different directions,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

performing certain functions on their way, using up a fraction of their
power in that manner, the rest flowing off into waste. Knowing this, the
problem before us is to learn how to redirect those streams of energy so
as to turn them to practical use where they can be used now, and thus
not only prevent waste, but increase the result of our efforts in
proportion. In brief, we want to know how we can take up all surplus
energy, that is, all energy that remains after normal functioning has
been provided for, and use that surplus in promoting more successfully
the work in which we are engaged. And to learn how to do this, we must
study the art of transmutation.

What we call transmutation is not some mysterious something that only a
few have the power to understand and apply, but one of the simplest
things in Nature, as well as one of the most constant of her processes.
Nature is continually transmuting her energies, and it is in this manner
that extraordinary results are found anywhere in the realms of Nature,
or anywhere in human nature where unconscious actions along greater
lines have been the cause. Whenever any individual has accomplished more
than usual, it is the law of transmutation through which the unusual has
been secured. The use of the law may have been unconscious, though
everything that is applied in part and unconsciously, can be applied
fully and thoroughly through conscious action.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

When any one is using his mind continually along a certain line, and is
so thoroughly absorbed in that line of action that it takes up his whole
attention, we invariably find that the mind while in that condition,
draws an extra amount of energy from the body. Sometimes it draws too
much, so that every desire of the body is, for the time being, suspended
and the vitality of the different physical organs decreased below
normal. A man while in this condition frequently loses desire for food,
and we all know of inventors who have been so absorbed in their
experiments that they have neither taken nor desired food for days. We
have also found the same condition in many others, especially among
authors, composers and artists, where the mind was given over completely
to the subject at hand. And what is the cause but transmutation? When
the mind takes up for its own use a great deal of the energy naturally
employed in the body, the power of normal functioning will have so
decreased that the desire for normal functioning will have practically
disappeared for the time being.

Another illustration with which we are all familiar, is where every
natural desire of the body disappears completely, for a time, when the
mind is completely absorbed in some entirely different desire; and here
we find the law that underlies the cure of all habits. If you would turn
your mind upon some desire that was directly opposite to the desire that
feeds your

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

habit, and if you would give over your whole attention to that opposite
desire, you would soon draw all the energy away from that desire which
perpetuates the habit. The habit in question therefore would soon die of
starvation. In the same way, people who are inclined to be materialistic
could overcome that tendency entirely by concentrating attention
constantly and thoroughly upon the idealistic side of life. In this
case, those forces of the system that are perpetuating materialistic
conditions would be transmuted into finer energies, and would thereby
proceed to build up idealistic or more refined conditions of body, mind
and personality. Both Nature and human experience are full of
illustrations of transmutation, so that we are not dealing in this study
with something that lies outside of usual human activity. We are dealing
with something that is taking place in our systems every minute, and we
want to learn how to take better control of this something, so that we
can apply the underlying law to the best advantage.

In learning to apply the law of transmutation, our first purpose should
be to employ all surplus energy either in promoting our work or in
developing faculties and talents. This process alone would practically
double the working capacity of any mind, and would steadily increase
ability and talent; and also to turn energy to good account that cannot
be used in its own channel now.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

To illustrate, suppose you have a desire for a certain physical or
mental action, and you know that it would not be possible to carry out
that desire at the time. Instead of permitting the energy that is active
in that desire to go to waste, you would turn that energy into some
other channel where it could be used to advantage now. Our second
purpose should be to direct all surplus energy into the brain and the
mind in case we had more energy in our body than we could use, or that
was required for physical functioning, and thereby become stronger and
more efficient in all mental activities. Our third purpose should be to
transmute all reproductive energy into talent and genius when there was
no need of that energy in its own particular sphere. And in this
connection, it is well to mention the fact that a man who is morally
clean, other things being equal, has in every instance, greater agility,
greater capacity and greater endurance by far than the man who is not.
While the latter is wasting his creative energies in useless pleasures,
as well as in disease producing habits, the former is turning all of his
creative energy into ability and genius, and the result is evident. In
carrying out these three purposes we can prevent all waste of mental and
personal power. We can control our desires completely; we can eliminate
impurity, and we can turn life and power into channels that will
invariably result in greater mental

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

power and brilliancy, if not marked ability and rare genius.

To experiment, turn your whole attention upon your mind for a few
minutes, and desire gently to draw all your surplus energy into the
field of mental action. Then permit yourself to think along those lines
where the mind is inclined to be most active. In a few moments you will
discover the coming of new ideas; and in many instances, you will for
several hours receive ideas that are brighter and more valuable than
what you have received for some time. Repeat the process later, and
again and again for many days in succession, and it will be strange
indeed, if you do not finally secure a group of ideas that will be worth
a great deal in your special line of thought or work. Whenever you feel
a great deal of energy in your system, and try to direct it into the
mind, you will have the same result. Ideas will come quickly and
rapidly, and among them all you will surely find a few that have
exceptional merit.

In learning the art of transmutation, the first essential is to train
your mind to think that all surplus energy is being turned into the
channel you have decided upon; that is, if you are a business man, you
naturally will want all your surplus energy to accumulate in your
business faculties. To secure this result, think constantly of your
surplus energy as flowing into those faculties. This mode of thinking
will soon give your energies the habit of doing what you

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

desire to have done. It is a well-known law, that if we continue to
think deeply and persistently along a certain line, Nature will
gradually take up that thought and carry it out. Another law of
importance in this connection is that if we concentrate attention upon a
certain faculty or upon a certain part of the system, we create a
tendency among our energies to flow towards that faculty or part. We
understand therefore the value of constantly bearing in mind the idea
that we wish to realize. What we constantly impress upon the mind
through our thoughts and desires, finally becomes a subconscious habit,
and when any line of action becomes a subconscious habit, it acts
automatically; that is, it works of itself.

Before taking up this practice, however, it is necessary to determine
positively what you actually desire your surplus energy to do. You must
know what you want. Then continue to want what you want with all the
power of desire that you can arouse. Most minds fail in this respect.
They do not know with a certainty what they wish to accomplish or
perfect. Their energies therefore are drawn into one channel today and
another tomorrow, and nothing is finished. If you are an inventor, train
your mind to think that all your surplus energy is constantly flowing
into your faculties of invention. If you are a writer, train your mind
to think that all your surplus energy is flowing into your literary
talents; or whatever it is that you may be doing or want to do, direct

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

your energy accordingly. You will soon find that you will increase in
power, ability and capacity along the lines of your choice, and if you
continue this process all through life, your ability will continue to
increase, no matter how long you may live.

The second essential is to desire deeply and persistently that all your
surplus energy shall flow into those functions or faculties that you
have selected for greater work. Wherever your desire is directed, there
the force of your system will also tend to go, and herein we find
another reason why persistent desire has such extreme value. The use of
desire in this connection, however, must always be deep and calm, and
never excited or overwrought.

The third essential is to place your mind in what may be termed the
psychological field, and while acting in that field, to concentrate upon
that part or faculty where you want your surplus energy to accumulate.
This essential or process constitutes the real art of transmutation,
though it is by no means the easiest to acquire. To master this method a
great deal of practice will be required, but whenever yol.i can place
your mind in the psychological field and concentrate subjectively upon
any part of your system where you want surplus energy to accumulate, all
your surplus energy positively will accumulate in that part within a few
moments' time. Through the same process, you can annihilate any desire
instantaneously, and change all the energy of that desire

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

into some other force. You can also, in the same way, reach your latent
or dormant energies, and draw all of those energies into any channel
where a high order of activity is desired; in fact, through this method,
you can practically take full possession of all the power, active or
latent, in your system, and use it in any way that you may wish. That
you should, after you learn to apply this method successfully, become
highly efficient in your work, is therefore evident, though this is not
all. Extraordinary capacity, mental brilliancy and genius can positively
be developed through the constant use of this method, provided, however,
that nothing is done, either in thought, life or conduct, to interfere
with the underlying law of the process.

To place your mind in the psychological field, try to turn your
conscious actions into what may be termed the finer depths of the
personality; that is, try to become conscious of your deeper life; try
to feel the undercurrents of mind and thought and consciousness, and try
to act in perfect mental contact with those deep, underlying forces of
personality and mentality that lie at the foundation of your conscious
activity. An illustration in this connection will be found valuable.
When you listen to music that seems to touch your soul, so that you can
feel the vibrations of its harmony thrill every atom of your being, you
are in the psychological field. You are alive in another and a finer
mental world, a mental

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

world that permeates your entire personal existence. You are also in the
psychological field when you are stirred by some emotion to the very
depth of your innermost life. A deepening of thought, feeling, life and
desire will take the mind, more or less, into the psychological field;
and whenever the mind begins to act in that field, you should
concentrate your attention upon that faculty or part of your system
where you wish extra energy to accumulate. Make your concentration
alive, so to speak, with interest, and make every action of that
concentration as deep as possible, and all your surplus energy will
positively flow towards the point of concentration.

The power of this process can be demonstrated in a very simple manner.
Place your mind in the psychological field, and then concentrate
subjectively upon your hand, arousing at the time a deep desire for the
increase of circulation in your hand. In a few moments, the veins on the
back of your hand will be filled to capacity, and your hand, even though
it might have been cold in the beginning, will become comfortably warm.
Another experiment that is not only interesting in this connection, but
may prove very valuable, is to concentrate in this same manner upon your
digestive organs, in case the digestive process is retarded. You will
soon feel more energy accumulating throughout the abdominal region, and
any unpleasant sensation that you might have felt on account of
indigestion will disappear entirely; in

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

fact, even chronic indigestion can be cured in this way if the method is
applied for a few minutes immediately before and after each meal. The
idea is simply this, that when you give extra energy to an organ, it
will be able to perform its function properly, and whenever any function
is performed properly, any ailment that might have existed in the organ
of that function, will disappear. A number of similar experiments may be
tried, all of which will prove equally interesting, and besides, will
train the mind to apply this great law of transmutation.

The following effects may be secured through transmutation: Working
capacity in any part of the personality or mentality may be constantly
increased; all the energy generated in the system may be employed
practically and successfully; the mind may be made more brilliant, as it
is an extraordinary amount of creative energy going into the mind that
invariably causes mental brilliancy. Any faculty selected can be given
so much of this surplus energy of the system, that it will almost from
the beginning, manifest an increase in ability, and will, in the course
of time, manifest rare talent and even genius. Moral purity may become
second nature, as all that energy that was previously squandered in
impure thought, impure desire or impure action can be transmuted
readily, and applied in the building of a more vigorous personality and
a more brilliant mind. A better control of all the forces of the
personality may be

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

obtained, and that mysterious something called personal magnetism may be
acquired to a remarkable degree.

The attainment or accumulation of personal magnetism is something that
we all desire, and the reason why is evident. What is called personal
magnetism is the result of an extra amount of creative energy stored up
in the personality and caused to circulate harmoniously throughout the
personality. And the effect of this power is very marked. People who
possess it are invariably more attractive, regardless of shape and form,
and they are invariably more successful, no matter what their work may
be. Hundreds of illustrations could be mentioned proving conclusively
the extreme value of personal magnetism, though we are all so familiar
with the fact that we do not require proof in the matter. What we want
to know is what this power really is, how it may be produced, and why
those who possess it have such a great advantage over those who do not
possess it.

To illustrate, we may take two women who look alike in every respect;
who have the same character and the same mentality, and who are equals
in every respect but one, and that is that the one has personal
magnetism while the other has not. But we need not be told of the fact.
The woman who does not possess this power cannot be compared in any way
with the woman who does possess it. The woman who does possess this
power is far more attractive, far more

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

brilliant, and seems to possess qualities of far greater worth; and the
reason is that personal magnetism tends to heighten the effect of
everything that you are, or that you may do. If we should compare two
business men of equal ability and power, the one having personal
magnetism and the other one not, we should find similar results. The one
having this power would be far more successful, regardless of the fact
that his ability and power in other respects were the same as his
associate. Even men of ordinary ability succeed remarkably when they
have personal magnetism; and we all know of women who are as plain as
nature could make them, and yet being in possession of personal
magnetism, are counted among the most attractive to be found anywhere.
The most ordinary human form becomes a thing of beauty if made alive
with this mysterious power, and a personality that had no attraction
whatever, will fascinate everybody to a marked degree if charged with
this power. We all know this to be true; we are therefore deeply
interested to know how this power might be secured.

In the first place, we must remember that personal magnetism does not
exercise its power by controlling or influencing other minds as many
have supposed. The fact is if you try to influence others, you will lose
this power, and lose it completely, no matter how strong it may be at
the present time. The secret of personal magnetism simply lies in the
fact

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

that it tends to bring out into expression the best that is in you, and
tends to heighten the effect of every expression; or, in other words, it
causes every expression to act to the best advantage; though we find
this power exercising its peculiar effect, not only in the personality
and in the mentality of the individual, but also in his work.

When a musician has this power, his music charms to a far greater degree
than if he does not possess it. There is something not only in the
singing voice, but also in the speaking voice that indicates the absence
or presence of this power. What it is no one can exactly describe, but
we know it is there, and it adds immeasurably to the quality of what is
expressed through the voice. In the field of literature we find the
action of this power to be very marked. A writer who does not possess
this mysterious force may write well, but there is something lacking in
what he has written. On the other hand, if he has this power, he gives
not only added charm to what he has written, but his ideas invariably
appear to be more brilliant. In fact, there seems to be a power in
everything he writes that is not ordinarily found on the printed page.
On the stage this power is one of the principal factors, and we
frequently find that the only difference between the good actor and a
poor one, is the possession of a high degree of personal magnetism. No
matter how well an actor may act, if he lacks in this power, he cannot
succeed on the

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

stage. When we go into the social world, we find the same fact. Those
who possess this power are invariably the favorites, even though they
may be lacking in many other qualities. In the business world we find in
every case that a man who is lacking in personal magnetism is at a
disadvantage, while the one who has an abundance of this power will have
no difficulty, other things being equal, in working himself to the fore.

In a deeper study of this force, we find that it affects every movement
of the body, every action of the mind, and every feeling or expression
that mind and personality may produce; that is, it seems to give
something additional to every action or movement, and makes everything
about the individual more attractive. We might say that this force sets
off everything about the person to a greater advantage. This power
therefore does not act directly upon others, but acts directly upon the
one who has it, and thereby makes the individual more striking, as well
as more attractive, both in appearance and in conduct. What is good in
you is made better if charged with this force, and every desirable
effort that you may make produces a better effect in proportion. Added
charm, added attractiveness and added efficiency—these invariably follow
where the individual is in possession of a marked degree of this power.
That which is beautiful is many times as beautiful where personal
magnetism is in action, and that

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

which is brilliant, becomes far more brilliant when combined with this
mysterious force. Many people are born with it and apply it
unconsciously, though the majority who have it, have acquired it through
various forms of training. Any system of exercise that tends to
harmonize the movements of the body, will tend to increase to some
extent the power of this force; though when such exercises are combined
with the transmutation of creative energy, the results will be far
greater. The reason for this is found in the fact that what is called
personal magnetism is the result of a great deal of creative energy held
in the system, or transmuted into harmonious muscular or mental
activity.

The development of this power depends upon the proper training of the
body in rhythmic movements, and the training of the surplus energy in
the system to act harmoniously along the lines of constructive action in
mind and body. A very important essential is to cultivate poise, which
means peace and power combined. Try to feel deeply calm throughout your
entire system, and at the same time, try to give full and positive
action to every power in your system. Try to hold in your system all the
energy generated, and the mere desire to do this will tend to bring
about what may be called accumulation of energy. To experiment, try for
several minutes to hold all your energy in your personality, and at the
same time, try to give all of that energy harmonious

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

action within your personality. In a few moments, you will actually feel
alive with power, and if you have succeeded very well with your
experiment, you will really feel like a storage battery for the time
being. You will have so much energy that you will feel as if you could
do almost anything. Experiment in this way at frequent intervals until
you get your system into the habit of carrying out this process
unconsciously. You will thereby cause your surplus energy to accumulate
more and more in your system, and you will produce what may be called a
highly charged condition of your personality, a condition that
invariably means the attainment of personal magnetism. To secure this
result, however, it is necessary to keep the mind in an undisturbed
attitude, to avoid all bad habits, physical or mental, to be in harmony
with everything and everybody, and to exercise full self-control under
every circumstance.

In cultivating this power, realize that it is the result of surplus
energy held in the system, and caused to circulate harmoniously through
every part of the system; remember that it is a power that does not act
intentionally upon persons or circumstances; that its aim is not to
control or influence anybody, but simply to act within the individual
self, and heighten the effect of everything that he may be or do.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Never think or speak of that which you do not wish to happen.*

*The whine, the sting and the sigh—these three must never appear in a
single thought or a single word.*

*You can win ten times as many friends by talking happiness as you can
by talking trouble. And the more real friends you have the less trouble
you will have.*

*Speak well of everything good you find and mean it. When you find what
you do not like keep quiet. The less you think or speak of what you do
not like the more you have of what you do like.*

*Magnify the good; emphasize that which has worth; and talk only of
those things that should live and grow.*

*When you have something good to say, say it. When you have something
ill to say, say something else*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. The Building Power of Constructive Speech](yfhu19)
