<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](caog04)  [Next](caog06.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Chaldean Account of Genesis*, by George Smith, \[1876\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span id="img_01900"></span> ![](img/01900.jpg)

### CHAPTER II.

### BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN LITERATURE.

<span class="small">Babylonian literature.—Kouyunjik
library.—Fragmentary condition.—Arrangement of
tablets.—Subjects.—Dates.—Babylonian source of literature.—Literary
period.—Babylonian Chronology.—Akkad.—Sumir.—Urukh, king of
Ur.—Hammurabi.—Babylonian astrology.—War of Gods.—Izdubar
legends.—Creation and fall.—Syllabaries and bilingual tablets.—Assyrian
copies.—Difficulties as to date.—Mutilated condition.—Babylonian
library.—Assyrian empire.—City of Assur.—Library at Calah.—Sargon of
Assyria.—Sennacherib.—Removal of Library to Nineveh.—Assurbanipal or
Sardanapalus.—His additions to library.—Description of contents.—Later
Babylonian libraries.</span>

<span id="img_01901"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/01901.jpg) |

IN order to understand the position of these legends it is necessary to
give some account of the wonderful literature of the Ancient Babylonians
and their copyists, the Assyrians. The fragments of terra cotta tablets
containing these legends were found in the débris which covers the
palaces called the South West Palace and the North Palace at Kouyunjik;
the former building being of the age of Sennacherib, the latter
belonging to the time of Assurbanipal. The tablets, which are of all
sizes, from one inch long to over a foot square, are nearly all in
fragments, and

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

in consequence of the changes which have taken place in the ruins the
fragments of the same tablet are sometimes scattered widely apart. It
appears from a consideration of the present positions of the fragments
that they were originally in the upper chambers of the palace, and have
fallen on the destruction of the building. In some of the lower chambers
they lay covering the whole floor, in other cases they lay in groups or
patches on the pavement, and there are occasional clusters of fragments
at various heights in the earth which covers the buildings. The other
fragments are scattered singly through all the upper earth which covers
the floors and walls of the palace. Different fragments of the same
tablets and cylinders are found in separate chambers which have no
immediate connection with each other, showing that the present
distribution of the fragments has nothing to do with the original
position of the tablets.

A consideration of the inscriptions shows that these tablets have been
arranged according to their subjects in various positions in the
libraries. Stories or subjects were commenced on tablets and continued
on other tablets of the same size and form, in some cases the number of
tablets in a series and on a single subject amounting to over one
hundred.

Each subject or series of tablets had a title, the title being formed by
the first phrase or part of phrase in the subject. Thus, the series of
Astrological tablets, numbering over seventy tablets, bore the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

title "When the gods Anu, Elu," this being the commencement of the first
tablet. At the end of every tablet in each series was written its number
in the work, thus: "the first tablet of "When the gods Anu, Elu," the
second tablet of "When the gods Anu, Elu," &c. &c.; and, further to
preserve the proper position of each tablet, every one except the last
in a series had at the end a catch phrase, consisting of the first line
of the following tablet. There were beside, catalogues of these
documents written like them on clay tablets, and other small oval
tablets with titles upon them, apparently labels for the various series
of works. All these arrangements show the care taken with respect to
literary matters. There were regular libraries or chambers, probably on
the upper floors of the palaces, appointed for the store of the tablets,
and custodians or librarians to take charge of them. It is probable that
all these regulations were of great antiquity, and were copied like the
tablets from the Babylonians.

Judging from the fragments discovered, it appears probable that there
were in the Royal Library at Nineveh over 10,000 inscribed tablets,
including almost every subject in ancient literature.

In considering a subject like the present one it is a point of the
utmost importance to define as closely as possible the date of our
present copies of the legends, and the most probable period at which the
original copies may have been inscribed. By far the greatest number of
the tablets brought from Nineveh

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

belong to the age of Assurbanipal, who reigned over Assyria B.C. 670,
and every copy of the Genesis legends yet found was inscribed during his
reign. The statements on the present tablets are conclusive on this
point, and have not been called in question, but it is equally stated
and acknowledged on all hands that these tablets are not the originals,
but are only copies from earlier texts. It is unfortunate that the date
of the original copies is never preserved, and thus a wide door is
thrown open for difference of opinion on this point. The Assyrians
acknowledge themselves that this literature was borrowed from Babylonian
sources, and of course it is to Babylonia we have to look to ascertain
the approximate dates of the original documents. The difficulty here is
increased by the following considerations: it appears that at an early
period in Babylonian history a great literary development took place,
and numerous works were produced which embodied the prevailing myths,
religion, and science of that day. Written many of them in a noble style
of poetry, and appealing to the strongest feelings of the people on one
side, or registering the highest efforts of their science on the other,
these texts became the standards for Babylonian literature, and later
generations were content to copy these writings instead of making new
works for themselves. Clay, the material on which they were written, was
everywhere abundant, copies were multiplied, and by the veneration in
which they were held these texts fixed and stereotyped the style

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

of Babylonian literature, and the language in which they were written
remained the classical style in the country down to the Persian
conquest. Thus it happens that texts of Rim-agu, Sargon, and Hammurabi,
who were one thousand years before Nebuchadnezzar and Nabonidus, show
the same language as the texts of these later kings, there being no
sensible difference in style to match the long interval between them.

There is, however, reason to believe that, although the language of
devotion and literature remained fixed, the speech of the bulk of the
people was gradually modified; and in the time of Assurbanipal, when the
Assyrians copied the Genesis legends, the common speech of the day was
in very different style. The private letters and despatches of this age
which have been discovered differ widely from the language of the
contemporary public documents and religious writings, showing the change
the language had undergone since the style of these was fixed. We have a
slightly similar case in England, where the language of devotion and the
style of the Bible differ in several respects from those of the English
of to-day.

These considerations show the difficulty of fixing the age of a document
from its style, and the difficulty is further increased by the
uncertainty which hangs over all Babylonian chronology.

Chronology is always a thorny subject, and dry and unsatisfactory to
most persons beside; some

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

notice must, however, be taken of it here, in order to show the reasons
for the dates and epochs fixed upon for the Genesis legends.

In this case the later chronology is not in question, and it is best to
start with the generally received date of about B.C. 1300 for the
conquest of Babylonia by Tugultininip, king of Assyria. Before this date
we have a period of about 250 years, during which a foreign race ruled
at Babylon. Berosus calls these foreigners Arabs, but nothing is known
as to their original home or race. It is supposed that this race came
into Babylonia, or obtained dominion there under a king named Hammurabi,
whose date is thus fixed about B.C. 1550. Many scholars do not agree to
this, and consider Hammurabi much more ancient; no one, however, fixes
him later than the sixteenth century B.C., so that the date B.C. 1550
may be accepted as the most moderate one possible for the epoch of
Hammurabi. The date of Hammurabi is of consequence in the question,
because there is no evidence of these legends being written after his
epoch.

This circumstance may be accounted for by the fact that during the
period following the conquest of Hammurabi the government was in the
hands of foreigners, and was much more centralized than it had been
before, Babylon being, so far as we know, the sole capital, the great
cities which had been centres of literature suffering a decline.

Before the time of Hammurabi, there ruled several

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

races of kings, of whom we possess numerous monuments. These monarchs
principally reigned at the cities of Ur, Karrak, Larsa, and Akkad. Their
inscriptions do not determine the length of their rule, but they
probably covered the period from B.C. 2000 to 1550. The name of the
monarch in whose time we have the first satisfactory evidence of
contemporary monuments is read Urukh, and in the present state of our
researches he may be fixed B.C. 2000. It must, however, be remarked that
many scholars place him at a much earlier date. From the time of Urukh
to that of Hammurabi the title of honour principally taken by the kings
is "King of Sumir and Akkad," that is, King of Lower and Upper
Babylonia. It appears probable that previous to the reign of Urukh the
two divisions of Sumir and Akkad were separate monarchies; and it is
therefore likely that any literature written before B.C. 2000 will show
evidences of this division.

The rough outlines of Babylonian chronology at this period may be
arranged as follows, always bearing in mind that the different dates are
the lowest we can fairly assume, and that several of them may be much
more ancient:—

Down to B.C. 2000 epoch of independent kingdoms in Babylonia; the
principal centre of activity being Akkad, a region on the Euphrates,
somewhere between latitudes 32° and 33°.

B.C. 2000. Era of Urukh, king of Ur, rise of Sumir, the southern part of
the country, Ur the metropolis.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

B.C. 1850. Era of Ismi-dagan, king of Karrak, Karrak the metropolis.

B.C. 1700. Rise of Larsa as metropolis.

B.C. 1600. Era of Sargon, king of Akkad; revival of the power of Akkad.

B.C. 1550. Era of Hammurabi, king of Babylon. Babylon the metropolis.

Although we cannot fix the dates of any monuments before the time of
Urukh, B.C. 2000, it is quite certain that there were buildings and
inscriptions before that date; and there are two literary works which I
should judge to be certainly older than this epoch, namely, the great
Chaldean work on Astrology, and a legend which, for want of a better
title, I call the Exploits of Lubara.

The Chaldean work, containing the bulk of their astrology, appears to
belong to the northern half of the country, that is to Akkad, and always
speaks of Akkad as a separate state, and implies it to be the leading
state. It mentions besides, the kingdoms of Subartu, Martu, or Syria,
Gutim or Goim, and Elam, and some parts, perhaps of later date than the
body of the work, give also the kingdoms of Kassi, Kissati, or the
peoples, Nituk or Asmun, Sumir, Yamutbal, and Assan. In the body of the
work there appear glosses, apparently later additions, mentioning kings
of the period B.C. 2000 to 1850. I have not noticed any gloss containing
a royal name later than the kings of Ur.

The work I have provisionally called "The Exploits

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

of Lubara," and which also bears evidence of great antiquity, is a much
shorter one, for while there are over seventy large tablets of the
astrology, this, on the other hand, only contained five small tablets.
This work notices a large number of peoples or states, the principal
being the people of the coast, Subartu, Assyria, Elam, Kassi, Sutu,
Goim, Lullubu, Akkad; the uniting of Sumir and Akkad, which was
accomplished at least B.C. 2000, is not mentioned, but the notice of the
Assyrians is rather an argument for a later date than I have chosen.

The Izdubar legends, containing the story of the Flood, and what I
believe to be the history of Nimrod, were probably written in the south
of the country, and at least as early as B.C. 2000. These legends were,
however, traditions before they were committed to writing, and were
common in some form to all the country. The story of the Creation and
Fall belongs to the upper or Akkad division of the country, and may not
have been committed to writing so early as the Izdubar legends; but even
this is of great antiquity.

About the same time as the account of the Creation, a series of tablets
on evil spirits, which contained a totally different tradition of the
Creation, was probably written; and there is a third account from the
City of Cutha, closely agreeing in some respects with the account handed
down by Berosus, which I should provisionally place about the same date.
It seems, from the indications in the inscriptions, that

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

there happened in the interval B.C. 2000 to 1850 a general collecting
and development of the various traditions of the Creation, Flood, Tower
of Babel, and other similar legends.

A little later, about B.C. 1600, a new set of astrological tablets was
written, together with a long work on terrestrial omens; these appear to
belong to the kingdom and period of Sargon, king of Akkad.

Some at least, and probably most of the syllabaries, bilingual and
explanatory tablets, grammars and vocabularies, belong to this period
also; but a few are of later date.

In spite of the indications as to peculiarities of worship, names of
states and capitals, historical allusions and other evidence, it may
seem hazardous to many persons to fix the dates of original documents so
high, when our only copies in many cases are Assyrian transcripts made
in the reign of Assurbanipal, in the seventh century B.C.; but one or
two considerations may show that this is a perfectly reasonable view,
and no other likely period can be found for the original composition of
the documents unless we ascend to a greater antiquity. In the first
place, it must be noticed that the Assyrians themselves state that the
documents were copied from ancient Babylonian copies, and in some cases
state that the old copies were partly illegible even in their day.
Again, in one case there is actual proof of the antiquity of a text, an
Assyrian copy of part of which is published in "Cuneiform Inscriptions,"
vol. ii. plate 54, Nos.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 3 & 4. In a
collection of tablets discovered by Mr. Loftus at Senkereh, belonging,
according to the kings mentioned in it, to about B.C. 1600, is part of
an ancient Babylonian copy of this very text, the Babylonian copy being
about one thousand years older than the Assyrian one.

It is, however, probable that most of the legends treated of in the
present volume had existed as traditions in the country long before they
were committed to writing, and some of these traditions, as embodied in
the various works, exhibit great difference in details, showing that
they had passed through many changes.

Taking the period of literary development in Babylonia as extending from
B.C. 2000 to 1550, we may say, it roughly synchronizes with the period
from Abraham to Moses, according to the ordinary chronology of our
Bibles, and during this period it appears that traditions of the
creation of the universe, and human history down to the time of Nimrod,
existed parallel to, and in some points identical with, those given in
the Book of Genesis.

Many of the documents embodying these traditions have been discovered in
sadly mutilated condition, but there can be no doubt that future
explorations will reveal more perfect copies, and numerous companion and
explanatory texts, which will one day clear up the difficulties which
now meet us at every step of their consideration.

So far as known contemporary inscriptions are

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

concerned, we cannot consider our present researches and discoveries as
anything like sufficient to give a fair view of the literature of
Assyria and Babylonia, and, however numerous and important are the
Genesis legends, they form but a small portion of the whole literature
of the country.

It is generally considered that the earliest inscriptions of any
importance which we now possess belong to the time of Urukh, king of Ur,
whose age may be placed with great probability about two thousand years
before the Christian era.

The principal inscriptions of this period consist of texts on bricks and
on signet cylinders, and some of the latter may be of much greater
antiquity. Passing down to the period of the kingdoms of Karrak, Larsa,
and Akkad, we find a great accession of literary material, almost every
class of writing being represented by contemporary specimens. It is
certain that even then the inscribed clay tablets were not isolated, but
already they were arranged in collections or libraries, and these
collections were placed at some of the principal cities. From Senkerch
and its neighbourhood have come our earliest specimens of these literary
tablets, the following being some of the contents of this earliest known
library:—

1\. Mythological tablets, including lists of the gods, and their
manifestations and titles.

2\. Grammatical works, lists of words, and explanations.

3\. Mathematical works, calculations, tables, cube and square root,
measures.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

4\. Astronomy, astrology, and omens.

5\. Legends and short historical inscriptions.

6\. Historical cylinders, one of Kudur-mabuk, B.C. 1600 (the earliest
known cylinder), being in the British Museum.

7\. Geographical tablets, and lists of towns and countries.

8\. Laws and law cases, sale and barter, wills and loans.

Such are the inscriptions from the libraries of the early inhabitants of
Babylonia, and beside these there are numerous texts, only known to us
through later copies, but which certainly had their origin as early as
this period.

Passing down from this period, for some centuries we find only detached
inscriptions, accompanied by evidence of the gradual shifting both of
the political power and literary activity from Babylonia to Assyria.

In Assyria the first centre of Literature and seat of a library was the
city of Assur (Kileh Shergat), and the earliest known tablets date about
B.C. 1500.

Beyond the scanty records of some of the monarchs nothing of value
remains of this library for several centuries, and the Assyrian literary
works are only known from later copies.

A revival of the Assyrian empire began under Assur-nazir-pal, king of
Assyria, who ascended the throne B.C. 885. He rebuilt the city of Calah
(Nimroud), and this city became the seat of an Assyrian library. Tablets
were procured from Babylonia by

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shalmaneser, son
of Assur-nazir-pal, B.C. 860, during the reign of Nabu-bal-idina, king
of Babylon, and these were copied by the Assyrian scribes, and placed in
the royal library. Vul-nirari, grandson of Shalmaneser, B.C. 812, added
to the Calah library, and had tablets written at Nineveh. Assurnirari,
B.C. 755, continued the literary work, some mythological tablets being
dated in his reign.

Tiglath Pileser, B.C. 745, enlarged the library, and placed in it
various copies of historical inscriptions. It was, however, reserved for
Sargon, who founded the last Assyrian dynasty, B.C. 722, to make the
Assyrian royal library worthy of the empire. Early in his reign he
appointed Nabu-suqub-gina principal librarian, and this officer set to
work making new copies of all the standard works of the day. During the
whole of his term of office copies of the great literary works were
produced, the majority of the texts preserved belonging to the early
period previous to B.C. 1600.

In the period which followed there was a general revival of all the
ancient works which had escaped destruction, and the study of this early
literature became a marked feature of the time.

Sennacherib, son of Sargon, B.C. 705, continued to add to his father's
library at Calah, but late in his reign he removed the collection from
that city to Nineveh, where from this time the national library remained
until the fall of the empire.

Esarhaddon, son of Sennacherib, B.C. 681, further

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

increased the national collection, most of his works being of a
religious character.

Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, the Sardanapalus of the Greeks, B.C.
673, was the greatest of the Assyrian sovereigns, and he is far more
memorable on account of his magnificent patronage of learning than on
account of the greatness of his empire or the extent of his wars.

Assurbanipal added more to the Assyrian royal library than all the kings
who had gone before him, and it is to tablets written in his reign that
we owe almost all our knowledge of the Babylonian myths and early
history, beside many other important matters.

The agents of Assurbanipal sought everywhere for inscribed tablets,
brought them to Nineveh, and copied them there; thus the literary
treasures of Babylon, Borsippa, Cutha, Akkad, Ur, Erech, Larsa, Nipur
and various other cities were transferred to the Assyrian capital to
enrich the great collection there.

The fragments brought over to Europe give us a good idea of this library
and show the range of the subjects embraced by this collection of
inscriptions. Among the different classes of texts, the Genesis stories
and similar legends occupied a prominent place; these, as they will be
further described in the present volume, need only be mentioned here.
Accompanying them we have a series of mythological tablets of various
sorts, varying from legends of the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

gods, psalms, songs, prayers, and hymns, down to mere allusions and
lists of names. Many of these texts take the form of charms to be used
in sickness and for the expulsion of evil spirits; some of them are of
great antiquity, being at least as old as the creation and Izdubar
legends. One fine series concerns the cure of witchcraft, a superstition
fully believed in in those days. Izdubar is mentioned in one of these
tablets as lord of the oaths or pledges of the world.

Some of the prayers were for use on special occasions, such as on
starting on a campaign, on the occurrence of an eclipse, &c. Astronomy
and Astrology were represented by various detached inscriptions and
reports, but principally by the great work on these subjects covering
over seventy tablets which was borrowed from the early Chaldeans, and
many copies of which were in the Library of Assurbanipal. This work on
Astrology and Astronomy was, as I have already stated, one of the most
ancient texts in the Euphrates valley.

There were also numerous copies of a long work on Terrestrial omens,
which appears to date from the time of Sargon, king of Akkad, about B.C.
1600. In this work everything in nature is supposed to portend some
coming event.

There is a fragment of one Astrological tablet which professes to be
copied from an original of the time of Izdubar.

Historical texts formed another section of the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

library, and these included numerous copies of inscriptions of early
Babylonian kings; there were beside, chronological tablets with lists of
kings and annual officers, inscriptions of various Assyrian monarchs,
histories of the relations between Assyria and Babylonia, Elam, and
Arabia, treaties, despatches, proclamations. and reports on the state of
the empire and military affairs.

Natural history was represented by tables of animals; mammals, birds,
reptiles, fishes, insects, and plants, trees, grasses, reeds, and
grains, earths, stones, &c. These lists are classified according to the
supposed nature and affinities of the various species, and show
considerable advance in the sciences. Mathematics had a place in the
library, there being problems, figures, and calculations; but this
branch of learning was not studied so fully as in Babylonia.

Grammar and Lexicography were better represented, there being many works
do these subjects, including lists of the signs and explanations,
declension of nouns, conjugation of verbs, examples of syntax, bilingual
tables, explanatory lists, &c. All these tablets were copied from the
Babylonians. In law and civil matters the library was also rich, and the
tablets serve to show that the same laws and customs prevailed in
Assyria as in Babylonia. There are codes of laws law cases, sale,
barter, loans, lists of property, lists of titles and trades, tribute,
and taxes, &c.

In Geography the Assyrians were not very forward;

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

but there are lists of countries and their productions, of cities,
rivers, mountains, and peoples.

Such are some of the principal contents of the great library from which
we have obtained our copies of the Creation and Flood legends, most of
the tablets were copied from early Babylonian inscriptions, the original
copies of the works have in most cases disappeared; but these remarkable
inscriptions have preserved to us texts which show the wonderful advance
made by the people of Chaldea before the time of Moses. Babylonian
literature, which had been the parent of Assyrian writing, revived after
the fall of Nineveh, and Nebuchadnezzar and his successors 'made Babylon
the seat of a library rivalling that of Assurbanipal at Nineveh. Of this
later development of Babylonian literature we know very little,
explorations being still required to bring to light the texts of this
epoch. Few fragments only, discovered by wandering Arabs or recovered by
chance travellers, have yet turned up, but there is in them evidence
enough to promise a rich reward to future excavators.

<span id="img_03600"></span> ![](img/03600.jpg)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Chaldean Legends Transmitted Through Berosus and
Other Ancient Authors](caog06.md)

</div>
