[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](htaq04)  [Next](htaq06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662316/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hidden Treasures of the Ancient Qabalah*, by Elias Gewurz, \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>THE HOLY SUPPER</p>
<p>The Holy Supper is kept, indeed,<br />
Whenever we share another's need.<br />
Not what we give, but what we share,<br />
The gift without the giver is bare.<br />
He who giveth Himself with his gift, feedeth three,<br />
Himself, his needy neighbor, and Me.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

*Spiritual Companionship Between Man and Woman*

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>What matter if I stand alone?<br />
  I wait with joy the coming years;<br />
My heart shall reap where it has sown,<br />
  And garner up its fruit of tears.<br />
The stars come nightly to the sky;<br />
  The tidal wave unto the sea;<br />
Nor time nor space nor deep nor High<br />
  Can keep my own away from me.<br />
                            —Burroughs</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### III.

### SPIRITUAL COMPANIONSHIP BETWEEN MAN AND WOMAN

In the ancient temples of Egypt and Chaldea they used to tell the
neophyte that whenever he met some truly congenial companion during his
subsequent career, it would he a sign that the time of his probation was
nearing to the end and that he was soon to be recognized and accepted as
a disciple of a great Master. As a rule, those who enter upon the path
must dwell alone; solitude and loneliness are their lot. It is only when
they have learned to stand alone and to remain unshaken that they are
allowed the companionship of a friend. The social life of a man
distracts the soul and makes it depend upon the whirl and change of
events for its sustenance. When the soul is to awaken to its new and
true life, these kaleidoscopic changes must give way to

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

constancy and unity. This cannot be the case until man has been tried
and proven in the furnace of affliction. When he has tasted of the
bitterness of life's cup and emptied it to the very dregs, when one
after the other of what we call life's joys have been taken from him and
he has lost his health, his possessions and his friends too, then a
sense of utter loneliness comes upon him and he enters what the mystics
call the great void. Here he has to stand his trial. If he passes it
successfully, he is admitted into the inner court of the temple, and
permitted to know the true character of his Karma and the laws under
which it operates.

Ordinarily the children of men are ignorant of Karmic law, and they do
not know the ways and the means by which they are judged. But the
disciple does know these things and this knowledge enables him to work
with the law consciously and intelligently. As soon as he can do that,
Karma relaxes its rigidity and, instead of the measure of judgment, the
Lords of Karma grant

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

him the measure of mercy. That is to say, he can now partake of the
things of this world and be in it, without being of it.

Spiritual companionship is one of the blessings that come into the
disciple's life at this period. He begins to recover his friends, but
this time they are friends of the soul and hound unto him by ties of
spiritual affinity. What a comfort and a joy to the suffering soul when
she finds a sister soul here on earth in whose company she can make her
pilgrimage to the other shore! Blessed are the souls that do find one
another while on their journey homeward bound. The help they can render
each other covers many planes; the various forces human beings are
possessed of, magnetic, electric, sympathetic, mental, psychic and moral
are all capable of being raised to higher planes of activity. They are
all biological in their essence, and, as such subject to the dominance
of the spiritual will.

The union of two beings strengthens the dominion of the will, and
especially is this the case if the union is between members of

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the opposite sex. The reason for this is the difference in the
magnetisms of the male and female bodies. Every atom in our constitution
is surrounded by a magnetic circle. This magnetic circle consists of
positive and negative particles, balancing each other. The mental and
spiritual particles of our higher bodies are likewise constituted.
Between two human beings of the opposite sex—provided their mentalities
are congenial—the same relation exists on a larger scale. The electric
elements preponderating in the male organism are balanced by the
magnetic currents of the female body acid the harmonious exchange of the
magnetisms thus generated is the cause of that feeling of exhilaration
and joy which a pure companionship between man and woman invariably
produces. So much so, that it often seems that the physical bodies have
no weight, but appear to float along without effort. No wonder that the
participants in such a union looked forward with great delight to the
time when they would meet. The old-fashioned conception of life, the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

prudery and restraint in the social intercourse of men and women, were
responsible for a great deal of harm. Untold misery was the result of
most of the marriage-relationships, because the partners did not know
each other sufficiently. But apart from it, the most innocent contact
between the sexes was looked upon askance by people whose minds have not
been pure enough to think of love as a Divine gift that can be expressed
on many planes much higher than the physical. Happily, these notions are
gradually passing away and man and woman can sustain friendly relations
to each other. The evil-minded person, who thinks of wrong at the sight
of what is God's most perfect gift to the children of men, that person
condemns himself because the evil he sees is in his own mind only. "To
the pure all things are pure." To return to our subject, the magnetisms
streaming out from the auras of man and woman are differently
constituted. Through their interblending, positive and negative
life-elements are obtained. This interblending creates life, and

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

life is not a material substance, but a spiritual element, highly
refined and potential with great possibilities and with great power.

Now all these benefits to be derived from the association between man
and woman are non-existent for those who have not yet mastered their
passions and lower emotions. People who live on the lower planes of life
may derive a certain pleasure according to their evolutionary status,
but this is not what we are here concerned with. The aspirant striving
to enter the temple of knowledge and wishing to taste of the heavenly
joys of pure and undefiled love must have subdued his desire nature; his
mind must be like a limpid lake, calm and tranquil, on the surface of
which not a ripple is to be seen.

Having accomplished this purification, man and woman are fit to be
spiritual companions, but not otherwise. That it is worth while to go
through this ordeal has been testified to by all who have attained unto
the goal. There is a love which few have known. It is the love that
opens the soul's

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

inner portals and admits our spirit into the holy of holies, the
sanctuary of the pure soul. There the glory of the Divine image is
restored, and nature crowns the victor with the laurels of a consummate
happiness, of which in ordinary life there is naught to serve us as an
illustration.

Wisdom, the ultimate aim of life, can only be acquired if the law leas
been fulfilled. The fulfillment of the law implies that we have had our
share of all experiences—if some of them are missed our education is
incomplete. Before we attain unto final liberation we must ascend the
ladder of earthly life and view from every rung of it the world around
us. It is this which is meant when we are told "to look intelligently
into the heart of men." We must learn our own lessons, even the highest,
by passing through the full gamut of the things which human life has to
offer. There are, [however](errata.htm#4), two ways of passing it—the
lawful one and the lawless one.

The lawful way of gaining experience on earth is the partaking of all it
has to offer

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

under the guidance of the Spirit and only in proportion to the Spirit's
actual needs. Lawlessness steps in when we desire for the sake of desire
and do not respect the Soul's protestations. The disciple to whom desire
is only a means of gaining knowledge uses it in accordance with the
eternal design which called it forth. On whatever plane desire exists,
it is only a means to an end for him and he does not allow it to tarnish
his higher nature, or to create within him the germ of attachment to any
form or shape of it. This resignation in the midst of the objects of
desire is productive of great and lasting strength. The continual
balancing of the centrifugal and centripetal forces of spirit generates
the Divine power of overcoming all the ailments of body and soul and
endows us with the supreme virtue of healing all manner of disease.

The spiritual companionship between man and woman has the acquisition of
this power for its purpose. Owing to her experience in past lives,
woman's interior nature is more centered in love than man's and
consequently

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

she supplies the necessary welding power to hold man's psychical and
spiritual natures to a given centre. The Divine self though ever present
in both sexes cannot appear to us, unless the love and power elements
are blended and eternal silence has been borne in the soul.

As man and woman grow in spiritual worth, their power and influence for
good go on increasing and they become focal points for the hosts of
heaven watching over humanity. Under the guidance of these guardians,
and, while doing their bidding and cultivating their higher nature, man
and woman grow in all excellence.

Those treading the path of discipleship find great help in such a
congenial companionship. The continuous transmutation of bodily
structure is attained and furthered through such soul communion; and
through the mental activity consequent upon it, the body is changed cell
by cell. This transmutation is the same as the alchemic process by which
food and drink and breath are changed into blood, from blood into aerial

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

fluid and then into etheric or mental substance. Then the ego touches it
by its own vibrations and it becomes more etherealized into soul or
auraic essence.

Every conscious effort we make to uplift and refine the physical body is
a step towards the quickening of our spiritual faculties, the deepening
of our insight and the increase in wisdom and understanding. The process
of life is a continuous chain of sublimation and refinement.

Beginning with the lowest and crudest forms of matter right up to the
highest expression of life, everything is undergoing evolution and
transformation. Speaking of matter, we are thinking of tangible material
such as we can see or touch or recognize by the physical senses, but air
is matter and we live completely immersed in it and in other airs, that
is to say, finer elements than the one we call air. In these tenuous
regions our evolution is going on while we are unaware of it. But all
the same is the substance of those planes subject to the universal law
of transmutation. We are, as it were, unconscious agents of nature on
those

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

planes, and she uses us to effect her designs everywhere.

The higher virtues of love and devotion subserve this purpose of
refinement on the higher planes. You often heard it stated by our great
teachers that the sentiment of love purifies the emotional body; so does
the sentiment of devotion. It virtually then comes to it that, even when
we think that we are acting in a most spontaneous way, bestowing our
love upon the object of our affection, or offering our devotion to our
ideal, even then we are only instruments of nature who works through us
like a clever craftsman in the execution of his plans.

At the same time, we must bear in mind that when we are used as agents
on those higher planes, it is well with us because we are then free from
the lower forms of Karma to which those on the material plane of life
are still subject. This is one of the benefits of spiritual
companionship; it advances us by planting within us the seeds of love
and veneration and turning the emotional and passional forces of our
nature

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

towards the inmost and the highest, thus giving us a foretaste of the
pure and selfless Divine love which we shall some day realize on the
higher ranges of cosmic life.

To conclude, let us review the main benefits derivable from the
association of man and woman in a pure spiritual companionship. First,
the relation must be established between people of congenial natures;
they must love the same things and be devoted to the same ideal; the
more such ideals they have in common, the better for them, for their
ties are strengthened thereby.

Second in importance, but not to be underestimated, is the physical
constitution of those associating. Some people think they can slight
this aspect but it is not so. Though true sympathy is of an interior
nature, it must not be forgotten that our senses are avenues to the
spirit and things that are to commend themselves to the Spirit must be
pleasing and acceptable to its sentinels outside, which we call our
senses.

Perfect sympathy can only subsist between partners whose bodily
constitutions

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

only introduce true harmony into their relationship. Where the slightest
repulsion exists, owing to external antipathy, the bond of union must
needs be weakened. If harmony has been established on the physical,
mental and spiritual planes, and the purpose of the given association is
to serve the highest which both partners cognize, then Divine revelation
comes to them and enlightens them in all things. It is the Voice of God
in the garden telling how to crown the sanctified life with beauty and
joy and how to make it a milestone for the wayfarers of succeeding
generations.

Star to star vibrates light, why not soul to soul? If the purpose of
life is beneficent, as we know it is, is it not the duty of each being
to serve as a channel for the spread of light and the increase of joy?
When two human beings are united for this object on earth, the angelic
hosts on high bless their union and take them into their charge. They
are led through the highways and byways of life and shown the untold
misery and suffering calling for aid and comfort. Looking

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

round them, they learn how to love those who know not what love is, how
to pity, how to help and how to grow God-like. Thus strengthened by
their own devotion to each other, they pass along on their mission of
mercy, pouring out their benedictions upon the needy and distressed with
whom their Karma brings them in contact. Their own pure personal love
has taught them love Divine which is purer still.

Having profited by their association in body, mind and soul, they now
work on the plane of spirit, as servants of the most high God. Truly
blessed is the portion of such, for they have found favor above all
other mortals, and, even when all things of earth shall pass away, their
loving deeds will live. For such there is no fear of death, for, having
fulfilled the cycle of their destiny on earth, they will continue their
labors of love in the regions beyond, in the gracious presence of the
Lord of Hosts, of whom we are told that "His mercies endure forever and
his compassions never fail."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Knowledge of God Obtainable Through Love Pure and
Undefiled](htaq06)
