[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](htaq07)  [Next](htaq09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662316/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hidden Treasures of the Ancient Qabalah*, by Elias Gewurz, \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

*The Peace That Passeth Understanding*

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>For only they who in full completeness<br />
  Have drained life's wine to its very lees,<br />
With all its bitterness and all its sweetness<br />
  Can joy completely in God's great peace.<br />
                          —Hawthorne</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### VI.

### THE PEACE THAT PASSETH UNDERSTANDING

Saint [Augustine](errata.htm#5) was one of those few Church Fathers
gifted with the true vision. One of his beautiful sayings is to the
effect that "Our hearts shall ever be restless until they find rest in
God." In the course of out journey through life we try to assuage our
pain by many things. We plunge into work and think that will make us
forget the dreariness of our existence, but, failing to find
satisfaction in work, we try pleasure, and naturally that, too, is
disappointing—even more so. And so again we try mental culture, but with
no greater success, and then we despair and begin to wonder whether
there are such things as peace and contentment to be found in this
valley of tears we call earth. Despair is generally a forerunner of
better things, and when a man is good

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

enough to despair of himself, it shows there is still something left in
him worth tribulation. This something begins to show its vitality when
it alone, of all things, has been left. Tolstoy says that man's worth to
the community where he lives and to the world in general, dates from the
day on which he knows himself to be worthless—when he loses all, he
gains all. To the seekers of peace something similar happens. Peace is a
plant which grows in the desert of our inner nature only. When
everything has become like a desert, when everything has been dried up,
even our tears, when we can no longer cry, and the very flower of life
has faded, then Peace germinates in the parched soil of the desolate
heart; and, just like the fair flowers in the garden, our lives begin to
emanate their sweetest fragrance when we are bruised and wilted and
altogether trodden down. This applies to the occult life especially; the
occult life—the one we have to live in this world, surrounded by its
hardships and cares. Our every relation to people and environment

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

is indicative of our occult status. The circumstances are our teachers
and, if we do not learn from them, our life has been lived in vain.

Just look at the rose, and its form and color, the fine lovely texture
of its petals and its sweet aroma. It is only because the sweet spirit
that animates it knew how to adapt itself to its environment and to
attract all that was needful for its growth and perfection, that the
rose became what it is. The same law holds good on the human plane. Let
us be like the spirit of the rose and we, too, shall dispense the
benediction of our qualities to all that pass by. Those who seek peace
must vibrate it themselves. But peace cannot be found before its time,
for it must be borne in mind that for long periods during our evolution
strife and stress are necessary. When, however, the time arrives for the
soul of man to rest from her toils, there enters the heart a kind of
rhythm which we call peace.

Peace is to the heart what rhythm is to matter; even in the physical
organism, a

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

kind of rhythmic peace must obtain. The soul's atoms are mingled with
other lower atoms, but never combined. An illustration from chemistry
will help us to understand this clearly:

Oxygen in pure air is mixed, but not combined, with nitrogen. When these
two gases are combined, according to their proportions, the result is a
deadly poison. This is exactly the internal process. When the atoms of
the various parts are mingled harmoniously, the result is physical and
spiritual well-being; when discord ruptures the rhythm of their
vibrations and their harmonious balance, disintegration sets in and
disease results.

If matter moves rhythmically, it is pleasing to our eyes, and our
feeling on beholding it is a restful one. In the heart of man peace
fulfills the same functions. Without it nothing of worth can be
accomplished by man; while to the peaceful soul all things are possible.

The mistake modern intellectualism makes is in believing that the brain
is the

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

real agent in all important work; the serious observer of life knows
this to be a fallacy. The brain is not the important part of the house
in which man resides. The centre of life is the heart, and, if
consciousness does not take its residence in the centre of life, it will
become separate from life and cease to be. Those who desire to develop
spiritually must think with their hearts.

Man is a constellation of powers in which all kinds of seeds are
contained. The heart is the seat of the central power from which all the
others derive their vitality and inspiration. That they may live and
function properly, the central power must be at peace with itself and
with each one of them. When this is the case, peace reigns supreme and
registers itself in the countenance by an attractive angelic radiance.
Kindliness and peacefulness always produce beauty and give the face a
touch of heaven, for beauty is the light of the soul reflected in the
forms of matter.

All of us have at one time or another met people who were a perpetual
mystery to us,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

owing to their constant and changeless calm. Nothing seemed to ruffle
them; they took everything just as it happened, and everybody just as he
was. They seemed to desire no change and no variation of anything. They
were the people who have discovered the secret of peace. As long as
"man's inhumanity to man makes countless millions mourn," that peace is
beyond attainment for the majority of the race. When the Sun of
righteousness arises some day and man realizes the unity of all that
lives and breathes, peace will be his. At present it must be won by a
prayer of the individual soul, who feels sorely in need of it. There are
thousands of such souls everywhere, and to them the message from on High
has come down, "Call upon me and I will answer thee, and I will show
thee great and mighty things, and I will heal thee and give thee an
abundance of truth and peace."

True prayer has a scientific basis; its effect is as certain as that of
any other cause in nature. Let us pray for peace and we shall obtain it,
even in the midst of stress

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

and storm. When it enters our hearts, we shall know it by the feeling of
reconciliation with which it will suffuse our whole being. After that we
shall rebel against nothing. For God is enough, and his abiding presence
in the soul of man makes her desire naught else.

Thus in the silence which follows the storm the precious jewel is found.
At last the harassed soul is at rest and, self-contained, wishes for
nothing outside herself. She has found the peace of God, the peace which
the world cannot give, neither can it take it away; the peace which
passeth all understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Justice and Mercy](htaq09)
