[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](htaq05)  [Next](htaq07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662316/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hidden Treasures of the Ancient Qabalah*, by Elias Gewurz, \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

*The Knowledge of God Obtainable Through Love Pure and Undefiled*

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>A picket frozen on his duty,<br />
  A mother starved for her brood,<br />
Socrates drinking the Hemlock,<br />
  And Jesus on the Rood.<br />
And the millions who, humble and nameless,<br />
  The narrow pathway of duty have trod;<br />
Some call it consecration,<br />
  While others call it God</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### IV.

### THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD OBTAINABLE THROUGH LOVE PURE AND UNDEFILED

The vague notions still prevailing among leaders of thought as to what
constitutes the summum bonum, the highest happiness, are responsible for
most of the chaos of our social life and our systems of education. As
long as we are not quite certain as to what the goal of humanity really
is, we cannot possibly order our lives to the best advantage. Man's
chief glory is the faculty whereby he knows. As long as material
conditions constrain him to spend the greater part of his life in manual
labor, he cannot of course devote much time to the cultivation of his
intellect; but, since the advent of scientific devices for labor-saving,
humanity has been in a better position to care for the intellectual
upliftment of the masses. The Higher Education has been increasing,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

art and literature are flourishing and every one, no matter how humble
he be, seems to be anxious for knowledge and eager for culture. With the
progress of the sciences, however, the problem arose how to utilize
their application so that it might result in the greatest happiness for
the greatest number. This is indeed a mighty problem, worthy of the
attention of the best and bravest of men. How can we use these God-given
gifts of inventors and their discoveries, so that they may not result in
multiplying human misery but rather in its reduction and final
elimination? The answer has not yet been found so far as practical life
is concerned. We still use our best energies and the most clever
intellects to manufacture implements of war and to organize bodies of
men against one another. Our economical conditions too are in a state of
perpetual disorder. Each man is for himself; millions are perishing
annually for lack of the very necessaries of life, and few of us seem to
care. There is plenty of food and an abundance of everything

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

to make life comfortable, but the good will seems to be lacking to make
all these good things subserve their proper purpose, namely, the welfare
of all.

As man masters nature and frees himself from her tyranny, the need for
utilizing all her forces to increase the sum total of human happiness
dawns upon him. He realizes the vanity of all things which narrow his
horizon and the poverty of even the greatest of pleasures if they serve
only the petty self. In this age and generation, the waves of social
sympathy rise very high and, amidst the indifference of the rich and
mighty ones, many a man says to himself, "I am my brother's keeper; his
troubles are mine, and I am responsible for his wellbeing." The public
institutions we possess, all the social arrangements for the welfare of
the poor and helpless ones, who have fallen by the wayside, are due to
the efforts of those chosen ones who have realized the seriousness of
life, and, wishing to make the best of it, are devoting their
possessions and their energies to ameliorate the conditions

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of the oppressed and downtrodden ones so as to bring a little of the
sweetness and light of civilization into the aching hearts of the
eternally disinherited. But man does not live by bread alone, and his
need of spiritual and intellectual sustenance is just as great and as
pressing as that of physical nourishment. The strongest desire of man is
to know. He wants to know the world in which he lives, the body he calls
his own, the soul he believes inspires him and the God from whom she
comes. All these things man wants to know, and the more time advances
towards the end of the cycle, the greater grows his eagerness for that
knowledge.

After securing the comforts of life and ease and leisure, man hungers
for mental and spiritual satisfaction. Of all the defects of the present
organization of society and of the cruelties consequent upon it, none is
so fatal to the welfare of man as the denial of knowledge to the
enquiring mind and of the chance of culture to the aspiring soul. The
absence of these opportunities

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

is the most blighting factor of the competitive system, because it
deprives man of his natural and legitimate right to acquire all the
knowledge he can about himself and his environment. The greatest
privileges of man being his capacity to know, anything that denies to
him the exercise of this faculty is an unmitigated evil. But it is not
only knowledge of material things which the mind craves; the desire to
know comprehends things unseen as well. The soul of man yearns for
nothing more deeply than for the knowledge of God. The vistas of
knowledge are infinite, but not even the highest can satisfy the heart
of man. It is only in the knowledge of God that man can find lasting
peace. "It is possible to know God," says an occult writer, but it is
not easy to acquire that knowledge. The Rosicrucians used to say, "In
order to know God one must be God," which means that we must transcend
ourselves altogether, and reach out to the sublime heights of the
Eternal. Unknown to the indifferent and slothful, God reveals

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

himself to the searching heart and rewards its persistent labors and
earnest seeking by the supreme gift of the knowledge of Himself.

"To know God is life eternal," says the apostle; the two are identical.
For in ordinary life our perspective is limited to this mundane plane,
and we can only know by means of the lower mind, but, when our intuition
takes the place of reason, and illumination that of speculation, we
know, even as we are known.

Here is a Heavenly promise to man: "Those who seek me, shall find me, if
they seek me with all their heart and all their soul." The trend of
modern life is towards the spiritual side of things. Science and
philosophy are both engaged in paving the way to a more intimate
acquaintance with things spiritual. Man as a unit, and as a member of
the collective body of the human race, seeks for God in everything he
does, but he does not always seek Him rightly, which is the reason of
his partial success; but the tendency of human endeavor is

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

growing more and more towards the spiritual. In all departments of life
men begin to realize the need for a readjustment of values and for the
subordination of the material side of life to the ideal one. This leads
to numerous improvements in the methods of labor and to social
reconstruction.

The love of God, being the crown of the inner life, is thus expressed in
practical life in the service of man. That passion, which formerly made
for acquisition, is now under the influence of growing knowledge
transmuted into the passion for doing good.

Ambition having fulfilled its purpose in former cycles, when infant
humanity wanted it as a spur to exertion and action, is now stepping
into the background and her place is taken by man's desire to serve and
to be useful. "God's own synonym is use," says a wise proverb, and, as
we were made in the image and likeness of God, it behooves us, also, to
be of use; only thus do we grow Godlike.

The knowledge of God is best acquired

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

by the practical expression of the Divine attributes in actual life. It
is the loving service we render wherever it is called for, which endows
us with these attributes. Love, pure and undefiled, expressed in
practical every-day life is God's own activity performed by His deputies
in human form on earth.

There are two paths of union with God, according to the mystics of old;
the path of Knowledge and the path of Love. Those who unite themselves
to God by knowledge will sooner or later see the need of love to
strengthen the bond of union, while those whose lives are full of
devotion must supplement their endeavors by searching and seeking after
the deeper mysteries of God-hood revealed by knowledge. The ancient
Sages, the great Masters of the Inner Wisdom, taught that the knowledge
of God, when obtained, makes of mortal man an immortal. The pure love
which helped the acquisition of that knowledge while the disciple was
treading the Path, provides him with his glorious garments when he

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

arrives at his destination. These garments are woven of good deeds done,
and of noble causes helped during the earthly life; on the heavenly
planes their memory becomes the germinating seed for deeds of mercy to
be done in future lives. The path of beauty and joy, the path of peace
and bliss, converge at the same point. From all sides do the wanderers
arrive, but the object of their pilgrimage is the same. It is the temple
of wisdom from whence light streameth out in all directions. Humanity
has to battle through the iron age with all the horrors incidental to
it, before man attains unto his spiritual consciousness. While the
battle lasts, every effort counts and every single step taken by the
individual pioneers brings mankind nearer to the portals of the
sanctuary in which all mysteries will be solved and all tears will be
dried. There man will learn to understand the secret of his voyage
through the cycles of time, and the purpose of his sojourn on earth.
Until that time arrives all our work is only preparatory.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

To utilize the fleeting moments, to obey the Spirits’ guidance, to
detach ourselves from all that drags us down and to join forces with all
that lifts us upward, that is our task for the present. The knowledge of
God is obtainable and will be ours, but the only way we can attain unto
it is by the constant practice of charity in thought, word and deed, and
by the expression of love pure and undefiled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Mystery of Time and Space](htaq07)
