<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn012) 
[Next](kn014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 13. *Concerning* <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>

   And <span class="small">TÂRÂ</span> (<span
class="small">TERAH</span>) begot a son and called him "<span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span>" (or, <span class="small">ABRÂM</span>).
And when <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> was twelve years old his
father <span class="small">TERAH</span> sent him to sell idols. And
<span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> said, "These are not gods that can
make deliverance"; and he took away the idols to sell even as his father
had commanded him. And he said unto those unto whom he would sell them,
"Do ye wish to buy gods that cannot make deliverance, \[things\] made of
wood, and stone, and iron, and brass, which the hand of an artificer
hath made?" And they refused to buy <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> the
idols from <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> because he himself had
defamed the images of his father. And as he was returning he stepped
aside from the road, and he set the images down, and looked at them, and
said unto them, "I wonder now if ye are able to do what I ask you at
this moment, and whether ye are able to give me bread to eat or water to
drink?" And none of them answered him, for they were pieces of stone and
wood; and he abused them and heaped revilings upon them, and they spake
never a word. And he buffeted the face of one, and kicked another with
his feet, and a third he knocked over and broke to pieces with stones,
and he said unto them, "If ye are unable to deliver yourselves from him
that buffeteth you, and ye cannot requite with injury him that injureth
you, how can ye be called 'gods'? Those who worship you do so in vain,
and as for myself I utterly despise you, and ye shall not be my gods."
Then he turned his face to the East, and he stretched out his hands and
said, "Be Thou my God, O Lord, Creator of the heavens and the earth,
Creator of the sun and the moon, Creator of the sea and the dry land,
Maker of the majesty of the heavens and the earth, and of that which is
visible and that which is invisible; O Maker of the universe, be Thou my
God. I place my trust in Thee, and from this day forth I will place my
trust in no other save Thyself." And then there appeared unto him a
chariot of fire which blazed, and <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> was
afraid and fell on his face on the ground; and \[God\] said unto him,
"Fear thou not, stand upright."<span
id="page_10_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_10_note_1) And He removed fear from
him.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_10">p. 10</span>

<span id="page_10_note_1"></span>[1](#page_10_fr_1) Compare Genesis xv.
1.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. Concerning the Covenant of ABRAHAM](kn014)

</div>
