<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn031) 
[Next](kn033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 32. *How the Queen brought forth and came to her own Country*

   And the Queen departed and came into the country of <span
class="small">BÂLÂ ZADÎSÂRĔYÂ</span> nine months and five days after she
<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> had separated from King <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span>. And the pains of childbirth laid hold upon
her, and she brought forth a man child, and she gave it to the nurse
with great pride and delight. And she tarried until the days of her
purification were ended, and then she came to her own country with great
pomp and ceremony. And her officers who had remained there brought gifts
to their mistress, and made obeisance to her, and did homage to her, and
all the borders of the country rejoiced at her coming. Those who were
nobles among them she arrayed in splendid apparel, and to some she gave
gold and silver, and hyacinthine and purple robes; and she gave them all
manner of things that could be desired. And she ordered her kingdom
aright, and none disobeyed her command; for she loved wisdom and God
strengthened her kingdom.

   And the child grew and she called his name <span
class="small">BAYNA-LEḤKEM</span>. And the child reached the age of
twelve years, and he asked his friends among the boys who were being
educated with him, and said unto them, "Who is my father?" And they said
unto him, "<span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King." And he went to
the Queen his mother, and said unto her, "O Queen, make me to know who
is my father." And the Queen spake unto him angrily, wishing to frighten
him so that he might not desire to go \[to his father\] saying, "Why
dost thou ask me about thy father? I am thy father and thy mother; seek
not to know any more." And the boy went forth from her presence, and sat
down. And a second time, and a third time he asked her, and he
importuned her to tell him. One day, however, she told him, saying, "His
country is far away, and the road thither is very difficult; wouldst
thou not rather be here?" And the youth <span
class="small">BAYNA-LEḤKEM</span> was handsome, and his whole body and
his members, and the bearing of his shoulders resembled those of King
<span class="small">SOLOMON</span> his father, and his eyes, and his
legs, and his <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> whole gait resembled those
of <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King. And when he was two and
twenty years old he was skilled in the whole art of war and of
horsemanship, and in the hunting and trapping of wild beasts, and in
everything that young men are wont to learn. And he said unto the Queen,
"I will go and look upon the face of my father, and I will come back
here by the Will of God, the Lord of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. How the King of ETHIOPIA travelled](kn033)

</div>
