<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn033) 
[Next](kn035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

### 34. *How the young man arrived in his mother's country*

   And when the young man arrived in his mother's country he rejoiced
there in the honour \[which he received\], and in the gifts \[that were
made\] to him. And when the people saw him they thought him to be the
perfect likeness of <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King. And
they made obeisance to him, and they said unto him, "Hail, the royal
father liveth!" And they brought unto him gifts and offerings, fatted
cattle and food, as to their king. And \[the people of\] the whole
country of <span class="small">GÂZÂ</span>, as far as the border of
<span class="small">JUDAH</span>, were stirred up and they said, "This
is King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>." And there were some who
said, "The King is in <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span> building his
house"—now he had finished building the House of God—and others said,
"This is <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King, the son of <span
class="small">DAVID</span>." And they were perplexed, and they disputed
with one another, and they sent off spies mounted on horses, who were to
seek out King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> and to find out if he
were actually in <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span>, or if he were
with them \[in <span class="small">GÂZÂ</span>\]. And the spies came to
the watchmen of the city of <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span>, and
they found King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> there, and they made
obeisance to him, and they said unto him, "Hail, may the royal father
live! \[Our\] country is disturbed because there hath come into it a
merchant who resembleth thee in form and appearance, without the
smallest alteration or variation. He resembleth thee in noble carriage
and in splendid form, and in stature and in goodly appearance; he
lacketh nothing in respect of these and is in no way different from
thyself. His eyes are gladsome, like unto those of a man who hath drunk
wine, his legs are graceful and slender, and the tower of his neck is
like unto the tower of <span class="small">DAVID</span> thy father. He
is like unto thee exactly in every respect, and every member of his
whole body is like unto thine."

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

   And King <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> answered and said unto
them, "Where is it then that he wisheth to go?" And they answered and
said unto him, "We have not enquired of him, for he is awesome like
thyself. But his own people, when we asked them, 'Whence have ye come
and whither do ye go?' said, 'We have come from the dominions of <span
class="small">HENDAKÊ</span> (<span class="small">CANDACE</span>) and
<span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and we are going to the country of
<span class="small">JUDAH</span> to King <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span>.'" And when King <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> heard this his heart was perturbed and he
was glad in his soul, for in those days he had no children, except a boy
who was seven years old and whose name was <span
class="small">ÎYÔRBE‛ÂM</span> (<span class="small">REHOBOAM</span>). It
happened to <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> even as Paul stateth,
saying, "God hath made foolishness the wisdom of this world,"<span
id="page_42_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_42_note_1) for <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> had made a plan in his wisdom and said, "By
one thousand women I shall beget one thousand men children, and I shall
inherit the countries of the enemy, and I will overthrow \[their\]
idols." But \[God\] only gave him three children. His eldest son was the
King of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, the son of the Queen of
<span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and was the firstborn of whom
\[God\] spake prophetically, "God sware unto <span
class="small">DAVID</span> in righteousness, and repented not, 'Of the
fruit of thy body will I make to sit upon thy throne.'"<span
id="page_42_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_42_note_2) And God gave unto <span
class="small">DAVID</span> His servant grace before Him, and granted
unto him that there should sit upon the throne of Godhead One of his
seed in the flesh, from the Virgin, and should judge the living and the
dead, and reward every man according to his work, One to whom praise is
meet, our Lord <span class="small">JESUS CHRIST</span>, for ever and
ever, Amen. And He gave him one on the earth who should become king over
the Tabernacle of the Law of the holy, heavenly <span
class="small">ZION</span>, that is to say, the King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. And as for those who reigned, who were
not \[of\] <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, that was due to the
transgression of the law and the commandment, whereat God was not
pleased.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="page_42_note_1"></span>[1](#page_42_fr_1) 1 Corinthians i. 20.

<span id="page_42_note_2"></span>[2](#page_42_fr_2) 2 Samuel vii. 17;
Psalm cxxxii. 11.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 35. How King SOLOMON sent to his son the commander of his
army](kn035)

</div>
