<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn055) 
[Next](kn057) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 56. *Of the Return of* <span class="small">ZADOK</span> *the Priest, and the giving of the Gift*

   And when <span class="small">ZADOK</span> the priest returned to
<span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King he found him sorrowful. And
the King answered and said unto <span class="small">ZADOK</span> the
priest, "When the Queen came there appeared to me by night this vision:
It <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> seemed as if I were standing in the
chamber of <span class="small">JERUSALEM</span>, and the sun came down
from heaven into the land of <span class="small">JUDAH</span>, and
lighted it up with great splendour. And having tarried a time it went
down and lighted up the Country of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>,
and it did not return to the land of <span class="small">JUDAH</span>.
And again the sun came down from heaven to the country of <span
class="small">JUDAH</span>, and lighted it up more brilliantly than it
did the first time; but the <span class="small">ISRAELITES</span> paid
no heed to it, and they wished to extinguish its light. And it rose
below the earth in a place where it was not expected, and it illumined
the country of <span class="small">RÔM</span>, and the country of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and afterwards all those who believed on
it."

   And <span class="small">ZADOK</span> the priest answered and said
unto him, "O my lord, why didst thou not tell me before that thou hadst
seen a vision of this kind? Thou makest my knees to tremble. Woe be unto
us, if our sons have carried off our Lady, the holy, heavenly <span
class="small">ZION</span>, the Tabernacle of the Law of God!" And the
King answered and said unto him, "Our wisdom is forgotten and our
understanding is buried. Verily the sun that appeared unto me long ago
when I was sleeping with the Queen of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> was the symbol of the holy <span
class="small">ZION</span>. But tell me: yesterday when thou didst take
off the splendid covering that was lying upon <span
class="small">ZION</span>, didst thou not make certain that <span
class="small">ZION</span> was \[there\]?" And <span
class="small">ZADOK</span> the priest answered and said, "I did not,
lord; it had three coverings over it, and I took off the outermost, and
dressed <span class="small">ZION</span> in the covering which thou didst
give me, and I brought \[the other\] to thee." And the King said unto
<span class="small">ZADOK</span>, "Go quickly and look at our Lady and
examine her closely." And <span class="small">ZADOK</span> the priest
took the keys, and went and opened the house of the sanctuary, and he
examined \[the place\] quickly, and he found there nothing except the
wooden boards which <span class="small">AZÂRYÂS</span> had fastened
together and had made to resemble the sides of the pedestal of <span
class="small">ZION</span>.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 57. Concerning the Fall of ZADOK the Priest](kn057)

</div>
