<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn066) 
[Next](kn068) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 67. *Concerning the lamentation of* <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>

   And now I will tell you how he died. His days were sixty \[years\],
when a sickness attacked him. And his days were not as the days of <span
class="small">DAVID</span> his father, but they were twenty \[years\]
shorter than his, because he was under the sway of women and worshipped
idols. And the angel of death came and smote him \[in\] the foot, and he
wept and said, "O Lord God of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, I am
conquered by the terrestrial law, for there is no one free from blemish
before Thee, O Lord, and there is no one righteous and wise before Thee,
O Lord. For Thou dost scrutinize and try the heart. Nothing is hidden
from Thee. Thou lookest upon the hidden things \[as if they were\]
revealed, and Thou searchest out the heart. Have mercy upon me, Lord.
Thou examinest the heart of man and dost try the reins. Have mercy upon
me, Lord. Thou hearest both the whisper and the thunderclap. Have mercy
upon me, Lord. And if Thou hast mercy upon the righteous who have not
transgressed Thy commandments, what is there wonderful in Thy mercy?
Have mercy upon me, Lord. But if Thou shouldest show mercy upon me, a
sinner, Thy mercy would be a marvellous and gracious thing. Have mercy
upon me, Lord. And although I have sinned remember <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, and <span class="small">ISAAC</span>, and
<span class="small">JACOB</span>, my fathers who did not transgress Thy
commandment. Have mercy upon me, Lord, for Thou art merciful and
forgiving; for the sake of <span class="small">DAVID</span> Thy servant
have <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> mercy upon me, Lord. O Master of
the world, and of kings and governors, have mercy upon me, Lord. O Thou
who makest fools to be wise, and the wise to be fools, have mercy upon
me, Lord. O Turner of sinners and Rewarder of the righteous, have mercy
upon me, Lord." And as he spake these words tears streamed down his
face, and he searched for his napkin.

   And the Angel of God went down to him and said unto him, "Hearken
thou unto what I shall say unto thee, for the sake of which God hath
sent me. From being a wise man thou hast turned thyself into a fool, and
from being a rich man thou hast turned thyself into a poor man, and from
being a king thou hast turned thyself into a man of no account, through
transgressing the commandment of God. And the beginning of thy evil was
the taking of many wives by thee, for through this thou didst transgress
His Law, and His decree, and the ordinance of God which <span
class="small">MOSES</span> wrote and gave to you, to <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, that ye should not marry wives from alien
peoples but only from your kinsfolk and the house of your fathers, that
your seed might be pure and holy and that God might dwell with you. But
thou didst hold lightly the Law of God, thinking that thou wast wiser
than God, and that thou wouldst get very many male children. But the
foolishness of God is wiser than the wisdom of men, and He hath only
given thee three sons: the one who carried off thy glory into an alien
land, and made the habitation of God to be in <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>; the one who is lame of foot, who shall
sit upon thy throne for the people of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>,
the son of the kin of thy kin from <span class="small">TARBÂNA</span>,
of the house of <span class="small">JUDAH</span>; and the one who is the
son of a Greek woman, a handmaiden, who in the last days shall destroy
<span class="small">REHOBOAM</span> and all thy kin of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>; and this land shall be his because he
believeth in Him that shall come, the Saviour. And the tribe of <span
class="small">REHOBOAM</span>, and those who are left of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, shall crucify Him that shall come, the
<span id="page_109">p. 109</span> Redeemer, and the memory of you shall
be blotted out from the earth. For they shall think out a plan which
they shall not be able to establish, and He will be wroth with them and
blot out the memorial of them.

   "And as for thee, <span class="small">JOSEPH</span>, the son of <span
class="small">JACOB</span>, shall be a symbol of thee. For his brethren
sold him into the land of <span class="small">EGYPT</span> from <span
class="small">SYRIA</span>, the country of <span
class="small">LÂBÂ</span> (<span class="small">LABAN</span>), and on his
going down into the land of <span class="small">EGYPT</span> there arose
a famine in <span class="small">SYRIA</span> and in all the world. And
through his going down he called his kinsfolk and delivered them from
famine and gave them a habitation in the land of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>, the name whereof is <span
class="small">GÊSHÊN</span> (<span class="small">GOSHEN</span>). For he
himself was King under <span class="small">PHARAOH</span>, King of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span>. Similarly the Saviour Who shall come from
thy seed shall set thee free by His coming, and shall bring thee out of
<span class="small">SHEÔL</span>, where until the Saviour cometh thou
shalt suffer pain, together with thy fathers; and He will bring thee
forth. For from thy seed shall come forth a Saviour Who shall deliver
thee, thee and those who were before thee, and those who shall \[come\]
after thee, from <span class="small">ADAM</span> to His coming in the
kin of your kin, and He shall make thee to go forth from <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span> as <span class="small">JOSEPH</span> brought
out his kinsfolk from the famine, that is to say the first <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span> in the land of famine, so also shall the
Saviour bring out of <span class="small">SHEÔL</span> you who are His
kinsfolk. And as afterwards the <span class="small">EGYPTIANS</span>
made \[the kinsmen of <span class="small">JOSEPH</span>\] slaves, so
also have the devils made you slaves through the error of idols.

   "And as <span class="small">MOSES</span> brought his kinsmen out of
the servitude \[of <span class="small">EGYPT</span>\], so shall the
Saviour bring you out of the servitude of <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span>. And as <span class="small">MOSES</span>
wrought ten miracles and punishments (or, plagues) before <span
class="small">PHARAOH</span> the King, so the Saviour Who shall come
from thy seed shall work ten miracles for life before thy people. And as
<span class="small">MOSES</span>, after he had wrought the miracles,
smote the sea and made the people to pass over as it were on dry <span
id="page_110">p. 110</span> land, so the Saviour Who shall come shall
overthrow the walls of <span class="small">SHEÔL</span> and bring thee
out. And as <span class="small">MOSES</span> drowned <span
class="small">PHARAOH</span> with the <span
class="small">EGYPTIANS</span> in the Sea of <span
class="small">ERITREA</span>, so also shall the Saviour drown <span
class="small">SATAN</span> and his devils in <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span>; for the sea is to be interpreted by <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span>, and <span class="small">PHARAOH</span> by
<span class="small">SATAN</span>, and his hosts of <span
class="small">EGYPTIANS</span> by devils. And as <span
class="small">MOSES</span> fed them \[with\] manna in the desert without
toil, so shall the Saviour feed you with the food of the Garden (i.e.,
Paradise) for ever, after He hath brought you out from <span
class="small">SHEÔL</span>. And as <span class="small">MOSES</span> made
them to dwell in the desert for forty years, without their apparel
becoming worn out, or the soles of their feet becoming torn, so the
Saviour shall make you to dwell without toil after the Resurrection. And
as <span class="small">JOSHUA</span> brought them into the Land of
Promise, so shall the Saviour bring you into the Garden of Delight. And
as <span class="small">JOSHUA</span> slew the seven Kings of <span
class="small">CANAAN</span>, so shall the Saviour slay the seven heads
of <span class="small">’IBLÎS</span>.<span
id="page_110_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_110_note_1) And as <span
class="small">JOSHUA</span> destroyed the people of <span
class="small">CANAAN</span>, so shall the Saviour destroy sinners and
shut them up in the fortress of <span class="small">SHEÔL</span>. And as
thou hast built the house of God, so shall churches be built upon the
tops of the mountains."

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_110">p. 110</span>

<span id="page_110_note_1"></span>[1](#page_110_fr_1) i.e., <span
class="small">SATAN</span>, the Devil.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 68. Concerning MARY, Our Lady of Salvation](kn068)

</div>
