<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn061) 
[Next](kn063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 62. *Concerning the answer which* <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> *made to them*

   And <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the King answered and said
unto them, "Hearken ye unto me and to what I shall say unto you.
Supposing He had taken me away whilst I was carrying <span
class="small">ZION</span>—what is impossible to God? And supposing He
had taken you away whilst ye were carrying her—what is impossible to
God? And supposing He were to make them to inherit our city, and destroy
us—what is impossible to God? For everything is His, and none can
gainsay His Will, and there is none who can transgress His command in
heaven above or on earth below. He is the King Whose kingdom shall
never, never pass away, Amen. But now let us go and kneel in the House
of God."

   And the elders of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> together with
their King went into the House of God, and they entered the Holy of
Holies, and they made supplication, and prostrated themselves, and
ascribed blessing to God. And <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> wept in
the habitation of the heavenly <span class="small">ZION</span>, the
Tabernacle of the Law of God, and they all wept with him, and after a
little while they held their peace. And <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> answered and said unto them, "Cease ye, so
that the uncircumcised people may not boast themselves over us, and may
not say unto us, 'Their glory is taken away, and God hath forsaken
them.' Reveal ye not anything else to alien folk. Let us set up these
boards, which are lying here nailed together, and let us cover them over
with gold, and let us decorate them after <span id="page_100">p.
100</span> the manner of our Lady <span class="small">ZION</span>, and
let us lay the Book of the Law inside it. <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span> the free that is in the heavens above us,
which <span class="small">JACOB</span> our father saw, is with us, and
below it is the Gate of Heaven, this <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span> on the earth. If we do the Will of God
and His good pleasure, God will be with us, and will deliver us out of
the hand of our enemy, and out of the hand of all those who hate us;
God's Will, and not our will, be done, and God's good pleasure, and not
our good pleasure, be done. Through this He hath made us sorrowful.
Henceforward His wrath will cool in respect of us, and He will not
abandon us to our enemies, and He will not remove His mercy far from us,
and He will remember the covenant with our fathers <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, and <span class="small">ISAAC</span>, and
<span class="small">JACOB</span>. He will not make His word to be a lie,
and will not break His covenant so that our fathers' seed shall be
destroyed."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 63. How the Nobles of ISRAEL agreed \[with the King\]](kn063)

</div>
