<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn063) 
[Next](kn065) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 64. *How the Daughter of* <span class="small">PHARAOH</span> *Seduced* <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>

   And then the daughter of <span class="small">PHARAOH</span> appeared
before <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>, and said unto him, "It is
good to worship the gods like my father and all the kings of <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> who were before my father." And <span
class="small">SOLOMON</span> answered and said unto her, "They call gods
the things which have been made by the hands of the worker in metal, and
the carpenter, and the potter, and the painter, and the hewer in stone,
and the sculptor; these are not gods, but the work of the hand of man,
in gold, and silver, in brass and lead, in iron and earthenware, and in
stone, and ye call 'our gods' the things that are not your gods. But we
worship none else than the Holy God of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>
and our Lady, the holy and heavenly <span class="small">ZION</span>, the
Tabernacle of the Law of God, whom He hath given us to worship, us and
our seed after us."

   And she answered and said unto him, "Thy son hath carried away thy
Lady <span class="small">ZION</span>, thy son whom thou hast begotten,
who springeth from an alien people into which God hath not commanded you
to marry, that is to say, from an <span class="small">ETHIOPIAN</span>
woman, who is not of thy colour, and is not akin to thy country, and who
is, moreover, black." And <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> answered
and said unto her, "Though thou speakest thus art thou not thyself of
\[that race\] concerning which God hath not commanded us that we should
take wives from it? And thy kin is her kin, for ye are all the children
of <span class="small">HAM</span>. And God, having destroyed of the seed
of <span class="small">HAM</span> seven kings, hath made us to inherit
this city, that we and our seed after us may dwell therein for ever. And
as concerning <span class="small">ZION</span>, the will of God hath been
performed, and He hath given her unto them so that they may worship her.
And as for me, I will neither sacrifice to nor worship thine idols, and
I will not perform thy wish."

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

   And though she spake in this wise unto him, and though she shewed
herself gracious unto him evening and morning, and night and day, he
continued to refuse her \[request\]. And one day she beautified and
scented herself for him, and she behaved herself haughtily towards him,
and treated him disdainfully. And he said unto her, "What shall I do?
Thou hast made thy face evil towards me, and thy regard towards me is
not as it was formerly, and thy beautiful form is not as enticing as
usual. Ask me, and I will give thee whatsoever thou wishest, and I will
perform it for thee, so that thou mayest make thy face (or, attitude)
gracious towards me as formerly"; but she held her peace and answered
him never a word. And he repeated to her the words that he would do
whatsoever she wished, and she said unto him, "Swear to me by the God of
<span class="small">ISRAEL</span> that thou wilt not play me false." And
he swore to her that he would give her whatsoever she asked for, and
that he would do for her everything that she told him. And she tied a
scarlet thread on the middle of the door of \[the house of\] her gods,
and she brought three locusts and set them in the house of her gods. And
she said unto <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>, "Come to me without
breaking the scarlet thread, bend thyself and kill these locusts before
me and pull out their necks"; and he did so. And she said unto him, "I
will henceforward do thy will, for thou hast sacrificed to my gods and
hast worshipped them." Now he had done thus because of his oath, so that
he might not break his oath which she had made him to swear, even though
he knew that it was an offence (or, sin) to enter into the house of her
gods.

   Now God had commanded the children of <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>, saying, "Ye shall not marry strange women
that ye may not be corrupted by them through their gods, and through the
wickedness of their works and the sweetness of their voices; for they
make soft the hearts of simple young men by the sweetness of their
gentle voices, and <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> by the beauty of
their forms they destroy the wisdom of the foolish man." Who was wiser
than <span class="small">SOLOMON</span>? yet he was seduced by a woman.
Who was more righteous than <span class="small">DAVID</span>? yet he was
seduced by a woman. Who was stronger than <span
class="small">SAMSON</span>? yet he was seduced by a woman. Who was
handsomer than <span class="small">’AMNÔN</span>? yet he was seduced by
<span class="small">TAMAR</span> the daughter of <span
class="small">DAVID</span> his father. And <span
class="small">ADAM</span> was the first creation of God, yet he was
seduced by <span class="small">EVE</span> his wife. And through that
seduction death was created for every created thing. And this seduction
of men by women was caused by <span class="small">EVE</span>, for we are
all the children of <span class="small">EVE</span>.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 65. Concerning the sin of SOLOMON](kn065)

</div>
