<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn075) 
[Next](kn077) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 76. *Concerning lying witnesses*

   And there was a certain depraved man of the seed of <span
class="small">BENJAMIN</span>, whose name was <span
class="small">BENYÂS</span>, who used to lead the mule of the King of
<span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and <span class="small">KARMÎN</span>
used to feed him, together with the mule of King <span
class="small">MANASSEH</span>. And among the neighbours of <span
class="small">KARMÎN</span> there were certain men who were envious of
him because of \[his\] pastures and wells, and because of the multitude
of his flocks and herds and servants, for the region \[where he had
settled\] was the inheritance of their fathers, and for this reason they
wished to drive him away from their country. And they kept watch upon
<span class="small">BENYÂS</span>, the leader of the king's mule, with
evil intent, and they abused <span class="small">KARMÎN</span>, and said
unto <span class="small">BENYÂS</span>, "This <span
class="small">KARMÎN</span> blasphemeth, and he hath blasphemed the King
of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, the anointed of God, saying, 'This
king is not the son of a free woman, but the son of an old woman servant
whom \[a certain man\] bought for two Ḳôr-measures \[of grain\] to work
at the mill and brick-making.' Do thou take thy case against him to the
king and accuse him, for we will be thy witnesses before the king, and
we will not let thee be put to shame." And they made a covenant
together, and they swore to him that they would bear false witness
against <span class="small">KARMÎN</span>, by whose tongue such a word
had never been uttered, and into whose mind such a thought had never
entered.

   And <span class="small">BENYÂS</span> went to his lord, the King, and
told him all this matter. And the King said unto him, "Is there any man
who hath heard this with thee?" And <span class="small">BENYÂS</span>
answered and said unto him, "Yea, there are some who have heard—two of
the nobles of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> who belong to <span
class="small">’ARMÂTÊM</span>." And the King said unto him, "Go now and
bring them hither secretly so that we may find <span id="page_129">p.
129</span> out whether they agree with thy words; \[and if they do\] we
will cut off the head of <span class="small">KARMÎN</span>." And <span
class="small">BENYÂS</span> departed and brought <span
class="small">ZARYÔS</span> and <span class="small">KÂRMÊLÔS</span>, of
the tribe of <span class="small">MANASSEH</span>, for it had been agreed
between them that they would not put him to shame before the King in the
matter of their lying testimony. And these two men agreed together and
planned when they were on \[their\] way, saying, "When we have spoken to
the King if he shall ask us afterwards separately (so that he may find
out the truth of our words), saying, 'Where did you hear these words?'
we will each of us answer and say unto him, 'When we were drinking wine
with him.' And when he shall say unto us, 'What day \[was this\]?' we
will say, 'Five days after the new moon.' And when he saith unto us,
'What time \[of the day\]?' we will say unto him, 'At the ninth hour,
when he was sitting with us, and we were drinking wine together.' And
when he shall ask us, saying, 'What did ye drink out of? and where were
ye sitting?' we will say unto him, 'Out of cups of gold, and our seats
were in the hall of his house where the cushions for reclining upon were
placed.'" And they agreed together on this evil plot \[whilst they
were\] on their way.

   And when they arrived in the presence of the King <span
class="small">BENYÂS</span> brought them forward, and the King
questioned them, and they repeated to him all their lying counsel. And
he asked them—according as they had surmised on the road—the occasion,
and the day, and the hour of their drinking \[wine\] and their sitting
\[in the hall\], and they told him. Now, God hath commanded that kings,
and governors, and all those who occupy a high position shall
investigate an accusation, even as God commanded <span
class="small">MOSES</span>.

   And when the King had enquired into all this matter, he called the
captain of his host who stood before him, and said unto him, "Go at dawn
of day to-morrow and surround the house of <span
class="small">KARMÎN</span> and let not anyone of his <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> people escape thee, neither man nor woman,
and slay \[them all\] with the sword. And as for <span
class="small">KARMÎN</span>, cut off his head, and bring hither all his
possessions, and his goods, and all his flocks and herds, and his gold
and silver."

   And those liars rejoiced and returned to their district, and they
went into the house of <span class="small">KARMÎN</span> and held
converse with him with words of peace, and they paid him compliments,
and they made jests before his face, evil being in their hearts. And
then was fulfilled on them the prophecy of <span
class="small">DAVID</span>, who said, "Those who speak words of peace
with their neighbour, and \[have\] evil in their hearts, reward them
according to the evil of their works and according to the evil of their
thoughts."<span id="page_130_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_130_note_1) And they drank
themselves drunk in the house of <span class="small">KARMÎN</span>, and
they slept together with him. And when they had fallen asleep, behold,
the Angel of God was sent to <span class="small">KARMÎN</span>, and he
awoke him and said unto him, "Leave all thy possessions and save
thyself, for men have been commanded by <span
class="small">MANASSEH</span> the King to cut off thy head. Take as much
of thy riches as thou canst carry, and flee into another country, for
this <span class="small">MANASSEH</span> is a slayer of the prophets,
and a seeker after the blood of innocent men."

   Then <span class="small">KARMÎN</span> rose up straightway, and
sought out his treasure in gold and took it, and he awoke his wife and
his two sons, and he also awoke his chosen servants, and loaded them
with possessions of great value, and went forth by night. And he sent
off his wife and his sons with two servants to go to <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span>, and departed with two of his servants to
a remote country—a distance of three months' journey—and he arrived at
<span class="small">BABYLON</span>. And he came to <span
class="small">BALÂ‛ÔN</span>, the King of <span
class="small">BABYLON</span>, and gave him a gift, and related unto him
what had happened to him. And <span class="small">BALÂ‛ÔN</span> loved
<span class="small">KARMÎN</span>, and gave him a habitation near the
house of his merchant, who <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> had
departed to a far country for a period of three years.

   And those men who had borne lying testimony they killed in bed in
<span class="small">KARMÎN'S</span> house.

   And the wife of the merchant loved <span class="small">KARMÎN</span>,
and she was seduced by him, and became with child; now the behaviour of
women is bad. And the husband of the woman had left her when she was
with child, and she brought forth and gave the child to a nurse who
brought it up. And in the second year she went astray and became with
child by <span class="small">KARMÎN</span>, for the person of <span
class="small">KARMÎN</span> was exceeding goodly in <span
class="small">ISRAEL</span>. And the woman wished to throw the child
whom she had conceived into the river when he was born and to wait for
the merchant her husband as if she had not gone astray, and had not done
anything \[wrong\]. Even as <span class="small">SOLOMON</span> the wise
man saith, "There are three things which are difficult to me in my mind,
and the fourth of these I cannot comprehend:—The track of the eagle in
the heavens, the path of the serpent on the rock, the track of a ship on
the sea."<span id="page_131_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_131_note_1) Now the fourth of them
of which he speaks concerneth the wicked woman, who, having wronged her
husband, and washed herself, sitteth down like a woman who hath done
nothing, and she sweareth an oath falsely.

   And at that time the wife of <span class="small">BALÂ‛ÔN</span>, the
King of <span class="small">BABYLON</span>, conceived and brought forth
something which was like unto an eagle, a perfect bird but altogether
without wings. And she called a handmaiden who was a favourite, and sent
the thing away in a wicker-basket and commanded her to cast it into the
sea (i.e., river), without letting anyone know about it. And the time
for the bringing forth of the wife of the merchant arrived, and she
brought forth a man child, comely in form \[and worthy of\] compassion.
And without suckling it she called to a handmaiden who was a favourite,
<span id="page_132">p. 132</span> and put it into the inner part of a
box and commanded her to throw him into the sea (i.e., river), without
anyone knowing about it; for she was afraid of her husband. And in the
same night two women brought forth, \[the merchant's wife\] and the wife
of the King, and at daybreak the two women sent their handmaidens to
cast their children into the river.

   And by the Will of God these two handmaidens met each other before
they had thrown the children into the river, and they talked together.
And the handmaiden of the King asked the handmaiden of the merchant,
saying, "What is in thy box?" and she showed her the beautiful child.
And the King's handmaiden said unto her, "Why hast thou brought him
here?" And the merchant's handmaiden said unto her, "Because the wife of
my lord hath gone astray with a certain <span
class="small">ISRAELITE</span>, and she conceived and brought forth a
child, and she hath commanded me to throw him into the river." And the
King's handmaiden said unto her, "Why doth she not bring up a child who
is so beautiful?" And the merchant's handmaiden said unto her, "Her
husband left her with child, and she brought forth a child, and is
rearing him; how then can she rear this child who is of strange and
alien seed?" And the merchant's handmaiden asked the King's handmaiden,
saying, "What hast thou in thy box?" And the King's handmaiden said unto
her, "My lady hath brought forth a child that hath not the appearance of
a man but of a wingless eagle, and she hath commanded me to throw it
into the river. And now, give me this child of thine that I may give it
to my mistress, and do thou take this bird, and cast it into the river";
and they did so. And the handmaiden of the King took the child \[of
<span class="small">KARMÎN</span>\] to her mistress, and the Queen
rejoiced, and it was reported to the King that the Queen had borne a
son. And the Queen gave the boy to the nurses, and he grew up in the
house of the King, and <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> she called his
name "<span class="small">NÂBÛKĔDNÂṢAR</span>" (<span
class="small">NEBUCHADNEZZAR</span>), which is, being interpreted, "By
the luck of the bird."

   And through this it is well known that the King of <span
class="small">BABYLON</span> is the seed of <span
class="small">SHEM</span>. And he came and overthrew <span
class="small">JERUSALEM</span> by the Will of God, and he carried away
captive the children of <span class="small">ISRAEL</span>, and he made
them to wander in the town of <span class="small">BABYLON</span> with
the grandchildren of <span class="small">MANASSEH</span>. And he was so
very rich that he set up a pillar of gold on the plain of <span
class="small">BABYLON</span> sixty cubits high, and he was very
arrogant, and he used to say, "I make the sun to shine in the heavens";
and he worshipped idols. And God abased him so that he might know Him,
and He set his portion with the beasts of the field. And when he knew
the Name of the Lord after seven years He had compassion upon him, and
brought him back in repentance. And the kingdom of <span
class="small">BABYLON</span> was his, and it belonged to those who were
of his seed for ever.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_130">p. 130</span>

<span id="page_130_note_1"></span>[1](#page_130_fr_1) Psalm xxviii. 3, 4

<span id="footnotes_page_131">p. 131</span>

<span id="page_131_note_1"></span>[1](#page_131_fr_1) Proverbs xxx. 18.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 77. Concerning the King of PERSIA](kn077)

</div>
