<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn077) 
[Next](kn079) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 78. *Concerning the King of* <span class="small">MOAB</span>

   And the King of <span class="small">MOAB</span> is of the seed of
<span class="small">SHEM</span>, and we will inform you how this hath
come to pass. When God made <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span> to depart
from his father's country into the land of <span
class="small">KÂRÂN</span> (<span class="small">HARRAN</span>), He made
<span class="small">LOT</span> to pass over into the land of <span
class="small">SODOM</span> and <span class="small">GOMORRAH</span>. And
when God wished to blot out the people of <span
class="small">SODOM</span> and <span class="small">GOMORRAH</span>, He
sent His Angels <span class="small">MICHAEL</span> and <span
class="small">GABRIEL</span> to bring out <span class="small">LOT</span>
and to burn up the cities of <span class="small">SODOM</span> and <span
class="small">GOMORRAH</span>; and they destroyed them and brought out
<span class="small">LOT</span> with his children. And his wife turned
round so that she might see the city of her father and her mother. Now
the wrath of God came down on the city of <span
class="small">SODOM</span> \[in the form of\] a rain of fire from
heaven, which burned up mountains, and hills, and stones, and earth. And
lightnings, and forked lightnings, and peals of thunder came down
mingled with the crashing of the wrath of God, and a cloud of fire which
made the heat to emit smoke. And when all this uproar was being heard
the Angels said unto <span class="small">LOT</span>, "Turn not round
after ye have gone forth from the city, turn not round that ye die not
the death." But when <span class="small">’AḲMÂBÂ</span>, the wife of
<span class="small">LOT</span>, heard this, she turned round, and she
became a pillar of salt, and she existeth to this day, to this very day.
And as for <span class="small">LOT</span>, God made him to dwell in the
mountains of <span class="small">ARARAT</span>. And he planted a new
vineyard, <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> and his daughters made their
father to drink wine, and they plotted a wicked plot, and they said,
"How (i.e., why) shall the possession of our father be wasted (or,
blotted out)? Our mother hath been destroyed on the road, and there is
no one to marry us here." And they made their father drunk, and his
elder daughter lay with him whilst his mind was clouded with wine, and
<span class="small">LOT</span> the righteous man did not know when his
daughter lay with him and when she rose up from him, for his mind was
clouded with strong drink. And <span class="small">NOAH</span> was drunk
and naked before his wife and children, and he cursed his son who
laughed at him; and \[the act of lying with his daughter\] was not
reckoned against <span class="small">LOT</span> as sin, for he did it
unknowingly. And his elder daughter conceived and brought forth a child,
and she called him "<span class="small">MOAB</span>", which is, being
interpreted, "From my father on my knee". And he was the father of the
<span class="small">MOABITES</span> and the <span
class="small">AGARENES</span>. Behold now, it is clear that the King of
<span class="small">MOAB</span> is of the seed of <span
class="small">SHEM</span>.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 79. Concerning the King of AMALEK](kn079)

</div>
