<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn111) 
[Next](kn113) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 112. *How the Prophets foreshadowed Him in their persons*

   <span class="small">ISAAC</span> commanded his father, saying, "Bind
me"; and he was offered up as a sacrifice, though he did not die, being
redeemed by the ram which came down from heaven. And in like manner the
Son of God was obedient to His Father even unto death. And He was bound
with the love of men, and He was nailed \[to the Cross\] and was
pierced, and the Son of God became our ransom, and His Godhead suffered
not.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

   Thus <span class="small">JACOB</span> his son departed to the land of
<span class="small">LÂBÂ</span> (<span class="small">LABAN</span>), the
country of his mother's brother, with his staff only, and there he made
many cattle, and acquired beasts both clean and unclean, and he begot
twelve sons, and he revealed baptism, and returned to his own country
where he received a blessing from <span class="small">ISAAC</span> his
father. And in like manner our Lord <span class="small">CHRIST</span>
came down from heaven, the Word of Godhead by Itself; and the staff of
<span class="small">JACOB</span> wherewith he pastured his sheep is our
Lady <span class="small">MARY</span> our salvation. And moreover, the
staff signifieth the wood of the Cross whereby, being crucified upon it,
He redeemed His flock and took possession of us from among the <span
class="small">JEWS</span>, and the heathen, and the <span
class="small">GENTILES</span>. And He chose for Himself Twelve Apostles,
and they made the people believe in all the earth and in every country,
and He went up to heaven to His Father.

   Thus <span class="small">MOSES</span> departed to the country of
<span class="small">MIDIAN</span>, and there he held converse with God,
Who made him to learn and to know the belief in the resurrection from
the dead of his fathers <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>, <span
class="small">ISAAC</span>, and <span class="small">JACOB</span>. And by
means of his staff (or, rod) He endowed him with the power to perform
miracles; and he begot two sons. And this showeth clearly that we shall
be saved by the Trinity. As the mouth of God proclaimed, "I am the God
of <span class="small">ABRAHAM</span>"—this of the Father—"and the God
of <span class="small">ISAAC</span>"—this of the Son—"and the God of
<span class="small">JACOB</span>"—when He saith this it is of the Holy
Ghost indicating the Trinity clearly and plainly. "I am not the God of
the dead, but the God of the living,"<span
id="page_219_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_219_note_1) for they all are alive
with God; and by this the Resurrection of the dead is to be understood.

   <span class="small">JONAH</span> was swallowed up and cast into the
belly of the great fish; and our Redeemer went down into the heart of
the earth, and rose again the third day. And <span
class="small">DANIEL</span> was cast into the pit of the lions, and
\[the king and the lords\] sealed it with their seals; and he rose up
<span id="page_220">p. 220</span> therefrom without the lions devouring
him. And similarly our Lord was cast into the grave, and the <span
class="small">JEWS</span> sealed it with their seals, imagining that
they were sealing up the rising of the sun so that it should not shine.
O ye foolish, wicked, blasphemous, blind, and weak-minded men, would ye
assert that the Spirit of Life should not appear and come forth? And the
<span class="small">JEWS</span> were put to shame, and He went forth to
illumine us who have believed upon Him.

   <span class="small">JOSEPH</span> was sold by the hand of his
brethren, and our Lord was sold by the hand of <span
class="small">JUDAH</span>. And <span class="small">JOSEPH</span> where
he was sold delivered his brethren from the famine, and <span
class="small">CHRIST</span> hath delivered us who believed upon Him and
hath made us His heirs and His brethren. And as <span
class="small">JOSEPH</span> gave an inheritance unto his kinsfolk in the
land of <span class="small">GÊSHAM</span> (<span
class="small">GOSHEN</span>), so shall \[<span
class="small">CHRIST</span>\] give unto His righteous ones a habitation,
an everlasting inheritance.

   And moreover, in order that ye may know, and understand, and be
certain about the resurrection of the dead, I will give you a sign,
which ye shall understand by the guidance of His word. When <span
class="small">ABRAHAM</span> had come unto the land of \[his\]
inheritance he bought first of all a tomb wherein to gather together the
dead bodies of his kinsfolk, and his children, and his wife, so that he
might join them in the resurrection; and there he buried his wife <span
class="small">SARAH</span> and he himself was buried. For he was a
prophet, and he knew that he would be raised up with his kin. And <span
class="small">ISAAC</span> and <span class="small">REBEKAH</span> his
wife were also buried there. And it remained their possession from the
time when <span class="small">JACOB</span> went down to the land of
<span class="small">EGYPT</span> with seventy-seven souls, because of
the famine and because <span class="small">JOSEPH</span> his son \[was
there\], until their number became six hundred thousand marching men who
were equipped for war, without \[reckoning\] women and children. And
<span class="small">JACOB</span> died in <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> at a good old age, and he said unto <span
class="small">JOSEPH</span> his son, "I adjure thee by the <span
id="page_221">p. 221</span> life of my father and by my God, Who is the
renewer of my life, that thou bury me not in this country, but in the
tomb of my fathers, so that my death may be with them and my life
subsequently with them."<span id="page_221_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_221_note_1) Know then by this
similitude of the word. And <span class="small">JOSEPH</span> his son
carried <span class="small">ISRAEL</span> and buried him by the grave of
his fathers, for he reverenced the oath which <span
class="small">JACOB</span> had made him to swear.

   And again, when <span class="small">JACOB</span> fell sick in <span
class="small">EGYPT</span> he called his brethren and his children, and
made them to swear that they would not leave his bones in the land of
<span class="small">EGYPT</span>, and said, "When God maketh you to
return take ye my bones with you and mingle them in the grave of my
fathers."<span id="page_221_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_221_note_2)

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_219">p. 219</span>

<span id="page_219_note_1"></span>[1](#page_219_fr_1) Matthew xxii. 32.

<span id="footnotes_page_221">p. 221</span>

<span id="page_221_note_1"></span>[1](#page_221_fr_1) Genesis xlvii. 29.

<span id="page_221_note_2"></span>[2](#page_221_fr_2) Genesis l. 25.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 113. Concerning the Chariot and the Vanquisher of the
Enemy](kn113)

</div>
