<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Africa](../../afr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kn112) 
[Next](kn114) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A. Wallis Budge, \[1932\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 113. *Concerning the Chariot and the Vanquisher of the Enemy*

   And the Archbishops (or, Patriarchs) answered and said unto <span
class="small">GREGORY</span>, the Worker of Wonders, "Behold now, we
know well, and thou hast made us to understand that the Kings of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> have become glorious and great through
<span class="small">ZION</span>. And the Kings of <span
class="small">RÔMÊ</span> also have become great because of the nails
\[of the Cross\] that <span class="small">HELENA</span> made into a
bridle, which hath become the vanquisher of the enemy for the King of
<span class="small">RÔMÊ</span>. And the chariot belongeth to the King
of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and it hath vanquished his
enemy. And tell us also how long the vanquisher of the enemy shall
remain with the King of <span class="small">RÔMÊ</span>, and the chariot
containing <span class="small">ZION</span> with the King of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>. Tell us, for God hath revealed unto thee
what hath been, and what shall be, vision and prophecy, like <span
class="small">MOSES</span> and <span class="small">ELIJAH</span>."

   And <span class="small">GREGORY</span> answered and said unto them,
"I will reveal unto you concerning the King of <span
class="small">RÔMÊ</span> when he shall transgress and shall provoke God
to wrath in the faith. This faith which we have ordered and laid down
<span id="page_222">p. 222</span> shall a king transgress who shall come
in <span class="small">RÔMÊ</span>, and there shall be associated with
him a certain archbishop, and they shall change and pervert the word of
the Twelve Apostles, and they shall cast it aside in the desire of their
heart\[s\], and they shall teach what they wish, and they shall turn the
Scriptures to suit their own nature, even as the Apostle saith, 'They
have behaved themselves like \[the people of\] <span
class="small">SODOM</span> and <span
class="small">GOMORRAH</span>.'<span
id="page_222_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_222_note_1) And our Lord said unto
His disciples in the Gospel, 'Guard ye yourselves against those who
shall come unto you in the apparel of sheep, and who are inwardly wolves
that tear.'<span id="page_222_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_222_note_2) And when they have
destroyed the faith the vanquisher of the enemy shall be taken away from
them, and there shall be none of those who have changed our faith who
shall sit upon the throne of <span class="small">PETER</span>, and the
bowels of their Archbishops shall be emptied out if they have taken
their seat upon it in perverted faith. For the Angel of God hath been
commanded to protect the throne of <span class="small">PETER</span> in
<span class="small">RÔMÊ</span>. And God shall take away the vanquisher
of the enemy from the king who shall not guard the faith, and the <span
class="small">PERSIANS</span> shall make war upon him and defeat him,
and it seemeth to me that his name is <span class="small">MARCION</span>
the Apostate. And the King of <span class="small">PERSIA</span>, whose
name is <span class="small">HARÊNÊWÔS</span> (<span
class="small">IRENAEUS</span>) shall conquer (?) him, and the king shall
carry him away, together with his horse, and by the Will of God the
horse on which is the vanquisher of the enemy shall be stirred up, and
shall go into the sea and perish therein. But the nails shall shine
there in the sea until <span class="small">CHRIST</span> shall come
again in great glory upon a cloud of heaven, together with power.

   "Now this hath God showed me in the pit. And as concerning the King
of <span class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>, and <span
class="small">ZION</span>, the Bride of heaven, and her chariot whereby
they move, I will declare unto you that which my God hath revealed unto
me and hath made me to understand. \[<span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span>\] <span id="page_223">p. 223</span> shall
continue in the orthodox faith until the coming of our Lord, and she
shall in no way turn aside from the word of the Apostles, and it shall
be so even as we have ordered until the end of the world.

   And one answered and said unto the Worker of Wonders (i.e., <span
class="small">GREGORY</span>), "Now when <span
class="small">SAMÂLYÂL</span> cometh, who is the False Christ (<span
class="small">ANTICHRIST</span>), will the faith of the people of <span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> be destroyed by his attack?" And <span
class="small">GREGORY</span> answered and said, "Assuredly not. Hath not
<span class="small">DAVID</span> prophesied saying, '<span
class="small">ETHIOPIA</span> shall make her hands come to God?'<span
id="page_223_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_223_note_1) And this that he saith
meaneth that the <span class="small">ETHIOPIANS</span> will neither
pervert nor change this our faith and what we have ordered, and the
faith of those who were before us, the teachers of the Law of the
Apostles."

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_222">p. 222</span>

<span id="page_222_note_1"></span>[1](#page_222_fr_1) Matthew x. 15.

<span id="page_222_note_2"></span>[2](#page_222_fr_2) Matthew vii. 15.

<span id="footnotes_page_223">p. 223</span>

<span id="page_223_note_1"></span>[1](#page_223_fr_1) Psalm lxviii. 31.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 114. Concerning the return of ZION](kn114)

</div>
