[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd02)  [Next](htd04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# A HEIFER OF THE DAWN.

### INVOCATION.

*Salutation to the great Third eye of the Master of all Emotion: that
eye, which could wither the God of Love with shooting flames, and yet
open, to her confusion, with the tenderness of a flower on the bashful
Párwatí, as she was endeavouring to rob him of the sight of her own
beauty by placing her hands over the other two* <span
id="fr_5"></span>[a](#fn_5)!

THERE lived formerly, in another *kalpa*, a stupid king, who possessed
two things, that like the edge of a sword kept him from sleeping: a
brave enemy and a beautiful daughter: for his enemy was too strong, and
his daughter too clever for him: moreover, his enemy was young, and his
daughter unmarried. And after racking his brains to no purpose for a
long time, there came to him at last,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

as he lay awake one night, a thought. And he exclaimed: Ha! I will mix
this poison and this nectar, and pour the sea of my daughter's beauty
over the fire of my enemy's hostility, and so extinguish it altogether:
and gain for my kingdom, security, and for my daughter, a husband, and
for myself, rest, and a release from anxiety. And this idea pleased him
so much that he shouted aloud. Then all the guards, thinking that he was
in danger, ran in with lights. And they saw the King stark naked,
skipping about the room like a calf; waving his hands, and exclaiming:
Ha! my enemy: ha! my daughter. So they said: Surely his short wits have
come to an end, and now he is mad. But the King sent for musicians, and
rose up then and there, and made merry all night, waiting with
impatience for the day.

Then in the morning he chose a messenger, and sent him away to his
enemy, and said to him, by the mouth of his envoy: Let us be friends and
rule the earth together in peace: and I will bestow on thee my daughter
in marriage, asking from thee nothing in return. And what a gift mine
is, thou shalt discover when it comes to thee. For should I describe its
value and its qualities in words beforehand, I should seem but a liar in
thine eyes.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

\[paragraph continues\] So the envoy went with his message. But the
King's daughter, hearing of the matter, privately sent agents of her
own, saying nothing to her father, to find out all they could about her
bridegroom, and his affairs.

Then time went by, and the King's envoy was absent so long, that the
King could hardly keep himself alive for vexation and impatience. But at
last, as he sat one day with his daughter beside him, there came in a
doorkeeper who fell at his feet, and said: Thy envoy has returned, and
now, what are the King's commands? And the King bade her <span
id="fr_6"></span>[b](#fn_6) bring him in, without losing a moment. So
the envoy came in, just as he was, dusty and travel-stained, and stood
before him. And the King looked at him with red eyes, and said: What
shall be done to the envoy who lingers on the King's errand, till his
black hairs turn to grey, and the grey to white?

Then the envoy joined his hands, and said: O King, let thy anger fall,
but not on the innocent. For as for me, I went and came, swifter than a
traveller in the rainy season returning to the caresses of

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

his bride. All the delay was caused by the madness of this son-in-law of
thine that is to be, or not, according to thy pleasure. For some time
ago, it happened, that returning from his army, which he had led away in
person to subdue a vassal that had revolted, he entered his apartments,
when nobody expected him, and saw his queen, for he had only one  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[e](#fn_7), conversing with a man, whom she had
conveyed into the palace in the clothes of a woman. And instantly there
came over him a horror of the world and its delusions, but above all of
women, so great, that, after banishing his queen, for he would not put
her to death, he turned his back upon his royal estate, and cast off his
kingly pleasures, as a snake discards its old skin. And he went and shut
himself up in a deserted temple of Maheshwara, that stands in a wood,
outside his capital, on the edge of a, sacred lotus pool. And there he
lives like an ascetic, cutting himself off from the conversation of men,
so that even his ministers can scarcely see him on important business of
state. And it was long before I could even manage to advise him of my
coming, and your proposal.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But at last, he sent for me, having learned of
my presence through his prime minister. So they led me to the temple in
the early morning. And as I stood waiting before it, suddenly I saw the
lotuses of the pool opening, one after another, at the touch of the
early sun; and at the same instant, the young King came out before the
temple, and stood on the steps leading down into the pool. And he looked
like a great ruby, for the sun's rays lit up the red bark garments in
which he was dressed and edged them with a fringe of flame: and I was
amazed at the sight of him, for he seemed like a King even among Kings.
And he said to me, in deep tones <span id="fr_8"></span>[d](#fn_8): Go
back to thy master, and tell him, that for the good of my kingdom and
his own, I will accept his offer: and there shall be peace and
friendship between us, and union cemented by the gift of his daughter:
whom I will treat royally, and as becomes a queen. But not as a wife:
for after we have perambulated the fire together, let her live in her
own palace, and forget that I am alive.

But when the envoy had got so far in his tale,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the King exclaimed in anger: What! does he dare to make such terms, and
send such an answer, and dishonour me and my daughter by such a
proposal? Then hearing him speak, his daughter, sitting beside him,
began to laugh. And she said: O my father, how is it, that with such
grey hairs, thou understandest nothing, neither of men, nor of women,
nor of policy, nor of me? Then the King said: My daughter, what are
these words? And what dost *thou* understand, of men or of policy, or
even of women and thyself, who art but fifteen <span
id="fr_9"></span>[e](#fn_9) years old? Then his daughter said: Here, in
this matter, all has gone well, and turned out according to thy wish;
and yet thou art ready to throw away all the advantages to thy realm, by
rejecting the proposal of my husband, which is as it should be. Then the
King said: How is it well, and not rather very ill? and how shall such a
husband obtain thee, who proposes not to treat thee as his wife? and
what is this absurdity that thou speakest?

Then his daughter got up and stood before him. And she clapped her hands
together, till her bangles

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

rang, and stamped her little foot on the ground, till it left a red
print upon the inlaid floor <span id="fr_10"></span>[f](#fn_10) and her
anklets clashed; and her mouth curled like Kama's bow, as if to
discharge the scornful arrows of her words. And she exclaimed: Didst
thou understand policy, thou wouldst not abandon an advantageous
alliance from anger springing out of personal considerations: didst thou
understand men, thou wouldst have perceived, from the answer of my
husband, that he is, as the envoy has said, an elephant among men, and
worthy of thee and me: didst thou understand women, thou wouldst know,
that he who has never tasted their nectar, may pass even his whole life
without ever knowing its sweetness, but that he who has tasted it once,
will taste it again, though gods and demons should stand in his way to
prevent him: and didst thou understand me, thou wouldst know that I will
have this husband, and he shall have me, on any conditions whatever: and
like a snake-charmer, I will soothe him and wile him by my jugglery and
the cunning of my voice till he will dance <span
id="fr_11"></span>[g](#fn_11) as I please. Out on her who cannot

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

cajole her own husband! Then said the King: Daughter, doubtless thou art
a very pundit, and thy pretty head is full of the sciences, though how
they got there at thy age, only the Creator can tell: none the less thou
art still very young: and in this matter of husbands, and their
management and cajolery, thou hast still to learn grammar <span
id="fr_12"></span>[h](#fn_12). Then his daughter laughed. And she
exclaimed: O my father, art thou really my father? Dost thou think that
the craft of a woman in the art which is her own comes to her by age and
experience, which on the contrary rather take it away? Did the Creator
teach the spider to make webs, and the bee to make honey, and the lotus
to bloom? and did he give its wisdom to the elephant, and yet leave
woman devoid of the skill proper to her nature? Know, that I will take
this burden off thy shoulders and lay it on my own, and bring the matter
to a successful issue, for thee, and also for my husband, and for
myself. Send thy envoy, and accept his proposal. And send me also to
him, as quickly as possible: and in the meanwhile, I will send him,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

by the mouth of thy envoy, a message on my own account.

So the King yielded to her, for by reason of his own stupidity and his
affection for her, he could not oppose her. And he sent accordingly a
message to his son-in-law, saying: I have accepted thy terms and am
sending thee my daughter with her retinue together with the new moon.
And I wish thee good fortune, and a change of disposition. And when the
envoy was about to depart, the King's daughter said to him: Say to my
husband these words, and beware lest thou add to them or take away one:
*Thy female slave is coining to thee with the new moon, and has noted
all her lord's commands. And the time of her arrival he shall learn by
the mouth of a mediator: but his eye shall not be offended by her
presence, nor his ear by her conversation, till he shall ask for it of
his own accord*.

So the envoy went, and carried to the young King the message of his
father-in-law, and of his future queen, But when the young King heard
her message, he said to himself: Her words are soft, and cunning, and
like butter to the ear: but she is a woman: let not even her shadow come
near me. And he remained in the deserted temple, which

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

resembled the ruin of his own life, expecting and yet shunning the
arrival of his queen.

Then after a while came the last day of the dark fortnight, and the eve
of the new moon <span id="fr_13"></span>[i](#fn_13); and with it came
the King's daughter, with her retinue. And she pitched her camp outside
the city, close to the wood in which stood the deserted temple, where
the King her husband had fixed his abode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[1:a](htd03.htm#fr_5) The details of this
conjugal episode between Shíwa and his wife may be found in the *Kumára
Sambhawa*, the *chef d’œuvre* of Kálidás.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[3:b](htd03.htm#fr_6) The doorkeeper
(*pratihárí*) seems to have been, in old Hindoo courts, a woman; as were
sometimes even the guards.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[4:e](htd03.htm#fr_7) A proof of great and
unusual delicacy or self-control in an eastern potentate.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[5:d](htd03.htm#fr_8) According to the Hindoos, a
deep-toned (*gambhíra*) voice is a special note of manliness and wisdom.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[6:e](htd03.htm#fr_9) Women are women very early
in the East. But the number fifteen had formerly a significance
analogous to that of our own 'sweet seventeen,' as is well observed by
A. V. W. Jackson of the old Iranians. (*Avesta Reader*, p. 44.)

<span id="fn_10"></span>[7:f](htd03.htm#fr_10) Because her feet were
reddened with lac.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[7:g](htd03.htm#fr_11) The cobra sits up, dances
and bows its head, when the juggler plays to it.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[8:h](htd03.htm#fr_12) Grammar was called, by
the old Hindoos, the *door* of all the sciences: and they studied it
sometimes for years and often all their life long.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[10:i](htd03.htm#fr_13) An important day among
the Hindoos, with a name of its own (*amáwasí*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mango](htd04)
