[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd04)  [Next](htd06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PÁTALÍ.

THEN he tossed all night on his bed of leaves, and rose before the sun,
and went out and stood on the steps of the pool, watching the images of
the last stars paling in the mirror of its water before the advent of
the day. And he looked and to! out of the trees again the *chétí* came
towards him with twinkling feet, holding a trumpet-flower <span
id="fr_16"></span>[c](#fn_16.md) in her hand. And she resembled the sky
before the dawn, touched with the first streak of red. So she came up to
the King, and stood near him, and said: O King, my mistress sends her
lord, by these unworthy

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

hands, a flower, and if his slumber has been sound, it is well with her.

Then the King said: *Chétí*, how can he pass untroubled nights, whose
memory is haunted by the injuries of a sex, even in thy opinion more
frivolous than dry leaves? Then the *chétí* laughed. And she said: O
King, I am young, yet am I older than thou art. Dost thou think so
lightly of the actions of women, and yet recollect and attach weight to
the words of one of the youngest of them? And the King was confused. And
he said: Maiden, young certainly thou art, and yet already full of the
delusive cunning of thy sex. And if such is the maid, what else can the
mistress be? Then the *chétí* was delighted. And she exclaimed: She is a
woman; is not that enough for thee? Are they not all without exception
like bamboo leaves, frivolous, and like their stalks, hollow? And yet,
judge not all flowers according to thy experience of the weed. For
though I and others are but weeds, yet is my mistress like this glorious
trumpet-flower. O King, art thou so simple, as to think that the
Creator, who in making all flowers equally flowers, nevertheless gave to
each its own peculiarity, was so left-handed as to make all women
identical? Truly, thou art but a poor judge. For some, like this
*pátalí*, are

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

glorious to look at, whereas others, like yesterday's mango, are loaded
with fragrance. Like her, whose husband once went upon a journey and
never returned. And year followed year, and still he never came. And
every day in all those years she was pestered by suitors, that,
attracted like bees by her beauty, came on ever more keenly the more she
drove them away. Then one night she took a lamp, and filled it with oil,
and a wick, and went down to the bank of Ganges, saying to herself: I
will light it, and set it afloat upon the river. And the flame is the
life of my husband. Therefore if it goes out, or sinks, I will also put
an end to my life, since he will be dead. But if it floats, I will wait
and endure, for I shall know that he will return. So she did. Now that
night there was a high wind, which blew furiously; and the waves of
Ganges were like those of the sea. But notwithstanding, she lit her
lamp, and pushed it out upon the river: for her faith <span
id="fr_17"></span>[d](#fn_17.md) was very strong. And at that moment the
Sky, with all

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

its myriad stars for eyes, was looking down at her. And when it saw her
little lamp, it laughed in scorn: and said: See what a miserable taper
yonder poor mortal woman calls a lamp! But Maheshwara heard the brag.
And suddenly, by his power, he created a calm. Then the waves of Ganges
sank to sleep, and on her <span id="fr_18"></span>[e](#fn_18.md) still
bosom floated the little lamp, with a flame that never wavered: and in
the silent mirror of her waters appeared another sky and other stars, in
mimicry of those above. Then said the kindly God: Sky, seest thou yonder
sky with all its stars below? And the Sky answered: Aye: but that sky
with its stars is but an illusion. And Maheshwara laughed. And he said:
Thou foolish Sky, know, that thou art thyself, with all thy stars, no
less an illusion than is that other sky below. The sole reality of all
is yonder little lamp, that floats midway, poised between the infinity
above and that below. For it embodies the good quality <span
id="fr_19"></span>[f](#fn_19.md) of a faithful wife.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

So the lamp floated on, till it went out of sight; and thereafter that
woman regained her husband, by the favour of the God.

Then the *chétí* looked at the King steadily, and laid the flower at his
feet, and went away. And the King looked after her, as she went: and
stood meditating, long after she was gone. And then he stooped, and
picked up the trumpet-flower. And he said: *Pátalí*, exquisitely lovely
is thy great crimson flower: and as for this strange maiden, surely
Saraswati <span id="fr_20"></span>[g](#fn_20.md) dwells upon her tongue.
But what of that? Is she not a woman? One of those who carry poison in
their teeth under the honey in their lips. And he threw the flower, with
his lips shut, into the pool, and went back to the temple with a sad
heart, to mourn through the day and await the coming of the night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17:c](htd05.htm#fr_16.md) *Pátalí*. Its colour is
pale red.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[19:d](htd05.htm#fr_17.md) The reader unacquainted
with Hindoo literature may possibly see in this a Christian idea; but it
is not so: or rather it is far more Indian than Christian: and the
original *bhakti* is stronger and far more intense in its meaning than
our *faith*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[20:e](htd05.htm#fr_18.md) Because *Gangá* is a
woman.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20:f](htd05.htm#fr_19.md) Goodness, or *sattwa*
(the noun, of which *satí*, a word familiar to all English readers in
connection with widow burning, is the adjective) is one of the three
great Qualities: *Passion* and *Darkness* being the other two. *Sattwa*
alone is real: that which is (*sat*). But the play on wife and goodness
cannot be rendered in English.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21:g](htd05.htm#fr_20.md) The goddess of
eloquence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jasmine](htd06.md)
