[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd12)  [Next](htd14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AMARANTH.

AND all night, he slept with the *Kadamba* flower on his bed of leaves:
and in the morning he went out, and watched the fire-flies on the pool
hastening to hide their lamps before they should be shamed by the coming
of the Great Lamp of day. And presently the *chétí* came towards him,
holding in her hand an amaranth <span id="fr_31"></span>[s](#fn_31). And
she looked like an incarnation of the essence of timidity, blushing at
the recollection of the adventure of the day before. And she came up to
the King, and said: O King, my mistress sends her lord, by these
unworthy hands, a flower, and if his slumber has been peaceful, it is
well with her.

Then the King said: Dear *chétí*, he sleeps well,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

who has not to reproach himself with withholding succour from the
suppliant. Then she dropped her eyes upon the ground. And the King
looked at her with affection, and he said: Dear *chétí*, do not be
ashamed: for thy case was perilous. Moreover, I took no advantage of
thee in thy distress. But nevertheless, could I discover that bee, I
would intoxicate him with nectar, till he could not fly. Then she said:
And what, if he had stung me? Then the King said: *Chétí*, had the
villain stung thee, I would have bound him with cobwebs, and thrown him
before an elephant. Then she laughed, and said: Poor bee! the punishment
would have exceeded his crime. But enough of him! Let me rather continue
to enlighten thee as to the virtues of my mistress. Then the King said
hastily: O thou tormenter, wilt thou never cease to remind me of thy
mistress? O that I were not a King, to endure by reason of policy queens
that I do not want! Or why art thou not thy mistress, and she the maid?
For as it is, I see before me nothing but despair. Then she said: O
King, despair is unavailing. And even greater obstacles than these have
been surmounted by others, by the favour of Ganesha and their own
determination. Did not Wishwamitra by resolution long ago become a

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Brahman? Then the King said with a sigh: O my
dear *chétí*, I am in misery, and instead of consoling me, thou mockest
me with old legends that are not to the point. And she said: O King,
some surmount obstacles, and some faint and die before shadows, which
seem to be but are not really obstacles at all. For once there was a
full moon. And looking for lotuses to love, he peered curiously into a
forest pool. Now in that pool there was a pure white lotus, growing in
the black mud. But that day there had come down to the pool two male
elephants; and they fought in the pool, and struck their tusks into each
other's sides, and their red blood streamed into the pool, and fell upon
the lotus, and turned its petals red. So when the moon looked down into
the pool, he exclaimed: Alas! it is only a red lotus, and not a bride
for me <span id="fr_32"></span>[t](#fn_32). So he pined away in sorrow,
and night after night he grew thinner and thinner, and at last his
emaciation became such that he vanished altogether, and ceased to exist.
And then on the dark night that precedes the new moon, the clouds
assembled in masses; and there fell a furious rain into the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

pool, and it washed the lotus clean. And when the new moon stole into
the pool, lo! he saw to his delight a pure white lotus, with a rain-drop
shining on its leaf, like a tear of joy at his approach <span
id="fr_33"></span>[u](#fn_33).

Then the King said: O, that I were that moon, and thou my lotus: then
would my nights pass like an instant of delight, and not hang over me,
as now they do, black with the hours of separation. But she laid the
amaranth at his feet, and went away: and turned, before she vanished in
the trees, and then became invisible. And the King stooped, and picked
up the flower. And he said: Amaranth, gladly would I stain thee, as
those mad elephants did the lotus, with my blood, could it avail: yet
even so, I could not make thy colour redder than it is. And he went back
to the temple, with the amaranth in his hand, sad at heart, fore-seeing
the conflict of his honour with his love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[49:s](htd13.htm#fr_31) *Kurabaka*: it has a
crimson flower.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[51:t](htd13.htm#fr_32) The white lotus
(*kumuda*) is the proper moon lotus, the others are apparently all
devoted to the sun.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[52:u](htd13.htm#fr_33) The King did not
understand her, for love is blind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ashóka](htd14)
