[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd14)  [Next](htd16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PALÁSHA.

AND he lay all night, tossing on his bed of leaves . and in the morning,
he arose before the sun, and stood sadly, plunged in meditation, like a
crane, on the edge of the pool. And he never noticed how the *chétí*
came towards him, till he looked up, and saw her standing beside him,
with a red *Palásha* flower in her hand. Then she said: O King, my
mistress sends her lord, by these unworthy hands, a flower, and if his
sleep has been sound, it is well with her.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Then the King said: Dear *chétí*, sleep, like a jealous rival, has taken
offence at thy frequent visits to me, and will not come near me. And she
said, with a smile: O King, let her not be angry, for soon will my
visits cease. Then the King cried out: Ah! say not so: thou hast uttered
the very secret of my heart. For I must ere long celebrate this hateful
marriage with thy mistress, for to keep her waiting any longer would not
be polite. And then, alas! what will become of me and thee? Thy visits
will cease, and if thy mistress should suspect me, she might put thee to
death. Then the *chétí* said: Nay, not so: for my mistress wishes well,
both to thee and to me. And I fear, lest when thou knowest her, it may
turn out wholly otherwise; and thou wilt rather forget the *chétí* for
the mistress. Then the King exclaimed: Be the sun my witness, that I
will not. Rather will I send her back to her father. Let him do what he
will: let him take my kingdom, and add it to his own: I care not, so
that he only leave me this wood and its pool, and thee for its visitor
in the morning. And she looked at him with a smile: and said: O King,
these are but idle words. And well do I know, that thou wilt never send
her back. Then the King said: *Chétí*, I will.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then she said: Nay, that were to deceive her,
and break thy own word. And deception is base, but fidelity is good.
Moreover, she is a deposit <span id="fr_35"></span>[y](#fn_35.md) in thy
hands. And know, that once there was a merchant, who possessed a great
pearl, such that the hand could hardly grasp it: and it resembled a mass
of sea-foam, collected into a ball in the light of the moon on an ocean
shell, under the constellation *Swáti*. And it was famous throughout the
kingdom. Then having to go on a journey, he went to a brother merchant,
and gave it to him, saying: This is a deposit with thee, till I return.
So he said: Very well: go without fear. And the merchant departed. But
the other buried the pearl in the ground. Then the King came to him and
said: Give me the pearl which was deposited with thee, and I will enrich
thee: if not, I will take it by force. Then the merchant said: What wilt
thou take, to wait for a week: for I love to look at it? The King said:
For one crore <span id="fr_36"></span>[z](#fn_36.md), I will wait for one
week. So the merchant gave him a crore. Then after a week, the King came

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

again, and said: Give me now the pearl. And the merchant bought from him
the delay of another week for another crore. And so he did, till after a
while his wealth was exhausted, and he was a beggar. Then the King said:
Give me now the pearl. Then the merchant said: King, I have a daughter,
fairer by far than all thy queens. Take her, and sell me, for her,
another week. So the King did. And then he came again: and said: Give me
now the pearl. Then the merchant said: Take my life, and sell me for it
yet another week; and when that is ended, take the pearl, and promise to
put me to death. So the King said: Very well. Then after three days, the
owner of the pearl returned. And he came and asked for his pearl: and
the other gave it to him, and said: Thou art returned in good time: here
is thy deposit; and all is well. And then he went to the King, and said:
O King, the owner of the pearl has returned: and I have restored to him
his own: and here I am. Then said the King: Thou art the pearl for whom
I have been waiting. And now thou shalt marry my daughter, and recover
thy own, as pure as when I took her; for she was thy deposit in my
hands: and my kingdom and all my affairs shall be in thine.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Then she laid the flower at the King's feet, and went away. But the King
stood and watched her as she went, till she passed out of his sight. And
then he stooped and took up the flower. And he said: O flower of the
Dhák, thou art a deposit in my hands. How shall I do without her? or how
retain her and my honour, for they are incompatible? And he went back to
the temple with the flower in his hand, striving to discover some way of
escape from the dilemma, but in vain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[58:y](htd15.htm#fr_35.md) This idea of a 'deposit'
constantly recurs in Hindoo poetry.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[58:z](htd15.htm#fr_36.md) About a million
sterling, when the rupee was equal to a florin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shamí](htd16.md)
