<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc122)  [Next](swc124) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Cornish Pulpit Retorts, Forty Years Ago</span>

Mr. Spry left the west country for Botusleming, where he displayed his
harmless eccentricities by boating on the Tamar, dressed in all sorts of
unclerical fancy costumes, or in parading Plymouth streets arrayed in a
suit of sailor cut, made out of striped bed-ticking. The great man of
Mr. Spry's new parish was a certain esquire, to whom the parson showed
so much less respect than the great man of the place thought due to his
squireship that, by way of revenge for the slight, the squire took every
opportunity to ridicule the vagaries of the parson, and often behaved in
church in such a way as was intended to show his contempt for the
reverend gentleman. Now, it was said that the squire had acquired a
great portion of his lands by unfairly foreclosing a mortgage. Mr. Spry
soon heard all the particulars of the transaction; for the parson,
notwithstanding all his whims, was a great favourite with the gossips of
his parish. One Sunday, when the squire behaved more than usually rude
in church, the parson took for his text, "The time of your redemption
draweth nigh." In his sermon Mr. Spry compared the sin-burthened soul of
man to a mortgaged estate of which the devil was the mortgagee, and the
old one's wiles, to get possession of the sinner's immortal part, with
the dishonest tricks which some other mortgagees put in practice when
they once get their clutches on a small part of a spendthrift's estate,
to gain the whole before it is fairly due. The parson took good care to
describe particularly all the procedure with which the squire was
accredited, and the picture he drew of the earthy mortgagee made the
squire to appear much blacker than the devil. The parson continued by
saying that the poor dupes thus treated are in a far worse case than the
sinner in the hands

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

of the Old Nick, because no amount of faith or good works can procure
their redemption from the power of one who is more avaricious than
Satan. Before the sermon was half over, all the congregation was on end,
pointing, or looking, towards the squire's pew, where his satanic
majesty's ensampler looked completely crestfallen.

Soon after this the squire threatened that he would twist the parson's
neck if he met him off his own ground. When this came to the parson's
ears, he hired an old woman, armed with a broom, to mount guard if he
went fishing on the river's bank, or took his walk in the woods. As a
farther piece of bravado, Mr. Spry had a miniature cannon mounted on the
parsonage garden-wall, and popped off this gun towards the squire's
residence every evening.

The eldest of the reverend gentleman's sons is married, and settled in
Australia, so that our Land's-end parson's descendants are likely to
become sturdy gum-suckers under the light of the southern cross.

At the time the Rev. Mr. Spry had the care of the souls in Sennen and
St. Levan, another wit-cracking divine, then well known in Penzance, who
afterwards became the curate of Illogan, was remarkable for a certain
kind of recklessness in his pulpit discourses. Some account of the
unusual style of the curate's sermons having reached his vicar, he
deputed a clergyman (whom he believed to be unknown to his curate) to
visit his church and report the proceedings. The curate got an inkling
of the intended inquisition, and some notes on the antecedents of the
inquisitor. The latter had held a commission in the army until it seemed
probable that he might be called on to perform some actual service for
his pay; then (he would have it believed) the spirit of grace so
operated on his heart that, instead of being a slayer of bodies, he
became a healer of souls. However, by following some spirit's dictation
(which, in this case, as in many others, was probably his own umpulse
and his own interest), before it came to the brunt of war, he had
exchanged his regimentals for a surplice, soon procured a good benefice
with the proceeds of his commission, the incumbent opportunely dying
off, and, having little to do, there he was, one Sunday, seated in a
dark corner of the church, watching every word that came from the mouth
of our curate.

Towards the end of a good practical discourse on the duties incident to
the various stations in life, the preacher observed that it was
everyone's duty "to live and labour truly to get their own living, in
that state of life to which it had pleased God to call them." He said
many of his hearer did so, and he believed many more would do so, but,
infortunately, parents’ vanity, or ambition, often misplace their
children, by fixing them in posts for which they are neither qualified
by nature nor by grace! For example, when the fond father sees his
chubby curly-pate, strutting up and down the garden-walk, flourishing
his wooden sword and beating

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

his sixpenny drum, he takes it into his head that his boy is destined to
become a martial hero. Thenceforth, the child's head is stuffed with
stories of warriors’ glorious deed. The next step:—The destined hero
comes home from school and so delights his fond parents by spouting "I
heard of battles, and I longed to go, to follow to the field some
warlike knight," that the boy's father promises him a real gun. After a
few years more, spent in poring over the imaginary exploits of fabulous
heroes, the youth fancies himself to be more than a match for Hector. A
commission is purchased for him by the time his beard is grown. Then,
the preacher (turning toward, and fixing his glance on, the spy)
continued:—"Now behold the soldier, who looks swords and daggers, talks
great guns, struts like a peacock or prances like a war-horse, and
fancies himself ready to face the devil or the cannon's mouth, but when
it comes to the tug of war, he finds that neither his natural nor his
acquired endowments are such as [constitute](errata.htm#21) a gallant
defender of king and country; or, to speak plainer, he finds out, just
in time to escape in a whole skin, that he is too big a coward to stand
the smell of gunpowder. What could he do better, then, than endeavour to
find the true state to which God had called, or for which nature had
qualified, such a person? Dearly beloved, this is no easy matter; for,
suppose he sells out of the army and purchases a living in the church,
he will soon find that this is no place for a coward, because it
requires courage to declare the truth without fear or favour! There is
some courage required to rebuke sin boldly, and not to wink at the
special vices of rich or poor. A man has no right to the church's pay
without doing the church's work. The honest minister will not hesitate
to call a spade a spade instead of the eternal shuffling and dealing out
of stale platitudes about the will of God, which is, somehow or other
always interpreted to be in favour of the peculiar crotchets of his
hearers and of the temporal interest of the soft-swaddering preacher,
who soothes his dull and respectable congregation with the gentle talk
about laying up a treasure in heaven (by giving to the church on earth),
of saving grace, of the highest blessedness, of the inner life, of the
spirit's promptings, and much more of the same vague cant, to which they
would be unable to give any rational meaning, to save their souls. The
parrot-like phrases come out of the wind-bag like so many tickets blown
up by chance. In good sooth I can think of no post," he continued, "to
which God calls a man, in which a coward can live and labour truly.
There are certain avocations, of the devil's invention, for which the
chief, almost the only, qualifications, are selfishness, cowardice, and
cunning. A coward may become an infamous spy, a cursed inquisitor, or a
double-dyed traitor and informer, who turns king's evidence: his majesty
ought to be ashamed of such. Now, it is enough to make a parson swear,
even to think of the varieties of [villainous](errata.htm#22) creatures
of the same class! One of the worst is the eavesdropper and tale-bearer,
who makes a mountain out of a mole-hill, and always ends every piece of
mischief-making gossip by saying to the filthy receiver of scandal,
"Don't tell who told

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

ye." Such an one is in general found to [the](errata.htm#23) old one's
masterpiece—that incarnate lie and mystery, the canting hypocrite, who
for a time seems to cheat God, man, and the devil with the sour-visaged
affection of extraordinary purity and strictness of demeanour. These
devil's chicken find nothing but villany in this world, because they
only seek for evil. Dearly beloved, we must leave these slimy
snakes-in-the-grass for Satan to deal with, in hopes that they will all
be roasted as they deserve. And may the Lord help all brave men and true
to some place in which they can honestly earn their daily bread. Have
faith, dear friends, that the Lord will help all, who are able and
willing, to some post in which they may honestly earn their bread, and
those who are not able to labour, must live, the best way—any way—they
can. Amen."

The ci-devant soldier came no more to hold inquisition, and the erratic
curate continued to serve the parish of Illogan until he got a better
living.

Some mistakes may be made in repeating the extraordinary sermons, yet,
if the exact expressions are not given, the substance is preserved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ghosts of Chapel-Street and St. Mary's Chapel-Yard](swc124)

</div>
