<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc135)  [Next](swc137) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Trewoof and the Old Mansion of the Levelis</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"When taste and genius both combine  
 To shape the stone or draw the line;  
 In fair proportion, just and free,  
 All own the power of Masonry."—Old Masonic Song.</span>

</div>

A quarter of an hour's walk brings us from Bosava to the gateway where
Lamorna road joins the highway to the Land's-end. Here, the pleasant
woody glen expands itself into a broad bottom, surrounded by green
hills. On a woody knoll, gently rising in the midst, are situated the
remains of the old mansion-house of Trewoof (more commonly called
Trove). We get a good view of a portion of this ancient seat of the
Levelis, or, Lovells, as we ascend the road on the eastern side of the
gateway leading to Lamorna. A few minutes’ walk in this direction will
bring us to Trove mill. Here we are in the very dwelling of the noted
witch, who figures at Bet of the Mill, in the guise-dance of Duffy and
the Devil.

A few years since all the mill-side of the gentle eminence on which
Trove mansion stands was shaded and sheltered by hedgerows and clumps of
flourishing oaks, elms, and other trees, which showed that it is neither
the fault of the soil nor of the climate that our hills and dales, in
many place, for want of wood, look so dreary, cold, and desolate. We
enter Trove by the avenue, the outer part of which was formerly called
the green-lane; the inner, the bowling-green. All about the town-place,
in the walls of outhouses, in hedges and ditches, we may find many
wrought stones, which formed parts of mullions, string-courses, foliated
window-headings, or that belonged to arched, deeply-moulded, and
otherwise enriched doorways of the demolished portions of the ancient
mansion. The stone steps of what was once the grand staircase of the
mansion may be found as gate-posts, lintels, and serving other purposes
in the farm-yards and fields. Many years ago, we were well acquainted
with all parts of Trove, and remember to have often then remarked the
curled-up corbel of a wind-course (or windspar course, as the old masons
used to call the raised stringcourse of the gable) built into the wall
of a pigsty: this marked the rather simple style and the date of one
portion of the building. If we remember rightly, near the entrance to
the little enclosure called the Hop-garden there was then a triangular
stone worked to lines verging to form a [rectangular](errata.htm#51)
apex, which was, however, truncated so as to leave space for a soffit to
receive the base of a pinnacle, or some kind of ornamental finial. The
fine work on this, and many other stones lying about in the ditches,
because rather unshapely for hedging, showed that a great portion of the
old mansion must have been in a very ornate style. Far away in the
hedges of fields we have also seen moulded stones which once belonged to
handsome doorways, windows, gables, chimney-stacks, and other ornamented
portions of a building that must

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

in its day have far surpassed any other in this neighbourhood. When the
successors of

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"This worthy family that flourished here  
 Since William's Conquest, full six hundred year."</span>

</div>

disposed of the estate of Trewoof, the land was sold in three unequal
portions, the old mansion divided, and each of the three purchasers
allotted a shore of the mansion-house proportionate to the value of his
land.

From what we know to have been the arrangement of other old manor-houses
of the west, built on a similar ground-plan, from the description of the
old proprietors, from the names retained by various parts of the old
buildings (even when divided and in ruins), and by other indications, we
can understand pretty clearly what this interesting old seat was like,
when the lord feasted his guests and retainers in the noble hall,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And in her bower sang the lady gay,  
 Bedeckt in gorgeous rich array."</span>

</div>

A pleasanter spot than the sunny slope on which Trove stands, surrounded
by the sheltering hills, is not to be found in the west country.

The ground-plan of the principal part of the old mansion was in the form
of the letter **E**. We suppose the back of the letter to represent the
east front, or the side looking towards Lamorna vale, and continuing
this front above the top limb of the letter, or the south wing of the
house, there was a group of inferior buildings surrounding three sides
of a kitchen-court, of which the south wing formed the fourth side.

The north wing stood a little farther back than the house which is now
at the end of the broad lane, or bowling-green, as it used to be called.
This wing, and part of the adjoining north end of the east front, was
allotted to the Harvey's portion of the land.

To the Tremewans was apportioned the middle of the eastern or Lamorna
front, the part which contains the fine arched doorway, with its
ornamented jambs, surmounted by the armorial bearings of the Levelis
(three calves’ heads, in allusion to the original name of the family).
This doorway is almost the only vestige of the old mansion that remains
entire.

The southern end of the east side, with the entire south wing and
kitchen-court (all demolished long ago) belonged to the Bossustows,
whose portion of the land was much larger than either of the other
parts.

The Harveys rebuilt the north wing in the present dwelling, which stands
near the original site.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

Part of the materials of the Bossustows’ portion (which served as a
quarry for more than a century) were used for building their new house
on the bank, which was formerly part of the ground known as the Ladies’
Garden, to which a broad flight of steps ascended from the Green Court,
which was enclosed on three sides by the mansion. Many years ago an old
gentlemen, who was the proprietor of this part of the property, gave us
such a graphic description of the ruins of the old mansion-house and
grounds as enabled us to form some idea of this once noble seat. The
venerable gentleman (being one who took great interest in such matters)
remembered much about the beautiful proportions of the large mullioned
windows of the room called "my lady's bower," in the end of this wing
next the garden, and (what was a most unusual plan here) that the seats
of stone, in the large window of the gable overlooking the private
garden, were against, or rather in, the jambs on each side. The
thickness and splaying of the wall afforded sufficient space on both
sides for benches, on each of which two persons might sit, so that four
persons, seated in the window, two on each side with their backs to the
jambs, would place their feet where the window-seat is now usually put.
By the shape of many wrought stones scattered about the Bossustows’
premises, we know that some portion of this part of the house was
battlemented, probably a porch which had long disappeared, and that some
of the windows were of a very ornate style.

The gentleman of whom we have spoken also learned much from the elders
of his ancient and respectable family, and other old people connected
with the place, of what had been the interior arrangement of the house.

Yet we must admit that all this does not furnish us with a very good
authority for an exact description of the old manor-house, and in some
instances we have copied from the existing remains of other old mansions
in the west. When these failed us, we have also drawn pretty freely from
fancy. And why not, if anything it suggests to us may afford a hint to
those who like the old style of building and gardening? As the different
portions of Trove are still designated by the names of the late
proprietors, whose families resided here for many generations, we have
thought best, for convenience sake, to do the same, although the lands
have passed into other hands some years ago. Before proceeding to the
interior we may remark that none of the original chimney-stacks appear
to be left standing, as in middle-age architecture these prominent
objects, however varied in design, were always ornamental, and served as
much to embellish the [dwelling](errata.htm#52)-house by their
[beautiful](errata.htm#53) form and proportions, seen against the sky,
as the light and elegant bell-turrets, or the graceful finials and
pinnacles of the same period did to adorn church and chapel. The roofs
were mostly of the pitch masons call square roofs; that is, the gables
or punions were right angles, rarely so high as to form equilateral
triangles, and, where roofs and gables were exposed to view, they were
still more

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

rarely found (except in debased masonry) at any uncertain angle between
the two; indeed, the old masons seemed instinctively to have worked by
the grand divisions of the circle, which are alone satisfactory to the
eye, and, however rough the material, the outline is always so pleasing
that one does not regard the details. We now proceed to the interior.

#### NORTH WING

In the north wing, fronting the centre of the avenue, was a broad arched
doorway under a roofed balcony or oriel supported on pillars. This we
know, because the room from which the balcony or oriel was entered,
retained the name of the oriel-chamber long after the porch, with its
balcony had disappeared, and the pillars used for rolling-stones on the
farm.

The archway opened into a passage, which gave direct access to the
interior court. Crossing this court, a flagged pavement led to a door in
the south wing, which contained the more private apartments. A
projection on the eastern side of the court contained the grand stone
staircase. This stair wing rose, tower-like, above the rest of the
building, with a flat roof and parapet. There was also an exterior
entrance to the staircase by a few semicircular steps to a door opening
on the first landing of the stair. On the western side of the court a
broad flight of steps rose to a terrace, which led away on either hand
to gardens and orchards. Returning to the passage, a room in the western
end of the north wing was supposed (from the name it bore of the Reeve's
room) to have been appropriated to the use of the reeve or steward.

On the other side the entrance was an apartment called the Little Hall,
which probably served as an ante-room to the adjoining great hall, or
the little hall might have been a solar, or private parlour for the
master and his family, to which he and his chief guests would retire
from the high table after the feast was over, leaving the commonalty to
their unrestrained mirth and revelry.

There was also a newel-stair from the passage to the oriel-chamber and
other rooms in this wing. Not long ago a large stone, which once formed
the arched heading of a doorway, was lying at the turn of the avenue.
Probably this stone crowned the grand entrance of the north wing.

#### THE HALL

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"In this hall was held many a sumptuous feast,  
 And there came lords, and dainty dames,  
 And many a noble guest."</span>

</div>

Through a broad folding-door in the eastern end of the north wing we
enter on the dais, in the grand room of state, which was in the northern
end of the Lamorna front, and occupied all the space on this side as far

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

as the ancient doorway still remaining, which opened into the entry
which was screened off the lower end of the hall. Two or three steps at
the higher or north end of the hall led to a raised boarded floor, or
dais, on which the high table was placed across the end of the hall. In
this end, at the back of the chair of state, there was a large mullioned
and transomed window, looking towards the avenue. At the east end of the
dais, opposite the entrance from the little hall, a window in a square
projection looked down the vale of Lamorna, and narrow lookouts, one on
each side of this bay, or square oriel, commanded a view of the eastern
entrance and the avenue.

Here the Levelis of old often sat down at the same board with their
household and dependents, to dispense their frank and social
hospitality: then

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"It was merry in hall when the beards wag
all,"</span>

</div>

and the minstrels’ harps, ringing to the metrical drolls or songs of the
bards, gave an air of romantic chivalry to the convivial scene, or the
mummer's jests excited the hearty laughter and boisterous mirth which
was good aid to the digestion of solid viands, from a festive board, in
the jovial days of old.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Merry it is in halle to hear the harpe,  
 The minstrelles synge, the jogleurs carpe."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> See the sturdy
servants bearing out the heaps of pewter plates, wooden trenchers, and
great round platters still containing enow of the untouched viands to
feast all the families of the poor women who are waiting in the glowing
kitchen for an abundant dole from the squire's board. The lady, and her
fair damsels, leave the high table on the dais, and enter the kitchen,
to see that all have enough and to spare. When they retire they are
followed by the blessings of the poor to their gay bower, "bedecked with
many a fragrant flower;" or some of the fair ascend to the minstrels’
gallery, that they may hear the music and look down on the sports of the
hall.

The tables are no sooner relieved of pewter plates and platters, with
the substantial remains of the feast, than the steaming wassail-bowl,
flowing with hot spiced wine, and flagons of sweet mead, are placed on
the table, with silver drinking-cups and goblets. The other tables are
replenished with black jacks and bekers, pewter jugs and flagons, full
of foaming ale, sweet cider, or common wines, which quickly pass from
hand to hand and from mouth to mouth, whilst the merrie disport of the
hall grows more boisterous, fast, and furious. After many flowing bowls
are emptied, to increase their revelry and mirth, the master of the
feast calls from the dais, "Harper! strike up thy liveliest strain, to
some well-known old song, that one and all may join in the refrain. Take
the boards from the tressels, clear the rushes off the floor for the
dance." Whilst

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

bards and minstrels sing their merriest songs, and jesters tell their
drolls, both of weeping and of game, or whilst the mummers get ready the
guise-dance, all join in the chorus of a three-men's-song. Then pass the
bowl around, till all are tired of frolic. The lord and his more
honoured guests retire to their chambers, or to my lady's bower, if they
are not too drunk. Many of those who remain in the hall stretch
themselves on the benches, or lie snoring under the tables, where we
leave them for the night, and follow the servitors through the screen
and across the entry into

#### THE KITCHEN

which occupied, with its offices, the remainder of the east front.

In the hospitable days of old this important room exhibited almost as
much state as the hall itself. One end of this large room was taken up
by the large open fireplace, with the oven opening into it. and a
wood-corner at the right-hand side. There was room for several persons
to sit within the chimney, on benches on each side of the fire. We wish
we could hear the songs that were sung and the merry drolls told in that
chimney-corner, by the blazing firelight of a frosty winter's night. The
whole of the west side, only leaving space for a doorway, was furnished
from end to end with a broad dresser, or side-board; with shelves, from
end to end, over door and all, displayed the shining pewter platters,
plates, and flagons, and many other things in the same serviceable
material. Piles of wooden trenchers, bowls, and basins, on shelves under
the board. Spits, pots, kettles, pans, and the endless variety of
cooking utensils that spoke of good cheer, hanging on the walls, or
suspended from racks and beams, with the flitches of bacon, collars of
brawn, dried beef, and other winter stores which required to be kept
dry.

The farm servants and day labourers took their meals in the kitchen on
ordinary occasions, and when the day's work was ended the old ballad
says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Then to their supper were they set orderlye,  
 With hot bag-puddings and good apple-pyes;  
 Nappy ale, good and stale, in a browne bowle,  
 Which did about the board merrilye trowle."</span>

</div>

Yet they had seldom such a meagre bill of fare as the above, not even on
fast days, when they feasted; besides, in the good old times, the supper
was the principal meal of the day. The fashionable dinner is only the
old English supper, with a change of name.

Looking down the vale were broad mullioned windows of many lights, with
an oaken bench continued all along the wall beneath. A great oak table,
near the windows, extended nearly all the length of the room, and doors,
opening into the entry, occupied the other side of this large apartment.
The kitchen, and offices belonging thereto, extended beyond the junction
of the east front with the south wing.

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

As in those times the mansion and farmhouse were mostly combined,
extensive buildings were required for what may be regarded as the
farming part of the establishment. These buildings surrounded the
servants’ court on the southern side of the wing that contained the
private rooms. The dairy, pantry, brewhouse, and store-rooms of various
kinds enclosed three sides. A large stone trough on one side received a
stream of water from the mill-brook, which still flows through the
orchard above. An exterior stairs from this court led up to the rooms
over the kitchens, pantries, and other offices and outbuildings. These
chambers were the wool-loft, cheese-room, apple-chamber, and perhaps the
upper servants’ sleeping-rooms. A few steps from this court also
descended to the cellars, under the parlour and lady's bower in the
south wing.

The kitchen offices and other building surrounding this court were of
plain yet honestly finished work—no out-of-the-way holes and corners
were slighted, nor anything attempted to be concealed or disguised. The
door and window-frames alone were of dressed-work. The windows were high
and had narrow openings, chamfered on the outside edges, and splayed
within. The stream of water might be turned into the dairy and thence
through to the kitchens at pleasure.

We now return to take the

#### EAST DOOR

The rich ornamentation of the jambs, and the heraldic devices on the
shields that surmount this noble doorway, can now scarcely be made out,
nor the fine work seen, from the detestable custom many of the cottagers
have of whitewashing a border round the outside of their doorways; yet
bedaubed as this interesting old doorway is with the cleaning-out of the
dame's limebrush, we may still see that the jambs are richly sculptured
with the figures of men, and other ornamentation, which gives some
indication of the date and style of the mansion. Above the doorway are
carved the arms of the family of Levelis, Leveal, or Lovell. The old
name has passed through these and other changes. The latter is the most
familiar form, as we always hear the old folks of Buryan, when speaking
of the last of the ancient name, say Squire Lovell of Trove. This
gentleman, the last of his name, though not the last of his race, was
Arthur Levelis, who died in 1671, to whom the monument was erected in
Buryan church, and inscribed with the following quaint epitaph:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"This worthy Family hath Flourished Here  
 Since William's Conquest, full six hundred year;  
 And Longer much it might But that the blest  
 Must spend their Seavenths in a Blessed Rest:  
 But yet this Gentleman, Last of his name,  
 Hath by his Vertues, Eterniz’d the same  
 Much more than Children could, or Bookes, for Loue  
 Records it Here in Heartes, in Life Above."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

Only fancy the trains of brocaded ladies, with their fair damsels; the
troops of armed knights, followed by their squires and pages who have
passed through this ancient portal, besides Duffy and the Devil; the old
Witch of the Mill; Joan, the squire's old drunken housekeeper trundled
through in the wheel-barrow, with the page Bevis (the last offshoot of
this once noble house, and ancestor of a race with a new name) bringing
up the rear. This doorway may be regarded as the principal entrance to
the hall, as the entry into which it opened was only lightly screened
off, and considered to form a portion of that apartment, though serving
as a passage to the kitchen on the left and to the grand staircase at
the end of the passage, in a projection which formed the tongue of the
letter **E**.

There was a short passage from the inner end of the entry (on the
kitchen side) from which doors opened into the buttery, pantry, and
other offices under the butler's charge. A few steps from the buttery
led down to the cellars under the private rooms in the south wing, and a
few steps up from the passage to a solar, private parlour, or
banqueting-room, through which one passed into the bower in the western
end of the south wing.

#### THE LADIES’ BOWER

In middle-age romances the term "bower" is ascribed indiscriminately to
bed-chamber and parlour. In the old ballad of King Estmere, we read,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Although it is seven years and more,  
   Since my daughter was in halle,  
 She shall come once downe for your sake  
   To glad my guestes alle.

 Down then came that mayden fayre,  
   With ladyes laced in pall,  
 And half a hundred of bold knightes,  
   To bring her from bowre to hall;  
 And as many gentle squiers,  
   To tend upon them all."

</div>

With the more general introduction of parlours the Ladies’ Bower was
regarded much as the modern drawing-room and boudoir. The most striking
feature in this parlour, or bower, was the large window, divided by
mullions and transoms into many lights.

To these pleasant nooks and corners the lady and her fair damsels
brought their spinning, their tapestry work, and their embroidery. In
these favourite, old-fashioned retreats the ladies of the olden time
wrought with their needles those marvellous and beautiful fabrics which
have never been surpassed, and rarely equalled, in modern times. The
ladies of the fifteenth century who could assume any amount of state and
dignity, when state was proper, were not above attending to their
housekeeping and were as skilled in the mysteries of cooking,
confectionery, brewing,

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

spinning, knitting, and shirt-making, as in making the beautiful lace
that is valued now higher than its weight in gold, entirely for the
excellence of its work; for the thread is often of the coarsest. Nay;
they were not above taking the grist to the mill and serging (bolting)
the meal to the degree of fineness suitable for the family requirements.

It might be truly said of the lady who came from her bower into the hall
with such great honour,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"She in her needle took delight,  
   And likewise in her spinning-wheel:  
 Her maids about her every night  
   Did use the distaff and the reel:  
 The spiders that on rafters twine,  
   Scarce spin a thread more soft and fine."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The humming of
bees which came in through the open casement, the sweet scent and gay
look of the pleasant garden, seen on the sunny bank sloping down to the
window of my lady's bower, where she sits watching the swarming bees,
and creating with her needle flowers only equalled in beauty by those in
the garden, make her sing, with the birds around her,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And there my love built me a bower;  
   Bedecke’d with many a fragrant flower;  
 A braver bower you ne’er did see,  
   Than my true love did build for me."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this delightful
retreat let her work and sing, whilst we survey the rest of the house,
before we pass into the gardens and other pleasant places of the old
abode.

#### STAIRCASE AND CHAMBERS

From the inner end of the entry we ascend the easy, low and broad stone
steps of the grand stairs, which were lighted by a large and lofty
mullioned and transomed window, with its arched head reaching nearly to
the carved beams and pendants of the roof. On the first landing (about
three feet from the pavement of the entry), a door opened on to an
outside semicircular landing, from which a few steps led down to an
alley in the green-court which conducted to the gardens. The broad
landing at the stair-head was at the end of the minstrels’ gallery, or
where the end of the said gallery should have been, had there been one
(which, in truth, we are rather doubtful about), from which the landing
might have been separated by a perforated screen of Gothic pattern, with
doors to this doubtful balcony. From the stair-head, corridors, or
galleries, passing round the interior or court side of the house, gave
access to all the principal chambers.

From a light gallery, supported by a few pillars at the back of the
hall, we look over on the dais of the state apartment, before we enter
the adjacent room in the north wing, which was always called

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

because a door in the north-west corner of this room opened into the
oriel, or covered balcony over the porch.

It was sometimes intended for the large oriel, over the principal
entrance to have been regarded as the sacrarium, or chancel; and the
oriel chamber, like the nave in the chapel, was the place from which the
family might join in the sacred office. We believe that this was the
original use of most of the rooms in old mansions still called the orrel
chambers (hence the name) because the same arrangement for the domestic
oratory is very general in old French chateaux and the casas of Spain.
We never heard of any portion of the old buildings, or ruins, being
called the chapel, yet there was probably a small chapel, or oratory,
near the mansion, by the side of the spring known as St. Ann's Well,
which was in some repute for its healing virtues.

From the orrel chamber a door opened into the reeve's or steward's
bedroom, situated over his office or parlour: there was also a newel
down to the passage, which crossed through the north wing to the
green-court. Returning to the head of the grand stairs, we find a
passage over the one below (in the rear of the kitchen); on the left are
doors opening into rooms over the kitchen and offices. These chambers
may also be reached by an exterior stairs in the servants’ court. On the
right-hand side of this corridor, near the end, folding doors open into
a suite of state apartments in the south wing, consisting of an
ante-chamber, through which, by an arched doorway, one passed into the
best, or

#### BRIDAL CHAMBER

For what reason the large outer room is made a mere passage of we could
never divine, yet such is the common arrangement (with respect to this
state apartment) in most old mansions of the time of Henry the Eighth
and the Elizabethan period, as might be seen in many old manor-houses in
the west not long ago. In this room, where the lords of the domain first
saw the light, and closed their eyes in everlasting rest, one was sure
to find the great oak bedstead, carved with all sorts of curious
devices—the dove and olive branch depending from the tester.

Two shelved recesses, or niches, contrived in the head of the bed, were
most convenient for the lady's cup of caudle, spiced wine, or something
stronger for herself and baby, when she got about as well as could be
expected. There were so many large closets in the recesses by the sides
of the chimneys, in all the out-of-the-way-places that could be made or
thought of, as well as under the sloping roof or winding stair, that
handing-presses were scarcely wanted. Yet one always found them
furnished with drawers within drawers at the bottom; shelves, pins,
racks, and other contrivances at the top, for the safe keeping of the
lady's embroidered robes, russet gowns, hoops, farthingales, and other
bravery that could

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

not be stowed away in the curiously-carved large oak chests with the
elaborately-wrought ironwork in hinges and locks, placed all on the
outside. (No craftsman then wished to conceal any part of their work;
all was honestly above board.)

The remains of some old chests, yet to be seen in churches, show the
style of those used in houses two or three centuries ago.

Perhaps the chest in which one of the misfortunate Levelis found the
skeleton of his long-lost lady-love was kept in this chamber; for his
step-father could have done no less than let him take the old oak chest
home with him, that he might weep over it when he had nothing else to
do.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Oh! the mistletoe bough, the mistletoe
bough."</span>

</div>

We can know but little for certain about the furnishing or adornments of
the bedrooms; yet, from the mention of a curious incident in one of the
romantic legends connected with the place, at the time of the Crusades,
we know that at least my lady's, or the best chamber was hung with
tapestry, and that a small spiral stair from a closet in this room
descended to the bower, where it was also concealed by a closet-door.

We conclude, from the remains of seats preserved about old-fashioned
places, that the settle, or settee, with back made to turn down on the
arms so as to serve as an occasionable, was a common piece of furniture
for bedroom and parlour.

Little more than half-a-century ago, before the substantial yeomanry of
the west became so generally infested with the desire of leaving their
pleasant ancestral homes to be occupied by their dairymen, that they
might exist for a time (like fish out of water) gasping in the
constrained life of a dull country town, where no one knows, nor cares,
anything more about them than to get their money, their houses contained
furniture well worthy the attention of antiquaries. In those more simple
times, many valuable, rare, and curious pieces of substantial ancient
furniture were seen, in the shape of carved bedsteads, bureaus (with
endless private drawers and pigeon-holes), chests (with
curiously-contrived skibbets), handsome buffets, or corner cupboards
(with their shelves displaying punch-bowls of old India china),
drinking-cups, and Venice glass, splendid as gems, with many other rich
and rare articles in pottery and verrerie. One frequently saw on the
place of honour—the upper shelf—silver flagons and drinking-cups. The
comfortable settles (carved and panelled) chairs of state, tables with
spider legs of all imaginable patterns, were found in all the ancient
homesteads, where the families of the old gentlemen-farmers of the west
had lived for centuries in the enjoyment of every comfort. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10)

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

When Tre, Pen, and Pol took it into their heads to run away from home,
many of these masterpieces of the turners’ and carvers’ craft, found
their way into county inns and cottages, or were left to rot in some
damp outhouse until the careless [tenantry](errata.htm#54) burnt them to
put them out of the way. It would require a volume of plates and another
of letterpress, to give an idea of the bold and picturesque though often
grotesque, designs shown in the pillared and half-head bedsteads, with
all their elaborate work in turning, panelling, and carving; the rich
handings, and curiously-vandyked valance (and with fringe, bells, and
balls), or garnished with gold and silver lace. It may be worth while to
remark (now that the Tudor style seems to have a chance to become
fashionable again), that when the pattern of the vandyke was traced on
the Damascus cloth, or other rich stuff, the material was cut wide
enough to make two setts of valance, so that there was no waste, and the
[complement](errata.htm#55) of the valance, vandyke, or denticulation,
in one room, would be found in the hangings of another. We know more
than one country inn where, by the fireside, may still be seen the cosy,
old, panelled settle, but now without the bankers and dorsars, or the
cushions, for the seats and back, that the useful ladies of old took
pride to adorn with their choice needlework. The carved, or
deeply-moulded and panelled, wood or stone-work

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

around the fireplace, and mantel-shelf were often the principal
ornaments of hall or chamber, as well as the wainscot and ornamental
plaster-work.

In various parts of the west we have frequently seen pieces of very
ancient furniture well worth preserving for the sake of the simplicity
and beauty of the designs. The [workmanship](errata.htm#56) is often
rude, yet the effect is good, and the peculiar way in which the
panelling is sunk makes the carving appear exceedingly deep and rich,
[particularly](errata.htm#57) around the recesses or niches, usual in
the heads of old-fashioned bedsteads.

As we have omitted, when speaking of the hall, to mention anything about
the armour, weapons, hunting-gear, and many other things usually found
suspended on the walls of this grand room of state, we will supply the
oversight by giving the translation of an extract from an old French
work which gives a description of a Norman hall in the fifteenth
century.

The customs of France and England were so much the same at that time
(particularly among the old Norman gentry) that the curious pieces of
information which it contains, relating to the manners of that age, are
equally applicable to either country:

"In the common hall (for to have two was a mark of great distinction),
there were the stags’ antlers, tipped with iron and fastened to the
[wainscot](errata.htm#58), on which were hung caps, hats, hunting-horns,
couplings and cords for the dogs, and rosaries for the use of the common
people. And on the dresser (dressouer), or buffet, with two shelves,
there was the Holy Bible, translated as commanded by King Charles the
Fifth more than two centuries ago, the Four Brothers Aymon, Oger the
Dane, Melusina, the Shepherds’ Calendar, the Golden Legend, or the
Romance of the Rose. Behind the principal door were long and large pegs,
to hang game upon, and at the bottom of the hall, on close boarding let
into the wall, half-a-dozen of bows with their quivers and arrows, two
good and large bucklers with two short and broad swords, two pikes
twenty feet long, two or three coats or shirts of mail in the little
chest full of bran: two strong foresters’ cross-bows (arbalestes de
passe) with their strings and other gear belonging thereto were also
within the chest. In the large window and over the chimney, three
arquebuses (hacquebutes). And, adjoining, the perch for the hawk; and
farther down at the sides, the fowling-nets for taking quails and
partridges, hunting-nets of various sizes, and other instruments used in
the chase. And under the large bench, three feet wide, fine fresh straw
for the dogs, which, by smelling and hearing their master near them, are
better and more vigorous on that account. In addition, two pretty good
chambers for the passers-by and the strangers. And in the fireplace
large billets of green wood, with one or two dry faggots, which made a
fire to last a long time."

The above is taken from *Les Contes et Discours d’Eutrapel,* par Noel du
Fail, 1732, 12mo., vol. 2, pp. 45-6. (Du temps present et passe.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[246:\*](swc136.htm#fr_10) It is within bounds
to say that there are not half so many proprietary farmers west of Hayle
now as there were threescore years ago. About that time a mania seems to
have taken some for educating their sons for the black-coated
professions, from some notion of the superior gentility; and the young
Bolerians seemed to think there was <span id="page_247">p. 247</span>
something more refined even in serving behind a counter, or wielding a
pen, than in ploughing and sowing their own lands. At the same time the
farmers’ daughters, being sent to boarding-school, soon ended by being
entirely ignorant of the ordinary work of a farmhouse kitchen, and knew
little more of what belongs to the dairy than that scalded cream is much
esteemed by their town acquaintances, many of whom would make better
farmers’ wives than the gentility-infected farmer's daughters. With a
few honourable exceptions, where the old names may still be found, the
land is now almost all in the hands of dairymen and other rackers, many
of them aliens to the place.

The general tone of rural society, too, is much altered for the worse
within the last half-century. Notwithstanding all the cant, to the
contrary, about the superior morality of the present time, there is now
no longer the same rough-and-ready, yet kind-hearted, cordiality between
neighbours, nor the same social gatherings at harvest-homes, or
parish-feasts; nor at any of the other times or tides when old
acquaintances used to meet to renew the friendship and neighbourly
feeling that made country life so much the more pleasant. The young men
have no longer the holiday sports and manly exercises, in which they
used to meet in friendly contest. In place of the old candour,
simplicity, and truth, there is now a clumsy plastering of affected
gravity and gentility that manifests itself in sanctimonious spleen,
hypocritical cant, and sickening grimace. There is but little gained on
the score of deception, for

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The wise distrust the too fair-spoken man."</span>

</div>

Yet there is now hopes of some social improvement being effected through
the Volunteer movement, which is bringing the élite of the young men
together just as the hurling and wrestling-matches were wont to do of
old.

It would be a matter of regret if the respectable remnant of
gentlemen-farmers were to desert such pleasant rural homes as they may
soon create, if they have not, around them, and were to abandon the
right royal independent and healthy occupation of farming, to enter some
(falsely-considered) more genteel profession, as that of lawyer, doctor,
or minister, when the ranks are already too full and many go to the
wall, yet not for want of sterling honesty and fair abilities either.
These qualities often obstruct success, in certain crafts and talking
trades.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Haunted Chamber and the Maltsman](swc137)

</div>
