<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc112)  [Next](swc114) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Sailor's History</span>

"He was one of an ancient family that came from Normandy and settled in
Sennen soon after the Conquest. They held their lands, ’tis said, as a
gift from the Conqueror. The two oldest branches of the family
terminated in daughters, who gave themselves, and their lands, to other
names; but, at the time, they had not much to bestow, as the 'First and
Last' inn of England belonged to them for many generations and they

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

could do no less, they thought, than be the best customers to their own
hotel."

'What you are tellan es Double-Dutch to me," says Mary, 'I don't know
what you mean about Normandy and Conquerors; I never head of any such
things before.'

"Nor do I know any more about it than thyself, I only repeat what I've
heard among them, but leave me go on and don't interrupt one. Thee art
all the time ready to take one up short. "Like many of the younger
brothers before him he was too proud to remain at home in a condition
little better than that of a labourer. Some of the old folks contrived
to give him good learning. He passed more time going about to all the
hurling-matches, wrestlings, and other games, where I was mostly his
comrade, than at school. By the age of fifteen he went to sea, and
before he was out of his teens, he became the second mate of an
East-Indiaman. These ships, much larger than any to be seen here, are of
a mixed breed between a merchantman and a man-of-war. Their crews, too,
are for the most part a cross between the real Jack Tar and the Jolly
Marine.

"I sailed in the same ship. Though he was an officer, and I before the
mast, he always treated me like a brother. When off duty the last voyage
we made together he took with him Margaret’s brother John, then a lad,
mad to go to sea with his cousin Bill. Before we returned he taught the
lad navigation, and made him of more use on board ship than many a
seaman double his age. Every voyage the sailor made, the richest stuffs
and other choice articles were always brought home with him for
Margaret. On his return from the last voyage he wished to be wedded to
Margaret. She was nothing loath; but her aged father, though he dearly
liked and was proud of his kinsman, the brave sailor, yet he either
feared to trust his darling daughter's fate in the hands of the young
devil-may-care tar, or, as the old man hinted more than once, he thought
cousin Billy ought to save more money before he thought of taking a
wife."

'The devil take the old curmidgeon!' says Mary.

"The old man's desire that before marrying his daughter, the sailor
should get richer, determined him to leave the India service and go a
privateering. He was soon appointed the captain to as fine a craft as
ever sailed for that game of neck-or-nothing, or worse.

"I very much desired, and he wished me, to go with him; but somehow my
old Joan, then a spanking, clean-built craft as you could see, enticed
me to—well, to ship with her. That she mightn't break her heart, poor
dear, I married and made what they call an honest woman of her. Before
that had taken place the privateer was far away. Joan often wished, ere
many months were over, that she had left me go, for I was as
discontented as could be on shore, and never could make up my mind to
work

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

underground; so I turned to streaming, and smuggling, by turns.
Margaret's young brother had to be kept home by main force, yet the
privateer Captain was loath to take him on such a dangerous expedition.
The youngster would no more work on the farm, nor go in the merchant
service again, but made one of the crew in every smuggling adventure
undertaken by me and my comrades, and determined to join the privateer
as soon as ever he might find an opportunity."

'I commend the boy for his pluck,' says Mary.

"Nearly three years passed without any particular tidings from the
sailor, and yet, by some means, rich presents were always arriving for
Margaret and her brothers. Nor were his other friends forgotten. One
Saturday I came home late at night after I'd been a week absent, over to
Roscrof for a cargo, and putting the goods safe. As soon as I came in,
Joan said, 'I've news for ’e, Mathy, that will make ’e jump out of thy
skin for joy! Guess what it is!" 'Why my old mate is come home,' says I,
and began to blubber like a great land-lubber for joy at the very
thought' of it. 'Now, don't tell me he esn’t,' says 1, 'for I shall
knock thee down, and shan't be able to help it, to be disappointed.'
'You great fool, you,' says Joan,' he esn’t come, than.' 'Then I'll
strangle thee,' says I. 'But he es comean in a few days, or a week,'
says she, 'and here es a packet and a letter that a strange seaman
brought here two days ago for you (and no one else but you), to give it
to Marget or her brother John. The seaman said that the one we should
all be glad to see, would be here very soon, and rich enough to get
married and stay at home all the rest of his time, of he would only be
contented with a land-lubber's life.'

"I stayed awake nearly all night, thinking to rise early to give the
good news to Margaret, but, when I thought to be getting up, I fell
asleep and snored away hours after other people were all up. I dressed
in haste, and, without staying for breakfast, started for Trigaminion.

"When I came to Morvah churchtown, the bell had ceased tolling, and the
people had gone into church. As Margaret usually came to church, I went
in expecting to find her there. She wasn't there. I would wait a
quarter-hour, or so, to see if she would come, and hadn't been in the
church more than ten minutes when the tramp of a horse was heard coming
near. A stranger entered the church.

"Everyone rose and gazed at him, and well they might,—such a fine
stalwart man, so handsomely dressed, was rarely seen in a country church
in these parts. His curling black hair, beard, and whiskers covered
great part of his face, and the little that could be seen of his skin
was the colour of mahogany. Yet the deep dye of this coal-black hair
made his complexion appear fair enough. His coat, of the finest
navy-blue cloth, was sparkling with gold lace and anchor buttons, and
the long boots, such as were then worn by naval officers, came halfways
up his thigh to meet

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

the skirts of his coat, leaving but little of his white small clothes to
be seen. A short sword, or cutlass, hung from the broad leather belt
round his waist. The finest of lace ruffles hung from the breast and
wrists of his shirt. In his hand he held a cocked-hat, looped up with
lace, and ornamented with a large cockade.

"He stopped at the entrance of the aisle, looked round, and, not seeing
Margaret, or any of her family, in church, was about to leave, when he
saw me and beckoned me to come to him.

"We were so glad to meet again that we had been in the public-house
parlour more than ten minutes before he began to talk with anything like
common sense. Then into the room bounded Meg's brother John, and clasped
his arms around the sailor's neck before he had time to turn round. The
two kissed and embraced, like the babes in the wood, poor dears, when
they met again, after they had lost each other for five minutes among
the brambles, when night came on, as you remember; or like Man Friday
meeting his dad; or, better still, one might compare their meeting to
that of the twin brothers, Dick and Bob Edwards, better known as the
Morvah Devils, who, for a number of years, worked, always together, the
same gun on board the Nymph, till Pellew left that ship; then one of the
twins being sent to another vessel, neither was good for anything, till
they were both brought back to the same gun again, and, like the Morvah
Devils, the Sailor V—— and Margaret’s brother from that day stood by
each other.

"'Cousin Bill, if you go off without me again, I'll be shot or shoot
you,' says Jack.

"'Thous dost know very well, my son,' replied the other, 'that but for
the fears of father and Meg I'd never have left thee here to rot on
Morvah Downs for the last three years;' then, pinching the youngster on
his forkle-end, the sailor examined his bone and muscle. 'Why Jan, my
dear, since I saw thee last thou art grown quite a man, I declare, and a
fine strong-built one too, by jingo.' The deuce take Meg and dad; I'll
ship with thee, Cousin Bill, let them say what they will, and go with
all my heart wherever thee hast a mind to sail, if it's to——,' —well, he
didn't say Heaven.

"As I thought Marget might be thrown into a sort of
[quandary](errata.htm#12) with the sudden joy and surprise, I said to
the sailor, 'Now you two stay here for a half-hour or so. I haven't yet
seen Miss Margaret, since you sent me this parcel and letter for her,
because I only came home last night from a trip over the other side.
'All right, comrade, make sail and we'll soon follow,' says he.

"The first words Marget spoke, when she entered the parlour, into which
I was shown, were, 'You're come, Mathy, to tell me that one I

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

have long expected is near by. I know he will be here in less than an
hour.'

'How should she know than?' Mary asked.

"No good to ask me, how she knew,' Mathy replied. "People remarked that
when she was very young there was often a strange look in her deep hazel
eyes. One moment they would seem to flash fire; the next they would be
like smooth water reflecting the sky, and seem to be looking inward. How
the deuce she should have known anything about the sailor's arrival I
can't tell. It's sometimes my belief, as well as many other people's,
that An Meg always knew more than she had any business to, but, like all
overwise ones, she could never read her own fortune. I believe that, by
some means, fair or foul, she did know of her sweetheart's coming,
because I never saw her dressed so grand and look so beautiful before in
my life. You should have seen her then as she sailed into the room on
her father's arm, arrayed in a blue satin gown, or robe, the train
looped up, and the open front showing an underskirt, or a petticoat, of
white satin. With the lace apron, long elbow ruffles, bows, furbelows,
and other flags and streamers, she was a fine a craft as one could
desire. Then her figure-head beat anything I've ever seen;—her dark,
chestnut-coloured hair, turned right back from her high and broad
forehead, fell in masses of long curls all over her neck and shoulders.
The hair at the back of her head was [kept](errata.htm#13) in its place
by a broad comb, ornamented with jewels; in her ears she wore a pair of
large flat hoop-shaped earrings of some foreign fashion. These golden
hoops were hung round with pearls, and these were matched by the string
of pearls she wore on her neck. You may fancy, from Meg's regular
features and remains of beauty now, how well she looked more than thirty
years ago.

"The parcel I brought her contained a store of trinklets and jewels. The
letter was to inform her that the sailor had arrived in port and would
be home soon. Whether the old gentleman was glad or sorry, was not easy
to know. I suppose he could hardly tell. He said that Margaret and John
had been mad, or possessed with the devil, ever since the sailor had
been gone; and, not to be wanting in courtesy, he took his hat and
gold-headed cane and walked up to the churchtown to meet and welcome his
kinsman home. Margaret and her lover expressed their happiness more by
their looks than by their words. Before half the afternoon was over,
such a crowd of young an old were come to greet the sailor (who, from a
boy, was known and liked by everybody from Hayle to the Land's-End),
that we had to leave the house in Trigaminion and got to churchtown,
where, before night, it seemed like Morvah fair, with the scores come
over from St. Just to welcome the sailor and take him away with them.
And to St. Just he had to go, in spite of his lady-love; for when the
warmhearted 'San Justers' take it into their heads to feast, or make
much of strangers, they all but kill them with kindness."

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

"Well, I s’pose one may venture to speak now, than,' says Mary, 'for you
seemed to have runned yourself out of breath, Captn. Mathy! How long are
’e goan to make the story before they get married? And seeman to me, for
a man, you must have been very particular in notan the women's dress in
your younger days! What a wonderful memory you must have too, that you
can mind the colour of the gownd An Meg wore thirty years ago. Are ’e
sure et wasn't a green one? what colour stocking ded she wear?'

'That I don't remember. I wish thee west stop thy clack, and listen. If
it wasn't a sky-blue gown it ought to have been. I know she had a neat
ankle and small foot, very high in the instep. The diamond buckles, in
her velvet shoes, made one notice her pretty feet the more.'

'Well, and for my part,' says Mary, 'I wouldn't give a straw for such a
constant and cold lover as Margaret’s sailor. I'm vexed to think of the
fellow, when he hadn't seen his sweetheart for three long years, not to
stay up courtan with her the first night after he came back. Now crack
away Captn.; I hope you will soon come to their wedden, and the sperat
that frightened ’e so.'

Captn. Mathy went on to say:—"The Sailor V—— told his comrades that his
share of the prizes they had taken, during the time he had been
privateering, was more than enough to buy the best farm in Morvah, aye,
or in St. Just either; but he wouldn't quit the sea—no, not he, whilst
he had a stump to stand on. His crew had become a very mixed multitide
from having had to ship strangers to supply the places of those killed
in action. He intended to dismiss the whole set, except a few of his old
hands, because the rest could never agree, and as many had been killed
by their messmates as by the crews of the vessels they boarded. Soon
after the intention of the privateer captain, to ship a new crew, became
known, more hands volunteered to go with him than would have manned a
first-rate man-of-war.

"As the sailor didn't know how to choose among all the brave boys who
wished to ship with him, they agreed to have a wrestling-match, to come
off the next Saturday on Sennen Green. Then and there he proposed to
select his crew from those who threw the greatest number of fair back
falls and showed best play.

"On Monday the sailor, Meg's brother John, and I, came back to
Trigaminion. Now, mind this, Mary," said Captn. Mathy, in a big voice,
"instead of being vexed for her sweetheart's absence the Sunday night,
Margaret let it be seen that she was proud of the notice taken of her
lover."

'The more fool she,' Mary replied.

"The next day many of the privateer captain's family came over from
Sennen to fetch him home with them. It had been decided, by the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

parties most interested, that in a week or ten days (with the old man's
consent or without) Margaret and the sailor would be married in
Falmouth, where he proposed to take a house for his wife and wished her
father to give up his farm, remove thither, and live with her. You may
be sure that the returned sailor's relations in Sennen and other places
were glad enough to see him if only for the scores of gold rings, and
rich jewels, pieces-of-eight, moidores, and doubloons he gave away among
them—he had something rare for every cousin of the tribe.

"On Saturday the sailor put up many handsome prizes, which were
contended for on Sennen Green. Margaret and all her family were there.
They too went over to Sennen on a visit with the sailor, most of his
family being related to them. The 'First and Last' was an open house for
all-comers, during the time the sailor remained at home, and some weeks
after. When the day came for Margaret and her brother to take leave of
their father they were all sadly cast down. The old gentleman could not
give his consent to part with either son or daughter; yet, knowing it
was worse than useless longer to oppose their desires, he contented
himself with murmuring over a string of old proverbs, such as, 'if they
made a hard bed for themselves they might lie on it;' 'those who
wouldn't be ruled by the rudder must be by the rock;' and such-like
everyday sayings, which old dotards are for ever spouting with the air
of prophets."

'Come to the wedding, do,' says Mary.

"Well, two of the old dames, now out on the cliff with Margaret, went up
with her as her bridesmaids. Several of the new crew, with myself as
their guide, had gone on, some days before the bridal party and wedding
guests, to make such preparations, on shore and on board the privateer,
as were required for the accommodation of the party.

"Friday, the day after the arrival of the bridal party in Falmouth, was
the wedding-day. During the forenoon of that day, and for weeks before,
the weather had been calm and heavy—scarcely a breath of air stirring.
The marriage-ceremony and wedding-dinner passed off gaily enough. But
before we had finished drinking health and long life to the new married
couple, many of the wedding guests were alarmed at the sudden darkness,
followed by as violent a tempest as ever raged over sea or land. All the
sailor portion of the guests hurried on board the ship to bring her
farther into harbour. Before an hour passed the sky was in a continued
blaze of lightning—the thunder roared as if defying wind and sea to make
a more horrible noise. Trees were uprooted even in the most sheltered
spots; houses unroofed, and chimneys blown down in all directions. The
ships in the most sheltered parts of Falmouth harbour dragged their
anchors and got foul of each other. The next morning all parts of the
coast were strewn with wrecks. Yet hours before Margaret and the Sailor
left their bridal chamber, the storm had passed away as suddenly as it
came on. In its violence and short duration it was

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

more like the hurricanes of the Indies than anything in the way of a
tempest ever seen here. It was remarked that during this dreadful night
the windows of Arwenic House (then uninhabited) were all ablaze with
light as if the ghosts of all the old Killigrews had come on the wings
of the tempest to hold high festival in their ancient home. Not the
least injury was sustained by the old mansion, though many buildings
(which numbered fewer days than that did years) were levelled to the
ground.

"It was also said that on this fearful night some notorious pirate
either died or that his spirit was put to rest, I forget which. There
was but little damage done to the privateer craft, as most of the new
crew had been to sea before. By the beginning of the next week
everything was put in ship-shape. The commander had purchased a
furnished house for his bride, much against her wish; for, strange as
you may think it, she did everything in her power to get the sailor to
take her to sea with him. Less than a week after the bridal, when all
the wedding guests except myself, were about to leave (I must except
myself, because I'd a much greater mind to go a privateering with my old
comrade than return to Morvah and Joan), accounts daily reached the
privateer commander from the captains of vessels, brought into Falmouth
for repairs, from pilots and others, that a fleet of merchantmen from
the Spanish Main, and bound for Spain, had, during the gale, been
separated from their armed convey, and from each other—that many of
these rich Godsends for wrecker, pirate, or privateer, were drifted far
out of their course away to the north and nor’-west of Scilly.

"The commander, Young John D—— (now his chief mate and brother-in-law),
all the crew, and even Marget and myself, were mad to put to sea and
give chase. Her husband and brother, in order to make her consent to
remain on shore without them, promised to be back again in a fortnight,
at the farthest, and that then if she still determined to risk the sea,
she might do so. Much money and other valuable were placed in safe hands
for Margaret’s use. Our gallant ship was ready for sea. I went on shore
to say good bye to Marget, when who should be there but my old Joan! She
and Meg, between them, managed to make me dead drunk and keep me out of
the way till the privateer was out of sight with the two I dearly loved;
and neither Margaret nor I have ever seen them since.

"Yet, a few days after the sailor left Falmouth his gallant ship, in all
her pride, put into Whitsand bay. John D——, and a dozen of the crew,
came ashore, proceeded to Penrose, and served out Justice Jones as the
old wretch deserved."

'Now, I haven't interrupted ’e all this time,' says Mary, 'nor asked ’e
a single question, but I'd like to know something about old Jones and
how he was served out.'

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

'It'll take too long now,' Mathy answered; 'let's finish one story
before begin another; besides there's no time to spare, for Meg and her
wedding guests (as she still calls the old dears who come to visit her
on these times) will soon return.'

"Whatever can be become of the privateer captain and all, or any, of his
crew, is known to no one in this country. Margaret often, in spite of
all hope, indulges the fancy, especially on these days that her husband
and brother are both still alive and will one day come back. That's the
reason she lives in this way, and will not touch a farthing of the money
her sailor left, hoping still that he may come home and want it. Even
his wedding suit, and all the other land clothes (he left all with her),
are taken out of the long oak chest, new folded, aired, and brushed,
just as if she expected him home before night.

"But, sometimes, her cooler reason gets uppermost, and then she's in
black despair. These are the times you may see her, at nights, wandering
about alone among the cliffs and carns. The more stormy the night the
more likely one is then to see her. I've heard her at such times, poor
soul, when she little thought I was watching her, for fear of some harm
happening to her, shriek and moan for hours together louder than the
wind and waves. The following day, or during many days, she would be
like one lost to the world. Then her harmless madness would come like a
shield to protect her wounded heart. I'm alway glad, for my part, to see
her indulge in her deviltry (I don't know what else to call it), because
then I know that the bleeding of her broken heart is stayed for the
time."

'Law! don't talk such nonsense,' says Mary; 'why, didn't she get married
again, and live like a sober respectable woman, to be sure?'

"From time to time, rumours have reached this place that the sailor V——,
John——, and some of the crew, were still alive and kept prisoners in one
of the Spanish settlements of America. These uncertain reports are
treasured up by Margaret, and serve to nourish her hopes. She, poor
crushed soul, may fancy what she will, but I know that the sailor is
dead, because I saw, at this very hour of the afternoon, nine years,
ago,

<span class="smallcaps">The Apparition of Billy V——</span>,

standing there, just inside the door, as plainly as I see the sloping
sunbeams now shining on the screen. The weather was calm, the sea smooth
as glass, but great part hidden from view with clouds of dry mist, which
rolled in to the foot of the cliff and up the hollows between the carns,
so that their tops only could be seen as if resting on the clouds. One
could hear the seamen speaking and the sheaves creaking in the blocks,
and other sounds on ship-board, out over the sea miles away. Everything

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

around—sky, sea, and land—seemed all unnatural-like; more like the
moving picture of some grand show than anything real.

"I was keeping in the fire, and thinking of my old comrade, when I heard
the cantering of a horse coming over the cliff. In an instant, by the
time I looked up, the tramp of the horse was on the caunce outside that
door. I looked through the open window and saw nothing outside but the
fog mixed with sunshine, as one may now and then see it on the cliffs
this time of the year. The tread of a man, in heavy boots, and the
jingle of spurs on the drussel, made me look towards the door. And there
stood the sailor, dressed every way the same as I saw him when he came
to Morvah church on his return from the three years’ privateering. There
he stood, just inside the door, where the sun now shines on the
floor—his peaked hat, looped up at the sides, with feather and black
cockade, was above the top of the doorway. He wore the same laced coat
of fine blue cloth, and the tops of his glossy boots reached half-ways
up the thighs. There he stood, the same man—tall, sturdy, and strong,
square-built, and broad-shouldered: he looked every inch the bold
buccaneer. I thought he was going to say, 'What cheer, messmate,' till I
noticed that though his face was turned towards me, yet he appeared not
to see me. I knew it was my old comrade, yet I had neither the power to
speak nor to move. A cold sweat ran over me, and I felt like one turning
to stone; yet I didn't think of the years gone by, and that, if alive,
he could no longer look so young as he did thirty years ago. In my
bewilderment and surprise, I stood gazing at him and forgot to notice
the fire, till, by a side glance, I saw the litter of furze on the
hearth-stone all in a blaze, carrying the fire to the foot of the
wood-corner. In a moment more the whole place would have been in flames.
I turned, an instant only, to sweep back the fire. When I looked towards
the door again there was nobody nor nothing there, where he stood, to be
seen but a man's coat and hat hanging on the screen—the same garments
(once the sailor's) you see there now, and that Meg puts on of stormy
nights, when she runs like a wild thing over the cleaves and carns."

'I should thing,' says Mary, 'you wed be glad to see your old mate, dead
or alive.'

'Aye, so I should, in good substantial flesh and blood, but not an
apparition like that. Yet, when I saw the lace at his wristbands, and
even the black silk tassels hanging from the tops of his boots, just as
I had noticed them when I walked by his wide on his wedding-day, I
didn't think him to be only a spirit, till I again heard the horse
tramping away over the cliff down to the carns below, where neither
horse nor goat could go. Still, bewildered and fear-struck, I went out
and stood on the bank at the end of the house, looked towards the sea in
the direction of the sound of the horse's hoofs, but there carns and
cleaves were all shrouded in mist which seemed to be gathering from all
quarters to that

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

place till it formed a black cloud above and a thick haze below, out of
which soon appeared the black masts of a black ship scudding away to
sea, with all her sails set and not a breath of wind stirring.

"The black cloud in the sky followed the death-ship (for the strange
craft was nothing else), and every now and then spread a blaze of
lightning over the western sky. The thunder roared, fire and smoke burst
from the hull of the ship, followed by the sound of a cannonade—Bomb!
bomb! bomb!—louder than the thunders roaring above and around. Just an
instant the smoke cleared away from the black hull, and there, on the
quarter-deck, was the sailor, brandishing his flashing sword, and not
another soul to be seen. Away, away, hurried the craft over the sea
towards the west, and was soon lost to sight in the thunder-cloud which
became thicker and blacker. At the same time, in every other direction,
the sky was clear and the sun shone bright.

"I then fell down in a fright and turned my face on the ground that I
might see no more of the terrible sight. There I lay, like one in a fit,
till Meg came back and roused me out of the sort of trance the fright
brought on.

"'Mathy,' says she, 'hast thou the stag (nightmare) on thy back, that
thou art groaning and grunting so in thy sleep? Rise up, and come in,
thou careless cook.'

"I crawled in as well as I could, and didn't say anything about the
apparition."

'Perhaps, after all,' says Mary, 'it was only your dreams and fancy.'

'Is your grammer fancy? You may take my solemn word for it. There I saw
the sailor, as plainly as I now see thee with thy mouth open, looking
like a fool frightened. And now you had better make haste home, for
Marget and her company will be back soon.'

'My dear Captn. Mathy,' said she, 'only leave me step up on the talfat a
minute to see the beautiful quilt; it's always spread on the bed when An
Meg's got company. I shall begin soon to make a quilt for myself, as I
hope to be married one day as well as the rest. I would like just to see
the star in the middle of the work. I'll be down again in a crack.'

'Be quick, then' says Mathy, 'if you want to see Margaret’s fancy work,
be up and down again in a couple of shakes, and I'll go outside the door
to see if the old ladies be in a sight. We shall both get into trouble
if they come back and find thee there. No one can tell what they may
think and say; but, of all the scores of times I've been here alone, it
never came into my head to mount the ladder and have a squint at the old
’oman's bed.'

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

The dame's talfat, or bed-place, over the spence and part of the
living-room, was reached by a steep stair-ladder. A strong stream of
light, coming through the little open loop-hole, lit up a portion of the
room, whilst the rest was in deep shadow, and made still darker by the
partly-drawn curtains of a heavy four-poster. Going from the sunshine
below into this place of streaky light and gloom, Mary could hardly make
out, at first, that on the middle of the quilt was a suit of man's
clothes laid at length, and carefully folded double. At last she saw
everything there to be exactly what Mathy had just described as the
wedding dress of the bold buccaneer. On the pillow was placed a cocked
hat. Next came the broad-skirted blue coat, with its bright gold lace
and anchor buttons. Shirt-ruffles were seen between the folds of the
breast, and deep rich lace hung out through the broad cuffs of the coat.
Meeting the coat-skirts were the high boots, and these looked full and
in form, as if the sailor's legs were still in them. Besides, they
appeared as smooth and bright as if they had only then left a
boot-maker's hands. Mary didn't venture to move the sailor's toggery,
that she might see the star in the centre of the patch-work. She saw
that hundreds and hundreds of pieces, of all shades and patterns, were
joined together so as to form most intricate, yet uniform, designs.

The next thing that struck her attention was a long oaken chest, with
heavy handles like those of a coffin. In the uncertain light the low
chest looked much like a bed for the dead. Margaret’s wedding cap and
other lace-work, placed on a fine flannel shirt, with other things, on
the lid, Mary took for a shroud.

After a glance at these Mary turned round again and took up the edge of
the quilt at the foot of the bed. She stood there for a minute's space,
examining, and trying to remember, the pattern of the patch-work round
the border, when, to her horror, she saw the boots move from each other,
and when she cast a glance towards the head of the bed, there lay the
sailor, with all his clothes around him, and looked as if he would that
instant spring off the bed.

The girl saw no more!

With one bound and a shriek, she sprang over stairs and fell on the
floor in a fit!

Mathy, hearing the noise she made, in coming so quickly down stairs, ran
in, drew her out of doors, soused her well with water, poured brandy
down her throat, and took other means which brought her to.

Mary's first cry, when the Captn, held her up, was, "Oh! release me from
the sailor or the devil, do; and leave me go."

Mathy let her go with all his heart. She ran home, took to her bed from
the effects of her fright, and was unable to quit it for many weeks.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

To her dying day Mary Polteer was ready to swear that she saw the
sailor's spirit dressed in his uniform, with cocked hat, boots and all,
lying in Margaret’s bed high by day.

"Sarved her right too," Mathy used to say, "for misbelieving me."

Whilst the Captn. had been relating to Mary Polteer as much as he knew
of the sailor's history, the old ladies had enjoyed a pleasant gossip,
and left the sunny bank on which they rested, among the earns, below,
about the time the curious damsel ran home in a fright at the sight of
the apparition.

When Margaret and her company arrived at the dwelling they were met by
An Joan, the Captn.’s wife, who brought down a large bowl of cream and a
monster apple-cake, steaming hot.

Soon after tea was over, the husbands of the two of the dames who
lived—the one in Trevidga, and the other in Trevalgan—joined the party.
Then came the tinners, Curnow and Tregeer. They didn't forget to bring
some bottles of the choicest liquors they had lately procured by a run
across the Channel.

The night sped joyfully. Song followed song, and droll was told for
droll. No one spoke of parting until the small hours of the morning.
Then, as "the moon shone bright, and the stars gave their light," the
jolly companions went out for a dance on the smooth turf, off the cliff.
Any stranger seeing the old dames and tinners cutting their wild capers
among the moon-lit carns, at that time of night, might well have taken
the jovial party for a company of witches holding their sabbath reel,
with dark-complexioned partners from the world below.

By daybreak all the loving friends, except one old dame who came from
many miles away, took leave of Margaret and her old acquaintance who
came to pass a few days with her.

Soon after that night, when the wise woman's fearful threats and curses
frightened away the folks who came to annoy her, they, and many others
who heard their report of what had then taken place, came to regard the
aged charmer as a real black witch. Even the children soon feared to go
near their former favourite, and their squalling was often stayed by the
threat of, "I'll give ’e to old Meg, the witch, I will, of thee doesn’t
stop thy bleatan, and the Bucca-boo, that do come to see her every
night, will carry thee away with en to the black place where a do live,
that a will." Others, who had less fear than hatred of the old dame,
closed their doors against her, and killed or wounded her pet animals,
whenever they had the chance to do it unperceived.

Long ago, Margaret’s friends in Sennen wished her to come and live near
them, where she would be sure of being treated with kindness, and now
the illusage of her neighbours made her desire some other refuge.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

Yet she could not make up her mind to leave the place where her lambs,
kids, and other dumb companions loved to roam, and the roof-tree, under
which her tame redbreasts had built their nests, and where the bees had
stored their sweets.

One day, late in the fall, whilst Margaret was still in two minds about
going or staying, one of her husband's relatives came to her dwelling,
accompanied by an aged seaman who was a native of St. Just, and who had
been one of the privateer's crew. The old mariner, without much preface,
related to Margaret, how, a few days after her brother and some of the
privateer's crew landed at Genvor, and had their game with the old
justice of Penrose, they fell in with a heavily laden Spanish
merchantman returning from the Indies. The privateers boarded the ship
with very little difficulty, but, in their headstrong heedlessness of
all command, every one of the undisciplined crew left the privateer,
except a man at the helm, and he, too, would have quitted his ship with
the rest, when, by some mishap, the privateer got adrift from the
merchantship, and, with this solitary seaman, was driven fast away over
sea and out of sight.

"At first the privateers didn't much regard, nor care about, their ship
drifting away. They felt sure of taking the Spanish vessel, but, for
once, they were sadly out in their reckoning. On board the merchantman
there were a good many passengers, mostly old soldiers returning home
after having served their time and feathered their nests in the
Spanish-American colonies. These veterans were in no haste to appear on
deck and take part in the fray, until they found that their own crew,
without their assistance, were likely to get the worst of it. Then they
came on, armed to the teeth, and by their united action soon killed all
the privateers excepting the Sailor V——, young D——, and four others (one
of whom was the old mariner himself), who were all put in irons, and
condemned to be hanged at the yard-arm, as soon as they arrived in port.
This country was not then at war with Spain, and, as the privateers
were, in this case, no better than pirates, they were doomed to suffer
the penalty usually awarded to these sea-robbers.

"When this sad remnant of the bold privateers (ironed and sent below
during the night), were turned up on deck the next morning, there was
neither sight nor sign of their ship and her solitary mariner. The
spanish veterans admired the Cornishmen for their pluck, treated them
like old comrades, and showed all the more kindness to the bold pirate
crew because, by the fortune of war, they were to be hanged in a few
days. They were within a day's sail of Cadiz, the wind and everything
else apparently favourable for a speedy termination of the good ship's
voyage, and the lives of the Cornish crew, by the way of the yard-arm,
where the six bold sea-robbers were to be hanged all in a row. The men
to be strung up, and those who were to perform that office for them,
were the best of friends and, joking over the matter, as either party
would have done the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

same to the others under similar circumstances, when there was a sudden
alarm of an ugly craft, seen approaching from the coast of Barbary.

"Before the boarding-netting was passed round the ship, the deck cleared
to work the guns, and the crew and passenger-soldiers all armed, the
approaching craft was made out to be one of the most dreaded
corsair-ships that hailed from Algiers. This was a good-sized, decked
vessel, which carried several guns, and ventured much farther to sea
than the row galleys which usually came out from the African pirates’
nests in fleets, to board the merchantmen when near the land. Like a
hawk pouncing on a dove, the pirate came up with the merchantman, and
boarded her. Moors and Spaniards fought like lions and tigers, and the
Dons were getting the worst of it when the Spanish commander came below
and said to his prisoners, "Now, you brave Christian villains, will you
do one good deed to save your souls before you die, and help us good
Catholics to fight against the Pagan Moors?" "Knock off our irons; give
us arms; and waste no more time in palaver," answered the sailor V——.
The reinforcement of the Cornishmen soon turned the scale in favour of
the Spaniards. The Saracens were confounded by hearing the wild whoops
and screams of the St. Just men, in a *lingua franca* new to Turks and
Pagans, crying out, 'Now comrades, one and all cut into them devils for
blood and life!"

"When the night closed in, a great part of the Moors were lying lifeless
in their gore, and many of the Spaniards in the same plight. Then the
sailor V—— passed the word, 'Hurra, comrades! Now for the Barbary ship.'
Before Spaniards or Moors had time to wink, the Cornishmen were on board
the Algerian and this spanking craft cast off the merchantman. Some of
the few Saracens found on board were spared to help to work the ship,
and the rest made 'to walk the plank.' 'Good bye, mates,' said the
sailor to the Spaniards; 'we like to ride on this sea-bird better than
to swing from your yard-arm.' The Dons, guessing their late prisoners’
intentions, were not sorry to see them save their bacon, and returned
their salute with a hearty 'Adios, companeros, hastaluego, y buena
ventura.'

"The Cornishmen found in their new ship a good store of money,
provisions, and water, with the flags of all nations, which were either
kept as trophies or used as decoys by the African sea-rovers.

"The sailor's first care was to cruise about in search of his own ship,
with her lonely mariner. Over a few weeks, she was seen making her
course for Cadiz. When the privateer tried to come up with their
wandering ship, their old messmate crowded sail to give a wide berth to
the dreaded Algerine. Signals were hoisted, and all done that could be
thought of to make the raw St. Just man understand that he was running
away from those he wished to find. At last a shot was fired across the
bows of the runaway in order to bring her commander to reason, but he
returned

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

two shots for one, and would soon have sent the Barbary ship and his old
comrades to the bottom, had it not been that, in the heat of the action,
he approached so near the Algerine as to hear the sailor V—— hail him
from the quarter-deck, 'Hallo, Captn. Jan Trezise! Will ’e take a few
more hands on board?' 'You many fancy the joy of our shipmate,' says the
Mariner, 'to find his late comrades; he had been doing his best to
follow them and share their fate or bring them off.'

"For God's sake," days Margaret, "tell me at once; is Billy V—— alive or
dead? Any my brother, where is he?"

Without heeding Margaret’s impatience, the old seaman continued:—"Sailor
V—— and his crew soon shifted to their recovered ship, with a great
store of valuables found in the corsair-ship. They then sent off the
deserted pirate-craft, under full sail, to course about the seas like
the Flying Dutchman or a spectre ship. Next they held a council to
decide on their future proceedings;—as they had so narrowly escaped
hanging to the yard-arm and lost so many of their shipmates, none felt
much inclined to return to England, except the captain, who wished to
see his bride and leave with her his share of the riches found in the
Algerine, before he proceeded on a long and uncertain expedition; but he
was with difficulty persuaded to try, first, a short buccaneering trip
to the Spanish Main.

"Many years were passed among the keys and islands, with alternate
fighting and feasting, good luck and bad. During this time, which sped
we hardly knew how, the sailor often planned and attempted to get away
home with his share of the tax that the buccaneers had levied on all
rich argosies which crossed their track; but the greater part of his
crew, augmented now by many desperate villains—English, French, and
Dutch—picked up here and there, always opposed his endeavours to go away
either with them or without them. They would give their captain, his
mates, and the rest of the Cornishmen, any share or all of the treasures
if they would only remain with them, either on sea or land.

"As they soon became well acquainted with the coasts of the islands and
mainland, they sometimes acted as honest pilots and protectors to the
vessels trading in these all but unknown seas. Yet this was dull work,
of which they soon tired, and all returned to the more exciting sport of
plundering the new settlements on the Spanish Main. Many of the ship's
company had taken off, nothing loth, to the islands, where their usual
rendezvous was held—a good number of fair Spanish maidens for their
wives, with slaves to wait on them all.

"One night, when they all landed to have a carouse on one of the smaller
islands of the West Indies (where they sometimes buried their
treasures), the Sailor V——, John D——, three St. Just men of his crew,
and a few others from the old country, who first joined them,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

planned to keep sober, and when the rest, according to their custom on
these occasions, would be all dead drunk, then to seize the ship, make
off, away, and leave their too-loving comrades behind. Nothing is so
uncertain, they say, as the wind and the women. The west-country
buccaneers sailed out of harbour with a fair breeze and a tranquil sea,
and left their comrades sweetly sleeping; but, soon after sunrise, the
breeze veered and sent them round the island, which was so shrouded in
fog that, except at rare intervals, they could see nothing farther ahead
than the peak of the bowsprit. In the meantime, the deserted part of the
crew got out of their long and sound sleep, to find their commander and
his mates had gone away, without saying adieu.

"The deserted crew were grieved and angry to find themselves thus
forsaken by the commander for whom all, in their savage regard, would
have given their lives. Yet there was still some hope that they might
see him again. He could not sail far without more wind. It was no easy
matter, at any time, to clear the small islands, with currents running
in all directions, and much more difficult when, as on that morning,
they were all shrouded in a dry mist. The mixed multitide, knowing that
there was, in a cove only a few miles distant, a good sailing craft
belonging to another crew who followed the same gentle profession as
themselves, procured this ship and ship's company, to go in pursuit of
their captain. About four hours before noon, the mist, at intervals
cleared away, and then the two vessels were seen within hailing distance
of each other. The Cornishmen fired a few shots at the ship in chase of
them, and, when preparing to give a broadside, their vessel struck on a
reef; then the one in pursuit came alongside, and all hands boarded the
deserter, with but little difficulty.

"The rest," said the old seaman, "is soon told, and, what is more
remarkable, this happened nine years and two months or so ago, in the
morning of the day which, of all days in the year, the captain always
kept as a festival in remembrance of his wedding-day."

"Stay, I know the rest," said Margaret, rising in great agitation; "but
tell me who was that lady who hung over my husband, weeping and holding
two children by the hand, when he lay dead and bleeding on the deck of
his vessel."

"That Lady," the seaman replied, as he sprang to his feet in
amaze,—"that lady and the two boys were your brother's wife and
children."

"And John, my brother, where was he? I thought I saw you! Yes, I see
now; it was you who held my husband's head in your arms, when a score or
more swarthy-looking seamen stood around distracted with grief?"

"Oh, lady," the seaman replied, "don't recall everything of that sad
time. Your brother, when he saw that our captain had, by mischance,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

received a death wound from a boarding-pike (we knew not how it
happened,—it was never intended), and our commander fall on the deck and
the blood pour from his side, mad with rage, would have killed all who
carne near him, and himself too, had he not been confined below. But,
lady, how can you know all that took place on that fatal morn?"

Margaret now addressed Captn. Mathy (who had entered her dwelling a few
minutes before, and stood near the door, listening in silence),—

"Old friend," said she, "you have often heard me called mad, and many
say that my visions are only waking dreams; but it was no diseased fancy
which made me see all that took place, a little before noon, on the
feast-day I have always observed. The day was close and sultry: I had
been up early, preparing to receive my accustomed visitors. Feeling
faint and weary, I sat a few moments on the rock outside the door, when,
suddenly, a thick fog surrounded me and hid everything from my view.
Then it seemed as if the sea were close at my feet. I heard around me
the bubbling of the waves, the confused clamour of many voices, mixed
with the booming of cannon. Another moment the sound of my husband's and
my brother's well-known voices came to my ears. Then the rock on which I
sat seemed to be on the deck of a vessel, floating in sea and mist.
Before me (and as near me as I am to you) lay my husband bleeding—a
dark-complexioned lady kneeling on the deck beside him, trying to
staunch his wound, the mariners all around him weeping, as the seaman
had just related. The fearful vision lasted no longer than a minute,
when all vanished and left me like one newly awakened from a trance.
Though I have never spoken of this apparition if left too deep a pang to
be forgotten. Yet now I rejoice to know that my husband's last thought
were of me, and that the dark lady was my brother's wife."

Mathy might have told how he, too, had seen the spirit of the Sailor,
only a few hours after the death-token came to Margaret, but grief and
awe kept him silent.

Neither of those who listened to Margaret’s account of the death-token
doubted the reality of the apparition, as everyone here believed that
the dying appear to the absent, on whom their thoughts are centred at
the moment the spirit leaves the body. Besides, a little more than nine
years before the returned seaman came to Margaret’s dwelling, it was
said that many persons had heard and seen in Trevilly cliff the peculiar
tokens which, in all time, had marked the coming death of any member of
the Sailor's family.

In a short time Margaret recovered her tranquility, and the old mariner
resumed his story:—

"The body of the Sailor V—— was taken to the land, and, in a beautiful
glen, beside a gently flowing river, where he delighted to

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

repose, and whither, he often said, he wished to bring his bride, that
they might settle there and roam no more, within the sound of the ocean,
under the shade of a spreading tulip-tree, we made his last
resting-place. Near by, John D—— made his dwelling, and in the garden
enclosed his brother's grave.

"The ship's company, when they lost their commander, and finding that
his brother-in-law refused to take the command or put to sea again,
brought thither their wives and families, soon cleared many acres of
rich land, and will ere long make a thriving settlement in that fair
clime, where flowers and fruit follow each other all the year round. And
there the descendants of our Cornishmen, and the Spanish and Indian
maidens, may be found at a distant day."

The mariner had long desired to revisit his native place, but found no
chance of leaving their unfrequented settlement until two years since,
when an English ship, on some exploring expedition, anchored in the bay
at the mouth of their river, and gave him a passage home, after taking
him to every other quarter of the globe on the way.

The seaman then told Margaret that her brother, wishing to know how it
fared with her and the rest of his family, had furnished him with plenty
of money for the journey and entrusted to his care a present for her.

On opening the canvas covering of a small parcel which the seaman put
into Margaret’s hand, it was found to contain a carefully-folded
bandana, and between the folds gold coins, precious stones, and jewels,
and a massive plain gold ring, taken from her husband's finger after
death. This ring and the handkerchief were all that Margaret took of the
rich store;—the rest she returned to the seaman for his own use. Now
there was an end to Margaret’s hopes and fears; she no longer desired to
live in the lonely dwelling on the cliff, and in a few weeks she
removed, with all her rare furniture, pet animals, bees, and favourite
flowers, to a comfortable cottage in the village of Escols. In her new
home she received every kindness, and, from having cheerful companions
to help her to pass the time, the strange fancies engendered by her
melancholy, lonely, existence gradually disappeared, and she became much
like the ordinary persons of healthy every-day life.

The only thing spoken of as remarkable, in later accounts of the dame,
is that she passed so much time in the study of astrology as to become a
great proficient in that mysterious science, which was then much
cultivated by many noted scholars of the west country. Besides several
other learned persons, Ustick of Botallack and Dr. Maddern are said to
have been frequent visitors to Margaret in Escols, and that, between
them, they drew horoscopes, concocted wonderful drugs, distilled strange
compounds and cordials, and predicted many remarkable events, some of
which really occurred to the persons for whom their schemes were cast,
or to somebody else. She was also a powerful charmer till the end of her
days.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Annual Visit of the West-Country Folks to the Pellar of Helston,
to have their Protection Renewed](swc114)

</div>
