<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc111)  [Next](swc113) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The White Witch, or Charmer of Zennor</span>

*Part Second*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"I think I'd like to be a witch,  
   To sail upon the sea,  
 In a tub or sieve, in storm or shine,  
   ’Mid wild waves flashing free.

 I'd catch the billows by the mane,  
   The bounding billows and strong,  
 Goad them, and curb them, or trample them down,  
   Or lull them with a song.

 I'd churn the sea, I'd tether the winds,  
   As suited my fancy best,  
 Or call the thunder out of the sky,  
   When the clouds were all at rest.

 I'd wreck great ships, if they crossed my path,  
   With all the souls on board,  
 Wretched, but not so wretched as I,  
   In the judgements of the Lord.

 And then, maybe, I'd choose out one  
   With his floating yellow hair,  
 And save him, for being like my love,  
   In the days when I was fair;

 In the days when I was fair and young,  
   And innocent and true;  
 And then, perhaps, I'd give him a kiss,  
   And drown him in the blue,

 In the blue, blue sea, too good to live  
 In a world so rotten and bad:  
 I think I'd like to be a witch,  
 To save me from going mad."—<span class="smallcaps">Anon</span>.

</div>

Soon after, the good dame started for the streamwork, the young woman
Mary Polteer ran down to the cliff, that she might put Margaret on her
guard. The kids and lambs were seeking their nightly places of shelter
among the ricks, and the bees were returning in haste to their hives,
when the young woman entered the open door and saw the old dame's
dwelling, as usual, nicely swept and sanded—her cat beside the pot of
sweet margery, on the window-ledge, backing in the rays of the setting
sun. The hares were jumping forth and back over the bars of the
high-backed chair, in which Margaret was seated, reading from a
conjuring-book, with large brass clasps and corners. Her book was full
of such queer figures as are put in the almanacks (Moore's) every year,
to show those who can understand such things, what is to take place for
the next twelve months. Marget was, at the same time, watching the sun
go down. When it touched the waves, she placed the hour-glass on the
board, before she spoke to or noticed Mary.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

"What made you come here now, Mary?" said the dame, as she turned the
hour-glass and replaced it on the table. "Before the sands are half down
you may have to hear the evil which the stars in their courses mark for
me during the next hour; yet you will witness how I shall overcome the
evil ones by the aid of more powerful spirits, who are always at my
command. Thou needn't fear no great harm under their, and my,
protection."

Margaret closed and clasped her book; then, as the evening was rather
cold, she placed her short red scarlet mantle over her shoulders, and
her old-fashioned steeple-crowned hat on the pile of grey hair which she
wore, turned up from her forehead, over a pad or cushion.

Margaret was as tall and upright as a grenadier, and her high headdress
and steeple-crown made her appear taller still.

Then she took, from a rack over the chimney, an ivory-headed cane—a
present from her lover. This was thought to be a conjuring-stick,
because the neck of the ivory head was encircled with a broad flat
silver plate, or ferule, on which were engraved five or more shields.
These were charged with very uncouth figures on one, an eagle displayed

with two heads; on another, three rampant toads; on the others a goblet,
spreading tree, and other such strange things as made everyone round
about her believe there must be something magical in this stock thus
ornamented, and this enchanter's staff was almost as much feared as the
stuffed crocodile, mounted by a stuffed ape, which swung from the
rafters overhead, and so contrived, by the cord, which suspended these
choice presents from some old sailor friend, being passed over the
key-beams to the talfat, that she could raise or lower them at pleasure.

Next she mounted a step or two of the stair-ladder, and took from the
talfat floor a pair of old horse-pistols. These, ready-loaded, she
placed on the book beside the hour-glass, and sat down with her cat on
her shoulder.

It was not to be wondered at that Margaret’s strange surroundings, queer
doings, and frightful threats and curses, when in her tantrums, made her
poor ignorant neighbours fear her as a most powerful witch. Mary begged
her not to use the pistols whatever might happen.

"Never fear," she replied; "there will be no bones broken; and if there
be a trifle of blood shed, it will neither be thine nor mine. Why, the
very sight of a pistol or smell of gunpowder is enough to frighten a
troop of the cowardly villains who would join to molest a lone
inoffensive old woman. Now, let them come, the wretches."

The words were scarcely out of her mouth before two men (old Bluebird
and Tom the Grunter) came to the open door leading a great

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

gaukum of a girl between them. Cherry squeaked out, "You have gauve
(given) me fits, you have, you d—d old black witch, you!"

Old Bluebird looked in and said, "We want some fire from thy hearth,
Mag, to heave the cheeld across that thee hast bewitched, and fire we
will have too."

"So you shall if you come an inch farther," said Margaret, levelling a
pistol at old Bluebird's head.

The men went back scared, dragging the maid Cherry with them.

"You old timdoodles, you, to be afraid of old Mag," says Katey the Kite,
as she advanced to the door with a stone in her hand. "Now, by gambers,
old witch, I'll fill thy shiman brass warmanpan with fire, and put thee
to set upon an, that I will; and here go for thy smart dresser, chayne,
and beautiful dome, that thee art so proud of," says Katey, as she threw
a stone and smashed some of the crockery. But before she had time to
pick up another stone, the old woman sent some shot into Katey the Kite,
which made her sting.

Then Margaret picked up the stone with her left hand, and taking her
staff in her right, went out and stood beside the rock before her door.
The frightened men, and ten or a dozen women, fell back for fear of
another charge of shot.

Margaret was little short of six feet, and, as she stood beside the
rock, with the old-fashioned steeple-crown mounted on the upturned hair,
and her short red mantle floating in the evening breeze, she appeared
taller and stranger than ever. For a minute's space Margaret looked
towards the setting sun, of which only a mere point of fire could be
seen above the ocean, sending a stream of golden light over the waters
from the verge of the horizon to the foot of the cliff on which these
mad proceedings were taking place. The sea-fowl were nesting together in
the cleeves, overhanging the surging waves; lambs and kids had gone to
their resting-places among the rocks; the murmur of the sea was like a
mother's gentle lullaby; the bright stars were beginning to shed their
beauty on the evening air; everything, above and around, betokened peace
and rest, except with these human animals who, through their
superstitious fears, were ready to tear in pieces a poor half-crazy old
woman.

Margaret seemed entranced, or lost in thought, till the last glimpse of
the sun disappeared beneath the ocean, and drew after it the stream of
golden light which bridged the blue waters a minute before. Then, an old
black goat, disturbed by the noise came and stood beside her; the tame
hares mounted the rock on the other side of their mistress; and an old
tame magpie left its roost in the wood-corner, flew out of the door, and
perched on the chimney. When the bird began to chatter, Mag seemed to
become herself again, or to recover her suspended energy. Holding the
stone in her left hand, above her head, and pointing her staff at the
confused crew, she began to speak in a slow measured tone.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

"Now is come the hour of sweet rest, for man and beast, and now the
devil, and all things evil, give double power to blast and ban."

Advancing a few steps, with he staff pointed at Katey the Kite, she
threw the stone on the ground and spoke in a louder key,

"My curse descend on the arm that cast that stone! Before three moons
have come and gone, thy arm, from finger-tops to shoulder-blade, shall
wither and waste to skin and bone."

The magpie, flapping its wings and shrieking, seemed to say amen to the
dame's curses.

At this instant, Captn. Mathy, Curnow, and Tregeer sprang over the
hedge, from the field above, and ran down between Mag and her
tormentors.

"Who sent ye hither?" said she. "Think not that I require your aid to
overcome a legion of such wretches." Then making on the air with her
staff what passed for magical signs: "I summon to my aid the spirits of
fire and air, of earth and water. Behold! they come, followed by plague
pestilence." Motioning the streamers to stand on one side, as she still
advanced toward the retreating crowd, she continued in a louder voice,
"You set of cowardly villains! be out of my sight and in your dwellings
before that bright star, close in the wake of the sun, sinks beneath the
waves. If one soul of ye remain within the sound of my voice a minute
longer, I'll blast ye all, both great and small; your blood shall turn
to water and the flesh rot from your bones. I curse ye all, from the
crown of your head to the sole of your foot, at home and abroad, in
eating and drinking, sleeping and waking." Thus she continued, according
to a formula then well known, with increasing vehemence, to pour out her
imprecations until she had spun almost as comprehensive a curse as was
ever composed by ancient priest or pope, though some of the latter were
famous, in the old times that we so much admire, for their curses of
execration, interdicts, and other powerful saintly anathemas, which (to
compare great things with small), in their effects on the superstitious,
priest-ridden multitude, were not unlike a witch's spells on those
within her more limited sphere. And our poor old charmer was driven to
use her ghostly weapons, too, in self-defence. Before Margaret came
within half-a-score paces of the two women, who were the chief
instigators of the attack, they turned tail and fled, followed by all
the rest of the rabble rout,—old Bluebird and Tom the Grunter bringing
up the rear.

"Bravo, old dear," says Curnow, "see ther, how they go, helter-skelter,
like a pack of pralled dogs with tin pans and kettles tied to their
tails."

Margaret turned round to the Captn., and said in her familiar voice,
"Old friend Mathy, thee dostn’t, I hope, think me a real black witch,
dost a? No, no! The fears and malice of the fools made them give me

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

the name, and that put it into my head to try the game, which you see
answers as well as one could expect. Come in now, my brave boys," says
she, "and drink health and success to the witch; perhaps, after all, if
you hadn't been here they mightn't have taken so much notice of my
ranting. You shall just give me a minute's grace, if you will, that I
may put the place to rights a bit."

There was no great damage done to the rare old furniture of An Meg's
dresser after all, as she had, the day before, put all her choicest
china and glass away in her chest. Probably she had an inkling of what
was about to take place from some of the children, who were always glad
to visit her. The broken jugs, with two grinning faces under one hat,
and other pieces of curiously-ornamented crockery, she could procure
again from St. Ives. When the men were about to follow into her
dwelling, they heard somebody whistling to them. Mathy went towards the
sound, and found old Bluebird creeping along under the hedge of the
field above.

"Oh! Captn. Mathy, come closer, do; I'm so scared I can hardly speak. Do
beg An Marget to forgive Katey, and to take the spell from her; the pain
es already set in her arm; a es going all stiff and dead! Think of me,
and all our poor dear children weth Katey not able to do a hand's turn
for us poor dears. Tell An Marget I'll go down to St. Ives tomorra and
buy the prettiest cloman jugs I can get for her, full of old wry faces,
like her's, your's, mine, Katey's, and Gracey's, of she will but take
off the spell from her."

"Well, old neighbour, [I'll](errata.htm#11) do the best I can weth her
for ’e. Stop here a minute."

When the Captn. begged Margaret to leave it all be over and be friends
again with Katey the Kite, An Meg replied,

"Well, you may go and tell old Bluebird that I'll do nothing farther
against her for this time, but it is past my skill, or that of any
woman, to undo what's done. She must go to the Pellar of Helston and
tell him to give her the Abracadabra charm; the sooner she starts the
better for her and all the rest; and tell old Bluebird that I want no
jugs of his buying."

The old man was much comforted when he received such a favourable answer
from Margaret, and declared he would stay up all night that his wife
Katey and Gracey Winkey should start by break of day to see the Pellar
of Helston, who was then the most noted conjuror of the country.

When the tinners entered Meg's dwelling all the conjuring traps had
disappeared—even the swinging crocodile was drawn up to the thatch, out
of sight. Meg had picked up the broken crockery, put the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

dresser to rights, as well as she could; a bright fire blazed on the
hearth; bottles of brandy, cordials, cake, barley bread and honey, were
placed on the board. Margaret, steeple-crown and mantle thrown aside,
bade them welcome with as much cheerfulness, heartiness, and
old-fashioned courtesy, as if the diablerie of the last hour had never
existed.

A jolly night was passed with the old dame, young woman and the tinners.
They sung "Here's a health to the barley mow!" with other old
three-men's songs, over and over. They danced hornpipes and three-handed
reels. Margaret showed off many of the steps for which she was famous in
her younger days. When the men were going to leave, Margaret said,

"You know, Mathy, to-morrow is my feasten-day: be sure to come early;
and if the rest of you, my brave boys, will come here in the evening,
you shall be heartily welcome. Something tells me that I shan't be here
another year; so let’s keep it up with a houseful!"

Although Mary Polteer remained with An Meg all night, yet she had no
invitation to come down in the evening, when the dame expected a visit
from her old friends, who were all related to her within the degrees of
third cousinship, then thought pretty near: they were also said to be as
whimsical as Meg, with a screw more or less loose in their upper storey.
Margaret didn't mind the visits of the tinners, but she had a mortal
dislike to any of the gossiping, prying women of the village, to come
near her hut at such times. Mary, however, determined not to have her
curiosity baulked, and made a fool's errand to buy or borrow some yarn,
as an excuse for going down to Margaret’s dwelling in the afternoon.
Before she came in sight of the cot she saw half-a-dozen, or more,
stately old dames walking away, at some distance, over the cliff.

When Mary looked in through the open door of Meg's dwelling she saw no
one but Captn. Mathy, with his back towards her, very busy keeping in
the furze fire under two brandasses (trivets): a good-size crock, with a
piece of beef, was boiling on the one, and on the other a small pot of
water for the ladies’ tea. There was no such thing as a teakettle then
in the parish, nor for many years afterwards. The table was laid with a
tea-set of old India china; the tea-pot was just the size of a
saffron-pot, and the cup but little larger than a thimble. There was
good store of fruit-cakes, and other nice things, on the bed of the
dresser, all ready to be cut and placed on the board. Mathy, hearing the
girl's step, as she came over the drussel, turned round and said,

"Hallo Mary? What brought thee here than? Ah, I needn't ask, thou
daughter of old Mother Eve—nothing more than thy itching curiosity to
see the old lady's set-out, but come thee wayst in. Upon my soul, I
verily believe, as much as I believe anything one don't know much about,
that a precious lot of you petticoat creatures will go to the hot

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

place below, merely to satisfy your troublesome curiosity as to how the
time es passed there, and that you may take the exact measure of the old
black gentleman's tails; and your mischief-making tattle will be a
greater plague than the brimstone down below. Yet after all," Mathy
continued, "I'm not sorry you come here, to stop an hour or so with me,
while the old ladies are away for a walk, and I'm left here, as you see,
to keep house and look after the cooking. I can't abide to stay in this
place by myself, even high by day; for if ever there was a place haunted
this is. The queer things, too, all about the old dwelling make one's
flesh creep on the bones—there's that old chattering magpie and the
hares! See them looking at me, just as if they understood, like human
creatures, every word we say. This feasten tide of Mag's is, to me, the
wishtest time of all the year. This was her wedding-day, now nearly
thirty years ago; and, a week after this time, I saw the last in life of
my old comrade, her husband, who was as dear to me as a brother, though
many a fair fight we've had together. And don't think me fancy foolish
when I tell thee that on this day, three years ago, I saw the sailor V——
standing there just inside the door, as plain as I see thee! Why you
needn't start: he is’nt there now. Some folks talk about spirits as if
they were quite familiar with them, but, for my part, I can't abide to
see them. I don't think I should much like to have a visit even from an
angel or a cherry-beam if they are anything like their pictures drawn on
the tombstones. I can't see, for my part, how the poor things, all head
and wings, can either stand, sit, or fly, without a body to balance
them, or a tail to steer by.

"Now the pots are both boiling, and it's time to put the cake down to
bake. Bring it here, from the table in the spence, while I sweep the
ashes from the baking-iron."

When the fire was made on the cake, and the glass turned, Mathy said,
"This is hot work, I'll have a dram, Mary; you take a drop too; don't
think me faint-hearted, that I should have been frightened with what I
saw but sit down on the form and just listen to me: I'll tell ye first
some of the sailor V——'s history, which I fear me when the end be known,
will prove a woeful tragedy. You have never heard anything of it from
Margaret, I expect, because what is always in her thoughts she never
speaks of to any but her husband's oldest friends."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sailors History](swc113)

</div>
