<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc105)  [Next](swc107) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Giant Wrath of Portreath</span>

In old times there lived in a cavern on the sea-shore, about ten miles
to the east of Hayle, a giant called Wrath, who had a bad character
given him by the people of St. Ives. Folks didn't believe half the evil
they said of him, but thought their fears of the giant, when alive, made
them take the dastardly revenge of abusing him when dead. Yet whether he
liked or disliked them it's hard to say, because if he killed them he
ate them, according to their own accounts—a proof that his stomach was
as strong as his arm. The place in which Wrath lived is the fissure or
gorge near Portreath, known by the name of the Giant's Zawn, or more
generally by that of Ralph's Cupboard. This latter name, of recent date,
was

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

given to the place after it had been inhabited by one Ralph, a famous
smuggler who found the place most convenient for his trade. By being
better acquainted than most other persons with the reefs and currents on
this rock-strewn coast, Ralph did not fear to run his little vessel into
the gorge on the darkest nights, safely land his goods, and whistle at
the king's men. In the time of the giant Wrath this remarkable gorge was
a deep cavern or zawn, into which the sea flowed, as it does still at
high tide. The roof has fallen in since the death of the giant. Here
Wrath would lie in wait and watch for any ships or fishing-boats from
St. Ives that might come sailing by. If they approached within a mile of
his hole, he would wade out, tap the fishermen or sailors on the head
with the tip of his finger to settle them, then tie the ships and boats
to his girdle, and quietly draw them into his den. He would save for
provision the well-fed and fleshy men,—the lean ones he threw overboard.

Ships bound for St. Ives, sailing in too deep water for him to reach by
wading, he sunk by slinging rocks on them from the cliff above. Many of
these rocks may still be seen above water at ebb-tide, and form a
dangerous reef stretching away from Godrevy Head. Long after the death
of the giant, his hole was the terror of the fishermen of St. Ives, who
always avoided the Cupboard, as they said that nothing ever came out of
it had had the bad luck to get into it; yet many unfortunate vessels
were often drifted thither by currents and driven in by storms, to
become the prey of the demon of the cavern. Many believed that much of
this legend was created by the fears of the fishermen out of the natural
dangers of the rock-bound coast about Portreath.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giant Bolster, of Saint Ann's](swc107)

</div>
