<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc129)  [Next](swc131) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Nancy Trenoweth, the Fair Daughter of the Miller of Alsia</span>

*Part II*

 

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"My bosom struggles  
   To him—oh! where?  
 Ah, might I but clasp him  
   And fold him there!

 And might I but kiss him,  
   As in wish I may,  
 My soul in his kisses  
   Should die away!

 Where I see him not  
   Seems the grave to be!  
 Tuneless and harsh  
   All the world to me.

 My heart is heavy,  
   My peace is o’er;  
 I shall find it never,  
   Oh, never more."—*Faust* (Filmore's translation).

</div>

So overpowering was the desire of Nancy Trenoweth to know the fate of
her lover and if it were destined for her ever to become the bride of
Lanyon, that, in company with two other love-sick damsels who were
equally agitated by hopes and fears. she assayed what was then regarded
as one of the most potent and fearful incantations, to induce the Powers
of Darkness to lift the veil from that portion of their future destiny
which they regarded as the main object of their existence:—when
Allhallows eve came, they had all three prepared for the spell of sowing
hemp-seed. Near the midnight hour, with the moon shining bright, Nancy
left the house quietly (for fear of disturbing the old couple, who had
long retired to rest), and met her companions in the town-place, where
they had agreed to meet and work their spells. Nancy and one of her
companions drew their circles at a good distance from, but within sight
of, each other. Nancy was the first to sow the magic grains, and
pronounce the seemingly harmless incantation of—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Hemp-seed! I sow thee. Hemp-seed, grow thee.  
 And he who will my true love be  
 Come after me, and mow thee."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> No sooner were the
words three times spoken than a lurid thundercloud obscured the light of
the moon. At the same instant a cloud of mist came sweeping in from over
sea, rolled up the cleves with the speed of a whirlwind, came careering
on to Kimyel town-place, and gathered around the circle in which Nancy
stood, trembling with affright at the fearful visions her spells had
summoned. The wind rose to a violent tempest, and the waves seemed to be
breaking and surging around her. The dark clouds overhead became one
sheet of flashing flames, which

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

showed her <span class="smallcaps">The Apparition of Lanyon</span>,
surrounded by the surging waves and dripping wet, as if he had been
drawn through the sea. He stood before her, dressed in outlandish
garb—with a long and flowing coal-black beard, and glared on Nancy with
such a look of terrible anger that she gave a fearful shriek, and the
vision instantly disappeared.

The spectral sea and tempest, with the apparition of Lanyon, was neither
seen nor heard by the other damsels, whose curiosity and hopes deferred
urged one of them on "to try for her sweetheart;" but she had no sooner
sown the seed and spoken the words "Let my true love come after me, and
mow," then turning quickly round, in hopes to meet her destined
bridegroom, she saw a white coffin resting within the circle. This
unlooked-for vision caused her to run from the charmed circle towards
the other girl (who stood near, being too timid to try the spell) and
fall to the ground in convulsions. Nancy, who had somewhat recovered her
fright, helped to convey their insensible companion to her home in the
next hamlet, which she only left to be taken to her untimely grave,
before the earliest flowers of spring bloomed in the meadows.

Nancy returned to Kimyel alone, to pass a sleepless night and wish for
daylight, and that her daily task might dispel the terror caused by the
fearful [apparitions](errata.htm#38) they had raised by their unholy
spells, which left a dread of some impending evil harder to bear than
the uncertainty about the fate of Frank Lanyon.

Madam Lanyon would also frequently visit the old woman of Alsia and weep
over the remembrance of her son while seeing his beautiful boy. Above
all, as she had firm faith in all the superstitious practices of the
olden times, and venerated the wise woman of Alsia as a priestess of
these ancient rites, she felt some gleams of hope when Johanna assured
her that she was certain that Frank would return and claim Nancy for his
bride, but all beyond was hidden from her view. Many a dreary winter's
night, during the most violent tempests, the parents of Lanyon and his
more than affianced bride would wander among the cleves in the darkest
nights, unable to rest, from their souls’ ardent desire to behold, dead
or alive, the one so dear to them.

March came, with its storms; and, one rainy and tempestuous night, the
old couple, with many others, as if by some presentiment of impending
fate, were drawn together in Baranhuel cliff, and they sought shelter
from the blast and driving rain amidst the towering carns of
Pednsawnack. Towards the middle of the night, sounds were heard as of
sailors calling for help. The wailing voices, which were but
indistinctly heard amid the booming of the breakers and the roaring of
the gale, seemed to proceed from Porthguarnon Cove. The moon shone out
for an instant, and the people on the cliff, running towards the place
from which the voices appeared to rise, saw a large ship in the offing,
and that a boat was driven on to a reef of shelving rocks and boulders
in or near Porthguarnon.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Many of the crew
were struggling in the surf, or clinging to the narrow ledges of the
rocks under the overhanging cliff, whence they had no chance of escape
from the rising tide without the assistance of those on shore, to take
them with ropes from the slippery shelves, to which they clung with the
desperation of drowning men who felt the waves fast rising around and
dashing over them. They had but little chance of escape from death at
their own doors. Soon, amongst the cries of many calling for help, were
distinguished the well-remembered voice of Lanyon, and of many of the
brave young men who had left Penberth, full of hope, more than a year
and a half ago. All those alive had kept together throughout their
wanderings;—they had gained riches to their heart's content by taking
the ship from the pirates, when they were about to sell them for slaves,
and were now returning, to enjoy the fruits of their toil and hardship.
The young men, over-anxious to land on their native shores, parted from
the ship in a boat and made for Penberth, but in the driving rain they
at first mistook the headland of Merthen Point for Pednsawnack, and the
stress of weather drove them in on the rocks of Porthguarnon.

Ropes were soon brought to the cliff, and Lanyon, braving death, would
have all the crew drawn up before himself. From long struggling in the
surf to save his comrades, he had barely the strength to place himself
in the loop of the rope, and was powerless to grasp it with his hands,
or push himself clear of the [overhanging](errata.htm#39) rocks. When,
after much difficulty, he was landed [on](errata.htm#40) the grass, he
was found to be much battered and bruised, the blood flowing from his
mouth, and he was apparently dead. Litters were soon formed, by placing
beds on doors, which were sent from Baranhuel, with everything else that
could be thought of for the comfort of the poor benumbed, half-drowned
crew, who were carried up to the mansion. Over a while Frank Lanyon
seemed to be recalled to life by hearing his mother's voice, and begged
to be taken home to Bosean. When the bearers of the dying comrade of
their early years reached the town-place, Frank begged to be left
outside the house, as he knew that he had only a few hours to live, and
that Nancy Trenoweth might be sent for without delay, for, unless he saw
her before he breathed his last, he could not rest in peace.

The parents were so much overwhelmed with their grief that they thought
no more of Frank's request, that Nancy should be fetched to him, until
they were on their way home from seeing their son laid in his last bed
in Buryan churchyard. They then regretted that they had placed him in
the grave without paying any regard to his dying wishes, or to the woman
who was still dear to him. No one, after the death of Frank, liked to be
the first to give her the evil tidings.

After the desolate old couple had taken leave, in the church-town, of
the friends who carne from a distance, and of the few who accompanied
them a little way on the road, they slowly and silently wended

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

their way towards their [dreary](errata.htm#41) habitation, but when
they came to Goonmenhere stile they felt impelled to turn down to Alsia,
to see their grandson, and to tell the miller that in their grief they
had neglected to fulfil the last request of the dead, and to beg them to
send for Nancy. The rough but honest miller they well knew had ever more
anger in his words than in his heart. They went on to Alsia. They felt
that any other place would be less mournful then than their own
[dreary](errata.htm#42) abode. When they were seated by Johanna's
fireside the old dame placed Frank's son in his grandfather's arms. The
sight of the beautiful boy—the image of Frank at his age—gave the first
cheering ray to the old man's heart. Whilst the grandparents were
embracing and weeping over the child the old woman went quietly out, and
in a minute returned with her daughter and the miller, who said and did
everything they could think of to comfort the old Lanyons, and mingled
their tears in the lament for the untimely fate of Frank.

As none but those who delight in giving pain are willing to be the
bearers of evil tidings, Frank was laid in his early grave, yet Nancy
had not even heard of the wreck, or that anything had occurred of what
was on the tongues of all persons in the neighbourhood, except those of
the lone house of Kimyel.

On the evening of the funeral, when the old folks with whom she lived
(who always sent early to rest) were buried in peaceful sleep, Nancy, as
was her custom, the last thing before closing the house for the night,
went out in the town-place to take a parting look at the sea, which she
regarded as the abode of the one who was never absent from her thoughts.
The evening was calm and clear. Moon and stars were shining brightly.
The smooth sea glistened in their light, as seemingly tranquil as if its
waters had never rolled in fury; and the forlorn woman, still fair as
the sky gemmed with countless stars, stood near a rock in the
town-place, gazing over the boundless waters with a sad and wistful
look, as if her spirit had departed to seek her lover through the
boundless realms of ocean, earth, and sky. Perchance she thought of him,
wearing out the strength of his young life as a galley-slave to the
detested Moor, or as wandering over the savage lands and burning sands
of Barbary. Her mind of her lover for ever dreaming, with unutterable
longing to again behold him, she often murmured his name and forgot all
else beneath the sun.

Nancy was roused from her mournful reveries by the tramp of a horse
coming through the lane with unusual speed. She went towards the house
and mounted the steps of the heaving-stock beside the door, the better
to see who could be coming to the place at that unusual time, when she
saw, approaching near, the well-remembered horse on which Lanyon often
came to meet her in Alsia lanes. The rider, too, was dressed in the
strange garb in which she saw the apparition of her lover when summoned
by her spells. The horseman hailed her by name, in the sweet

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

tones of her lover's voice, saying, "I am come, my love, to make thee my
bride before to-morrow night." He brought his steed close beside the
heaving-stock on which Nancy stood, spellbound, as ever, by the charm of
love when she saw Lanyon. "Thy lips are icy-cold, dear Frank, and they
hand is cold and damp as clay," said Nancy, when she clasped his neck
and kissed him. His eyes glared on her like those of a dead corpse, and
made her blood run cold, yet she had no power to resist his will when he
said, "We have plighted our vows and sworn to be married, alive or dead;
shrink not from me in fear, sweetheart, Come, mount behind me, and let
us away;—ere to-morrow night thou shalt be my bride." With scarcely a
moment's delay, Nancy sprang on the horse behind him. When to steady
herself in her seat, she placed her arm around him, it became as stiff
as iron and cold as ice. Away they went like a wind-blast; all things
seemed to spin around them; rocks and hedges appeared flying past, as
with fearful speed they shot through Trevellow lanes. The horseman spoke
not, and nothing stayed their downward rushing course until they came to
the waters in Trove Bottom;—there the horse stopped an instant to drink.

At that moment, the moon shining brightly behind them, Nancy saw,
reflected in the water, the horseman before her like the corpse of
Lanyon, arrayed in a shroud and other grave-clothes. Now she knew that
she was carried away by a spirit; yet, as if bound by some magic spell,
she had neither the power to move nor speak. Again they rushed on. The
wind swept howling by them when they passed the trees in Trevider lane,
and a tempest seemed to rage around, dashing on over hills and hollows,
as in a few minutes they were near the smith's shop at the end of
Burrian lane.

When Nancy saw by the light shining across the road from the forge fire,
and by the sparks flying from the door and chimney, that the smith was
still at work, she now recovered her speech, and, as they came careering
on, called out with all her might, "Save me! save me! save me!" The
smith sprang out with a bar of red-hot iron in his hand, and as they
rushed by he caught hold of the woman or her dress, held her fast, and
drew her off the horse. The spirit also grasped her dress, and the horse
going like the wind, Nancy and the smith were dragged along past the old
alms-house to the churchyard wall. Here the flying steed stooped for a
moment, and the smith, with his red-hot iron, burned off the woman's
dress from the spirit's grasp, when it rose from the horse, passed over
into the churchyard, and with a wild, wailing, awful cry, like that of a
man in his death agony, vanished on the grave in which Frank Lanyon had
been laid a few hours before, and the piece of Nancy's dress, burned off
in the spirits grasp, was found the following day. The woman, more dead
than alive, fell on the ground, while the horse white with foam,
gallopped off homeward, and was next morning found dead in Bosean
town-place.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

The smith there, assisted by some of the neighbours, took Nancy in a
dying state to Alsia. She no longer desired to live when, on the way,
she was informed of Lanyon's sad fate. After being laid on her mother's
bed she only lived long enough to request that the child, then folded in
her arms, might be given up to Frank's parents, who were there, beside
her bed, weeping over her. Above all, she desired that they would lay
her beside Lanyon the next day, before the hour in which unresting
spirits leave their graves to seek the help of the living. Then she
gently sank, and, when the morning light shone through the casement, the
fair daughter of the Miller of Alsia was seen reposing in her last
sleep—her countenance beaming with the same sweet and joyful smile it
ever wore when she met her lover in their happiest hours.

And ere the stars of heaven shed their sparkling light into the honeyed
cups of the stars of earth, the lovers reposed in the same grave, where
the companions of their earliest years planted all the sweetest flowers,
which were often sprinkled with the tears of young and old.

N.B. All the old story-tellers are particular in stating—that the piece
of the woman's dress burned off in the spirit's grasp was found in
Lanyon's grave when it was re-opened for Nancy's burial.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sequel](swc131)

</div>
