<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc110)  [Next](swc112) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The White Witch, or Charmer of Zennor</span>

*Part First*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The Cornish drolls are dead, each one;  
 The [fairies](errata.htm#7) from their haunts have gone:  
 There's scarce a witch in all the land,  
 The world has grown so learn’d and grand."—  
                                  <span class="smallcaps">Henry
Quick</span>, of Zennor</span>

</div>

A few years ago, an aged tinner of Lelant told us a story in which,
among other matters, he related something about the doings of the
captain of a stream-work with the black and white witches of Zennor and
the Pellar of Helston, which will throw some light on certain
proceedings and afford a sketch of characters but little known.

The spoken parts of the story are, for the most part, given in the
tinner's words, to serve as an example of the every-day language of the
old country folk:—

When Jack Tregear (who tells the story) was a youngster, he worked for
Uncle Matthew Thomas, who employed ten or a dozen men, off and on, in
streaming some of the moors in Trewe Bottom. These moors, which lie up
towards Zennor from Nancledrea, have been streamed for tin over and over
again. They say that there are still to be seen about Trewe the remains
of old bals which had been worked before the Flood. Uncle Mathy had a
cothouse and a few little quillets and crofts up in Treen, or some other
place near Zennor cliff; but here he was seldom to be found, as he left
his few cattle, and the land, to the care of the old woman and the
children, to do the best they could. Some of the men were often away
from the stream-work, for weeks on a stretch, as they formed good part
of a noted crew of Ludgvan smugglers who always made three or four trips
every summer, over to Roscoff, in [Brittany](errata.htm#8), for brandy,
silk handkerchiefs, lace, and other things.

The goods were mostly run in on the eastern green, landed about Long
Rock, and good part of the liquor taken off the horses (kept ready
waiting) up to the moors, and secreted among the stream-works.

Uncle Mathy and all his men had a venture. Our free traders ran but
little risk then, as there was no Preventive Service of any note. The
excisemen were supposed to keep a sharp look-out, but they were often
the greatest smugglers of all. If the boat escaped the revenue cutter
they didn't care a cuss for anything else.

No riding officer would like to venture among the stream leats and bogs
in Trewe moors, where scores of ankers of brandy were often kept among
the burrows till the innkeepers, gentry, and other regular customers
wanted them. Now and then there was a bit of a shindy with the
streamers, excisemen, and riding-officers for mere sham, and the
smugglers would leave an anker or two, now and then, to be taken, in
places where they

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

never kept their stock. This served for a decoy, and the government crew
knew well now that was their share and they had better not look for any
more.

The streamers built a much larger moor-house than was usual for such
sized tin-works, because many of the men lived down in Ludgvan, and
others over in Towesnack, miles away from the work: besides, as some
always remained on the place by night, when there was much liquor to be
disposed of, and as they wanted a good shelter for bad weather, all
hands turned-to and soon got up a house more than thirty feet long and
twelve feet wide, with a broad deep chimney in one end, and a
wood-corner that would hold a cartload of turves, and furze enough to do
the cooking for a week. Between the fireplace and the end wall of the
house, there was a place contrived to be entered from the wood-corner,
large enough for storing away a score of ankers or more, besides other
goods which required to be kept dry. When the wood-corner was full of
fuel no person could see that the chimney-end wall was double. A low
doorway, no more than four feet high, was made in the middle of one side
wall. There was room enough and to spare, on the left side of the
entrance, to pile up more tin than they ever washed out in six months;
so they had no occasion to take their stuff to the smelting-house when
the price was low.

On the chimney side of the door some planks, fastened to stakes driven
into the floor, kept together, quite tidy-like, a few bur’ns of heath,
rushes, ferns, or straw, which served for the men to stretch themselves
on when they had to remain there over night. There were no windows but
the portholes all round, which were wanted to have a shot at the wild
fowl that came over the moors in large flocks in the winter, and settled
down on the fowling-pool at the back of the house. "Well", says Uncle
Jan, "that old moor-house was a comfortable place enough, with the tin
piled up in one end, a blazing turf fire in the other, and plenty of
good liquor at hand. We lived there like fighting-cocks. When we wished
to have a few rabbits for a pie one had only to go out with the dog, and
half-a-dozen nets to set in the gaps round a barley arish, and come back
in an hour or two with as many rabbits as were wanted for a week. The
place was safe enough too, for if any of the preventives had a mind to
pay us a visit, one man inside could keep out a hundred. The door was
made low on purpose that if any persons we didn't want stooped down and
poked their heads in, one could crack their skulls as easy as so many
eggs into a frying-pan."

Many of the hardy old gentlemen, from the town and about, who often came
over the moors hunting in the winter, would stop and pass a jolly night
with the streamers. Capt. Mathy seldom went home, from Monday morning
till Saturday night, when there were much goods in the moor-house, and,
as Jack Tregear's quarters were some miles away,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

he mostly brought his week's provisions and stayed there for company.
When the Ludgvan men were on a trip to France, the captain and Jack had
all the place to themselves except when the innkeepers or others came
there to deal for the liquor. Jack and Uncle Mathy got on capitally
together. After supper they would drink a good jug of toddy between
them; then turn in; but the worst was, best part of the night Capt.
Mathy would keep Jack awake by talking about the places where he thought
crocks of gold and other treasures were buried among the rocks in the
Giant's Castle on Trecrobben hill, and about Choon and Bossigran Castles
as well. And it was thought by the old people that much riches were put
in the ground at no great distance from the quoits (cromlechs), barrows,
and rounds, when the red-headed Danes, the pirates, settled here for
seven years, made the people quit their old dwellings, give up to them
all the enclosed and cultivated lands, and go to live on the commons and
wastes in the best way they could. It was then that the old natives made
the gurgoes one may still see about on the cliffs, moors, and other land
not worth cultivating. Many of the rich people, who then buried their
treasures and went to Wales, or over sea to seek for help to conquer the
pirates, never lived to come back.

A few years after, when King Arthur drove all the Danes, he didn't kill,
over cliffs into the sea, there was nobody living here who knew the
meaning of the marks made on some of the rocks found about in
out-of-the-way places, to show where to dig. They say that there are
records still kept in Wales concerning what took place then, which would
explain all about where the gold is to be found if one could but get
hold of them.

"I wish we could but catch a spriggan, a piskey, or a knacker," says
Capt. Mathy one night, "ef one can but lay hands on any of the smale
people unawares before they vanish, or turn into muryans (ants), they
may be made to tell where the goold es buried."

"Ded ’e ever hear of anybody who ever catched on?" Jack asked.

"Why ess, and knowed his son too; he was my near neighbour, and lived in
Trevidga: he told me all about et. One day Uncle Billy, his father, was
over in the craft, Zennor church-town side of the hill, cuttan away down
in the bottom, where the furze was as high as his head, with bare places
here and there, among the brakes all grown over with three-leaved grass
(white clover), hurt-trees (whortleberry plants), and griglans (heath).
Uncle Billy was cuttan an openan into one of these place, thinkan to
touch pipe there, eat his fuggan (heavy cake), and have a smoke. As he
opened the furze, to come to work his hook handy, he spied the prettiest
little creature of a smale body one ever seed, sleepan away on a bank of
wild thyme all in blossom. The little creature wasn't bigger than a cat,
yet every inch like a man, dressed in a green coat, sky-blue breeches
and stockings, with diamond-buckled shoes; his little three-cocked hat
was drawn over his face to shade en from the sun while

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

he slept. Uncle Billy stopped and looked at am more than a minute,
langan to carry an home some way or other. 'Ef I could but keep am,'
thought he, 'we should soon be rich enow to ride in a coach.' Then he
put down the furze-hook easy, took of the cuff from his arm, and slipped
the little gentleman into the cuff, feet foremost, before he waked up.
The little fellow then opened his pretty brown eyes and said, 'Mammy!
where are ’e, mammy and daddy! and where am I? And who are you? You are
a fine great bucca sure enough; what are ’e caled, an?' says he to Uncle
Billy. 'I want my mammy! can ’e find her for me?' 'I don't know
whereabouts she do put up,' says Uncle Billy; 'come, you shall go home
with me, ef you will, and live with our people till your mother do come
for ’e.' 'Very well,' says the spriggan, 'I dearly love to ride the kids
over the rocks, and to have milk and blackberries for supper; will ’e
give me some?' 'Ess, my son, and bread and honey too, says the old man
Uncle Billy, as he took the small body up in his arms and carried him
home.

"When the little chap was took out of the curze-cuff and placed upon the
hearth-stone, he begun to play with the children as if he had lived with
them all his lifetime. The old man and woman were delighted. The
children crowed for joy to see the pretty little man jumpan about, and
they called am <span class="smallcaps">Bobby Griglans</span>. Twice a
day a little chayne cup of milk, fresh from the cow, was given to Bobby.
He was very nice in his diet, and didn't care for anything but a drop of
milk, and a few blackberries, hurts, or hoggans (haws) for a change.

"In the mornings, when the work was going on, he would perch himself up
on the furze and ferns in the top of the wood-corner, to be out of the
smut and dirt. There he would sing and chirrup away like a robin
redbreast. When the hearth was swept, the turfy fire made up, and the
old woman fixed on the chimney stool, to knit for the afternoon, Bobby
would dance for hours together on the hearth-stone, before her; the
faster the knitting-needles clicked, the quicker Bobby would spin round
and round. Uncle Billy and An Mary wouldn't leave Bobby go out to play,
for fear he might be seen, or run away, before the next good moonlight
nights, when he promised to show the old couple the exact spot, on
Rosewall Hill, where there was lots of money buried, and another place
on the hill where there was a good lode of tin.

"Three days after Bobby Griglans was catched and carried up to Trevidga,
half-a-score or more of the neighbours came, with their horses and
leaders, to help Uncle Billy to get home his furze from the hill, in
trusses, and to help him make the rick for winter, as the custom was
before wheel-roads were made and wains came into use. The old man didn't
like for the spriggan to be seen, so he shut him and the youngest
children up in the barn and put a padlock on the door. The smale people
had been getting scarcer and scarcer, as so much laming and love of

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

unpoetical facts came into fashan, until they were nearly all frightened
away. However, Uncle Billy would keep his out of sight for the time,
because you see it was become such a rare thing to see a spriggan or
piskey that the folks would be coming about in troops to have a look at
Bobby, who didn't like to be gazed at and made to show all his parts to
strangers. 'Now, stay in the barn and play like good children, but ef on
of ’e cry, or try to get out, you will get your breeches warmed with a
good wallopan,' says Uncle Billy.

"The children wer sometimes heard laughan and sometimes cryan. Bobby
passed the time dancean on the barn-boards and peepan through the cracks
in the door at the furze-carriers; but, as soon as ever the men went in
to dinner, up jumped Bob, unbarred the winder, called to the children,
'Come along, some, quick; now for a game of mop-and-heede' (hide and
seek). Bob and the children jumped out and away, to play among the
trusses of furze dropped all round the stem of the rick. In turnan a
corner they saw a little man and woman no bigger than Bob. The little
man was dressed just like an, only he wore high ridan boots with little
silver spurs. The little woman's green gound was spangled all over with
silver stars; diamond buckles shone in her high-heeled shoes; and her
little steeple-crowned blue hat, perched on a pile of golden curls, was
wreathed round with griglan blossoms. The pretty little soul was wrigan
her hands and cryan, 'Oh! my dear and tender Skillywidden; wherever
can’st a be gone to? Shall I never cast eyes on thee any more, my only
joy?' 'Now go ’e back, do,' says Bob to the children, 'my dad and man
are come here too!' On the same breath he called out, 'Here I am,
mammy.' By the time he said 'Here I am,' the little man and woman, with
the precious Skillywidden, were no more to be seen, and they have never
ben seen there since.

"The children got a good threshan for leavan Skillywidden get away, and
serve them right, for ef they had kept an in tell night, he would have
shown their daddy where plenty of crocks of gold are buried, and all of
them would be gentry now."

"Old tinners will have it," continued Mathy, "that underground spriggans
are nothing more than the sperats of the Jews who used to work the bals.
I know the first verse of an old song about King John and the Jews. Here
it is:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"An ancient story I'll tell you anon,  
 Which is older by far than the days of King John;  
 But this you should know, that the red-robed sinner  
 Robbed the Jew of the gold he had made as a tinner."</span>

</div>

"Captn., ded ’e ever know one to see the knacker workan under ground?"
asked Jack. "Ded I ever know one! I have, known scores of tinners, in my
time, my son, who have seen the little buccas workan

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

away, or settan down for touch-pipe, and the men liked to see them too,
because et es a sure sign that, wherever they are seen or heard, the
lode es rich ahead. Many a good tribute-pitch I have found by the sound
of the knackers; for, wherever there es good ground, one es sure to hear
the sound of their picks.

"Why I ought to know somethan about them, for I once seed three workan
away as plain es I now see thee, my dear, settan upon the chimley-stool
weth thy pipe in thy mouth. When I was twenty years younger I worked in
Balleswidden for a spell. I always worked on tribute when I could; that
suited me better than wages, for, work or play, I was then my own
master.

"One night I was workan away for dear life, the sweat going over me like
rain. I was in good heart, because for every stroke of my tool I heard
three of four clicks from the knackers, workan away ahead of me. By the
sound they seemed to be very near. My head ached, and my back too, when
I said to myself, 'I'll only break a foot or two more and touch pipe a
bit.' After a few strokes the ground crumbled down loose and easy, and I
found that I had broken into a vug (an aperture in a lode, frequently
lined with crystals and of capacious size). My eyes were dazzled at fust
with the glistening of the bunches of diamonds and crystals of all
colours which hung down from the roof and surrounded the sides of this
sawn in the lode, which I came on just like as when one do break a spar
stone and find, sometimes, the clearest Cornish diamonds in the middle
of en. When I rubbed my eyes and looked sharper into the inner end there
I spied three of the knackers. They were no bigger, either one of them,
than a good sixpenny doll; yet in their faces, dress, and movements,
they had the look of hearty old tinners. I took the most notice of the
one in the middle. He was settan down on a stone, his jacket off and his
shirt-sleeves rolled up. Between his knees he held a little anvil, no
more than an inch square, yet as complete as any you ever seed in a
smith's shop. In his left hand he held a boryer, about the size of a
darning-needle, which he was sharpan for one of the knackers, and the
other was waitan his turn to have the pick he held in his hand new
cossened, or steeled.

"When the knacker-smith had finished the boryer to his mind, he rested
the end of the hammer-hilt on the anvil and looked out towards me.

"'What cheer, comrade,' says he; 'I couldn't think where the cold wind
was coman from, and my light es blown out.' 'Aw! good mornan, es that
you? how are ’e, an?' says I; 'and how is all the rest of your family?
How glad I am to see ’e; I'll fetch ’e my candle in a wink, that you may
see better; your own es too small,' says I to am, 'for to stand the
draft I've left into your shop, but I'll give ’e a pound of my candles,
my dear, with all my heart I will, ef you have a mind to have them.'

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

"In less than no time I turned round again weth my candle in my hand.
And what dost a thing, Jan? When I looked again into the vug there
wasn't one of the knackers to be sen nor their tools neither. 'Arrea
than!' says I, 'where are a gone to, an, in such a hurry? One might
think you wed be glad to shake a paw with an old comrade, who had been
workan on the same lode weth ’e for months past.' I heard them, away
somewhere in the lode ahead, tee-hee-an, fust; then squeakan like youn
rabbits that whitnecks (weasels) had got by the throat. 'Well,' says I,
'you are very unsociable like, seeman to me,—you little old smoke-dried
hook-nosed, goggle-eyed Jews that you are. I s’pose you are vexed
because I've broken into your pretty workshop. Well, I dont' care of you
are,' thought I, and weth all the Cornish diamonds and other beautiful
stones round this I shall make a good penny, and I ded too, by sellan
them to the gentry, who will give any money sometimes for what they cale
specimens. But lots of the best of the diamonds that I found then are
down in that bal now, covered up with the deds, because I hided away the
finest and clearest crystals tel there was a good chance to take them
away, and the cappens know nothan about at, but before the chance came I
lost and forgot them, among so much stuff as was thrown back.

"What dost a say Jack, 'How did the knackers get away?' Well, how should
I know that, or how they got there either, any more than how a toad to
get into the middle of a rock, scores of fathoms underground. There es
no satisfaction in life in tellan a story to such a doubting Jack as
thee art. Have faith in what older people tell thee; for that es nothan
to the wenders I have sen, and hope to see agen before die."

Every night Uncle Mathy would talk of the small folks and buried
treasures, till he fell asleep, and then he would be sure to dream of
some particular place, about the old castles, or quoits, where the gold
was to be found. At last he got so crazy about the matter that, when he
dreamed three nights following of the same place, he would steal away
some night as soon as the moon was in the second quarter (that being the
time for good luck) wander miles away over the hills, with pick and
shoul on his shoulder, to dig round the quoits, or castles. Choon, Carn
Galva, and Bossigran were all tried in turn. He always contrived, when
he could, to pass over Burn Downs at midnight, that he might touch the
Witches’ Rock and go round it nine times, to be safe from bad luck. In
the morning, by break of day, he would come down to the moors, so tired
he could hardly drag his legs after him, and often as wet as a shag.

Whether he ever found a crock of money or no wasn't known to many. Some
say that he did, and sold the old coins to the Jews.

He had in his possession some queer old green pieces, on which was
stamped the figure of a head wearing a crown with long spikes on it; the
coin was rough round the edge, just like a deaden bullet beaten flat
with a hammer. If he didn't find money, says the old tinner, I know

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

he found the rheymaticks, and then he thought himself bewitched and his
cattle too. The few cows that An Jone and the maidens looked after, were
gone to skin and bone; in the little poor quillets, never dressed nor
tilled, there was scarcely grass to keep a goat alive; the poor cows, do
what they would, couldn't make much milk out of the thistles, gadjevraws
(ox-eyes, daisies), and furse, that had overgrown the ground. They were
for ever rearing calves, and nothing to keep the young cattle half the
year, but what they could pick up about the lanes or in other persons’
ground. The old woman and children were, great part of the time, racing
all over the country after their strayed yearlings. The hedges of the
crofts were, all round, full of gaps; and, as a bad hedge makes a
breachy beast, no fence that a greyhound could get over would stop
Captn’ Mathy's cattle out of the neighbours’ grass, or corn; and, as es
well known, nobody up in that country (where the cow starved in the
church-yard, broke into the belfry, and ate the bell-rope of straw),
have anything to spare from their own cattle.

Mathy's cows were most gone to sew (dry) and the young cattle were so
often beaten and bruised, by those on whose fields they trespassed, that
the poor wisht-looking things always seemed to be pining away from their
legs. Math was sure some of the neighbours had ill-wished them, and the
cows and hisself. He would serve them out for et, that he would, before
many days. He said he would give An Magge a golden guinea to make them
all wish their cake dough, who had begridged, overlooked, or ill-wished
his stock.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

In a hollow, almost surrounded by the carns of Zennor cliffs, and not
far from the hamlet of Treen, there was a solitary hut, which had been
built near an old boujey (sheep-fold and shed). This lonely dwelling,
hidden amongst the huge rocks, would not be noticed by the one who
passed the cliff unless the attention were arrested by the smoke which
arose amidst the rude earns or by the numerous sheep, goats, and poultry
about the rocks, and on pools formed by the brook which flowed down the
little glen. At this time an elderly dame lived here with no other
company than a great number of tame animals. By many of these she was
always surrounded when in her dwelling, and was usually attended by half
a dozen sheep, as many kids or goats, dogs, cats, tame hares, and
poultry, when she walked out.

At times, many visitors came to this out-of-the way dwelling, because
the elderly woman who resided there was one of the most noted wise
women, or white witches, of the northern parishes. She had charms for
all kinds of skin diseases, salves for wounds and bruises, water of her
own distilling for tender eyes and mullygrubbs, besides some nostrum for
most other disorders then known. This charmer, in her character

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

of white-witch, also professed to be able to put a spell of pain on
anyone (though unknown to her) who illwished, begrudged, or overlooked
(blighted with the evil eye) any person or anything, so as to make the
illwisher confess and lift, that is dispel, the evil from the blighted
object, in order to be released from the pain inflicted by the wise
woman or those who follow her instructions. When the illwishers were
known to her, she had the skill to make an image of them in wax, and, by
means of this effigy, she would punish them to her heart's content, or
to the satisfaction of those who employed her. She also knew all about
the lucky and unlucky times, and enough of the black art to become a
witch if she had a mind to. This step she sometimes threatened to take
if provoked beyond endurance. On the whole this aged charmer was more
feared than loved by many of her neighbours.

The dame, then only known as An (aunt) Maggey, or Marget the witch,
belonged to one of the old, decayed, poor, and proud families of Morvah,
who disowned her because, when only in her teens, she had wedded with a
brisk young sailor who was killed, in an engagement on board the
privateer, or as some say, pirate ship, which he commanded. Then the
sorrow-stricken woman made her habitation amidst the rocks of Zennor
cliff. The poor widow's maiden name was Margaret D——. This decayed
family was, a century or so ago, connected by marriage with all the
ancient blood of the West. On two or three particular times in every
year the old lady might still be seen, dressed out in all the grandeur
of her youthful days. On these rare occasions she was visited by many
who had been the cherished friends of her youth, and the greatest part
of them claimed cousin-ship to the poor old lady. Capt. Mathy was one of
the favoured, who always visited Margaret on these occasions; he had
been her lover's comrade until the latter left, with a roving
commission, for the high seas.

Why she kept these tides no one knew but the few intimate friends who
were admitted to see her. Perhaps these days were hearts’ festivals for
the poor lone women, when, for a time, she was cheered by the
remembrance of former joys. Anyone who had the rare chance to behold An
Marget then, however, would see her attired in a blue silk gown almost
thick enough to stand on end. The open front of the trailing, robe-like
gown showed a quilted petticoat of white satin, half concealed by an
apron of muslin. which was so skilfully embroidered with Margaret’s own
needle that it looked like the richest old-fashioned lace. The quilting
of the petticoat was done with chain-stitch of blue silk. In the middle
of each raised square was a sprig of some dainty little blue flower, all
worked in silks of the natural colours of the stem, leaves, and
blossoms; each sprig of the same size yet of different kind of flowers
and work. A running pattern of wild rose sprays and convolvulus
surrounded the bottom. On her arms she wore long netted silk gloves,
reaching to the elbows, there met by lace ruffles which hung far below
her waist. Her

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

silver-grey hair, raised from her forehead on cushions, was crowned with
a lace cap like a fairy web. Then she wore amber beads on her neck,
diamond rings, on her fingers, and silver buckles shone in her velvet
shoes. On all ordinary occasions she wore the same simple dress as other
cottagers round.

A lady, who frequently visited poor Margaret, (who was also related to
her) told of another dress which she often wore. This was of fine white
linen, printed with a running pattern of flowers and foliage, the
colours of which were all so bright and natural that the fine white
holland appeared to be covered with wreaths of convolvulus, pimpernel,
roses, pinks, lilies, cowslips, speedwell, and other tiny wild blossoms
most artfully entwined. With this summer's dress she wore a round white
satin hat, garlanded with rare flowers. This small flat hat was jauntily
placed on one side the raised hair, and fastened to it by jewel-headed
pins, stuck through the cushion. There were lace ruffles and all the
other accessories.

The hut in which the dame lived, with her lambs, kids, cats, tame hares,
and poultry (besides the robins, wrens, and sparrows, which nested under
the thatched roof) was only just large enough to hold her turn
(spinning-wheel), table, high-backed carved oak chair, a few stools, and
[opposite](errata.htm#9) the door, her dresser, which was the pride of
the old lady's heart. On the few blue-painted shelves were arranged,
with the greatest care and an eye to effect, many rare pieces of old
china, earthenware of brilliant colours and of graceful or grotesque
forms, besides many singularly-shaped glasses of all hues; these her
roving lover had brought her from abroad.

Over the fire-place were a large bright warming-pan and hour-glass,
foreign shells, coral, and many other fancy things, brought her from
distant lands, by the young mariner for whose love she had forsaken her
home and proud kinsfolks long ago. An Maggey's bed, large carved oak
chest, small treadle-turn for spinning thread, and a few others things,
were placed on a talfat which extended over half the length of the hut.
A little window, a few inches wide and a foot or so high, at the head of
the old dame's bed, always stood open—that she might hear, she said, the
voice of her sailor, V—— in the roar of the billows, the murmur of the
waves, and the calling of the cleves.

Whatever converse she might have held with the spirit of the departed
through the little open window, the robins and wrens made good use of it
to pass in and out at their pleasure, to their nests beneath Margaret’s
roof, and a swarm of bees, from the garden below, had found their way
through it and made their habitation in the angle of the punion under
the roof. The honeycombs hanging from rafters and key-beams, were within
reach from the floor. Everything about the place was as clean as

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

clean could be, and as sweet as the roses, pinks, and thyme in the
garden beside the door, notwithstanding her large family of pet animals.

The dame made the principal part of her livelihood by spinning and
knitting. She made better thread for saddlers and shoemakers than they
could get elsewhere. As she had abundance of good bog-turf (peat) and
furze for fuel, and a great quantity of mint, savoury, and other herbs
in her garden, she made excellent still-waters, and good cordials by
distilling fermented wort with aromatic herbs, and her sweet drink
(mead) prepared from the purest of honey and richest of spices, was the
best of all her cordials. Besides these resources, she had always
abundance of poultry, and the folks who came to be charmed, or to be
benefited in other ways by her more mysterious arts of white witchcraft,
though they never gave her money (that would spoil the charm) always
left on the rock outside the door, good offerings of provisions, wool,
flax, corn for her poultry, and other goods, which those who came to
consult the wise woman thought she might require.

What seemed the strangest of all the dame's freaks was a fondness for
using firearms. They say that, when young, she was a capital shot, and
in all weathers went out hunting with her brothers, or other sportsmen,
none of whom would kill more game than Margaret. When she settled in the
lone hut, often of a winter's day, she alight be seen, with a man's coat
and hat on, stalking over the cliff, or moors, to get a shot at the wild
fowl. At other times she would amuse herself, for hours together, with a
brace of old horse-pistols, in firing ball at the target she made of her
outhouse door. The young tinners, who often came down of a summer's
evening to have a shooting-match with An Meg, supplied her with plenty
of powder and the lead, from which she moulded the bullets and cast the
shot, or rather slugs, for herself and the boys. And, as Jan Tregear
said, the goats, dogs, and even the hares, seemed to like the sport, for
they would crowd round as if they enjoyed the smoke and noise. The
vagaries of the dame were not thought so very strange a century or so
ago, when the ladies took as much, or more, delight in the sports of the
field, and other outdoor exercises, as the men do now. Many thought it
likely enough that the old lady might be "a little touched in the head,"
as her grandmother or her great-granny was one of an ancient family,
many of whom were remarkable for their flighty ways, which every now and
then (from grandfather to grandson in general) culminated in downright
madness.

This family, notwithstanding their spice of insanity, produced many
learned astrologers, who, however, do not seem to have profited much by
their science, as they failed to secure Alverton, and other of their
ancient possessions, to their descendants, some of whom still claim to
be legal heirs to this property.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

Though An Maggey was feared by many, and loved by few except by the
children of the neighbours round and the old friends of her youth,
Captn. Mathy and the wise dame were always wonderfully thick; so, when
he took it into his head that he and his cattle were bewitched, off he
went to consult her. An Marge told him that it was no wonder if his
young cattle were ill-wished every hour in the day, because they were as
breachy as goats; half the time they were never spanned and in other
people's fields. One could hardly help ill-wishing the things that were
for ever troubling. And as for himself, she said that he brought the
aches and pains in his limbs by hunting for gold when he should have
been in his bed, and, as he knew that if anyone had ill-wished his
cattle, in the black minute, their curse would not fall to the ground,
he might find out the ill-wishers, if he would make use of the bottle of
water in the way she had told him, so as to give them such pains as
would make them confess and consent to raise the spell.

Mathy determined to bury the bottle, as directed by the wise woman. Then
he wished Margaret good night, saying he should see her again soon.

"I wish ’e well till I see ’e again, Mathy," said she, "but one can
hardly blame the neighbours for ill-wishing ’e. I am sorry for the
cattle, poor things; but you know very well, Mathy, and everyone else
who know ’e, that, at times (always when you haven't your own way) you
are as cross a devil as ever lived, and I advise ’e, like a sister, give
up steaming and smuggling, and stay at home to till the land, that the
half-starved cattle may have something to eat. I wish ’e well. And don't
cork the bottle too tight, for fear of what may happen."

Captn. Mathy took the bottle of water from the ill-wished cattle down to
the moor-house, and buried it under the tin, that it might be close at
hand, to be quickly uncorked should anyone be in extremis. An Joney, the
captn’s wife, found out what had been done by the directions of Marget.
Without delay, she spoke of it to another dame, her next neighbour, and
begged her not to say anything about it. Before Joney left the door, the
woman to whom she told the secret felt herself ailing in a queer way;
and as soon at Joney was out of sight, the gossiping dame went round and
told the secret, and how she felt herself ailing, to every other woman
in Treen.

"Good lord," said they all, "we don't know, any of us, but we may have
ill-wished the cussed breachy things in the evil hour and minutes, and
now we shall all suffer—God knows what—through the scheming of old
Marget and he."

Scores in the parish knew they had often ill-wished and ill-used the
troublesome cattle, which were always ranging about and no one to keep
them to stays. Mathy so frightened many of the self-accused ill-wishers,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

particularly the women, by threatening what he and An Marget would do by
them, if they didn't confess and do all they could to break their spell,
and that before the day was over scores believed they felt the pains
which they say are sure to follow when such measures are taken

As one fool makes many, in a few days, whenever the women round met at
the mill or market, they talked of nothing else but the pains some were
suffering for having ill-wished Captn' Mathy's cattle, and the fancy
seemed to spread among them like the plague; for those who listened no
sooner heard the pains described than they felt the very same. Before a
week was over half the women in Zennor, and many of the men, felt as if
they had a spell put on them, and, in the gloom of the evenings, when
the streamers had left work and most of them gone home, troops of women
might be seen slowly beating their way down over the moors, through
brambles, furze, and bots, to see Captn. Mathy, confess that they had
ill-wished his cattle, and beg that the bottle might be uncorked for
they were ready to burst.

"No, you black witches, you shall suffer longer yet, for bewitching me
and ill-wishing my cattle," was the only answer they got.

At last the men, belonging to the self-accused witches, threatened that
they would all come down in a body, and burn the moor-house and Mathy in
it, if the women didn't get the relief they wanted. They would come
down, they swore, in force strong enough to thrash him and all his
smuggling crew. And sure enough, one evening, about dusk, when the
Ludgvan men were, some of them, taking off their high streamers’ boots,
making ready to go home, and consulting together whether they hadn't
better remain with the old Captn. for fear of what the Zennor goats
might, in their madness, take it into their heads to do (they had a
quantity of goods about; besides all, the streamers left in the
moor-house the long boots they wore when working knee deep in the water;
these were as high as seamen's boots and cost little short of three
pounds a pair) one of the men called Curnow, who lived down near
Terrassow, some miles away, said he very much wanted to go home that
night, and before he took off his heavy boots, to put on lighter gear
for walking in, he stepped out to take a look round. In a few minutes he
was in again.

"Now no fuss nor noise, my boys," says he, "but be quick and load all
the old muskets with a slight charge of powder, small shot, and peas;
put a heavier charge, and more lead, in the new fowling-pieces. The
pistols are all right. We shall have some fun, for I be cussed ef there
esen't some scores coman down the moors within gunshot carryan on their
backs burns of furze, and some are skulking down by the fowling-pool to
see who of us is about, thinkan no doubt that all of us, except the
Captn. and Jack, are off home. You leave them to me, Captn.," says
Curnow, "we will set the door open for them, and we waun't give them any
shot, unless we are forced to, for fear of hurting the women among

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

them. Yet we arn’t going to be beaten either. No, it shall never be said
the 'Ludgvan Hurlers' were thrashed by a set of 'Zennor Goats.'"

The moor-house was rather dark, because all the portholes, which served
also for windows, were bunged up with wads of ferns or rushes, to keep
out the cold, except two or three near the chimney.

"By the time we had the guns charged," said Jan Tregear, "about three
score or more, the greatest number of them women, came within a hundred
yards of the house, and in front of the door. Here they threw into a
heap nearly a wainload of furze." Curnow placed himself to sit on the
side of the bunk or bed opposite the open door, that he might watch
their proceedings. The Zennor folks talked all together a few minutes;
then one of them took from his picket a tinder-box, struck a light, and
fixed a candle in a lantern.

Next, Uncle Dick Thomas, a near neighbour and cousin to the Captn., came
within a few yards of the door, and called out "Mathy, boy! art thee in
there, Mathy, or where art ah?" No speak with the Captn. Uncle Dick now
came nearer to the door, and several of the rest followed close on his
heels, drawing the faggots of furze with them.

"Now, I tell thee," says the leader of the Zennor men, "thee may’st see
that we are in downright earnest, and unless thee dost come out, unbury,
and smash to shreds that damned bottle, we will burn thy moor-house and
thee too, that we will; and ef thy cowardly Ludgvan crew had been weth
thee, we'd serve tham all the same, that we wed, wedn as comrades? Thee
wesn’t so much as speak to us! I'll come in this minnat and drag thee
out by the scruff of the neck, that I will. I'm coman to thee." "Look
sharp boys! Keep close behind me! We'll get some of their liquor or es
much to me!" says Uncle Dick, in a whisper to his crew.

Before the streamers’ captain had time to think what to do, the Treen
men's champion, with a thick stick in his hand, stooped down, bent most
in double, as was necessary to enter the low doorway.

Uncle Dick no sooner poked his head over the drussel (door-sill) than
Cornow rose from the bed, where he had been quietly watching, spun
round, and gave Uncle Dick a back kick, ar as we say a poot, right on
the crown of his head, with his heavy iron-plated boot, and sent his
sprawling on the cawnse outside the door.

"I am very weel I thank ’e! How are you Richard? I hope you haven't hurt
your horns, have ’e my old buck?" says Curnow: "dear me, how dedn’t ’e
stoop lower; you are too proud, you are! Uncle Dick do ’e happen to have
in your pocket a pipeful of the tobacca you brought away from the last
burran (burial) you went to, away over in Gulval or some place where
they still make good funerals? And ded ’e well fill your pockets with
biske, to carry home to the children? And how often

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

ded ’e change your place among the ring of people out of the town-plat
that you might drink twice or three times to every other body's once,
when the toddy (grog) was carried round the pile of tin, the water
turned out, and all were satisfied. No, you dedn’t help the poor people
to carry the corpse over the hills to church-town, ded ’e, after you had
busted yourself on toddy and cake, and stuffed a few ounces of shag in
the palm of your hand instead of the bowl of you pipe, and pocketed pipe
and all! One might hear ’e for miles away, coman home so jolly, singan,
"Here's a health to the baarley now," to the tune of the Old Hundred.

Next, up carne, with a gurze-pike (fork) in his hand, Tom, the son of
the man laid sprawling on the cawnse. Curnow settled him in the same way
as he had served his dad.

"Ah! es that you, Tom? how are ’e, my son? Weren't ’e tired agan you got
back to the hills t’other night weth the great sack of apples you stole
from Trassow orchard?"

Whilst the back kicks and banter were going on, the folks outside still
thought there was no person in the moor-house but the Captn. and his
mate Jack Tregear, who was well up to banter; and, thinking Mathy was
only laughing at them, the women brought the faggots close round the
house, under the eaves of the thatch, took the candle from the lantern
and set the furze on fire, when one of those within, seeing what they
were up to, seized an old musket loaded with peas, and let fly among
them. The woman ran away howling that they were all killed dead; "and
faith," says Jan, "we gave chase and well peppered some of them."

The streamers rushed out of the moor-house just in time to drag the
blazing faggots away from under the eaves of the thatched roof. The
affray was now getting serious, for the Ludgvan men, sallying out in
chase of their besiegers, were again going to fire on them, when they
saw the parson of Gulval and some other gentlemen, who had been up
hunting on the hills, approach the fleeing Zennor folks. The gentlemen
having heard the firing and seen the crowd of women in the moors, came
down to know what was going on. The parson's common sense enabled him to
understand, that the self-accused ill-wishers were suffering more from
illusory fears than from any bodily ailment. "Yet," he said, "the old
wives’ fancies are no more to be trifled with than any other contagious
disease."

The hunters advised both parties to make the matter up. They were both
to blame. The Captn. should keep his fences in repair and his stock from
trespassing on his neighbours; and they, in turn, had
[ill-used](errata.htm#10) the poor beasts, and what some called an evil
conscience was making cowards and fools of them all.

After much good advice from the preaching hunters, Mathy consented to
produce the bottle and break it before their eyes, that all might see

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

the result, if they chose. A large case-bottle, which contained water
from all the diseased animals, was then dug out of

On the evening of the attack on the moorhouse, several persons, who were
neither so weak or wicked-minded as the company of ill-wishers’ came
down to the streamwork, out of curiosity, to see what would take
place,—among others a young woman called Mary Polteer, who lingered
until after the crowd of distressed ones had departed, that she might
tell Captn. Mathy how she became aware that some mischief was brewing
for Margaret, because Old Katey the Kite (a small farmer's wife of
Treen) had been going round the parish telling everyone that Margaret
was a rank black witch and nothing better—she could be sworn that her
dairy, and everything in the house was bewitched, since she refused to
leave Old Mag have a pint of cream from the pan before it came in turn
to be unreamed (skimmed).

"Now it happened in this way," says the mistress of the dairy. "One day,
a few months ago, Old May came up for a pound of butter to pay for some
spinning work she had done for me. When the old jade tasted the butter
(as good a butter as ever was made), she spat et out agen, and said,
'Why, this butter, of one can cale et butter forsooth, es sour and
stinkan and too salt by half! The cream,' says she, 'es left twice too
long on the milk weth this hot weather, but if you like I will take a
pint of cream, that haven't been scalded more then four-and-twenty
hours, instead of the butter.' Well, I was vexed when I answered her
that neither for the devil, nor for the devil's dame, wed I unream a pan
of milk before the proper time. 'You waan’t, waan’t ’e?' says Old Mag,
goan backward and shakan her bony finger at me. Before another moon you
shall wish you had, that you shall.' She mumbled much more to herself,
that I couldn't make out. I told her I dedn’t fear her, the black witch,
and took the fire-shovel of humers (embers) and throwed at her, but
there didn't a spark reach her." (if you can throw fire over a witch
that will break the spell they say.) "The old witch turned again, called
me a dirty, greedy slut, and said, 'Thee shust rue the day that thee
hast refused me a cup of cream; though a pig must have a good stomach to
eat en out of thy spence, that do smell as bad of train as a stinkan
fish sellar, with the pots of rusty pilchards and other lumber under the
benches.' She said much more, mumblan to herself, like all the old
witches do, than I could make out. Well, as true as we stand here, from
that day to this I have found nothing but bad luck in the house, and
haven't been able to make a bit of sweet butter for the summer. One day
the milk will turn all to wey and cruds (curds) when over scaldan; the
next all es gone sour in the pans, and no more cream on them than I can
hold in my hand. Cuss the black witch! I don't fear her neither. As for
the buck (fermentation) why for more than a week runnan the milk will be
foaman over the pans and not a midgan of cream to be seen. When all the
time there's no buck in other people's dairies, and how often the cow
have kicked the bucket

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I can't tell thee.
Our boy Honney's wife and I have agreed that we will go down soon, and
bring blood from old Mag, ef we run a pin in her arm to the bone." (If
you don't fear a witch, and can bring blood from her, that too will
break the spell, they say.)

"Well, and thee art in the right too," says Gracey Winkey, the dame who
was listening to old Katey.

"I don't know," says Jan Tregear, "what her right name was; I believe I
never heard, any more than that of old Katey. I only know that everybody
called her Gracey Winkey, because she was always blinkan her peepers.
Why there are so many of one name up there in the high countries that
they have to give each other necknames to know who is meant, and one is
sure to remember them when the neck-names seem suitable, as they, for
the most part, are. Old Katey the Kite was all legs and wings, weth a
hooked bill. Her old Timdoodle of a husband was always goan about puffed
up like a sellack, and everybody called am Old Blue-Bird; and Gracey's
old lutterpooch (lazy sloven), was known to everyone as Tom the
Grunter."

"I will go down why (with ye), for sure as I'm alive," says Gracey, "my
ducks are begrudged by old Mag, and all because I wedden’t save for her
a settan of ducks’ eggs, when my old hen had been cluckan for weeks and
I'd no eggs to put under her. 'A may be you will wish you had,' mumbled
Old Mag, as she crossed the drussel (door sill). Now before the ducks
had laid half the eggs I wanted, the mollard (drake) was straddelan
about like a toad weth a broken back, all the settan of eggs went addle
under the hin, and no hin can set better than our old coppy, for she
most starved herself to death on the nest; her eggs were never cold. And
a es my belief that out Tom's maid, Cherry, es bewitched to—the poor
wisht-lookan creater that she es! How else shud she be so queer in the
head, and havan fits now, any more than other times, years agone? We
have done all we can to cure her of the fits. She have begged a penny a
piece from twenty-seven young men to buy a selver ring to cure her. She
may wear the ring, or lev at alone, the fits come all the same. And we
have made her do other things that everybody says es good for curean
fits."

Katey now joined in:—"We will go down one evnan, the five of us, your
Tom and our Jan shall go too, and pass the cheeld, poor deer, across the
fire; that's the surest way to break the spell and unbewitch her." Katey
the Kite continued to say, "All that old Mag do keep the hares for es
that she may take their shape by night and prowl about unbeknown to
anybody. Haven't more than one gave chase to a hare that no dogs can
ever catch, and, when last sen to jump in through the winder of old
Mag's spence, nothan like a hare was found there, inside the dwellan,
bot only the old witch gaspan for breath?"

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Another woman, who joined the dames, declared that more than one cheeld
had been born in the parish, with a hare-lip, all through the fright
given by old Mag's hares when they crossed the women's path, in spite of
the mother's smock beean rented from bottom to top.

Mary further informed the Captn. that, before the three dames parted,
they were joined by several others who had all made up their minds that
Margaret was more of a black witch than a white one, and all agreed they
would go down and make her quail and break the spells of bad luck.
"Else," sai they, "ef nothan else will do we must, One and Ale, go over
to Helston for the Pellar."

Now the tinner went on to say, as Mathy well knew that Mary Polteer and
Margaret had always ben stanch friends, he (Mathy) told the young woman
to be sure to keep her eyes and ears open, to find out what was going on
among them; and, as fools and cheldran tell the truth, they say, by
means of Cherry, and the young fry, she could know what was planned, and
send him word in time to prevent more mischief, for he well knew that ef
Margaret had powder and lead by her she would be like enow to give some
to the first who entered her dwelling against her will.

One afternoon, a few days after the siege of the moor-house, about an
hour before sunset, the streamers saw An Joan, the Captn.’s wife, coman
down the moors, in great haste, and beckonan the men to come to her.
"Run down to the cliff, do, Mathy, and three or four of the rest of ’e;
run quick, or they will tear Marget lem from lem; for Mary found out
how, this evenan, Katey the Kite, Gracey Winkey, and three or four other
women, and some men, agreed to bring blood from Marget and lift the maid
Cherry across the fire. Take your cudgels, or guns, and run boys, run,
to keep the villans from Marget. She es no more a witch than I am; she's
only a little cracked to think herself one sometimes, and now the moon
es near the full."

The streamers armed themselves with sticks, and went off to the cliff,
by the shortest cut, as fast as they could lay feet to ground.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Second](swc112)

</div>
