[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070046)  [Next](0070048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVII.—That Astrology, Soothsaying, and Similar Arts are the Invention of Demons.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p1"></span>These were the inventors of
astrology, and soothsaying, and divination, and those productions which
are called oracles, and necromancy, and the art of magic, and whatever
evil practices besides these men exercise, either openly or in secret.
Now all these things are false of themselves, as the Erythræan <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Sibyl testifies:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p1.2"></span> “Since all these things are
> erroneous,  
> Which foolish men search after day by day.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p2"></span>But these same authorities by their
countenance <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) cause it to be
believed that they are true. Thus they delude the credulity of men by
lying divination, because it is not expedient for them to lay open the
truth. These are they who taught men to make images and statues; who, in
order that they might turn away the minds of men from the worship of the
true God, cause the countenances of dead kings, fashioned and adorned
with exquisite beauty, to be erected and consecrated, and assumed to
themselves their names, as though <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>they were assuming some characters. But
the magicians, and those whom the people truly call enchanters, <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) when they practice their detestable
arts, call upon them by their true names, those heavenly names which are
read in the sacred writings. Moreover, these impure and wandering
spirits, that they may throw all things into confusion, and overspread
the minds of men with errors, interweave and mingle false things with
true. For they themselves feigned that there are many heavenly beings,
and one king of all, <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p4.2"></span>Jupiter;
because there are many spirits of angels in heaven, and one Parent and
Lord of all, God. But they have concealed the truth under false names,
and withdrawn it from sight.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p5"></span>For God, as I have shown in the
beginning, <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) does not need a name,
since He is alone; nor do the angels, inasmuch as they are immortal,
either suffer or wish themselves to be called gods: for their one and
only duty is to submit to the will of God, and not to do anything at all
except at His command. For we say that the world is so governed by God,
as a province is by its ruler; and no one would say that his
attendants <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) are his sharers in
the administration of the province, although business is carried on by
their service. And yet these can effect something contrary to the
commands of the ruler, through his ignorance; which is the result of
man’s condition. But that guardian of the world and ruler of the
universe, who knows all things, from whose divine eyes nothing is
concealed, <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) has alone with His
Son the power over all things; nor is there anything in the angels
except the necessity of obedience. Therefore they wish no honour to be
paid to them, since all their honour is in God. But they who have
revolted from the service of God, because they are enemies of the truth,
and betrayers <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) of God attempt to
claim for themselves the name and worship of gods; not that they desire
any honour <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-Page_66"></span>(for what honour is there to the
lost?), nor that they may injure God, who cannot be injured, but that
they may injure men, whom they strive to turn away from the worship and
knowledge of the true Majesty, that they may not be able to obtain
immortality, which they themselves have lost through their wickedness.
Therefore they draw on darkness, and overspread the truth with
obscurity, that men may not know their Lord and Father. And that they
may easily entice them, they conceal themselves in the temples, and are
close at hand at all sacrifices; and they often give prodigies, that
men, astonished by them, may attach to images a belief in their divine
power and influence. Hence it is that the stone was cut by the augur
with a razor; that <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p9.2"></span>Juno of Veii
answered that she wished to remove to Rome; that <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p9.3"></span>Fortuna Muliebris <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) announced the threatening danger; that
the ship followed the hand of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>Claudia; that <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.2"></span>Juno when plundered, and the <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.3"></span>Locrian Proserpine, and the <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.4"></span>Milesian Ceres, punished the
sacrilegious; that <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.5"></span>Hercules
exacted vengeance from <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.6"></span>Appius,
and <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.7"></span>Jupiter from <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.8"></span>Atinius, and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.9"></span>Minerva from Cæsar. Hence it was that
the serpent sent for from <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10.10"></span>Epidaurus freed the city of Rome from
pestilence. For the chief of the demons was himself carried thither in
his own form, without any dissembling; if indeed the ambassadors who
were sent for that purpose brought with them a serpent of immense size.
 

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p11"></span>But they especially deceive in the
case of oracles, the juggleries of which the profane <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) cannot distinguish from the truth; and
therefore they imagine that commands, <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) and victories, and wealth, and
prosperous issues of affairs, are bestowed by them,—in short, that the
state has often been freed from imminent dangers by their
interposition; <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) which dangers
they have both announced, and when appeased with sacrifices, have
averted. But all these things are deceits. For since they have a
presentiment <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) of the arrangements
of God, inasmuch as they have been His ministers, they interpose
themselves in these matters, that whatever things have been accomplished
or are in the course of accomplishment by God, they themselves may
especially appear to be doing or to have done; and as often as any
advantage is hanging over any people or city, according to the purpose
of God, either by prodigies, or dreams, or oracles, they promise that
they will bring it to pass, if temples, honours, and sacrifices are
given to them. And on the offering of these, when the necessary <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) result comes to pass, they acquire for
themselves the greatest veneration. Hence temples are vowed, and new
images consecrated; herds of victims are slain; and when all these
things are done, yet the life and safety of those who have performed
them are not the less sacrificed. But as often as dangers threaten, they
profess that they are angry on account of some light and trifling cause;
as <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p16.1"></span>Juno was with <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p16.2"></span>Varro, because he had placed a
beautiful boy on the carriage <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) of
<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p17.2"></span>Jupiter to guard the dress, and
on this account the Roman name was almost destroyed at Cannæ. But if
<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p17.3"></span>Juno feared a second <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p17.4"></span>Ganymede, why did the Roman youth
suffer punishment? Or if the gods regard the leaders only, and neglect
the rest of the multitude, why did <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p17.5"></span>Varro alone escape who acted thus, and
why was <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p17.6"></span>Paulus, who was
innocent, <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) slain? Assuredly
nothing then happened to the Romans by “the fates of the hostile <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p18.5"></span>Juno,” <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) when <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p19.3"></span>Hannibal by craft and valour despatched
two armies of the Roman people. For <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p19.4"></span>Juno did not venture either to defend
Carthage, where were her arms and chariot, or to injure the Romans; for
 

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p19.5"></span> “She had heard that sons of
> Troy  
> Were born her Carthage to destroy.” <span
> id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348)  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p21"></span>But these are the delusions of
those who, concealing themselves under the names of the dead, lay snares
for the living. Therefore, whether the impending danger can be avoided,
they wish it to appear that they averted it, having been appeased; or if
it cannot be avoided, they contrive that it may appear to have happened
through disregard <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) of them. Thus
they acquire to themselves authority and fear from men, who are ignorant
of them. By this subtilty and by these arts they have caused the
knowledge of the true and only God to fail <span
id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) among all nations. For, being
destroyed by their own vices, they rage and use violence that they may
destroy others. Therefore these enemies of the human race even devised
human victims, to devour as many lives as possible.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_333"></span>[65:334](0070047.htm#fr_333) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p3"></span> By their presence.  

<span id="fn_334"></span>[65:335](0070047.htm#fr_334) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>Malefici—evil doers. The word is
specially used of enchanters.  

<span id="fn_335"></span>[65:336](0070047.htm#fr_335) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p6"></span> Book i. ch. vi.  

<span id="fn_336"></span>[65:337](0070047.htm#fr_336) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>Apparitors. The word is especially
applied to public servants, as lictors, etc.  

<span id="fn_337"></span>[65:338](0070047.htm#fr_337) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p8"></span> Surrounded, shut in.  

<span id="fn_338"></span>[65:339](0070047.htm#fr_338) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p9.1"></span>Prævaricatores. The word is properly
applied to an advocate who is guilty of collusion with his antagonist,
and thus betrays his client.  

<span id="fn_339"></span>[66:340](0070047.htm#fr_339) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p10"></span> Womanly Fortune.  

<span id="fn_340"></span>[66:341](0070047.htm#fr_340) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p12"></span> Unbelievers.  

<span id="fn_341"></span>[66:342](0070047.htm#fr_341) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p13"></span> Governments.  

<span id="fn_342"></span>[66:343](0070047.htm#fr_342) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p14"></span> At their nod, or suggestion.  

<span id="fn_343"></span>[66:344](0070047.htm#fr_343) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p15"></span> They presage.  

<span id="fn_344"></span>[66:345](0070047.htm#fr_344) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p16"></span> That which was necessary according
to the purpose and arrangement of God.  

<span id="fn_345"></span>[66:346](0070047.htm#fr_345) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p17.1"></span>Tensa; a carriage on which the images
of the gods were carried to the circus at the Circensian games.  

<span id="fn_346"></span>[66:347](0070047.htm#fr_346) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p17.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p18"></span> Deserved nothing, had nothing
worthy of punishment. <span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p18.1"></span>Varro and
<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p18.2"></span>Paulus Æmilius were the two
consuls who commanded at Cannæ. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p18.3"></span>Varro escaped, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p18.4"></span>Paulus was slain.  

<span id="fn_347"></span>[66:348](0070047.htm#fr_347) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p18.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p19.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p19.2"></span>Æn., viii. 292.  

<span id="fn_348"></span>[66:349](0070047.htm#fr_348) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p19.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p20.1"></span>Ibid., i. 19.  

<span id="fn_349"></span>[66:350](0070047.htm#fr_349) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p22"></span> Contempt.  

<span id="fn_350"></span>[66:351](0070047.htm#fr_350) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xvii-p23"></span> They have made old.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVIII.—Of the patience and vengeance of God, the worship of
demons, and false religions](0070048)
