[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070345)  [Next](0070347) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxxvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXXVII.

<span id="iii.v.xxxvii-p1"></span>While occupied in this plan, he
received letters from <span id="iii.v.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Constantine
which deterred him from proceeding in its execution, so for a time he
dissembled his purpose; nevertheless any Christian that fell within his
power was privily thrown into the sea. Neither did he cease from his
custom of sacrificing every day in the palace. It was also an invention
of his to cause all animals used for food to be slaughtered, not by
cooks, but by priests at the altars; so that nothing was ever served up,
unless foretasted, consecrated, and sprinkled with wine, according to
the rites of paganism; and whoever was invited to an entertainment must
needs have returned from it impure and defiled. In all things else he
resembled his preceptor <span id="iii.v.xxxvii-p1.2"></span>Galerius.
For if aught chanced to have been left untouched by <span
id="iii.v.xxxvii-p1.3"></span>Diocles and <span
id="iii.v.xxxvii-p1.4"></span>Maximian, <span
id="iii.v.xxxvii-p1.5"></span>that did <span
id="iii.v.xxxvii-p1.6"></span>Daia greedily and shamelessly carry off.
And now the granaries of each individual were shut, and all warehouses
sealed up, and taxes, not yet due, were levied by anticipation. Hence
famine, from neglect of cultivation, and the prices of all things
enhanced beyond measure. Herds and flocks were driven from their pasture
for the daily sacrifice. By gorging his soldiers with the flesh of
sacrifices, he so corrupted them, that they disdained their wonted
pittance in corn, and wantonly threw it away. Meanwhile <span
id="iii.v.xxxvii-p1.7"></span>Daia recompensed his bodyguards, who were
very numerous, with costly raiment and gold medals, made donatives in
silver to the common soldiers and recruits, and bestowed every sort of
largess on the barbarians who served in his army. As to grants of the
property of living persons, which he made to his favourites whenever
they chose to ask what belonged to another, I know not whether the same
thanks might not be due to him that are given to merciful robbers, who
spoil without murdering.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXVIII](0070347)
