[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070124)  [Next](0070126.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XII.—Of True Virtue; And of the Estimation of a Good or Bad Citizen.

<span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p1"></span>What would you do to those who give
the name of justice to the tortures inflicted by tyrants of old, who
fiercely raged against the innocent; and though they are teachers of
injustice and cruelty, wish to appear just and prudent, being blind and
dull, and ignorant of affairs and of truth? Is justice so hateful to
you, O abandoned minds, that ye regard it as equal with the greatest
crimes? Is innocence so utterly lost in your eyes, that you do not think
it worthy of death only, <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009.md) but
it is esteemed as beyond all crimes to commit no crime, and to have a
breast pure from all contagion of guilt? And since we are speaking
generally with those who worship <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-Page_148"></span>gods, let us have your permission to
do good with you; for this is our law, this our business, this our
religion. If we appear to you wise, imitate us; if foolish, despise us,
or even laugh at us, if you please; for our folly is profitable to us.
Why do you lacerate, why do you afflict us? We do not envy your wisdom.
We prefer this folly of ours—we embrace this. We believe that this is
expedient for us,—to love you, and to confer all things upon you, who
hate us.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p3"></span>There is in the writings of <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p3.1"></span>Cicero <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010.md) a passage not inconsistent with the
truth, in that disputation which is held by <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p4.2"></span>Furius against justice: “I ask,” he says,
“if there should be two men, and one of them should be an excellent man,
of the highest integrity, the greatest justice, and remarkable faith,
and the other distinguished by crime and audacity; and if the state
should be in such error as to regard that good man as wicked, vicious,
and execrable, but should think the one who is most wicked to be of the
highest integrity and faith; and if, in accordance with this opinion of
all the citizens, that good man should be harassed, dragged away, should
be deprived of his hands, have his eyes dug out, should be condemned, be
bound, be branded, be banished, be in want, and lastly, should most
justly appear to all to be most wretched; but, on the other hand, if
that wicked man should be praised, and honoured, and loved by all,—if
all honours, all commands, all wealth, and all abundance should be
bestowed upon him,—in short, if he should be judged in the estimation of
all an excellent man, and most worthy of all fortune,—who, I pray, will
be so mad as to doubt which of the two he would prefer to be?” Assuredly
he put forth this example as though he divined what evils were about to
happen to us, and in what manner, on account of righteousness; for our
people suffer all these things through the perverseness of those in
error. Behold, the state, or rather the whole world itself, is in such
error, that it persecutes, tortures, condemns, and puts to death good
and righteous men, as though they were wicked and impious. For as to
what he says, that no one is so infatuated as to doubt which of the two
he would prefer to be, he indeed, as the one who was contending against
justice, thought this, that the wise man would prefer to be bad if he
had a good reputation, than to be good with a bad reputation.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p5"></span>But may this senselessness be absent
from us, that we should prefer that which is false to the true? Or does
the character of our good man depend upon the errors of the people, more
than upon our own conscience and the judgment of God? Or shall any
prosperity ever allure us, so that we should not rather choose true
goodness, though accompanied with all evil, than false goodness together
with all prosperity? Let kings retain their kingdoms, the rich their
riches, as <span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p5.1"></span>Plautus says, <span
id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011.md) the wise their wisdom; let them
leave to us our folly, which is evidently proved to be wisdom, from the
very fact that they envy us its possession: for who would envy a fool,
but he who is himself most foolish? But they are not so foolish as to
envy fools; but from the fact of their following us up with such care
and anxiety, they allow that we are not fools. For why should they rage
with such cruelty, unless it is that they fear lest, as justice grows
strong from day to day, they should be deserted together with their
decaying <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012.md) gods? If, therefore,
the worshippers of gods are wise, and we are foolish, why do they fear
lest the wise shall be allured by the foolish?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[147:1010](0070125.htm#fr_1009.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p2.1"></span>Ne morte quidem simplici dignum putetis.  

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[148:1011](0070125.htm#fr_1010.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p4"></span> \[From the <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p4.1"></span>Republic, iii. xvii. 27.\]  

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[148:1012](0070125.htm#fr_1011.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p6.1"></span>Curcul., i. 3, 22.  

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[148:1013](0070125.htm#fr_1012.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xii-p7.1"></span>Cariosis. There is a great variety of
readings in this place.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—Of the increase and the punishment of the
Christians.](0070126.md)
