[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070221)  [Next](0070223.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxx"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXXIV.—That Men are Born to Justice.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p1"></span>Let us now see what is proposed to
the wise man as the chief good. <span
id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495.md) That men are born to justice is not
only taught by the sacred writings, but is sometimes acknowledged even
by these same philosophers. Thus <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p2.2"></span>Cicero says: “But of all things which
fall under the discussion of learned men, nothing assuredly is more
excellent than that it should be clearly understood that we are born to
justice.” This is most true. <span id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496.md)
For we are not born to wickedness, since we are a social and sociable
animal. The wild beasts are produced to exercise their fierceness; for
they are unable to live in any other way than by prey and bloodshed.
These, however, although pressed by extreme hunger, nevertheless refrain
from animals of their own kind. Birds also do the same, which must feed
upon the carcases of others. How much more is it befitting, that man,
who is united with man both in the interchange of language and in
communion of feeling, should spare man, and love him! For this is
justice.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p4"></span>But since wisdom has been given to
man alone, that he may understand God, and this alone makes the
difference between man and the dumb animals, justice itself is bound up
in two duties. He owes the one to God as to a father, the other to man
as to a brother; for we are produced by the same God. Therefore it has
been deservedly and rightly said, that wisdom is the knowledge of divine
and human affairs. For it is right that we should know what we owe to
God, and what to man; namely, to God religion, to man affection. But the
former belongs to wisdom, the latter to virtue; and justice comprises
both. If, therefore, it is evident that man is born to justice, it is
necessary that the just man should be subject to evils, that he may
exercise the virtue with which he is endued. For virtue is the enduring
of evils. He will avoid pleasures as an evil: he will despise riches,
because they are frail; and if he has them, he will liberally bestow
them, to preserve the wretched: he will not be desirous of honours,
because they are short and transitory; he will do injury to no one; if
he shall suffer, he will not retaliate; and he will not take vengeance
upon one who plunders his property. For he will deem it unlawful to
injure a man; and if there shall be any one who would compel him to
depart from God, he will not refuse tortures nor death. Thus it will
come to pass, that he must necessarily live in poverty and lowliness,
and in insults, or even tortures.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[235:1496](0070222.htm#fr_1495.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p2"></span> Some editions repeat the words
“<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p2.1"></span>summum bonum,” but these words
appear to obstruct the sense.  

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[235:1497](0070222.htm#fr_1496.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p3"></span> \[i.e., <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxx-p3.1"></span>philosophically; our moral constitution
dictating what is just.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXV.—That immortality is the chief good](0070223.md)
