[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070036)  [Next](0070038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-Page_50"></span>  

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chap. vii.—of god, and the religious rites of the foolish; of avarice, and the authority of ancestors.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p2"></span>The foolish, therefore, err in a
twofold manner: first, in preferring the elements, that is, the works of
God, to God <span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>Himself; secondly, in
worshipping the figures of the elements themselves under human form. For
they form the images of the sun and moon after the fashion of men; also
those of fire, and earth, and sea, which they call <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p2.2"></span>Vulcan, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p2.3"></span>Vesta, and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p2.4"></span>Neptune. Nor do they openly sacrifice to
the elements themselves. Men are possessed with so great a fondness for
representations, <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) that those
things which are true are now esteemed of less value: they are
delighted, in fact, with gold, and jewels, and ivory. The beauty and
brilliancy of these things dazzle their eyes, and they think that there
is no religion where these do not shine. And thus, under pretence of
<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>worshipping the gods, avarice and
desire are worshipped. For they believe that the gods love whatever they
themselves desire, whatever it is, on account of which thefts and
robberies and murders daily rage, on account of which wars overthrow
nations and cities throughout the whole world. Therefore they consecrate
their spoils and plunder to the gods, who must undoubtedly be weak, and
destitute of the highest excellence, if they are subject to desires. For
why should we think them celestial if they long for anything from the
earth, or happy if they are in want of anything, or uncorrupted if they
take pleasure in those things in the pursuit of which the desire of men
is not unreservedly condemned? They approach the gods, therefore not so
much on account of religion, which can have no place in badly acquired
and corruptible things, as that they may gaze upon <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) the gold, and view the brilliancy of
polished marble or ivory, that they may survey with unwearied
contemplation garments adorned with precious stones and colours, or cups
studded with glittering jewels. And the more ornamented are the temples,
and the more beautiful the images, so much the greater majesty are they
believed to have: so entirely is their religion confined <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) to that which the desire of men
admires.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p6"></span>These are the religious institutions
handed down to them by their ancestors, which they persist in
maintaining and defending with the greatest obstinacy. Nor do they
consider of what character they are; but they feel assured of their
excellence and truth on this account, because the ancients have handed
them down; and so great is the authority of antiquity, that it is said
to be a crime to inquire into it. And thus it is everywhere believed as
ascertained truth. In short, in <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p6.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7.4"></span>Cotta thus speaks to <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7.5"></span>Lucilius: “You know, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7.6"></span>Balbus, what is the opinion of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7.7"></span>Cotta, what the opinion of the pontiff.
Now let me understand what are your sentiments: for since you are a
philosopher, I ought to receive from you a reason for your religion; but
in the case of our ancestors it is reasonable to believe them, though no
reason is alleged by them.” If you believe, why then do you require a
reason, which may have the effect of causing you not to believe? But if
you require a reason, and think that the subject demands inquiry, then
you do not believe; for you make inquiry with this view, that you may
follow it when you have ascertained it. Behold, reason teaches you that
the religious institutions of the gods are not true: what will you do?
Will you prefer to follow antiquity or reason? And this, indeed, was not
imparted <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) to you by another, but
was found out and chosen by yourself, since you have entirely uprooted
all religious systems. If you prefer reason, you must abandon the
institutions and authority of our ancestors, since nothing is right but
that which reason prescribes. But if piety advises you to follow your
ancestors, then admit that they were foolish, who complied with
religious institutions invented contrary to reason; and that you are
senseless, since you worship that which you have proved to be false. But
since the name of ancestors is so greatly objected to us, let us see, I
pray, who those ancestors were from whose authority it is said to be
impious to depart. <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180)  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p10"></span><span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>Romulus, when he was about to found the
city, called together the shepherds among whom he had grown up; and
since their number appeared inadequate to the founding of the city, he
established an asylum. To this all the most abandoned men flocked
together indiscriminately from the neighbouring places, without any
distinction of condition. Thus he brought together the people from all
these; and he chose into the senate those who were oldest, and called
them Fathers, by whose advice he might direct all things. And concerning
this senate, <span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p10.2"></span>Propertius the
elegiac poet thus speaks:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p10.3"></span> “The trumpet used to call the
> ancient Quirites to an assembly; <span
> id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) those hundred in the field often
> formed the senate. The senate-house, which now is raised aloft and
> shines with the well-robed senate, received the Fathers clothed in
> skins, rustic spirits.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p12"></span>These are the Fathers whose decrees
learned and sagacious men obey with the greatest devotion; and all
posterity must judge that to be true and unchangeable which an hundred
old men clothed in skins established at their will; who, however, <span
id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-Page_51"></span>as has
been mentioned in the first book, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) were enticed by <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p13.1"></span>Pompilius to believe the truth of those
sacred rites which he himself delivered. Is there any reason why their
authority should be so highly esteemed by posterity, since during their
life no one either high or low judged them worthy of affinity? <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_175"></span>[50:176](0070037.htm#fr_175) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p2.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p3"></span> Imaginum.  

<span id="fn_176"></span>[50:177](0070037.htm#fr_176) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p4"></span> Ut oculis hauriant.  

<span id="fn_177"></span>[50:178](0070037.htm#fr_177) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p5"></span> Nihil aliud est.  

<span id="fn_178"></span>[50:179](0070037.htm#fr_178) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7.2"></span>De Nat. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7.3"></span>Deor., iii. 2.  

<span id="fn_179"></span>[50:180](0070037.htm#fr_179) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p7.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p8"></span> Insinuata.  

<span id="fn_180"></span>[50:181](0070037.htm#fr_180) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p9"></span> \[See Clement, vol. ii. cap. 10, p.
197, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_181"></span>[50:182](0070037.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p11"></span> Ad verba.  

<span id="fn_182"></span>[51:183](0070037.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p13"></span> Twenty-second chapter.  

<span id="fn_183"></span>[51:184](0070037.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vii-p14"></span> Relationship by marriage. The
allusion is to the well-known story, that all the neighbouring towns
refused to intermarry with the Romans.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VIII.—Of the use of reason in religion; and of dreams,
auguries, oracles, and similar portents](0070038)
