[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070293)  [Next](0070295) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv.vii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VII.—Of All the Parts of the Body.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p1"></span>God therefore connected and bound
together the parts which strengthen <span
id="fr_1844"></span>[1845](#fn_1844) the body, which we call bones,
being knotted and joined to one another by sinews, which the mind might
make use of, as bands, <span id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845) if it
should wish to hasten forward or to lag behind; and, indeed, without any
labour or effort, but with a very slight inclination, it might moderate
and guide the mass of the whole body. But He covered these with the
inward organs, <span id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846) as was
befitting to each place, that the parts which were solid might be
enclosed and concealed. Also He mixed with the inward organs, veins as
streams divided through the whole body, through which the moisture and
the blood, running in different directions, might bedew all the limbs
with the vital juices; and He fashioned these inward organs after that
manner which was befitting to each kind and situation, and covered them
with skin drawn over them, which He either adorned with beauty only, or
covered with thick hair, or fenced with scales, or adorned with
brilliant feathers. But that is a wonderful contrivance of God, that one
arrangement and one state exhibits innumerable varieties of animals. For
in almost all things which breathe there is the same connection and
arrangement of the limbs. For first of all is the head, and annexed to
this the neck; also the breast adjoined to the neck, and the shoulders
projecting from it, the belly adhering to the breast; also the organs of
generation subjoined to the belly; in the last place, the thighs and
feet. Nor do the limbs only keep their own course and position in all,
but also the parts of the limbs. For in the head itself alone the ears
occupy a fixed position, the eyes a fixed position, likewise the
nostrils, the mouth also, and in the teeth and tongue. And though all
these things are the same in all animals, yet there is an infinite and
manifold diversity of the things formed; because those things of which I
have spoken, being either more drawn out or more contracted, are
comprehended by lineaments differing in various ways. What! is not that
divine, that in so great a multitude of living creatures each animal is
most excellent in its own class and species?—so that if any part should
be taken from one to another, the necessary result would be, that
nothing would be more embarrassed for use, nothing more unshapely to
look upon; as if you should give a prolonged neck to an elephant, or a
short neck to a camel; or if you should attach feet or hair to serpents,
in which the length of the body equally stretched out required nothing
else, except that being marked as to their backs with spots, and
supporting themselves by their smooth scales, with winding courses they
should glide into slippery tracts. But in quadrupeds the same designer
lengthened out the arrangement of the spine, which is drawn out from the
top of the head to a greater length on the outside of the body, and
pointed it into a tail, that the parts of the body which are offensive
might either be covered on account of their unsightliness, or be
protected on account of their tenderness, so that by its motion certain
minute and injurious animals might be driven away from the body; and if
you should take away this member, the animal would be imperfect and
weak. But where there is reason and the hand, that is not so necessary
as a covering of hair. To such an extent are all things most befittingly
arranged, each in its own class, that nothing can be conceived more
unbecoming than a quadruped which is naked, or a man that is covered.  

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p5"></span>But, however, though nakedness itself on
the part of man tends in a wonderful manner to beauty, yet it was not
adapted to his head; for what great deformity there would be in this, is
evident from baldness. Therefore He clothed the head with hair; and
because it was about to be on the top, He added it as an ornament, as it
were, to the highest summit of the building. And this ornament is not
collected into a circle, or rounded into the figure of a cap, lest it
should be unsightly by leaving some parts bare; but it is freely poured
forth in some places, and withdrawn in others, according to the
comeliness of each place. Therefore, the forehead entrenched by a
circumference, and the hair put forth from the temples before the ears,
and the uppermost parts of these being surrounded after the manner of a
crown, and all the back part of the head covered, display an appearance
of wonderful comeliness. Then the nature of the beard contributes in an
incredible degree to distinguish the maturity of bodies, or to the
distinction of sex, or to the beauty of manliness and strength; so that
it appears that the system of the whole work would not have been in
agreement, if anything had been made otherwise than it is.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1844"></span>[288:1845](0070294.htm#fr_1844) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>Solidamenta corporis.  

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[288:1846](0070294.htm#fr_1845) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>Retinaculis.  

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[288:1847](0070294.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>Visceribus.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VIII.—Of the parts of man: the eyes and ears](0070295)
