[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070277)  [Next](0070279.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XV.—Whence Sins Extended to Man.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p1"></span>Here perhaps some one may ask, Whence
sins extended to man, or what perversion distorted the rule of the
divine institution to worse things, so that, though he was born to
justice, he nevertheless performs unjust works. I have already in a
former place explained, that God at the same time set before him good
and evil, and that He loves the good, and hates the evil which is
contrary to this; but that He permitted the evil on this account, that
the good also might shine forth, since, as I have often taught, we
understand that the one cannot exist without the other; in short, that
the world itself is made up of two elements opposing and connected with
one another, of fire and moisture, and that light could not have been
made unless there has also been darkness, since there cannot be a higher
place without a lower, nor a rising without a setting, nor warmth
without cold, nor softness without hardness. Thus also we are composed
of two substances equally opposed to one another—soul and body: the one
of which is assigned to the heaven, because it is slight and not to be
handled; the other to the earth, because it is capable of being laid
hold of: the one is firm <span id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731.md) and
eternal, the other frail and mortal. Therefore good clings to the one,
and evil to the other: light, life, and justice to the one; darkness,
death, and injustice to the other. Hence there arose among men the
corruption of their nature, so that it was necessary that a law should
be established, by which vices might be prohibited, and the duties of
virtue be enjoined. Since, therefore, there are good and evil things in
the affairs of men, the nature of which I have set forth, it must be
that God is moved to both sides, both to favour when He sees that just
things are done, and to anger when He perceives unjust things.  

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p3"></span>But <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p3.1"></span>Epicurus opposes us, and says: “If there is
in God the affection of joy leading Him to favour, and of hatred
influencing Him to anger, He must of necessity have both fear, and
inclination, and desire, and the other affections which belong to human
weakness.” It does not follow that he who is angry must fear, or that he
who feels joy must grieve; in short, they who are liable to anger are
less timid, and they who are of a joyful temperament are less affected
with grief. What need is there to speak of the affections of humanity,
to which our nature yields? Let us weigh the divine necessity; for I am
unwilling to speak of nature, since it is believed that our God was
never born. The affection of fear has a subject-matter in man, but it
has none in God. Man, inasmuch as he is liable to many accidents and
dangers, fears lest any greater violence should arise which may strike,
despoil, lacerate, dash down, and destroy him. But God, who is liable
neither to want, nor injury, nor pain, nor death, can by no means fear,
because there is nothing which can offer violence to Him. Also the
reason and cause of desire is manifest in man. For, inasmuch as he was
made frail and mortal, it was necessary that another and different sex
should be made, by union with which offspring might be produced to
continue the perpetuity of his race. But this desire has no place in
God, because frailty and death are far removed from Him; nor is there
with Him any female in whose union He is able to rejoice; nor does He
stand in need of succession, since He will live for ever. The same
things may be said respecting envy and passion, to which, from sure and
manifest causes, man is liable, but to which God is by no means liable.
But, in truth, favour and anger and pity have their substance <span
id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732.md) in God, and that greatest and
matchless power employs them for the preservation of the world.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[272:1732](0070278.htm#fr_1731.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>Solidum.  

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[272:1733](0070278.htm#fr_1732.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p4.1"></span>Materia. Subjective existence.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVI.—Of God, and his anger and affections](0070279.md)
