[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070019)  [Next](0070021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p0.1"></span>Chap. xiv.—what the sacred history of euhemerus and ennius teaches concerning the gods.

<span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1"></span>Now, since the sacred history differs
in some degree from those things which we have related, let us open
those things which are contained in the true writings, that we may not,
in accusing superstitions, appear to follow and approve of the follies
of the poets. These are the words of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.1"></span>Ennius: “Afterwards <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.2"></span>Saturn married <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.3"></span>Ops. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.4"></span>Titan, who was older <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.5"></span>than Saturn, demands the kingdom for
himself. Upon this their mother <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.6"></span>Vesta, and their sisters <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.7"></span>Ceres and Ops, advise Saturn not to give up
the kingdom to his brother. Then Titan, who was inferior in person to
Saturn, on that account, and because he saw that his mother and sisters
were using their endeavours that Saturn might reign, yielded the kingdom
to him. He therefore made an agreement with Saturn, that if any male
children should be born to him, he would not bring them up. He did so
for this purpose, that the kingdom might return to his own sons. Then,
when a son was first born to Saturn, they slew him. Afterwards twins
were born, <span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.8"></span>Jupiter and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.9"></span>Juno. Upon this they present <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.10"></span>Juno to the sight of Saturn, and secretly
hide <span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.11"></span>Jupiter, and give him to Vesta
to be brought up, concealing him from Saturn. Ops also brings forth
<span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.12"></span>Neptune without the knowledge of
Saturn, and secretly hides him. In the same manner Ops brings forth
twins by a third birth, <span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.13"></span>Pluto and
<span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.14"></span>Glauca. Pluto in Latin is <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.15"></span>Dispater; others call him <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.16"></span>Orcus. Upon this they show to Saturn the
daughter Glauca, and conceal and hide the son Pluto. Then Glauca dies
while yet young.” This is the lineage of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.17"></span>Jupiter and his brothers, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p1.18"></span>as these things are written, and the
relationship is handed down to us after this manner from the sacred
narrative. Also shortly afterwards he introduces these things: “Then
Titan, when he learned that sons were born to Saturn, and secretly
brought up, secretly takes with him his sons, who are called Titans, and
seizes his brother Saturn and Ops, and encloses them within a wall, and
places over them a guard.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2"></span>The truth of this history is taught by
the <span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.1"></span>Erythræan Sibyl, who speaks
almost the same things, with a few discrepancies, which do not affect
the subject-matter itself. Therefore <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.2"></span>Jupiter is freed from the charge of the
greatest wickedness, according to which he is reported to have bound his
father with fetters; for this was the deed of his uncle <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.3"></span>Titan, because he, contrary to his promise
and oath, had brought up male children. The rest of the history is thus
put together. <span id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.4"></span>It is said that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.5"></span>Jupiter, when grown up, having heard that
his father and mother had been surrounded with a guard and imprisoned,
came with a great multitude of Cretans, and conquered <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.6"></span>Titan and his sons in an engagement, and
rescued his parents from imprisonment, restored the kingdom to his
father, and thus returned into Crete. Then, after these things, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.7"></span>they say that an oracle was given to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.8"></span>Saturn, bidding him to take heed lest his
son should expel him from the kingdom; that he, for the sake of
weakening the oracle and avoiding the danger, laid an ambush for <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.9"></span>Jupiter to kill him; that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.10"></span>Jupiter, having learned the plot, claimed
the kingdom for himself afresh, and banished Saturn; and that he, when
he had been tossed over all lands, followed by armed men whom <span
id="iii.ii.i.xv-p2.11"></span>Jupiter had sent to seize or put him to
death, scarcely found a place of concealment in Italy.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XV.—How they who were men obtained the name of
gods](0070021)
