[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070175)  [Next](0070177) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XII.—Of the Soul and the Body, and of Their Union and Separation and Return.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p1"></span>Now let us refute the arguments of
those who maintain the opposite opinions, which <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p1.1"></span>Lucretius has related in his third book.
Since, he says, the soul is born together with the body, it must
necessarily die with the body. But the two cases are not similar. For
the body is solid, and capable of being grasped <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) both by the eyes and the hand; but
the soul is slight, <span id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371) and
eluding the touch and sight. The body is formed from the earth, and made
firm; the soul has in it nothing concrete, nothing of earthly weight, as
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p3.2"></span>Plato maintained. For it could not
have such great force, such great skill, such great rapidity, unless it
derived its origin from heaven. The body, therefore, since it is made up
of a ponderous and corruptible element, and is tangible and visible, is
corrupted and dies; nor is it able to repel violence, because it comes
under the sight and under the touch; but the soul, which by its
slightness avoids all touch, can be dissolved by no attack. Therefore,
although they are joined and connected together from birth, and the one
which is formed of earthly material <span
id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372) is, as it were, the vessel of the
other, which is drawn out from heavenly fineness, when any violence has
separated the two, which separation is called death, then each returns
into its own nature; that which was of earth is resolved into earth;
that which is of heavenly breath remains fixed, and flourishes always,
since the divine spirit is everlasting. In fine, the same <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p4.2"></span>Lucretius, forgetting what he asserted,
and what dogma he defended, wrote these verses: <span
id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p5.2"></span> “That also which before was
> from the earth passes back into the earth, and that which was sent
> from the borders of ether is carried again by the quarters of
> heaven.” <span id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374)  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p7"></span>But this language was not for him to
employ, who contended that souls perished with the bodies; but he was
overcome by the truth, and the true system stole upon him unawares.
Moreover, that very inference which he draws, that the soul suffers
dissolution, that is, that it perishes together with the body, since
they are produced together, is both false, and is capable of being
turned to the opposite direction. For the body does not perish together
with the soul; but when the soul departs it remains entire for many
days, and frequently by medical preparations it remains entire for a
very long time. For if they both perished together, as they are produced
together, the soul would not hastily depart and desert the body, but
both would be dispersed alike at one point of time; and the body also,
while the breath still remained in it, would dissolve and perish as
quickly as the soul departs: yes, truly, the body, being dissolved, the
soul would vanish, as moisture poured forth from a broken vessel. For if
the earthly and frail body after the departure of the soul does not
immediately flow away and waste into earth, from which it has its
origin, therefore the soul, which is not frail, endures to eternity,
since its origin is eternal. He says, since the understanding increases
in boys, and is vigorous in young men, and is lessened in the aged, it
is evident that it is mortal. First, the soul is not the same thing as
the mind; for it is one thing that we live, another that we reflect. For
it is the mind of those who are asleep which is at rest, <span
id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375) not <span id="page_209">p.
209</span> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-Page_209"></span>the soul; and in
those who are mad, the mind is extinguished, the soul remains; and
therefore they are not said to be without a soul, but to be deprived of
their mind. <span id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376) Therefore the
mind, that is, the understanding, is either increased or lessened
according to age. The soul is always in its own condition; and from the
time when it receives the power of breathing, it remains the same even
to the end, until, being sent forth from the confinement of the body, it
flies back to its own abode. In the next place, the soul, although
inspired by God, yet, because it is shut up in a dark abode of earthly
flesh, does not possess knowledge, which belongs to divinity. Therefore
it hears and learns all things, and receives wisdom by learning and
hearing; and old age does not lessen wisdom, but increases it, if the
age of youth has been passed in virtue; and if excessive old age shall
have enfeebled the limbs, it is not the fault of the mind if the sight
has vanished, if the tongue has become benumbed, if the hearing has
grown deaf, but it is the fault of the body. But, it is said, the memory
fails. What wonder, if the mind is oppressed by the ruin of the falling
house, and forgets the past, not about to be divine on any other
condition than if it shall have escaped the prison in which it is
confined?  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p10"></span>But the soul, he says, is also
subject to pain and grief, and loses its senses through drunkenness,
whence it is evidently frail and mortal. On this account, therefore,
virtue and wisdom are necessary, that both grief, which is contracted by
the suffering and the sight of unworthy objects, may be repelled by
fortitude, and that pleasure may be overcome, not only by abstaining
from drinking, but also from other things. For if it be destitute of
virtue, if it be given up to pleasure, and thus rendered effeminate, it
will become subject to death, since virtue, as we have shown, is the
contriver of immortality, as pleasure is of death. But death, as I have
set forth, does not entirely extinguish and destroy, but visits with
eternal torments. For the soul cannot entirely perish, since it received
its origin from the Spirit of God, which is eternal. The soul, he says,
is sensible even of disease of the body, and suffers forgetfulness of
itself; and as it grows ill, so also it is often healed. This is
therefore the reason why virtue is especially to be used, that the
mind—not the soul <span id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377) —may not be
harassed by any pain of the body, or undergo oblivion of itself. And
since this has its seat in a certain part of the body, when any violence
of disease has vitiated that part, it is moved from its place; and as
though shaken, it departs from its station, about to return when a cure
and health shall have remodelled its abode. For, since the soul is
united with the body, if it is destitute of virtue, it grows sick by the
contagion of the body, and from sharing its frailty the weakness extends
to the mind. But when it shall be disunited from the body it will
flourish by itself; nor will it now be assailed by any condition of
frailty, because it has laid aside its frail covering. As the eye, he
says, when torn out and separated from the body, can see nothing, so
also the soul, when separated, can perceive nothing, because it is
itself also a part of the body. This is false, and dissimilar to the
case supposed; for the soul is not a part of the body, but in the body.
As that which is contained in a vessel is not a part of the vessel, and
these things which are in a house are not said to be a part of the
house; so the mind is not a part of the body, because the body is either
the vessel or the receptacle of the soul.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p12"></span>Now, that is a much more empty
argument which says that the soul appears to be mortal because it is not
quickly sent forth from the body, but gradually unfolds itself from all
the members, beginning from the extremity of the feet; as though, if it
were eternal, it would burst forth in a single moment of time, which
takes place in those who die by the sword. But they who are slain by
disease are longer in breathing forth their spirit, so that as the limbs
grow cold the soul is breathed forth. For, since it is contained in the
material of the blood, as light is in the oil, that material being
consumed by the heat of fevers, the extremities of the limbs must grow
cold; since the more slender veins are extended into the extremities of
the body, and the extreme and smaller streams are dried up when the
fountain-spring fails. It must not, however, be supposed that, because
the perception of the body fails, the sensibility of the soul is
extinguished and perishes. For it is not the soul that becomes senseless
when the body fails, but it is the body which becomes senseless when the
soul takes its departure, because it draws all sensibility with it. But
since the soul by its presence gives sensibility to the body, and causes
it to live, it is impossible that it should not live and perceive by
itself, since it is in itself both consciousness and life. For as to
that which says,  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p12.1"></span> “But if our mind were
> immortal, it would not when dying complain so much of its dissolution
> as it would rejoice in passing abroad and quitting its vesture like a
> snake,” <span id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378)  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p14"></span>I never saw any one who complained
of his dissolution in death; but he perhaps had seen some Epicurean
philosophizing even in death, <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-Page_210"></span>and with his latest breath
discoursing about his dissolution.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p15"></span>How can it be known whether he
feels that he is in a state of dissolution, or that he is being set free
from the body, when his tongue grows dumb at his departure? For as long
as he perceives and has the power of speech, he is not yet dissolved;
when he has suffered dissolution, he is now unable either to perceive or
to speak, so that either he is not yet able to complain of his
dissolution, or he is no longer able. But, it is said, he understands
before he undergoes dissolution, that he must undergo it. Why should I
mention that we see many of the dying, not complaining that they are
undergoing dissolution, but testifying that they are passing out, and
setting forth on their journey and walking? and they signify this by
gesture, or if they still are able, they express it also by their voice.
From which it is evident that it is not a dissolution which takes place,
but a separation; and this shows that the soul continues to exist. Other
arguments of the Epicurean system are opposed to <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p15.1"></span>Pythagoras, who contends that souls
migrate from bodies worn out with old age and death, and gain
admission <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379) into those which
are new and recently born; and that the same souls are always reproduced
at one time in a man, at another time in a sheep, at another in a wild
beast, at another in a bird; and that they are immortal on this account,
because they often change their abodes, consisting of various and
dissimilar bodies. And this opinion of a senseless man, since it is
ridiculous and more worthy of a stage-player than of a school of
philosophy, ought not even to have been refuted seriously; for he who
does this appears to be afraid lest any one should believe it. Therefore
we must pass by those things which have been discussed in behalf of
falsehood against falsehood; it is sufficient to have refuted those
things which are against the truth.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[208:1371](0070176.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p2.1"></span>Comprehensibile.  

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[208:1372](0070176.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p3.1"></span>Tenuis.  

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[208:1373](0070176.htm#fr_1372) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p4.1"></span>De terrenâ concretione.  

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[208:1374](0070176.htm#fr_1373) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p5.1"></span>De Rer. Nat., ii. 999.  

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[208:1375](0070176.htm#fr_1374) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p6"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p6.1"></span>Ex ætheris oris. Concerning <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p6.2"></span>αιθη</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p6.3"></span>́</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p6.4"></span>ρ</span> consult
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p6.5"></span>Lewis, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p6.6"></span>Plato, etc., pp. 127–129.\]  

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[208:1376](0070176.htm#fr_1375) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p8.1"></span>Sopitur.  

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[209:1377](0070176.htm#fr_1376) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p9.1"></span>Non exanimes, sed dementes vocantur.  

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[209:1378](0070176.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11"></span> \[The original must be compared:
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11.1"></span>Ne ullo corporis dolore frangatur
et oblivionem sui non anima, sed mens patiatur. For <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11.2"></span>νου</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11.3"></span>̑</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11.4"></span>ς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11.5"></span>ψυχη</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11.6"></span>́</span>, see <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11.7"></span>Lewis, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p11.8"></span>ut supra, pp. 219, etc.\]  

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[209:1379](0070176.htm#fr_1378) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p13.1"></span>Lucret., iii. 611.  

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[210:1380](0070176.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xii-p16.1"></span>Se insinuare.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIII.—Of the soul, and the testimonies concerning its
eternity](0070177)
