[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070012)  [Next](0070014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p0.1"></span>chap. VII.—Concerning the testimonies of apollo and the gods.

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p1.1"></span>Apollo, indeed, whom they think divine
above all others, and especially prophetic, giving responses at
Colophon,—I suppose because, induced by the pleasantness of Asia, he had
removed from Delphi,—to some one who asked who He was, or what God was
at all, replied in twenty-one verses, of which this is the beginning:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p1.2"></span> “Self-produced, untaught,
> without a mother, unshaken,  
> A name not even to be comprised in word, dwelling in fire,  
> This is God; and we His messengers are a slight portion of God.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p2"></span>Can any one suspect that this is
spoken of <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p2.1"></span>Jupiter, who had both a
mother and a name? Why should I say that <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p2.2"></span>Mercury, that thrice greatest, of whom I
have made mention above, not only speaks of God as “without a mother,”
as <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p2.3"></span>Apollo does, but also as
“without a father,” because He has no origin from any other source but
Himself? For He cannot be produced from any one, who Himself produced
all things. I have, as I think, sufficiently taught by arguments, and
confirmed by witnesses, that which is sufficiently plain by itself, that
there is one only King of the universe, one Father, one God.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p3"></span>But perchance some one may ask of us
the same question which <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p3.1"></span>Hortensius
asks in <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p3.2"></span>Cicero: If God is one
only, <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) what solitude can be happy?
As though we, in asserting that He is one, say that He is desolate and
solitary. Undoubtedly He has ministers, whom we call messengers. And
that is true, which I have before related, that <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p4.2"></span>Seneca said in his <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p4.3"></span>Exhortations that God produced ministers
of His kingdom. But these are neither gods, nor do they wish to be
called gods or to be worshipped, inasmuch as they do nothing but execute
the command and will of God. Nor, however, are they gods who are
worshipped in common, whose number is small and fixed. But if the
worshippers of the gods think that they worship those beings whom we
call the ministers of the Supreme God, there is no reason why they
should envy us who say that there is one God, and deny that there are
many. If a multitude <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p4.4"></span>of gods
delights them, we do not speak of twelve, or three hundred and
sixty-five as Orpheus did; but we convict them of innumerable errors on
the other side, in thinking that they are so few. Let them know,
however, by what name they ought to be called, lest they do injury to
the true God, whose name they set forth, while they assign it to more
than one. Let them believe their own <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p4.5"></span>Apollo, who in that same response took
away from the other gods their name, as he took away the dominion from
<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p4.6"></span>Jupiter. For the third verse shows
that the ministers of God ought not to be called gods, but angels. He
spoke falsely respecting himself, indeed; for though he was of the
number of demons, he reckoned himself among the angels of God, and then
in other responses he confessed himself a demon. For when he was asked
how he wished to be supplicated, he thus answered:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p4.7"></span> “O all-wise, all-learned, versed
> in many pursuits, hear, O demon.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p5"></span>And so, again, when at the entreaty
of some one he uttered an imprecation against the <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p5.1"></span>Sminthian Apollo, he began with this
verse:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p5.2"></span> “O harmony of the world, bearing
> light, all-wise demon.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p6"></span>What therefore remains, except that
by his own confession he is subject to the scourge of the true God and
to everlasting punishment? For in another response he also said:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p6.1"></span> “The demons who go about the
> earth and about the sea  
> Without weariness, are subdued beneath the scourge of God.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p7"></span>We speak on the subject of both in
the second book. In the meantime it is enough for us, that while he
wishes to honour and place himself in heaven, he has confessed, as the
nature of the matter is, in what manner they are to be named who always
stand beside God.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p8"></span>Therefore let men withdraw themselves
from errors; and laying aside corrupt superstitions, let them
acknowledge their Father and Lord, whose excellence cannot be estimated,
nor His greatness perceived, nor His beginning comprehended. When the
earnest attention of the human mind and its acute sagacity and memory
has reached Him, all ways being, as it were, summed up and
exhausted, <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) it stops, it is at a
loss, it fails; nor is there anything beyond to which it can proceed.
But because that which exists must of necessity have had a beginning, it
follows that since there was nothing before Him, He was produced from
Himself before all things. Therefore He is called by <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p9.1"></span>Apollo “self-produced,” by the <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p9.2"></span>Sibyl “self-created,” “uncreated,” and
“unmade.” And <span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p9.3"></span>Seneca, an acute man,
saw and expressed this in his <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p9.4"></span>Exhortations. “We,” he said, “are
dependent upon another.” Therefore we look to some one to whom we owe
that which is most excellent in us. Another brought us into being,
another formed us; but God of His own power made Himself.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[17:42](0070013.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p4"></span> \[[1 John iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008)<span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p4.1"></span>. The Divine Triad “is Love.”\]  

<span id="fn_42"></span>[17:43](0070013.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.ii.i.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.viii-p9"></span> Subductis et consummatis.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VIII.—That God is without a body, nor does he need
difference of sex for procreation](0070014)
