[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070080)  [Next](0070082.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxx"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXX.—The Conclusion of the Things Before Spoken; And by What Means We Must Pass from the Vanity of the Philosophers to True Wisdom, and the Knowledge of the True God, in Which Alone are Virtue and Happiness.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p1"></span>I have taught, as far as my humble
talents permitted, that the philosophers held a course widely deviating
from the truth. I perceive, however, how many things I have omitted,
because it was not my province to enter into a disputation against
philosophers. But it was necessary for me to make a digression to this
subject, that I might show that so many and great intellects have
expended themselves in vain on false subjects, lest any one by chance
being shut out by corrupt superstitions, should wish to betake himself
to them as though about to find some certainty. Therefore the only hope,
the only safety for man, is placed in this doctrine, which we defend.
All the wisdom of man consists in this alone, the knowledge and worship
of God: this is our tenet, this our opinion. Therefore with all the
power of my voice I testify, I proclaim, I declare: Here, here is that
which all philosophers have sought throughout their whole life; and yet,
they have not been able to investigate, to grasp, and to attain to it,
because they either retained a religion which was corrupt, or took it
away altogether. Let them therefore all depart, who do not instruct
human life, but throw it into confusion. For what do they teach? or whom
do they instruct, who have not yet instructed themselves? whom are the
sick able to heal, whom can the blind guide? Let us all, therefore, who
have any regard for wisdom, betake ourselves to this subject. Or shall
we wait until <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Socrates knows
something? or <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p1.2"></span>Anaxagoras finds
light in the darkness? or until <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p1.3"></span>Democritus draws forth truth from the
well? or <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p1.4"></span>Empedocles extends the
paths of his soul? or until <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p1.5"></span>Arcesilas and <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p1.6"></span>Carneades see, and feel, and perceive?  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p2"></span>Lo, a voice from heaven teaching the
truth, and displaying to us a light brighter than the sun itself. <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493.md) Why are we unjust to ourselves, and
delay to take up wisdom, which learned men, though they wasted their
lives in its pursuit, were never able to discover. Let him who wishes to
be wise and happy hear the voice of God, learn righteousness, understand
the mystery of his birth, despise human affairs, embrace divine things,
that he may gain that chief good to which he was born. Having overthrown
all false religions, and having refuted all the arguments, as many as it
was customary or possible to bring forward in their defence; then,
having proved the systems of philosophy to be false, we must now come to
true religion and wisdom, since, as I shall teach, they are both
connected together; that we may maintain it either by arguments, or by
examples, or by competent witnesses, and may show that the folly with
which those worshippers of gods do not cease to upbraid us, has no
existence with us, but lies altogether with them. And although, in the
former books, when I was contending against false religions, and in
this, when I was overthrowing false wisdom, I showed where the truth is,
yet the next book will more plainly indicate what is true religion and
what true wisdom.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_493"></span>[100:494](0070081.htm#fr_493.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxx-p3"></span> \[A noble utterance from Christian
philosophy, now first gaining the ear and heart of humanity.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV. Of True Wisdom and Religion](0070082.md)
