[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070077)  [Next](0070079.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXVII.—How Little the Precepts of Philosophers Contribute to True Wisdom, Which You Will Find in Religion Only.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p1"></span>What, then? Do they enjoin nothing
similar? Yes, indeed, many things; and they frequently approach the
truth. But those precepts have no weight, because they are human, and
are without a greater, that is, that divine authority. No one therefore
believes them, because the hearer imagines himself to be a man, just as
he is, who enjoins them. Moreover, there is no certainty with them,
nothing which proceeds from knowledge. But since all things are done by
conjecture, and many differing and various things are brought forward,
it is the part of a most foolish man to be willing to obey their
precepts, since it is doubted whether they are true or false; and
therefore no one obeys them, because no one wishes to labour for an
uncertainty. The Stoics say that it is virtue which can alone produce a
happy life. Nothing can be said with greater truth. But what if he shall
be tormented, or afflicted with pain? Will it be possible for any one to
be happy in the hands of the executioners? But truly pain inflicted upon
the body is the material of virtue; therefore he is not wretched even in
tortures. <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Epicurus speaks much
more strongly. The wise man, he says, is always happy; and even when
shut up in the bull of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p1.2"></span>Phalaris
he will utter this speech: “It is pleasant, and I do not care for it.”
Who would not laugh at him? Especially, because a man who is devoted to
pleasure took upon himself the character of a man of fortitude, and that
to an immoderate degree; for it is impossible that any one should esteem
tortures of the body as pleasures, since it is sufficient for
discharging the office of virtue that one sustains and endures them.
What do you, Stoics, say? What do <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-Page_97"></span>you, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p1.3"></span>Epicurus? The wise man is happy even
when be is tortured. If it is on account of the glory of his endurance,
he will not enjoy it, for perchance he will die under the tortures. If
it is on account of the recollection of the deed, either he will not
perceive it if souls shall perish, or, if he shall perceive it, he will
gain nothing from it.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>What other advantage is there then
in virtue? what happiness of life? Is it that a man may die with
equanimity? You present to me the advantage of a single hour, or perhaps
moment, for the sake of which it may not be expedient to be worn out by
miseries and labours throughout the whole of life. But how much time
does death occupy? on the arrival of which it now makes no difference
whether you shall have undergone it with equanimity or not. Thus it
happens that nothing is sought from virtue but glory. But this is either
superfluous and short-lived, or it will not follow from the depraved
judgments of men. Therefore there is no fruit from virtue where virtue
is subject to death and decay. Therefore they who said these things saw
a certain shadow <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479.md) of virtue; they
did not see virtue itself. For they had their eyes fixed on the earth,
nor did they raise their countenances on high that they might behold her
 

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p3.1"></span> “Who showed herself from the
> quarters of heaven.” <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p5"></span>This is the reason why no one
obeys their precepts; inasmuch as they either train men to vices, if
they defend pleasure; or if they uphold virtue, they neither threaten
sin with any punishment, except that of disgrace only, nor do they
promise any reward to virtue, except that of honour and praise only,
since they say that virtue is to be sought for its own sake, and not on
account of any other object. The wise man therefore is happy under
tortures; but when he suffers torture on account of his faith, on
account of justice, or on account of God, that endurance of pain will
render him most happy. For it is God alone who can honour virtue, the
reward of which is immortality alone. And they who do not seek this, nor
possess religion, with which eternal life is connected, assuredly do not
know the power of virtue, the reward of which they are ignorant; nor
look towards heaven, as they themselves imagine that they do, when they
inquire into subjects which do not admit of investigation, since there
is no other cause for looking towards heaven, unless it be either to
undertake religion, or to believe that one’s soul is immortal. For if
any one understands that God is to be worshipped, or has the hope of
immortality set before him, his mind <span
id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481.md) is in heaven; and although he may not
behold it with his eyes, yet he does behold it with the eye of his soul.
But they who do not take up religion are of the earth, for religion is
from heaven; and they who think that the soul perishes together with the
body, equally look down towards the earth: for beyond the body, which is
earth, they see nothing further, which is immortal. It is therefore of
no profit that man is so made, that with upright body he looks towards
heaven, unless with mind raised aloft he discerns God, and his thoughts
are altogether engaged upon the hope of everlasting life.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_479"></span>[97:480](0070078.htm#fr_479.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p3"></span> A shadow; outline, or
resemblance.  

<span id="fn_480"></span>[97:481](0070078.htm#fr_480.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>Lucretius, i. 65.  

<span id="fn_481"></span>[97:482](0070078.htm#fr_481.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p6"></span> Thus St. Paul, [Col. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>, exhorts us to set our affections on
things above, not on things of the earth.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXVIII.—Of true religion and of nature. whether fortune is
a goddess, and of philosophy](0070079.md)
