[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070315)  [Next](0070317.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.vii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VII.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p1"></span>While <span
id="iii.v.vii-p1.1"></span>Diocletian, that author of ill, and deviser
of misery, was ruining all things, he could not withhold his insults,
not even against God. This man, by avarice partly, and partly by timid
counsels, overturned the Roman empire. For he made choice of three
persons to share the government with him; and thus, the empire having
been quartered, armies were multiplied, and each of the four princes
strove to maintain a much more considerable military force than any sole
emperor had done in times past. <span
id="fr_1967"></span>[1968](#fn_1967.md) There began to be fewer men who
paid taxes than there were who received wages; so that the means of the
husbandmen being exhausted by enormous impositions, the farms were
abandoned, cultivated grounds became woodland, and universal dismay
prevailed. Besides, the provinces were divided into minute portions, and
many presidents and a multitude of inferior officers lay heavy on each
territory, and almost on each city. There were also many stewards of
different degrees, and deputies of presidents. Very few civil causes
came before them: but there were condemnations daily, and forfeitures
frequently inflicted; taxes on numberless commodities, and those not
only often repeated, but perpetual, and, in exacting them, intolerable
wrongs.  

<span id="iii.v.vii-p3"></span>Whatever was laid on for the maintenance
of the soldiery might have been endured; but <span
id="iii.v.vii-p3.1"></span>Diocletian, through his insatiable avarice,
would never allow the sums of money in his treasury to be diminished: he
was constantly heaping together extraordinary aids and free gifts, that
his original hoards might remain untouched and inviolable. He also, when
by various extortions he had made all things exceedingly dear, attempted
by an ordinance to limit their prices. Then much blood was shed for the
veriest trifles; men were afraid to expose aught to sale, and the
scarcity became more excessive and grievous than ever, until, in the
end, the ordinance, after having proved destructive to multitudes, was
from mere necessity abrogated. To this there were added a certain
endless passion for building, and on that account, endless exactions
from the provinces for furnishing wages to labourers and artificers, and
supplying carriages and whatever else was requisite to the works which
he projected. <span id="iii.v.vii-p3.2"></span>Here public halls, <span
id="iii.v.vii-p3.3"></span>there a circus, <span
id="iii.v.vii-p3.4"></span>here a mint, and <span
id="iii.v.vii-p3.5"></span>there a workhouse for making implements of
war; in one place a habitation for his empress, and in another for his
daughter. Presently great part of the city was quitted, and all men
removed with their wives and children, as from a town taken by enemies;
and when those buildings were completed, to the destruction of whole
provinces, he said, “They are not right, let them be done on another
plan.” Then they were to be pulled down, or altered, to undergo perhaps
a future demolition. By such folly was he continually endeavouring to
equal Nicomedia with the city Rome in magnificence.  

<span id="iii.v.vii-p4"></span>I omit mentioning how many perished on
account of their possessions or wealth; for such evils were exceedingly
frequent, and through their frequency appeared almost lawful. But this
was peculiar to him, that whenever he saw a field remarkably well
cultivated, or a house of uncommon elegance, a false accusation and a
capital punishment were straightway prepared against the proprietor; so
that it seemed as if <span id="iii.v.vii-p4.1"></span>Diocletian could
not be guilty of rapine without also shedding blood.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[303:1968](0070316.htm#fr_1967.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p2"></span> \[See p. 12, note 1, <span
id="iii.v.vii-p2.2"></span>supra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VIII](0070317.md)
