[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070251)  [Next](0070253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lx"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXIV.—The Passions are to Be Subdued, and We Must Abstain from Forbidden Things.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p1"></span>Let virtue alone please us, whose
reward is immortal when it has conquered pleasure. But when the passions
have been overcome and pleasures subdued labour in suppressing other
things is easy to him who is a follower of God and of truth: he will
never revile, who shall hope for a blessing from God; he will not commit
perjury, lest he should mock God; but he will not even swear, lest at
any time, either by necessity or through habit, he should fall into
perjury. He will speak nothing deceitfully, nothing with dissimulation;
he will not refuse that which he has promised, nor will he promise that
which he is unable to perform; he will envy no one, since he is content
with himself and with his own possessions; nor will he take away from,
or wish ill to another, upon whom, perhaps, the benefits of God are more
plenteously <span id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586) bestowed. He will
not steal, nor will he covet anything at all belonging to another. He
will not give his money to usury, for that is to seek after gain from
the evils of others; nor, however, will he refuse to lend, if necessity
shall compel any one to borrow. He must not be harsh towards a son, nor
towards a slave: he must remember that he himself has a Father and a
Master. He will so act towards these as he will wish that others should
act towards him. He will not receive excessive gifts from those who have
less resources than himself; for it is not just that the estates of the
wealthy should be increased by the losses of the wretched.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p3"></span>It is an old precept not to kill,
which ought not to be taken in this light, as though we are commanded to
abstain only from homicide, which is punished even by public laws. But
by the intervention of this command, it will not be permitted us to
apply peril of death by word, nor to put to death or expose an infant,
nor to condemn one’s self by a voluntary death. We are likewise
commanded not to commit adultery; but by this precept we are not only
prohibited from polluting the marriage of another, which is condemned
even by the common law of nations, but even to abstain from those who
prostitute their persons. For the law of God is above all laws; it
forbids even those things which are esteemed lawful, that it may fulfil
justice. It is a part of the same law not to utter false witness, and
this also itself has a wider meaning. For if false witness by falsehood
is injurious to him against whom it is spoken, and deceives him in whose
presence it is spoken, we must therefore never speak falsely, because
falsehood always deceives or injures. Therefore he is not a just man
who, even without inflicting injury, speaks in idle discourse. Nor
indeed is it lawful for him to flatter, for flattery is pernicious and
deceitful; but he will everywhere guard the truth. And although this may
for the present be unpleasant, nevertheless, when its advantage and
usefulness shall appear, it will not produce hatred, as the poet
says, <span id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587) but gratitude. <span
id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span id="iii.ii.viii.lx-Page_250"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[249:1587](0070252.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p2.1"></span>Proniora sunt.  

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[249:1588](0070252.htm#fr_1587) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p4.1"></span>Terent., <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lx-p4.2"></span>And., i. 1.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXV.—Precepts about those things which are commanded, and
of pity](0070253)
