[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070120)  [Next](0070122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VIII.—Of Justice Known to All, But Not Embraced; Of the True Temple of God, and of His Worship, that All Vices May Be Subdued.

<span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p1"></span>They, therefore, who think that no
one is just, have justice before their eyes, but are unwilling to
discern it. For what reason is there why they should describe it either
in poems or in all their discourse, complaining of its absence, when it
is very easy for them to be good if they wish? Why do you depict to
yourselves justice as worthless, <span id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978)
and wish that she may fall from heaven, as it were, represented in some
image? Behold, she is in your sight; receive her, if you are able, and
place her in the abode of your breast; and do not imagine that this is
difficult, or unsuited to the times. Be just and good, and the justice
which you seek will follow you of her own accord. Lay aside every evil
thought from your hearts, and that golden age will at once return to
you, which you cannot attain to by any other means than by beginning to
worship the true God. But you long for justice on the earth, while the
worship of false gods continues, which cannot possibly come to pass. But
it was not possible even at that time when you imagine, because those
deities whom you impiously worship were not yet produced, and the
worship of the one God must have prevailed throughout the earth; of that
God, I say, who hates wickedness and requires goodness; whose temple is
not stones or clay, but man himself, who bears the image of God. And
this temple is adorned not with corruptible gifts of gold and jewels,
but with the lasting offices of virtues. Learn, therefore, if any
intelligence is left to you, that men are wicked and unjust because gods
are worshipped; and that all evils daily increase to the affairs of men
on this account, because God the Maker and Governor of this world has
been neglected; because, contrary to that which is right, impious
superstitions have been taken up; and lastly, because you do not permit
God to be worshipped even by a few.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p3"></span>But if God only were worshipped,
there would not be dissensions and wars, since men would know that they
are the sons of one God; and, therefore, among those who were connected
by the sacred and inviolable bond of divine relationship, there would be
no plottings, inasmuch as they would know what kind of punishments God
prepared for the destroyers of souls, who sees through secret crimes,
and even the very thoughts themselves. There would be no frauds or
plunderings if they had learned, through the instruction of God, to be
content with that which was their own, though little, so that they might
prefer solid and eternal things to those which are frail and perishable.
There would be no adulteries, and debaucheries, and prostitution of
women, if it were known to all, that whatever is sought beyond the
desire of procreation is condemned by God. <span
id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979) Nor would necessity compel a woman to
dishonour her modesty, to seek for herself a most disgraceful mode of
sustenance; since the males also would restrain their lust, and the
pious and religious contributions of the rich would succour the
destitute. There would not, therefore, as I have said, be these evils on
the earth, if there were by common consent a general observance <span
id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980) of the law of God, if those things
were done by all which our people alone perform. How happy and how
golden would be the condition of human affairs, if throughout the world
gentleness, and piety, and peace, and innocence, and equity, and
temperance, and faith, took up their abode! In short, there would be no
need of so many and varying laws to rule men, since the law of God alone
would be sufficient for perfect innocence; nor would there be any need
of prisons, or the swords of rulers, or the terror of punishments, since
the wholesomeness of the divine precepts infused into the breasts of men
would of itself instruct them to works of justice. But now men are
wicked through ignorance of what is right and good. And this, indeed,
<span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p5.3"></span>Cicero saw; for, discoursing on the
subject of the laws, <span id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981) he says:
“As the world, with all its parts agreeing with one another, coheres and
depends upon one and the same nature, so all men, being naturally
confused among themselves, disagree through depravity; nor do they
understand that they are related by blood, and that they are all subject
to one and the same guardianship: for if this were kept in mind,
assuredly men would live the life of gods.” Therefore the unjust and
impious worship of the gods has introduced all the evils by which
mankind in turn destroy one another. For they could not retain their
piety, who, as prodigal and rebellious children, had renounced the
authority of God, the common parent of all.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_978"></span>[143:979](0070121.htm#fr_978) <span
id="iii.ii.v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.viii-p2.1"></span>Inanem.  

<span id="fn_979"></span>[143:980](0070121.htm#fr_979) <span
id="iii.ii.v.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p4"></span> \[This is not consistent with the
Church’s allowance of matrimony to women past child-bearing, nor with
the language of the Apostle, [1 Cor. vii.
2-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002)<span
id="iii.ii.v.viii-p4.1"></span>. See my note (2), vol. ii. p. 262.\]  

<span id="fn_980"></span>[143:981](0070121.htm#fr_980) <span
id="iii.ii.v.viii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.viii-p5.1"></span>Si ab omnibus in legem Dei conjuraretur.
The word “<span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p5.2"></span>conjuro,” contrary to its
general use, is here employed in a good sense.  

<span id="fn_981"></span>[143:982](0070121.htm#fr_981) <span
id="iii.ii.v.viii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.viii-p6"></span> \[See ed. <span
id="iii.ii.v.viii-p6.1"></span>Klotz, vol. ii. p. 403, Lips., 1869.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IX.—Of the crimes of the wicked, and the torture inflicted
on the Christians](0070122)
