[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070058)  [Next](0070060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VIII.—Of the Chief Good, and the Pleasures of the Soul and Body, and of Virtue.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p1"></span>What then remains, but that we
leave raving and obstinate wranglers, and come to the judge, who is in
truth the giver of simple and calm wisdom? which is able not only to
mould us, and lead us into the way, but also to pass an opinion on the
controversies of those men. This teaches us what is the true and highest
good of man; but before I begin to speak on this subject, all those
opinions must be refuted, that it may appear that no one of those <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>philosophers was wise. Since the
inquiry is respecting the duty of man, the chief good of the chief
animal ought to be placed in that which it cannot have in common with
the other animals. But as teeth are the peculiar property of wild
beasts, horns of cattle, and wings of birds, so something peculiar to
himself ought to be attributed to man, without which he would lose the
fixed <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) order of his condition.
For that which is given to all for the purpose of life or generation, is
indeed a natural good; but still it is not the greatest, unless it be
peculiar to each class. Therefore he was not a wise man who believed
that pleasure of the mind is the chief good, since that, whether it be
freedom from anxiety or joy, is common to all. I do not consider <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p2.2"></span>Aristippus even worthy of an answer;
for since he is always rushing into pleasures of the body, and is only
the slave of sensual indulgences, no one can regard him as a man: for he
lived in such a manner that there was no difference between him and a
brute, except this only, that he had the faculty of speech. But if the
power of speaking were given to the ass, or the dog, or swine, and you
were to inquire from these why they so furiously pursue the females,
that they can scarcely be separated from them, and even neglect their
food and I drink; why they either drive away other males, <span
id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-Page_75"></span>or
do not abstain from the pursuit even when vanquished, but often, when
bruised by stronger animals, they are more determined in their pursuit;
why they dread neither rain nor cold; why they undertake labour, and do
not shrink from danger;—what other answer will they give, but that the
chief good is bodily pleasure?—that they eagerly seek it, in order that
they may be affected with the most agreeable sensations; and that these
are of so much importance, that, for the sake of attaining them, they
imagine that no labour, nor wounds, nor death itself, ought to be
refused by them? Shall we then seek precepts of living from these men,
who have no other feelings than those of the irrational creatures?  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p3"></span>The Cyrenaics say that virtue
itself is to be praised on this account, because it is productive of
pleasure. True, says the filthy dog, or the swine wallowing in the
mire. <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) For it is on this account
that I contend with my adversary with the utmost exertion of strength,
that my valour may procure for me pleasure; of which I must necessarily
be deprived if I shall come off vanquished. Shall we therefore learn
wisdom from these men, who differ from cattle and the brutes, not in
feeling, but in language? To regard the absence of pain as the chief
good, is not indeed the part of Peripatetic and Stoic, but of clinical
philosophers. For who would not imagine that the discussion was carried
on by those who were ill, and under the influence of some pain? What is
so ridiculous, as to esteem that the chief good which the physician is
able to give? We must therefore feel pain in order that we may enjoy
good; and that, too, severely and frequently, that afterwards the
absence of pain may be attended with greater pleasure. He is therefore
most wretched who has never felt pain, because he is without that which
is good; whereas we used to regard him as most happy, because he was
without evil. He was not far distant from this folly, who said that the
entire absence of pain was the chief good. For, besides the fact that
every animal avoids pain, who can bestow upon himself that good, towards
the obtaining of which we can do no more than wish? But the chief good
cannot make any one happy, unless it shall be always in his power; and
it is not virtue, nor learning, nor labour, which affords this to man,
but nature herself bestows it upon all living creatures. They who joined
pleasure with virtuous principle, wished to avoid this common blending
together of all, but they made a contradictory kind of good; since he
who is abandoned to pleasure must of necessity be destitute of virtuous
principle, and he who aims at principle must be destitute of pleasure.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p5"></span>The <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p5.1"></span>chief good of the Peripatetics may
possibly appear excessive, various, and—excepting those goods which
belong to the mind, and what they are is a great subject of
dispute—common to man with the beasts. For goods belonging to the
body—that is, safety, freedom from pain, health—are no less necessary
for dumb creatures than for man; and I know not if they are not more
necessary for them, because man can be relieved by remedies and
services, the dumb animals cannot. The same is true of those which they
call the goods of fortune; for as man has need of resources for the
support of life, so have they <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388)
need of prey and pasture. Thus, by introducing a good which is not
within the power of man, they made man altogether subject to the power
of another. Let us also hear <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p6.1"></span>Zeno, for he at times dreams of virtue.
The chief good, he says, is to live in accordance with nature. Therefore
we must live after the manner of the brutes. For in these are found all
the things which ought to be absent from man: they are eager for
pleasures, they fear, they deceive, they lie in wait, they kill; and
that which is especially to the point, they have no knowledge of God.
Why, therefore, does he teach me to live according to nature, which is
of itself prone to a worse course, and under the influence of some more
soothing blandishments plunges headlong into vices? Or if he says that
the nature of brutes is different from the nature of man, because man is
born to virtue, he says something to the purpose; but, however, it will
not be a definition of the chief good, because there is no animal which
does not live in accordance with its nature.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p7"></span>He who made knowledge the chief
good, gave something peculiar to man; but men desire knowledge for the
sake of something else, and not for its own sake. For who is contented
with knowing, without seeking some advantage from his knowledge? The
arts are learned for the purpose of being put into exercise; but they
are exercised either for the support of life, or pleasure, or for glory.
That, therefore, is not the chief good which is not sought for on its
own account. What difference, therefore, does it make, whether we
consider knowledge to be the chief good, or those very things which
knowledge produces from itself, that is, means of subsistence, glory,
pleasure? And these things are not peculiar to man, and therefore they
are not the chief goods; for the desire of pleasure and of food does not
exist in man alone, but also in the brutes. How is it with regard to the
desire of glory? Is it not discovered in horses, since they exult in
victory, and are grieved when vanquished? “So great is their love of
praises, so great is their eagerness for victory.” <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) Nor without <span id="page_76">p.
76</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-Page_76"></span>reason does that
most excellent poet say that we must try “what grief they feel when
overcome, and how they rejoice in victory.” But if those things which
knowledge produces are common to man with other animals, it follows that
knowledge is not the chief good. Moreover, it is no slight fault of this
definition that bare knowledge is set forth. For all will begin to
appear happy who shall have the knowledge of any art, even those who
shall know mischievous subjects; so that he who shall have learned to
mix poisons, is as happy as he who has learned to apply remedies. I ask,
therefore, to what subject knowledge is to be referred. If to the causes
of natural things, what happiness will be proposed to me, if I shall
know the sources of the Nile, or the vain dreams of the natural
philosophers respecting the heaven? Why should I mention that on these
subjects there is no knowledge, but mere conjecture, which varies
according to the abilities of men? It only remains that the knowledge of
good and evil things is the chief good. Why, then, did he call knowledge
the chief good more than wisdom, when both words have the same
signification and meaning? But no one has yet said that the chief good
is wisdom, though this might more properly have been said. For knowledge
is insufficient for the undertaking of that which is good and avoiding
that which is evil, unless virtue also is added. For many of the
philosophers, though they discussed the nature of good and evil things,
yet from the compulsion of nature lived in a manner different from their
discourse, because they were without virtue. But virtue united with
knowledge is wisdom.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p9"></span>It remains that we refute those
also who judged virtue itself to be the chief good, and <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p9.1"></span>Marcus Tullius was also of this
opinion; and in this they were very inconsiderate. <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) For virtue itself is not the chief
good, but it is the contriver and mother of the chief good; for this
cannot be attained without virtue. Each point is easily understood. For
I ask whether they imagine that it is easy to arrive at that
distinguished good, or that it is reached only with difficulty and
labour? Let them apply their ingenuity, and defend error. If it is
easily attained to, and without labour, it cannot be the chief good. For
why should we torment ourselves, why wear ourselves out with striving
day and night, seeing that the object of our pursuit is so close at
hand, that any one who wishes may grasp it without any effort of the
mind? But if we do not attain even to a common and moderate good except
by labour, since good things are by their nature arduous and
difficult, <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) whereas evil things
have a downward tendency, it follows that the greatest labour is
necessary for the attainment of the greatest good. And if this is most
true, then there is need of another virtue, that we may arrive at that
virtue which is called the chief good; but this is incongruous and
absurd, that virtue should arrive at itself by means of itself. If no
good can be reached unless by labour, it is evident that it is virtue by
which it is reached, since the force and office of virtue consist in the
undertaking and carrying through of labours. Therefore the chief good
cannot be that by which it is necessary to arrive at another. But they,
since they were ignorant of the effects and tendency of virtue, and
could discover nothing more honourable, stopped at the very name of
virtue, and said that it ought to be sought, though no advantage was
proposed from it; and thus they fixed for themselves a good which itself
stood in need of a good. From these <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p11.1"></span>Aristotle was not far removed, who
thought that virtue together with honour was the chief good; as though
it were possible for any virtue to exist unless it were honourable, and
as though it would not cease to be virtue if it had any measure of
disgrace. But he saw that it might happen that a bad opinion is
entertained respecting virtue by a depraved judgment, and therefore he
thought that deference should be paid to what in the estimation of men
constitutes a departure from what is right and good, because it is not
in our power that virtue should be honoured simply for its own deserts.
For what is honourable <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392)
character, except perpetual honour, conferred on any one by the
favourable report of the people? What, then, will happen, if through the
error and perverseness of men a bad reputation should ensue? Shall we
cast aside virtue because it is judged to be base and disgraceful by the
foolish? And since it is capable of being oppressed and harassed, in
order that it may be of itself a peculiar and lasting good, it ought to
stand in need of no outward assistance, so as not to depend by itself
upon its own strength, and to remain stedfast. And thus no good is to be
hoped by it from man, nor is any evil to be refused.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_386"></span>[74:387](0070059.htm#fr_386) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>Rationem, “the plan or method of his
condition.”  

<span id="fn_387"></span>[75:388](0070059.htm#fr_387) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p4"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p4.1"></span>Sus ille lutulentus. 2 Pet. ii. 22.\]  

<span id="fn_388"></span>[75:389](0070059.htm#fr_388) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p6"></span> They, i.e., the beasts of prey and
the tame animals.  

<span id="fn_389"></span>[75:390](0070059.htm#fr_389) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p8.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p8.2"></span>Georg., iii. 112, 102.  

<span id="fn_390"></span>[76:391](0070059.htm#fr_390) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p10"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p10.1"></span>De Finibus, book v. cap. 28.\]  

<span id="fn_391"></span>[76:392](0070059.htm#fr_391) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p11"></span> Literally, “since the nature of
good things is placed on a steep ascent, that of evil things on a
precipitous descent.”  

<span id="fn_392"></span>[76:393](0070059.htm#fr_392) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p12"></span> <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p12.1"></span>Honestas</span> is used with some
latitude of meaning, to express respectability of character, or
honourable feeling, or the principle of honour, or virtue itself. \[See
[Philipp. iv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008)<span
id="iii.ii.iii.viii-p12.2"></span>.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IX.—Of the chief good, and the worship of the true God, and
a refutation of Anaxagoras](0070060)
