[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070272)  [Next](0070274.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.x-p0.1"></span>Chap. X.—Of the Origin of the World, and the Nature of Affairs, and the Providence of God.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p1"></span>They who do not admit that the world was
made by divine providence, either say that it is composed of first
principles coming together at random, or that it suddenly came into
existence by nature, but hold, as <span
id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Straton <span
id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670.md) does, that nature has in itself the
power of production and of diminution, but that it has neither
sensibility nor figure, so that we may understand that all things were
produced spontaneously, without any artificer or author. Each opinion is
vain and impossible. But this happens to those who are ignorant of the
truth, that they devise anything, rather than perceive that which the
nature of the subject <span id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671.md)
requires. First of all, with respect to those minute seeds, by the
meeting together of which they say that the whole world came into
existence, <span id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672.md) I ask where or
whence they are. Who has seen them at any time? Who has perceived them?
Who has heard them? Had none but <span
id="iii.iii.x-p4.2"></span>Leucippus <span
id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673.md) eyes? Had he alone a mind, who
assuredly alone of all men was blind and senseless, since he spoke those
things which no sick man could have uttered in his ravings, <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674.md) or one asleep in his dreams?  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p7"></span>The ancient philosophers argued that all
things were made up of four elements. <span
id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675.md) He would not admit this, lest he
should appear to tread in the footsteps of others; but he held that
there were other first principles of the elements themselves, which can
neither be seen, nor touched, nor be perceived by any part of the body.
They are so minute, he says, that there is no edge of a sword so fine
that they can be cut and divided by it. From which circumstance he gave
them the name of atoms. But it occurred to him, that if they all had one
and the same nature, they could not make up different objects of so
great a variety as we see to be present in the world. He said,
therefore, that there were smooth and rough ones, and round, and
angular, and hooked. How much better had it been to be silent, than to
have a tongue for such miserable and empty uses! And, indeed, I fear
lest he who thinks these things worthy of refutation, should appear no
less to rave. Let us, however, reply as to one who says something. <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676.md) If they are soft <span
id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677.md) and round, it is plain that they
cannot lay hold of one another, so as to make some body; as, though any
one should wish to bind together millet into one combination, <span
id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678.md) the very softness of the grains
would not permit them to come together into a mass. If they are rough,
and angular, and hooked, so that they may be able to cohere, then they
are divisible, and capable of being cut; for hooks and angles must
project, <span id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679.md) so that they may
possibly be cut off.  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p13"></span>Therefore that which is able to be cut
off and torn away, will be able both to be seen and held. “These,” he
says, “flutter about with restless motions through empty space, and are
carried hither and thither, just as we see little particles of dust in
the sun when it has introduced its rays and light through a window. From
these there arise trees and herbs, and all fruits of the earth; from
these, animals, and water, and fire, and all things are produced, and
are again resolved into the same elements.” This can be borne as long as
the inquiry is respecting small matters. Even the world itself was made
up of these. He has reached to the full extent of perfect madness: it
seems impossible that anything further should be said, and yet he found
something to add. “Since everything,” he says, “is infinite, and nothing
can be empty, it follows of necessity that there are innumerable
worlds.” What force of atoms had been so great, that masses so
incalculable should be collected from such minute elements? And first of
all I ask, What is the nature or origin of those seeds? For if all
things are from them, whence shall we say that they themselves are? What
nature supplied such an abundance of matter for the making of
innumerable worlds? But let us grant that he raved with impunity
concerning worlds; let us speak respecting this in which we are, and
which we see. He says that all things are made from minute bodies which
are incapable of division.  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p14"></span>If this were so, no object would ever
need the seed of its own kind. Birds would be born without eggs, or eggs
without bringing forth; likewise the rest of the living creatures
without coition: trees and the productions of the earth would not have
their own seeds, which we daily handle and sow. Why does a corn-field
arise from grain, and again grain from a corn-field? In short, if the
meeting together and collecting <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-Page_266"></span>of atoms would effect all things, all
things would grow together in the air, since atoms flutter about through
empty space. Why cannot the herb, why cannot the tree or grain, arise or
be increased without earth, without roots, without moisture, without
seed? From which it is evident that nothing is made up from atoms, since
everything has its own peculiar and fixed nature, its own seed, its own
law given from the beginning. Finally, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p14.1"></span>Lucretius, as though forgetful of
atoms, <span id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680.md) which he was
maintaining, in order that he might refute those who say that all things
are produced from nothing, employed these arguments, which might have
weighed against himself. For he thus spoke:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.x-p15.2"></span> “If things came from nothing, any
> kind might be born of anything; nothing would require seed.” <span
> id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681.md)  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p17"></span>Likewise afterwards:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.x-p17.1"></span> “We must admit, therefore, that
> nothing can come from nothing, since things require seed before they
> can severally be born, and be brought out into the buxom fields of
> air.” <span id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682.md)  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p19"></span>Who would imagine that he had brain when
he said these things, and did not see that they were contrary to one
another? For that nothing is made by means of atoms, is apparent from
this, that everything has a definite <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683.md) seed, unless by chance we shall
believe that the nature both of fire and water is derived from atoms.
Why should I say, that if materials of the greatest hardness are struck
together with a violent blow, fire is struck out? Are atoms concealed in
the steel, or in the flint? Who shut them in? Or why do they not leap
forth spontaneously? Or how could the seeds of fire remain in a material
of the greatest coldness?  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p21"></span>I leave the subject of the flint and
steel. If you hold in the sun an orb of crystal filled with water, fire
is kindled from the light which is reflected from the water, even in the
most severe cold. Must we then believe that fire is contained in the
water? And yet fire cannot be kindled from the sun even in summer. If
you shall breathe upon wax, or if a light vapour shall touch
anything—either the hard surface <span
id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684.md) of marble or a plate of metal—water
is gradually condensed by means of the most minute drops. Also from the
exhalation of the earth or sea mist is formed, which either, being
dispersed, moistens whatever it has covered, or being collected, is
carried aloft by the wind to high mountains, and compressed into cloud,
and sends down great rains. Where, then, do we say that fluids are
produced? Is it in the vapour? Or in the exhalation? Or in the wind? But
nothing can be formed in that which is neither touched nor seen. Why
should I speak of animals, in whose bodies we see nothing formed without
plan, without arrangement, without utility, without beauty, so that the
most skilful and careful marking out <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685.md) of all the parts and members repels
the idea of accident and chance? But let us suppose it possible that the
limbs, and bones, and nerves, and blood should be made up of atoms. What
of the senses, the reflection, the memory, the mind, the natural
capacity: from what seeds can they be compacted?  <span
id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686.md) He says, From the most minute.
There are therefore others of greater size. How, then, are they
indivisible?  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p25"></span>In the next place, if the things which
are not seen are formed from invisible seeds, it follows that those
which are seen are from visible seeds. Why, then, does no one see them?
But whether any one regards the invisible parts which are in man, or the
parts which can be touched, and which are visible, who does not see that
both parts exist in accordance with design?  <span
id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687.md) How, then, can bodies which meet
together without design effect anything reasonable?  <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688.md) For we see that there is nothing in
the whole world which has not in itself very great and wonderful design.
And since this is above the sense and capacity of man, to what can it be
more rightly attributed than to the divine providence? If a statue, the
resemblance of man, is made by the exercise of design and art, shall we
suppose that man himself is made up of fragments which come together at
random? And what resemblance to the truth is there in the thing
produced,  <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689.md) when the greatest
and most surpassing skill <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690.md) can
imitate nothing more than the mere outline and extreme lineaments <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691.md) of the body? Was the skill of man
able to give to his production any motion or sensibility? I say nothing
of the exercise of the sight, of hearing, and of smelling, and the
wonderful uses of the other members, either those which are in sight or
those which are hidden from view. What artificer could have fabricated
either the heart of man, or the voice, or his very wisdom? Does any man
of sound mind, therefore, think that that which man cannot do by reason
and judgment, may be accomplished by a meeting together of atoms
everywhere adhering to each other? You see into what foolish ravings
they have fallen, while they are unwilling to assign to God the making
and the care of all things  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p31"></span>Let us, however, concede to them that
the things which are earthly are made from atoms: are the things also
which are heavenly? They <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-Page_267"></span>say that the gods are without
contamination, eternal, and blessed; and they grant to them alone an
exemption, so that they do not appear to be made up of a meeting
together of atoms. For if the gods also had been made up of these, they
would be liable to be dispersed, the seeds at length being resolved, and
returning to their own nature. Therefore, if there is something which
the atoms could not produce, why may we not judge in the same way of the
others? But I ask why the gods did not build for themselves a
dwelling-place before those first elements produced the world? It is
manifest that, unless the atoms had come together and made the heaven,
the gods would still be suspended through the midst of empty space. By
what counsel, then, by what plan, did the atoms from a confused mass
collect themselves, so that from some the earth below was formed into a
globe, and the heaven stretched out above, adorned with so great a
variety of constellations that nothing can be conceived more
embellished? Can he, therefore, who sees such and so great objects,
imagine that they were made without any design, without any providence,
without any divine intelligence, but that such great and wonderful
things arose out of fine and minute atoms? Does it not resemble a
prodigy, that there should be any human being who might say these
things, or that there should be those who might believe them—as <span
id="iii.iii.x-p31.1"></span>Democritus, who was his hearer, or <span
id="iii.iii.x-p31.2"></span>Epicurus, to whom all folly flowed forth
from the fountain of <span id="iii.iii.x-p31.3"></span>Leucippus? But,
as others say, the world was made by Nature, which is without perception
and figure. <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692.md) But this is much
more absurd. If Nature made the world, it must have made it by judgment
and intelligence; for it is he that makes something who has either the
inclination to make it, or knowledge. If nature is without perception
and figure, how can that be made by it which has both perception and
figure, unless by chance any one thinks that the fabric of animals,
which is so delicate, could have been formed and animated by that which
is without perception, or that that figure of heaven, which is prepared
with such foresight for the uses of living beings, suddenly came into
existence by some accident or other, without a builder, without an
artificer?  <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693.md)  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p34"></span>“If there is anything,” says <span
id="iii.iii.x-p34.1"></span>Chrysippus, “which effects those things
which man, though he is endowed with reason, cannot do, that assuredly
is greater, and stronger, and wiser than man.” But man cannot make
heavenly things; therefore that which shall produce or has produced
these things surpasses man in art, in design, in skill, and in power.
Who, therefore, can it be but God? But Nature, which they suppose to be,
as it were, the mother of all things, if it has not a mind, will effect
nothing, will contrive nothing; for where there is no reflection there
is neither motion nor efficacy. But if it uses counsel for the
commencement of anything, reason for its arrangement, art for its
accomplishment, energy for its consummation, and power to govern and
control, why should it be called Nature rather than God? Or if a
concourse of atoms, or Nature without mind, made those things which we
see, I ask why it was able to make the heaven, but unable to make a city
or a house?  <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694.md) Why it made
mountains of marble, but did not make columns and statues? But ought not
atoms to have come together to effect these things, since they leave no
position untried? For concerning Nature, which has no mind, it is no
wonder that it forgot to do these things. What, then, is the case? It is
plain that God, when He commenced this work of the world,—than which
nothing can be better arranged with respect to order, nor more befitting
as to utility, nor more adorned as to beauty, nor greater as to
bulk,—Himself made the things which could not be made by man; and among
these also man himself, to whom He gave a portion of His own wisdom, and
furnished him with reason, as much as earthly frailty was capable of
receiving, that he might make for himself the things which were
necessary for his own uses.  

<span id="iii.iii.x-p36"></span>But if in the commonwealth of this
world, so to speak, there is no providence which rules, no God who
administers, no sense at all prevails in this nature of things. From
what source therefore will it be believed that the human mind, with its
skill and its intelligence, had its origin? For if the body of man was
made from the ground, from which circumstance man received his
name; <span id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695.md) it follows that the
soul, which has intelligence, and is the ruler of the body, which the
limbs obey as a king and commander, which can neither be looked upon nor
comprehended, could not have come to man except from a wise nature. But
as mind and soul govern everybody, so also does God govern the world.
For it is not probable that lesser and humble things bear rule, but that
greater and highest things do not bear rule. In short, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p37.2"></span>Marcus Cicero, in his <span
id="iii.iii.x-p37.3"></span>Tusculan Disputations, <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696.md) and in his <span
id="iii.iii.x-p38.1"></span>Consolation, says: “No origin of souls can
be found on earth. For there is nothing, he says, mixed and
compound <span id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697.md) in souls, or which
may appear to be produced and made up from the earth; nothing moist or
airy, <span id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698.md) or of the nature of
fire. <span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-Page_268"></span>For in these natures there is nothing
which has the force of memory, of mind and reflection, which both
retains the past and foresees the future, and is able to comprise the
present; which things alone are divine. For no source will ever be found
from which they are able to come to man, unless it be from God.” Since,
therefore, with the exception of two or three vain calumniators, it is
agreed upon that the world is governed by providence, as also it was
made, and there is no one who ventures to prefer the opinion of Diagoras
and Theodorus, or the empty fiction of Leucippus, or the levity of <span
id="iii.iii.x-p40.2"></span>Democritus and <span
id="iii.iii.x-p40.3"></span>Epicurus, either to the authority of those
seven ancient men who were called wise, <span
id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699.md) or to that of <span
id="iii.iii.x-p41.4"></span>Pythagoras or of <span
id="iii.iii.x-p41.5"></span>Socrates or <span
id="iii.iii.x-p41.6"></span>Plato, and the other philosophers who judged
that there is a providence; therefore that opinion also is false, by
which they think that religion was instituted by wise men for the sake
of terror and fear, in order that ignorant men might abstain from sins.
 

<span id="iii.iii.x-p42"></span>But if this is true, it follows that we
are derided by the wise men of old. But if they invented religion for
the sake of deceiving us, and moreover of deceiving the whole human
race, therefore they were not wise, because falsehood is not consistent
with the character of the wise man. But grant that they were wise; what
great success in falsehood was it, that they were able to deceive not
only the unlearned, but <span id="iii.iii.x-p42.1"></span>Plato also,
and <span id="iii.iii.x-p42.2"></span>Socrates, and so easily to delude
<span id="iii.iii.x-p42.3"></span>Pythagoras, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p42.4"></span>Zeno, and <span
id="iii.iii.x-p42.5"></span>Aristotle, the chiefs of the greatest sects?
There is therefore a divine providence, as those men whom I have named
perceived, by the energy and power of which all things which we see were
both made and are governed. For so vast a system of things <span
id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700.md) such arrangement and such
regularity in preserving the settled orders and times, could neither at
first have arisen without a provident artificer, or have existed so many
ages without a powerful inhabitant, or have been perpetually governed
without a skilful and intelligent <span
id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701.md) ruler; and reason itself declares
this. For whatever exists which has reason, must have arisen from
reason. Now reason is the part of an intelligent and wise nature; but a
wise and intelligent nature can be nothing else than God. Now the world,
since it has reason, by which it is both governed and kept together, was
therefore made by God. But if God is the maker and ruler of the world,
then religion is rightly and truly established; for honour and worship
are due to the author and common parent of all things.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[265:1671](0070273.htm#fr_1670.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p2"></span> \[Peripatetic; succeeded <span
id="iii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>Theophrastus <span
id="iii.iii.x-p2.2"></span>B.C. 238.\]  

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[265:1672](0070273.htm#fr_1671.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p3"></span> <span id="iii.iii.x-p3.1"></span>Ratio.
 

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[265:1673](0070273.htm#fr_1672.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p4.1"></span>Coiisse.  

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[265:1674](0070273.htm#fr_1673.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p5"></span> \[<span
id="iii.iii.x-p5.1"></span>Leucippus, anterior to <span
id="iii.iii.x-p5.2"></span>B.C. 470, author of the atomic theory.\]  

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[265:1675](0070273.htm#fr_1674.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p6.1"></span>Delirare posset.  

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[265:1676](0070273.htm#fr_1675.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p8"></span> \[See <span
id="iii.iii.x-p8.1"></span>Tayler Lewis, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p8.2"></span>Plato contra Atheos, p. 119.\]  

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[265:1677](0070273.htm#fr_1676.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p9"></span> i.e., something to the purpose.  

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[265:1678](0070273.htm#fr_1677.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.1"></span>Lenia; others read “<span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.2"></span>lævia,” smooth.  

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[265:1679](0070273.htm#fr_1678.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p11.1"></span>Coagmentationem.  

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[265:1680](0070273.htm#fr_1679.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p12.1"></span>Eminere, “to stand out prominently.”  

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[266:1681](0070273.htm#fr_1680.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p15"></span> \[Vol. vi. p. 445, note 18.\]  

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[266:1682](0070273.htm#fr_1681.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p15.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p16"></span> Lucret., i. 160.  

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[266:1683](0070273.htm#fr_1682.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p18.1"></span>Ibid., i. 206.  

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[266:1684](0070273.htm#fr_1683.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p20.1"></span>Certum.  

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[266:1685](0070273.htm#fr_1684.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p22"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p22.1"></span>Crustam marmoris.  

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[266:1686](0070273.htm#fr_1685.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p23.1"></span>Descriptio.  

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[266:1687](0070273.htm#fr_1686.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p24"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p24.1"></span>Coagmentari.  

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[266:1688](0070273.htm#fr_1687.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p26"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p26.1"></span>Ratio.  

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[266:1689](0070273.htm#fr_1688.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p27"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p27.1"></span>Rationale.  

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[266:1690](0070273.htm#fr_1689.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p28"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p28.1"></span>Ficto.  

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[266:1691](0070273.htm#fr_1690.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p29"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p29.1"></span>Artificium.  

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[266:1692](0070273.htm#fr_1691.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p30"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p30.1"></span>Umbram et extrema lineamenta.  

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[267:1693](0070273.htm#fr_1692.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p32"></span> \[See p. 97, note 4, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p32.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[267:1694](0070273.htm#fr_1693.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p33"></span> \[See <span
id="iii.iii.x-p33.1"></span>Cicero’s judgment, p. 99, note 6, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p33.3"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[267:1695](0070273.htm#fr_1694.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p35"></span> \[See <span
id="iii.iii.x-p35.1"></span>Dionysius, cap, ii. p. 85, vol. vi., this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[267:1696](0070273.htm#fr_1695.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p37"></span> <span id="iii.iii.x-p37.1"></span>Homo
ab humo.  

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[267:1697](0070273.htm#fr_1696.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p37.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p38"></span> \[Book i. cap. 27.\]  

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[267:1698](0070273.htm#fr_1697.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p39"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p39.1"></span>Concretum.  

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[267:1699](0070273.htm#fr_1698.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p40"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p40.1"></span>Flabile.  

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[268:1700](0070273.htm#fr_1699.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p40.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p41"></span> \[P. 101, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p41.2"></span>supra; also vol. v. p. 11, note 2.\]  

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[268:1701](0070273.htm#fr_1700.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p42.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p43"></span> <span id="iii.iii.x-p43.1"></span>Tanta
rerum magnitudo.  

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[268:1702](0070273.htm#fr_1701.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p44"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.x-p44.1"></span>Sentiente; others read “<span
id="iii.iii.x-p44.2"></span>sciente.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XI.—Of God, and that the one God, and by whose providence
the world is governed and exists](0070274.md)
