[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070376)  [Next](0070378.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="vi.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>from the second chapter.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>2. “I know
thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience.”\] In the first epistle He
speaks thus: I know that thou sufferest and workest, I see that thou art
patient; think not that I am staying long from thee.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p2"></span>“And that thou canst not bear them that
are evil, and who say that they are Jews and are not, and thou has found
them liars, and thou hast patience for My name’s sake.”\] All these
things tend to praise, and that no small praise; and it behoves such
men, and such a class, and such elected persons, by all means to be
admonished, that they may not be defrauded of such privileges granted to
them of God. These few things He said that He had against them.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p3"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>4, 5. “And
thou hast left thy first love: remember whence thou hast fallen.”\] He
who falls, falls from a height: therefore He said <span
id="vi.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>whence: because, even to the very last, works
of love must be practised; and this is the principal commandment.
Finally, unless this is done, He threatened to remove their candlestick
out of its place, that is, to disperse the congregation.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p4"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>6. “This
thou hast also, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitanes.”\] But
because thou thyself hatest those who hold the doctrines of the
Nicolaitanes, thou expectest praise. Moreover, to hate the works of the
Nicolaitanes, which He Himself also hated, this tends to praise. But the
works of the Nicolaitanes were in that time false and troublesome men,
who, as ministers under the name of <span
id="vi.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>Nicolaus, had made for themselves a heresy, to
the effect that what had been offered to idols might be exorcised and
eaten, and that whoever should have committed fornication might receive
peace on the eighth day. Therefore He extols those to whom He is
writing; and to these men, being such and so great, He promised the tree
<span id="vi.ii.ii-p4.3"></span>of life, which is in the paradise of His
God.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p5"></span>The following epistle unfolds the mode of
life and habit of another order which follows. He proceeds to say:—  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p6"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>9. “I know
thy tribulation and thy poverty, but thou art rich.”\] For He knows that
with such men there are riches hidden with Him, and that they deny the
blasphemy of the Jews, who say that they are Jews and are not; but they
are the synagogue of Satan, since they are gathered together by
Antichrist; and to them He says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>10. “Be
thou faithful unto death.”\] That they should continue to be faithful
even unto death.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p8"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>11. “He
that shall overcome, shall not be hurt by the second death.”\] That is,
he shall not be chastised in hell.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p9"></span>The third order of the saints shows that
they are men who are strong in faith, and who are not afraid of
persecution; but because even among them there are some who are inclined
to unlawful associations, He says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p10"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>14–16.
“Thou hast there some who hold the doctrine of <span
id="vi.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>Balaam, who taught in the case of <span
id="vi.ii.ii-p10.3"></span>Balak that he should put a stumbling-block
before the children of Israel, to eat and to commit fornication. So also
hast thou them who hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes; but I will
fight with them with the sword of my mouth.”\] That is, I will say what
I shall command, and I will tell you what you shall do. For <span
id="vi.ii.ii-p10.4"></span>Balaam, <span
id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262.md) with his doctrine, taught <span
id="vi.ii.ii-p11.3"></span>Balak to cast a stumbling-block before the
eyes of the children of Israel, to eat what was sacrificed to idols, and
to <span id="page_347">p. 347</span> <span
id="vi.ii.ii-Page_347"></span>commit fornication,—a thing which is known
to have happened of old. For he gave this advice to the king of the
Moabites, and they caused stumbling to the people. Thus, says He, ye
have among you those who hold such doctrine; and under the pretext of
mercy, you would corrupt others.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p12"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>17. “To
him that overcometh I will give the hidden manna, and I will give him a
white stone.”\] The hidden manna is immortality; the white gem is
adoption to <span id="vi.ii.ii-p12.2"></span>be the son of God; the new
name written on the stone is “Christian.”  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p13"></span>The fourth class intimates the nobility
of the faithful, who labour daily, and do greater works. But even among
them also He shows that there are men of an easy disposition to grant
unlawful peace, and to listen to new forms of prophesying; and He
reproves and warns the others to whom this is not pleasing, who know the
wickedness opposed to them: for which evils He purposes to bring upon
the head of the faithful both sorrows and dangers; and therefore He
says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p14"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>24. “I
will not put upon you any other burden.”\] That is, I have not given you
laws, observances, and duties, which is another burden.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p15"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>25, 26.
“But that which ye have, hold fast until I come; and he that overcometh,
to him will I give power over all peoples.”\] That is, him I will
appoint as judge among the rest of the saints.  

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p16"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>28. “And
I will give him the morning star.”\] To wit, the first resurrection. He
promised the morning star, which drives away the night, and announces
the light, that is, the beginning of day.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[346:2263](0070377.htm#fr_2262.md) <span
id="vi.ii.ii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p11"></span> [Num.
xxiii](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#000.md)<span
id="vi.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>. \[<span
id="vi.ii.ii-p11.2"></span>Wordsworth, ed. 1852, pp. 78–92.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From the third chapter](0070378.md)
