[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070056)  [Next](0070058.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-Page_73"></span>  

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chap. VI.—Of Wisdom, and the Academics, and Natural Philosophy.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p2"></span>Does wisdom therefore nowhere exist?
Yes, indeed, it was amongst them, but no one saw it. Some thought that
all things could be known: these were manifestly not wise. Others
thought that nothing could be known; nor indeed were these wise: the
former, because they attributed too much to man; the latter, because
they attributed too little. A limit was wanting to each on either side.
Where, then, is wisdom? It consists in thinking neither that you know
all things, which is the property of God; nor that you are ignorant of
all things, which is the part of a beast. For it is something of a
middle character which belongs to man, that is, knowledge united and
combined with ignorance. Knowledge in us is from the soul, which has its
origin from heaven; ignorance from the body, which is from the earth:
whence we have something in common with God, and with the animal
creation. Thus, since we are composed of these two elements, the one of
which is endowed with light, the other with darkness, a part of
knowledge is given to us, and a part of ignorance. Over this bridge, so
to speak, we may pass without any danger of falling; for all those who
have inclined to either side, either towards the left hand or the right,
have fallen. But I will say how each part has erred. The Academics
argued from obscure subjects, against the natural philosophers, that
there was no knowledge; and satisfied with the examples of a few
incomprehensible subjects, they embraced ignorance as though they had
taken away the whole of knowledge, because they had taken it away in
part. But natural philosophers, on the other hand, derived their
argument from those things which are open, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>and inferred that all things could be
known, and, satisfied with things which were manifest, retained
knowledge; as if they had defended it altogether, because they had
defended it in part. And thus neither the one saw what was clear, nor
the others what was obscure; but each party, while they contended with
the greatest ardour either to retain or to take away knowledge only, did
not see that there would be placed in the middle that which might guide
them to wisdom.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p3"></span>But <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>Arcesilas, who teaches that there is no
knowledge, <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379.md) when he was
detracting from <span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>Zeno, the chief of
the Stoics, that he might altogether overthrow philosophy on the
authority of <span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p4.2"></span>Socrates, undertook
this opinion to affirm that nothing could be known. And thus he
disproved the judgment of the philosophers, who had thought that the
truth was drawn forth, <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380.md) and found
out by their talents,—namely, because that wisdom was mortal, and,
having been instituted a few ages before, had now attained to its
greatest increase, so that it was now necessarily growing old and
perishing, the Academy <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381.md) suddenly
arose, the old age, as it were, of philosophy, which might despatch it
now withering. And <span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>Arcesilas
rightly saw that they are arrogant, or rather foolish, who imagine that
the knowledge of the truth can be arrived at by conjecture. But no one
can refute one speaking falsely, unless he who shall have previously
known what is true; but <span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p6.2"></span>Arcesilas,
endeavouring to do this without a knowledge of the truth, introduced a
kind of philosophy which we may call unstable or inconstant. <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382.md) For, that nothing may be known, it is
necessary that something be known. For if you know nothing at all, the
very knowledge that nothing can be known will be taken away. Therefore
he who pronounces as a sentiment that nothing is known, professes, as it
were, some conclusion already arrived at and known: therefore it is
possible for something to be known.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p8"></span>Of a similar character to this is
that which is accustomed to be proposed in the schools as an example of
the kind of fallacy called <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>asystaton</span><span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p8.2"></span>; that some one had dreamt that he should
not believe dreams. For if he did believe them, then it follows that he
ought not to believe them. But if he did not believe them, then it
follows that he ought to believe them. Thus, if nothing can be known, it
is necessary that this fact must be known, that nothing is known. But if
it is known that nothing can be known, the statement that nothing can be
known must as a consequence be false. Thus there is introduced a tenet
opposed to itself, and destructive of itself. But the evasive <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383.md) man wished to take away learning from
the other philosophers, that he might conceal it at his home. For truly
he is not for taking it from himself who affirms anything that he may
take it from others: but he does not succeed; for it shows itself, and
betrays its plunderer. How much more wisely and truly he would act, if
he should make an exception, and say that the causes and systems of
heavenly things only, or natural things, because they are hidden, cannot
be known, for there is no one to teach them; and ought not to be
inquired into, for they cannot be found out by inquiry! For if he had
brought forward this exception, he would both have admonished the
natural philosophers not to search into those things which exceeded the
limit of human reflection; and would have freed himself from the
ill-will arising from calumny, and would certainly <span id="page_74">p.
74</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-Page_74"></span>have left us something
to follow. But now, since he has drawn us back from following others,
that we may not wish to know more than we are capable of knowing, he has
no less drawn us back from himself also. For who would wish to labour
lest he should know anything? or to undertake learning of this kind that
he may even lose ordinary knowledge? For if this learning exists, it
must necessarily consist of knowledge; if it does not exist, who is so
foolish as to think that that is worthy of being learned, in which
either nothing is learned, or something is even unlearned? Wherefore, if
all things cannot be known, as the natural philosophers thought, nor
nothing, as the Academics taught, philosophy is altogether extinguished.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_379"></span>[73:380](0070057.htm#fr_379.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p4"></span> The master of ignorance.  

<span id="fn_380"></span>[73:381](0070057.htm#fr_380.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>Erutam.  

<span id="fn_381"></span>[73:382](0070057.htm#fr_381.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p6"></span> The New Academy.  

<span id="fn_382"></span>[73:383](0070057.htm#fr_382.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p7"></span> In Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>ἀσύστατον</span>, “without consistency,
not holding together;” in Latin, “<span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p7.2"></span>instabile” or “<span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p7.3"></span>inconstans.”  

<span id="fn_383"></span>[73:384](0070057.htm#fr_383.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>Versutus, one who turns and shifts.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VII.—Of moral philosophy, and the chief good](0070058.md)
