[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070178)  [Next](0070180) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XV.—Of the Devastation of the World and Change of the Empires.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p1"></span>It is contained in the mysteries of
the sacred writings, that a prince of the Hebrews, compelled by want of
corn, passed into Egypt with all his family and relatives. And when his
posterity, remaining long in Egypt, had increased into a great nation,
and were oppressed by the heavy and intolerable yoke of slavery, God
smote Egypt with an incurable stroke, and freed His people, leading them
through the midst of the sea, when, the waves being cut asunder and
parted on either side, the people went over on dry ground. And the king
of the Egyptians endeavouring to follow them as they fled, the sea
returning to its place, he was cut off, with all his people. And this
deed so illustrious and so wonderful, although for the present it
displayed to men the power of God, was also a foreshadowing and figure
of a greater deed, which the same God was about to perform at the last
consummation of the times, for He will free His people from the
oppressive bondage of the world. But since at that time the people of
God were one, and in one nation only, Egypt only was smitten. But now,
because the people of God are collected out of all languages, and dwell
among all nations, and are oppressed by those bearing rule over them, it
must come to pass that all nations, that is, the whole world, be beaten
with heavenly stripes, that the righteous people, who are worshippers of
God, may be set free. And as then signs were given by which the coming
destruction was shown to the Egyptians, so at the last time wonderful
prodigies will take place throughout all the elements of the world, by
which the impending destruction may be understood by all nations.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p2"></span>Therefore, as the end of this world
approaches, the condition of human affairs must undergo a change, and
through the prevalence of wickedness become worse; so that now these
times of ours, in which iniquity and impiety have increased even to the
highest degree, may be judged happy and almost golden in comparison of
that incurable evil. For righteousness will so decrease, and impiety,
avarice, desire, and lust will so greatly increase, that if there shall
then happen to be any good men, they will be a prey to the wicked, and
will be harassed on all sides by the unrighteous; while the wicked alone
will be in opulence, but the good will be afflicted in all calumnies and
in want. All justice will be confounded, and the laws will be destroyed.
No one will then have anything except that which has been gained or
defended by the hand: boldness and violence will possess all things.
There will be no faith among men, nor peace, nor kindness, nor shame,
nor truth; and thus also there will be neither security, nor government,
nor any rest from evils. For all the earth will be in a state of tumult;
wars will everywhere rage; all nations will be in arms, and will oppose
one another; neighbouring states will carry on conflicts with each
other; and first of all, Egypt will pay the penalties of her foolish
superstitions, and will be covered with blood as if with a river. Then
the sword will traverse the world, mowing down everything, and laying
low all things as a crop. And—my mind dreads to relate it, but I will
relate it, because it is about to happen—the cause of this desolation
and confusion will be this; because the Roman name, by which the world
is now ruled, will be taken away from the earth, and the government
return to Asia; and the East will again bear rule, and the West be
reduced to servitude. <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) Nor
ought it to appear wonderful to any one, if a kingdom founded with such
vastness, and so long increased by so many and such men, and in short
strengthened by such great resources, shall nevertheless at some time
fall. There is nothing prepared by human strength which cannot equally
he destroyed by human strength, since the works of mortals are mortal.
Thus also other kingdoms in former times, though they had long
flourished, were nevertheless destroyed. For it is related that the
Egyptians, and Persians, and Greeks, and Assyrians had the government of
the world; and after the destruction of them all, the chief power came
to the Romans also. And inasmuch as they excel all other kingdoms in
magnitude, with so much <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-Page_213"></span>greater an overthrow will they fall,
because those buildings which are higher than others have more weight
for a downfall. <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391)  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p5"></span><span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p5.1"></span>Seneca therefore not unskilfully divided
the times of the Roman city by ages. For he said that at first was its
infancy under King <span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p5.2"></span>Romulus, by whom
Rome was brought into being, and as it were educated; then its boyhood
under the other kings, by whom it was increased and fashioned with more
numerous systems of instruction and institutions; but at length, in the
reign of <span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p5.3"></span>Tarquinius, when now it
had begun as it were to be grown up, it did not endure slavery; and
having thrown off the yoke of a haughty tyranny, it preferred to obey
laws rather than kings; and when its youth was terminated by the end of
the Punic war, then at length with confirmed strength it began to be
manly. <span id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392) For when Carthage was
taken away, which was long its rival in power, it stretched out its
hands by land and sea over the whole world, until, having subdued all
kings and nations, when the materials <span
id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393) for war now failed, it abused its
strength, by which it destroyed itself. This was its first old age,
when, lacerated by civil wars and oppressed by intestine evil, it again
fell back to the government of a single ruler, as it were revolving to a
second infancy. <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394) For, having
lost the liberty which it had defended under the guidance and authority
of <span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p8.4"></span>Brutus, it so grew old, as
though it had no strength to support itself, unless it depended on the
aid of its rulers. But if these things are so, what remains, except that
death follow old age? And that it will so come to pass, the predictions
of the prophets briefly announce under the cover <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395) of other names, so that no one can
easily understand them. Nevertheless the Sibyls openly say that Rome is
doomed to perish, and that indeed by the judgment of God, because it
held His name in hatred; and being the enemy of righteousness, it
destroyed the people who kept <span id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396)
the truth. <span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p10.4"></span>Hystaspes also, who was
a very ancient king of the Medes, from whom also the river which is now
called Hydaspes received its name, handed down to the memory of
posterity a wonderful dream upon the interpretation of a boy who uttered
divinations, announcing long before the founding of the Trojan nation,
that the Roman empire and name would be taken away from the world.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[212:1391](0070179.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p3"></span> \[This could not have been ventured
before <span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p3.1"></span>Constantine’s time, and must
have been bold even then. [2 Thess. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p3.2"></span>. P. 213, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p3.4"></span>infra.\]  

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[213:1392](0070179.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p4"></span> \[The Colosseum and its traditions
may have influenced our author in this passage. See vol. iii. p. 108,
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p4.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[213:1393](0070179.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p6.1"></span>Juvenescere.  

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[213:1394](0070179.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p7.1"></span>Materia.  

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[213:1395](0070179.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p8"></span> \[See p. 169, notes 1, 2, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p8.3"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[213:1396](0070179.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p8.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p9.1"></span>Sub ambage; properly a “circumlocution.”
 

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[213:1397](0070179.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p10.1"></span>Alumnum veritatis. \[P. 212, note 1,
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xv-p10.3"></span>supra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVI.—Of the devastation of the world, and its prophetic
omens](0070180)
