[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070479)  [Next](0070481) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

## <span id="xii.ii-p0.1"></span>EARLY LITURGIES. <span id="fr_4085"></span>[4086](#fn_4085)

### <span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>The Divine Liturgy of James the Holy Apostle and Brother of the Lord.

##### <span id="xii.ii-p1.2"></span>i.

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>The Priest. <span
id="fr_4086"></span>[4087](#fn_4086)  

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p4.1"></span>I</span> O <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p4.2"></span>Sovereign</span> Lord our God, contemn me not,
defiled with a multitude of sins: for, behold, I have come to this Thy
divine and heavenly mystery, not as being worthy; but looking only to
Thy goodness, I direct my voice to Thee: God be merciful to me, a
sinner; I have sinned against Heaven, and before Thee, and am unworthy
to come into the presence of this Thy holy and spiritual table, upon
which Thy only-begotten Son, and our Lord <span
id="xii.ii-p4.3"></span>Jesus Christ, is mystically set forth as a
sacrifice for me, a sinner, and stained with every spot. Wherefore I
present to Thee this supplication and thanksgiving, that Thy Spirit the
Comforter may be sent down upon me, strengthening and fitting me for
this service; and count me worthy to make known without condemnation the
word, delivered from Thee by me to the people, in Christ <span
id="xii.ii-p4.4"></span>Jesus our Lord, with whom Thou art blessed,
together with Thy all-holy, and good, and quickening, and
consubstantial <span id="fr_4087"></span>[4088](#fn_4087) Spirit, now
and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>Prayer of the standing beside the altar.  

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p7.1"></span>II</span> Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, the triune light of the Godhead, which is unity
subsisting in trinity, divided, yet indivisible: for the Trinity is the
one God Almighty, whose glory the heavens declare, and the earth His
dominion, and the sea His might, and every sentient and intellectual
creature at all times proclaims His majesty: for all glory becomes Him,
and honour and might, greatness and magnificence, now and ever, and to
all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>Prayer of the incense at the
beginning. <span id="fr_4088"></span>[4089](#fn_4088)  

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p10.1"></span>III</span> Sovereign Lord <span
id="xii.ii-p10.2"></span>Jesus Christ, O Word of God, who didst freely
offer Thyself a blameless sacrifice upon the cross to God even the
Father, the coal of double nature, that didst touch the lips of the
prophet with the tongs, and didst take away his sins, touch also the
hearts of us sinners, and purify us from every stain, and present us
holy beside Thy holy altar, that we may offer Thee a sacrifice of
praise: and accept from us, Thy unprofitable servants, this incense as
an odour of a sweet smell, and make fragrant the evil odour of our soul
and body, and purify us with the sanctifying power of Thy all-holy
Spirit: for Thou alone art holy, who sanctifiest, and art communicated
to the faithful; and glory becomes Thee, with Thy eternal Father, and
Thy all-holy, and good, and quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to all
eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>Prayer of the commencement.  

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>IV</span> O beneficent King eternal, and
Creator of the universe, receive Thy Church, coming unto Thee through
Thy Christ: fulfil to each what is profitable; lead all to perfection,
and make us perfectly worthy of the grace of Thy sanctification,
gathering us together within Thy holy Church, which Thou hast purchased
by the precious blood of Thy only-begotten Son, and our Lord and Saviour
<span id="xii.ii-p12.2"></span>Jesus Christ, with whom Thou art blessed
and glorified, together with Thy all-holy, and good, and quickening
Spirit, now and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p14.1"></span>V</span> Let us again pray to the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>The Priest, prayer of the incense at the
entrance of the congregation.  

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span>God, who didst accept the gifts of <span
id="xii.ii-p16.1"></span>Abel, the sacrifice of <span
id="xii.ii-p16.2"></span>Noah and of <span
id="xii.ii-p16.3"></span>Abram, the incense of <span id="page_538">p.
538</span> <span id="xii.ii-Page_538"></span><span
id="xii.ii-p16.4"></span>Aaron and of <span
id="xii.ii-p16.5"></span>Zacharias, accept also from the hand of us
sinners this incense for an odour of a sweet smell, and for remission of
our sins, and those of all Thy people; for blessed art Thou, and glory
becomes Thee, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, now and
ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span>Sir, pronounce the blessing. <span
id="fr_4089"></span>[4090](#fn_4089)  

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span>The Priest prays.  

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span>Our Lord and God, <span
id="xii.ii-p21.1"></span>Jesus Christ, who through exceeding goodness
and love not to be restrained wast crucified, and didst not refuse to be
pierced by the spear and nails; who didst provide this mysterious and
awful service as an everlasting memorial for us perpetually: bless Thy
ministry in Christ the God, and bless our entrance, and fully complete
the presentation of this our service by Thy unutterable compassion, now
and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span>The responsive prayer from the Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p23.1"></span>VI. </span>The Lord bless us, and make us
worthy seraphically to offer gifts, and to sing the oft-sung hymn of the
divine Trisagion, by the fulness and exceeding abundance of all the
perfection of holiness, now and ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span>Then the Deacon begins to sing in the
entrance. <span id="fr_4090"></span>[4091](#fn_4090)  

<span id="xii.ii-p26"></span>Thou who art the only-begotten Son and Word
of God, immortal; who didst submit for our salvation to become flesh of
the holy God-mother, <span id="fr_4091"></span>[4092](#fn_4091) and
ever-virgin Mary; who didst immutably become man and wast crucified, O
Christ our God, and didst by Thy death tread death underfoot; who art
one of the Holy Trinity glorified together with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, save us.  

<span id="xii.ii-p28"></span>The Priest says this prayer from the gates
to the altar.  

<span id="xii.ii-p29"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p29.1"></span>VII</span> God Almighty, Lord great in glory,
who hast given to us an entrance into the Holy of Holies, through the
sojourning among men of Thy only-begotten Son, our Lord, and God, and
Saviour <span id="xii.ii-p29.2"></span>Jesus Christ, we supplicate and
invoke Thy goodness, since we are fearful and trembling when about to
stand at Thy holy altar; send forth upon us, O God, Thy good grace, and
sanctify our souls, and bodies, and spirits, and turn our thoughts to
piety, in order that with a pure conscience we may bring unto Thee
gifts, offerings, and fruits for the remission of our transgressions,
and for the propitiation of all Thy people, by the grace and mercies and
loving-kindness of Thy only-begotten Son, with whom Thou art blessed to
all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p30"></span>After the approach to the altar, the Priest
says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p31"></span><span id="xii.ii-p31.1"></span>VIII. Peace
be to all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p32"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p33"></span>And to thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p34"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p35"></span>The Lord bless us all, and sanctify us for
the entrance and celebration of the divine and pure mysteries, giving
rest to the blessed souls among the good and just, by His grace and
loving-kindness, now and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p36"></span>Then the Deacon says the bidding
prayer. <span id="fr_4092"></span>[4093](#fn_4092)  

<span id="xii.ii-p38"></span><span id="xii.ii-p38.1"></span>IX. In peace
let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p39"></span>For the peace that is from above, and for
God’s love to man, and for the salvation of our souls, let us beseech
the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p40"></span>For the peace of the whole world, for the
unity of all the holy churches of God, let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p41"></span>For the remission of our sins, and
forgiveness of our transgressions, and for our deliverance from all
tribulation, wrath, danger, and distress, and from the uprising of our
enemies, let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p42"></span>Then the Singers sing the Trisagion Hymn.  

<span id="xii.ii-p43"></span>Holy God, holy mighty, holy immortal, have
mercy upon us.  

<span id="xii.ii-p44"></span>Then the Priest prays, bowing.  

<span id="xii.ii-p45"></span><span id="xii.ii-p45.1"></span>X. O
compassionate and merciful, long-suffering, and very gracious and true
God, look from Thy prepared dwelling-place, and hear us Thy suppliants,
and deliver us from every temptation of the devil and of man; withhold
not Thy aid from us, nor bring on us chastisements too heavy for our
strength: for we are unable to overcome what is opposed to us; but Thou
art able, Lord, to save us from everything that is against us. Save us,
O God, from the difficulties of this world, according to Thy goodness,
in order that, having drawn nigh with a pure conscience to Thy holy
altar, we may send up to Thee without condemnation the blessed hymn
Trisagion, together with the heavenly powers, and that, having performed
the service, well pleasing to Thee and divine, we may be counted worthy
of eternal life.  

<span id="xii.ii-p46"></span>(Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p47"></span>Because Thou art holy, Lord our God, and
dwellest and abidest in holy places, we send up the praise and the hymn
Trisagion to Thee, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and to all eternity. <span id="page_539">p. 539</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_539"></span>  

<span id="xii.ii-p48"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p49"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p50"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p51"></span><span id="xii.ii-p51.1"></span>XI. Peace be
to all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p52"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p53"></span>And to thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p54"></span>The Singers.  

<span id="xii.ii-p55"></span>Alleluia.  

<span id="xii.ii-p56"></span><span id="xii.ii-p56.1"></span>Then there
are read in order <span id="fr_4093"></span>[4094](#fn_4093) <span
id="xii.ii-p57.3"></span> the holy oracles of the Old Testament, and of
the prophets; and the incarnation of the Son of God is set forth, and
His sufferings and resurrection from the dead, His ascension into
heaven, and His second appearing with glory; and this takes place daily
in the holy and divine service. <span
id="fr_4094"></span>[4095](#fn_4094)  

<span id="xii.ii-p59"></span>After the reading and instruction the
Deacon says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p60"></span><span id="xii.ii-p60.1"></span>XII. Let us
all say, Lord, be merciful. <span id="fr_4095"></span>[4096](#fn_4095)  

<span id="xii.ii-p62"></span>Lord Almighty, the God of our fathers;  

<span id="xii.ii-p63"></span>We beseech Thee, hear us.  

<span id="xii.ii-p64"></span>For the peace which is from above, and for
the salvation of our souls;  

<span id="xii.ii-p65"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p66"></span>For the peace of the whole world, and the
unity of all the holy churches of God;  

<span id="xii.ii-p67"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p68"></span>For the salvation and help of all the
Christ-loving people;  

<span id="xii.ii-p69"></span>We beseech Thee, hear us.  

<span id="xii.ii-p70"></span>For our deliverance from all tribulation,
wrath, danger, distress, from captivity, bitter death, and from our
iniquities;  

<span id="xii.ii-p71"></span>We beseech Thee, hear us.  

<span id="xii.ii-p72"></span>For the people standing round, and waiting
for the rich and plenteous mercy that is from Thee;  

<span id="xii.ii-p73"></span>We beseech Thee, be merciful and gracious.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p74"></span>Save Thy people, O Lord, and bless Thine
inheritance.  

<span id="xii.ii-p75"></span>Visit Thy world in mercy and compassion.  

<span id="xii.ii-p76"></span>Exalt the horn of Christians by the power
of the precious and quickening cross.  

<span id="xii.ii-p77"></span>We beseech Thee, most merciful Lord, hear
us praying to Thee, and have mercy upon us.  

<span id="xii.ii-p78"></span>The People (thrice).  

<span id="xii.ii-p79"></span>Lord, have mercy upon us.  

<span id="xii.ii-p80"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p81"></span><span id="xii.ii-p81.1"></span>XIII. For
the remission of our sins, and forgiveness of our transgressions, and
for our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger, and distress,
let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p82"></span>Let us all entreat from the Lord, that we
may pass the whole day, perfect, holy, peaceful, and without sin.  

<span id="xii.ii-p83"></span>Let us entreat from the Lord a messenger of
peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies.  

<span id="xii.ii-p84"></span>Let us entreat from the Lord forgiveness
and remission of our sins and transgressions.  

<span id="xii.ii-p85"></span>Let us entreat from the Lord the things
which are good and proper for our souls, and peace for the world.  

<span id="xii.ii-p86"></span>Let us entreat from the Lord, that we may
spend the remaining period of our life in peace and health.  

<span id="xii.ii-p87"></span>Let us entreat that the close of our lives
may be Christian, without pain and without shame, and a good plea at the
dread and awful judgment-seat of Christ.  

<span id="xii.ii-p88"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p89"></span><span id="xii.ii-p89.1"></span>XIV. For
Thou art the gospel and the light, Saviour and keeper of our souls and
bodies, God, and Thy only-begotten Son, and Thy all-holy Spirit, now and
ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p90"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p91"></span>Amen. <span
id="fr_4096"></span>[4097](#fn_4096)  

<span id="xii.ii-p97"></span>The Priest  

<span id="xii.ii-p98"></span>God, who hast taught us Thy divine and
saving oracles, enlighten the souls of us sinners for the comprehension
of the things which have been before spoken, so that we may not only be
seen to be hearers of spiritual things, but also doers of good deeds,
striving after guileless faith, blameless life, and pure conversation.  

<span id="xii.ii-p99"></span>(Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p100"></span>In Christ <span
id="xii.ii-p100.1"></span>Jesus our Lord, with whom Thou art blessed,
together with Thy all-holy, good, and quickening Spirit, now and always,
and for ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p101"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p102"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p103"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p104"></span><span id="xii.ii-p104.1"></span>XV. Peace
be to all. <span id="page_540">p. 540</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_540"></span>  

<span id="xii.ii-p105"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p106"></span>And to Thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p107"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p108"></span>Let us bow our heads to the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p109"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p110"></span>To Thee, Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p111"></span>The Priest prays, saying<span
id="xii.ii-p111.1"></span>:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p112"></span>O Sovereign giver of life, and provider of
good things, who didst give to mankind the blessed hope of eternal life,
our Lord <span id="xii.ii-p112.1"></span>Jesus Christ, count us worthy
in holiness, and perfect this Thy divine service to the enjoyment of
future blessedness.  

<span id="xii.ii-p113"></span>(Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p114"></span>So that, guarded by Thy power at all
times, and led into the light of truth, we may send up the praise and
the thanksgiving to Thee, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, now
and ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p115"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p116"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p117"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p118"></span><span id="xii.ii-p118.1"></span>XVI. Let
none remain of the catechumens, none of the unbaptized, none of those
who are unable to join with us in prayer. Look at one another. <span
id="fr_4097"></span>[4098](#fn_4097) The door.  

<span id="xii.ii-p120"></span>All erect: <span
id="fr_4098"></span>[4099](#fn_4098) let us again pray to the Lord.  

##### <span id="xii.ii-p121.1"></span>II <span id="fr_4099"></span>[4100](#fn_4099)

<span id="xii.ii-p123"></span>The Priest says the prayer of incense.  

<span id="xii.ii-p124"></span>Sovereign Almighty, King of Glory, who
knowest all things before their creation, manifest Thyself to us calling
upon Thee at this holy hour, and redeem us from the shame of our
transgressions; cleanse our mind and our thoughts from impure desires,
from worldly deceit, from all influence of the devil; and accept from
the hands of us sinners this incense, as Thou didst accept the offering
of <span id="xii.ii-p124.1"></span>Abel, and <span
id="xii.ii-p124.2"></span>Noah, and <span
id="xii.ii-p124.3"></span>Aaron, and <span
id="xii.ii-p124.4"></span>Samuel, and of all Thy saints, guarding us
from everything evil, and preserving us for continually pleasing, and
worshipping, and glorifying Thee, the Father, and Thy only-begotten Son,
and Thy all-holy Spirit, now and always, and for ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p125"></span>And the Readers begin the Cherubic Hymn.  

<span id="xii.ii-p126"></span>Let all mortal flesh be silent, and stand
with fear and trembling, and meditate nothing earthly within itself:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p127"></span>For the King of kings and Lord of lords,
Christ our God, comes forward to be sacrificed, and to be given for food
to the faithful; and the bands of angels go before Him with every power
and dominion, the many-eyed cherubim, and the six-winged seraphim,
covering their faces, and crying aloud the hymn, Alleluia, Alleluia,
Alleluia.  

<span id="xii.ii-p128"></span>The Priest, bringing in the holy
gifts, <span id="fr_4100"></span>[4101](#fn_4100) says this prayer:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p130"></span>XVII. O God, our God, who didst send forth
the heavenly bread, the food of the whole world, our Lord <span
id="xii.ii-p130.1"></span>Jesus Christ, to be a Saviour, and Redeemer,
and Benefactor, blessing and sanctifying us, do Thou Thyself bless this
offering, and graciously receive it to Thy altar above the skies:  

<span id="xii.ii-p131"></span>Remember in Thy goodness and love those
who have brought it, and those for whom they have brought it, and
preserve us without condemnation in the service of Thy divine mysteries:
for hollowed and glorified is Thy all-honoured and great name, Father,
and Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to all eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p132"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p133"></span>Peace be to all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p134"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p135"></span>Sir, pronounce the blessing.  

<span id="xii.ii-p136"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p137"></span>Blessed be God, who blesseth and
sanctifieth us all at the presentation of the divine and pure mysteries,
and giveth rest to the blessed souls among the holy and just, now and
always, and to all eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p138"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p139"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p139.1"></span>XVIII</span> Let us attend in wisdom.  

<span id="xii.ii-p140"></span>The Priest begins.  

<span id="xii.ii-p141"></span>I believe in one God, Father Almighty,
Maker of heaven and earth, and in one Lord <span
id="xii.ii-p141.1"></span>Jesus Christ, the Son of God: <span
id="xii.ii-p141.2"></span>and the rest of the Creed.  

<span id="xii.ii-p142"></span>Then he prays, bowing his neck.  

<span id="xii.ii-p143"></span>XIX. God and Sovereign of all, make us,
who are unworthy, worthy of this hour, lover of mankind; that being pure
from all deceit and all hypocrisy, we may be united with one another by
the bond of peace and love, being confirmed by the sanctification of Thy
divine knowledge through Thine only-begotten Son, our Lord and Saviour
<span id="xii.ii-p143.1"></span>Jesus Christ, with whom Thou art
blessed, together with Thy all-holy, and good, and quickening Spirit,
now and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p144"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p145"></span>XX. Let us stand well, let us stand
reverently, let us stand in the fear of God, and with compunction of
heart. In peace let us pray to the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p146"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p147"></span>For God of peace, mercy, love, compassion,
and loving-kindness art Thou, and Thine only-begotten Son, and Thine
all-holy Spirit, now and ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p148"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p149"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p150"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p151"></span>Peace be to all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p152"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p153"></span>And to thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p154"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p155"></span>Let us salute one another with an holy
kiss. <span id="fr_4101"></span>[4102](#fn_4101) Let us bow our heads to
the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p157"></span>The Priest bows, saying this prayer:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p158"></span>XXI. Only Lord and merciful God, on those
who are bowing their necks before Thy holy altar, and seeking the
spiritual gifts that come from Thee, send forth Thy good grace; and
bless us all with every spiritual blessing, that cannot be taken from
us, Thou, who dwellest on high, and hast regard unto things that are
lowly.  

<span id="xii.ii-p159"></span>(Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p160"></span>For worthy of praise and worship and most
glorious is Thy all-holy name, Father and Son and Holy Spirit, now and
always, and to all eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p161"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p162"></span>Sir, pronounce the blessing.  

<span id="xii.ii-p163"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p164"></span>The Lord will bless us, and minister with
us all by His grace and loving-kindness.  

<span id="xii.ii-p165"></span>And again.  

<span id="xii.ii-p166"></span>The Lord will bless us, and make us worthy
to stand at His holy altar, at all times, now and always, and for ever.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p167"></span>And again.  

<span id="xii.ii-p168"></span>Blessed be God, who blesseth and
sanctifieth us all in our attendance upon, and service of, His pure
mysteries, now and always, and for ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p169"></span>The Deacon makes the Universal Litany.  

<span id="xii.ii-p170"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p170.1"></span>XXII</span> In peace let us pray to the Lord.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p171"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p172"></span>O Lord, have mercy.  

<span id="xii.ii-p173"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p174"></span>Save us, have mercy upon us, pity and keep
us, O God, by Thy grace.  

<span id="xii.ii-p175"></span>For the peace that is from above, and the
loving-kindness of God, and the salvation of our souls;  

<span id="xii.ii-p176"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p177"></span>For the peace of the whole world, and the
unity of all the holy churches of God;  

<span id="xii.ii-p178"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p179"></span>For those who bear fruit, and labour
honourably in the holy churches of God; for those who remember the poor,
the widows and the orphans, the strangers and needy ones; and for those
who have requested us to mention them in our prayers;  

<span id="xii.ii-p180"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p181"></span>For those who are in old age and
infirmity, for the sick and suffering, and those who are troubled by
unclean spirits, for their speedy cure from God and their salvation;  

<span id="xii.ii-p182"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p183"></span>For those who are passing their days in
virginity, and celibacy, and discipline, and for those in holy
matrimony; and for the holy fathers and brethren agonizing in
mountains, <span id="fr_4102"></span>[4103](#fn_4102) and dens, and
caves of the earth;  

<span id="xii.ii-p185"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p186"></span>For Christians sailing, travelling, living
among strangers, and for our brethren in captivity, in exile, in prison,
and in bitter slavery, their peaceful return;  

<span id="xii.ii-p187"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p188"></span>For the remission of our sins, and
forgiveness of our transgressions, and for our deliverance from all
tribulation, wrath, danger, and constraint, and uprising against us of
enemies;  

<span id="xii.ii-p189"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p190"></span>For favourable weather, peaceful showers,
beneficent dews, abundance of fruits, the perfect close of a good
season, and for the crown of the year;  

<span id="xii.ii-p191"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p192"></span>For our fathers and brethren present, and
praying with us in this holy hour, and at every season, their zeal,
labour, and earnestness;  

<span id="xii.ii-p193"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p194"></span><span id="page_542">p. 542</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_542"></span>For every Christian soul in tribulation and
distress, and needing the mercy and succour of God; for the return of
the erring, the health of the sick, the deliverance of the captives, the
rest of the fathers and brethren that have fallen asleep aforetime;  

<span id="xii.ii-p195"></span>Let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p196"></span>For the hearing and acceptance of our
prayer before God, and the sending down on us His rich mercies and
compassion.  

<span id="xii.ii-p197"></span>Let us beseech the Lord. <span
id="fr_4103"></span>[4104](#fn_4103)  

<span id="xii.ii-p199"></span>And for the offered, precious, heavenly,
unutterable, pure, glorious, dread, awful, divine gifts, and the
salvation of the priest who stands by and offers them;  

<span id="xii.ii-p200"></span>Let us offer supplication to God the Lord.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p201"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p202"></span>O Lord, have mercy.  

<span id="xii.ii-p203"></span>(Thrice.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p204"></span>Then the Priest makes the sign of the
cross on the gifts, <span id="fr_4104"></span>[4105](#fn_4104) and,
standing, speaks separately thus:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p206"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ii-p206.1"></span>XXIII</span> Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good-will among men, etc.  

<span id="xii.ii-p207"></span>(Thrice.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p208"></span>Lord, Thou wilt open my lips, and my mouth
shall show forth Thy praise.  

<span id="xii.ii-p209"></span>(Thrice.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p210"></span>Let my mouth be filled with Thy praise, O
Lord, that I may tell of Thy glory, of Thy majesty, all the day.  

<span id="xii.ii-p211"></span>(Thrice.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p212"></span>Of the Father. Amen. And of the Son. Amen.
And of the Holy Spirit. Amen. Now and always, and to all eternity. Amen.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p213"></span>And bowing to this side and to that, <span
id="fr_4105"></span>[4106](#fn_4105) he says:  

<span id="xii.ii-p215"></span><span id="xii.ii-p215.1"></span>XXIV.
Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together.  

<span id="xii.ii-p216"></span>And they answer, bowing:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p217"></span>The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee. <span
id="fr_4106"></span>[4107](#fn_4106)  <span
id="fr_4107"></span>[4108](#fn_4107)  

<span id="xii.ii-p219"></span>Then the Priest, at great length:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p220"></span>O Sovereign Lord, who hast visited us in
compassion and mercies, and hast freely given to us, Thy humble and
sinful and unworthy servants, boldness to stand at Thy holy altar, and
to offer to Thee this dread and bloodless sacrifice for our sins, and
for the errors of the people, look upon me Thy unprofitable servant, and
blot out my transgressions for Thy compassion’s sake; and purify my lips
and heart from all pollution of flesh and spirit; and remove from me
every shameful and foolish thought, and fit me by the power of Thy
all-holy Spirit for this service; and receive me graciously by Thy
goodness as I draw nigh to Thy altar.  

<span id="xii.ii-p221"></span>And be pleased, O Lord, that these gifts
brought by our hands may be acceptable, stooping to my weakness; and
cast me not away from Thy presence, and abhor not my unworthiness; but
pity me according to Thy great mercy, and according to the multitude of
Thy mercies pass by my transgressions, that, having come before Thy
glory without condemnation, I may be counted worthy of the protection of
Thy only-begotten Son, and of the illumination of Thy all-holy Spirit,
that I may not be as a slave of sin cast out, but as Thy servant may
find grace and mercy and forgiveness of sins before Thee, both in the
world that now is and in that which is to come.  

<span id="xii.ii-p222"></span>I beseech Thee, Almighty Sovereign,
all-powerful Lord, hear my prayer; for Thou art He who workest all in
all, and we all seek in all things the help and succour that come from
Thee and Thy only-begotten Son, and the good and quickening and
consubstantial Spirit, now and ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p223"></span>XXV. O God, who through Thy great and
unspeakable love didst send forth Thy only-begotten Son into the world,
in order that He might turn back the lost sheep, turn not away us
sinners, laying hold of Thee by this dread and bloodless sacrifice; for
we trust not in our own righteousness, but in Thy good mercy, by which
Thou purchasest our race.  

<span id="xii.ii-p224"></span>We entreat and beseech Thy goodness that
it may not be for condemnation to Thy people that this mystery for
salvation has been administered by us, but for remission of sins, for
renewal of souls and bodies, for the well-pleasing of Thee, God and
Father, in the mercy and love of Thy only-begotten Son, with whom Thou
art blessed, together with Thy all-holy and good and quickening Spirit,
now and always, and for ever. <span id="fr_4108"></span>[4109](#fn_4108)
 

<span id="xii.ii-p226"></span>XXVI. O Lord God, who didst create us, and
bring us into life, who hast shown to us ways to salvation, who hast
granted to us a revelation of heavenly mysteries, and hast appointed us
to this ministry in the power of Thy all-holy Spirit, grant, O
Sovereign, that we may become servants of Thy new testament, ministers
of Thy pure <span id="page_543">p. 543</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_543"></span>mysteries, and receive us as we draw near to
Thy holy altar, according to the greatness of Thy mercy, that we may
become worthy of offering to Thee gifts and sacrifices for our
transgressions and for those of the people; and grant to us, O Lord,
with all fear and a pure conscience to offer to Thee this spiritual and
bloodless sacrifice, and graciously receiving it unto Thy holy and
spiritual altar above the skies for an odour of a sweet spiritual smell,
send down in answer on us the grace of Thy all-holy Spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p227"></span>And, O God, look upon us, and have regard
to this our reasonable service, and accept it, as Thou didst accept the
gifts of <span id="xii.ii-p227.1"></span>Abel, the sacrifices of <span
id="xii.ii-p227.2"></span>Noah, the priestly offices of <span
id="xii.ii-p227.3"></span>Moses and <span
id="xii.ii-p227.4"></span>Aaron, the peace-offerings of <span
id="xii.ii-p227.5"></span>Samuel, the repentance of <span
id="xii.ii-p227.6"></span>David, the incense of <span
id="xii.ii-p227.7"></span>Zacharias. As Thou didst accept from the hand
of Thy apostles this true service, so accept also in Thy goodness from
the hands of us sinners these offered gifts; and grant that our offering
may be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit, as a
propitiation <span id="fr_4109"></span>[4110](#fn_4109) for our
transgressions and the errors of the people; and for the rest of the
souls <span id="fr_4110"></span>[4111](#fn_4110) that have fallen asleep
aforetime; that we also, Thy humble, sinful, and unworthy servants,
being counted worthy without guile to serve Thy holy altar, may receive
the reward of faithful and wise stewards, and may find grace and mercy
in the terrible day of Thy just and good retribution.  

<span id="xii.ii-p230"></span>Prayer of the veil. <span
id="fr_4111"></span>[4112](#fn_4111)  

<span id="xii.ii-p232"></span><span id="xii.ii-p232.1"></span>XXVII. We
thank Thee, O Lord our God, that Thou hast given us boldness for the
entrance of Thy holy places, which Thou hast renewed to us as a new and
living way through the veil of the flesh <span
id="fr_4112"></span>[4113](#fn_4112) of Thy Christ. We therefore, being
counted worthy to enter into the place of the tabernacle of Thy glory,
and to be within the veil, and to behold the Holy of Holies, cast
ourselves down before Thy goodness:  

<span id="xii.ii-p234"></span>Lord, have mercy on us: since we are full
of fear and trembling, when about to stand at Thy holy altar, and to
offer this dread and bloodless sacrifice for our own sins and for the
errors of the people: <span id="fr_4113"></span>[4114](#fn_4113) send
forth, O God, Thy good grace, and sanctify our souls, and bodies, and
spirits; and turn our thoughts to holiness, that with a pure conscience
we may bring to Thee a peace-offering, the sacrifice of praise:  

<span id="xii.ii-p236"></span>(Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p237"></span>By the mercy and loving-kindness of Thy
only-begotten Son, with whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy
all-holy, and good, and quickening Spirit, now and always:  

<span id="xii.ii-p238"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p239"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p240"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p241"></span>Peace be to all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p242"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p243"></span>Let us stand reverently, let us stand in
the fear of God, and with contrition: let us attend to the holy
communion service, to offer peace to God.  

<span id="xii.ii-p244"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p245"></span>The offering of peace, the sacrifice of
praise.  

<span id="xii.ii-p246"></span>The Priest <span
id="xii.ii-p246.1"></span>\[A veil is now withdrawn from the oblation of
bread and wine.<span id="xii.ii-p246.2"></span>\]  

<span id="xii.ii-p247"></span>And, uncovering the veils that darkly
invest in symbol <span id="fr_4114"></span>[4115](#fn_4114) this sacred
ceremonial, do Thou reveal it clearly to us: fill our intellectual
vision with absolute light, and having purified our poverty from every
pollution of flesh and spirit, make it worthy of this dread and awful
approach: for Thou art an all-merciful and gracious God, and we send up
the praise and the thanksgiving to Thee, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
now, and always, and for ever.  

##### <span id="xii.ii-p248.2"></span>III.

##### <span id="xii.ii-p248.3"></span>The Anaphora.

<span id="xii.ii-p249"></span>Then he says aloud:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p250"></span><span id="xii.ii-p250.1"></span>XXVIII.
The love of the Lord and Father, the grace of the Lord and Son, and the
fellowship and the gift of the Holy Spirit, be with us all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p251"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p252"></span>And with thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p253"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p254"></span>Let us lift up our minds and our
hearts. <span id="fr_4115"></span>[4116](#fn_4115)  

<span id="xii.ii-p256"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p257"></span>It is becoming and right.  

<span id="xii.ii-p258"></span>Then the Priest prays.  

<span id="xii.ii-p259"></span>Verily it is becoming and right, proper
and due to praise Thee, to sing of Thee, to bless Thee, to worship Thee,
to glorify Thee, to give Thee thanks, Maker of every creature visible
and invisible, the treasure of eternal good things, the fountain of life
and immortality, God and Lord of all:  

<span id="xii.ii-p260"></span>Whom the heavens of heavens praise, and
all the host of them; the sun, and the moon, and all the choir of the
stars; earth, sea, and all that is in them; Jerusalem, the heavenly
assembly, <span id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_544"></span>and church of the first-born that are
written in heaven; spirits of just men and of prophets; souls of martyrs
and of apostles; angels, archangels, thrones, dominions, principalities,
and authorities, and dread powers; and the many-eyed cherubim, and the
six-winged seraphim, which cover their faces with two wings, their feet
with two, and with two they fly, crying one to another with unresting
lips, with unceasing praises:  

<span id="xii.ii-p261"></span>(Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p262"></span>With loud voice singing the victorious
hymn of Thy majestic glory, crying aloud, praising, shouting, and
saying:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p263"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p264"></span>Holy, holy, holy, O Lord of Sabaoth, the
heaven and the earth are full of Thy glory. Hosanna in the highest;
blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the
highest. <span id="fr_4116"></span>[4117](#fn_4116)  

<span id="xii.ii-p266"></span>The Priest, making the sign of the
cross <span id="fr_4117"></span>[4118](#fn_4117) on the gifts, says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p268"></span><span id="xii.ii-p268.1"></span>XXIX. Holy
art Thou, King of eternity, and Lord and giver of all holiness; holy
also Thy only-begotten Son, our Lord <span
id="xii.ii-p268.2"></span>Jesus Christ, by whom Thou hast made all
things; holy also Thy Holy Spirit, which searches all things, even Thy
deep things, O God: holy art Thou, almighty, all-powerful, good, dread,
merciful, most compassionate to Thy creatures; who didst make man from
earth after Thine own image and likeness; who didst give him the joy of
paradise; and when he transgressed Thy commandment, and fell away, didst
not disregard nor desert him, O Good One, but didst chasten him as at
merciful father, call him by the law, instruct him by the prophets; and
afterwards didst send forth Thine only-begotten Son Himself, our Lord
<span id="xii.ii-p268.3"></span>Jesus Christ, into the world, that He by
His coming might renew and restore Thy image;  

<span id="xii.ii-p269"></span>Who, having descended from heaven, and
become flesh of the Holy Spirit and Virgin Godmother <span
id="fr_4118"></span>[4119](#fn_4118) Mary, and having sojourned among
men, fulfilled the dispensation for the salvation of our race; and being
about to endure His voluntary and life-giving death by the cross, He the
sinless for us the sinners, in the night in which He was betrayed, nay,
rather delivered Himself up for the life and salvation of the world,  

<span id="xii.ii-p271"></span>Then the Priest holds the bread in his
hand, and says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p272"></span><span id="xii.ii-p272.1"></span>XXX.
Having taken the bread in His holy and pure and blameless and immortal
hands, lifting up His eyes to heaven, and showing it to Thee, His God
and Father, He gave thanks, and hallowed, and brake, and gave it to
us, <span id="fr_4119"></span>[4120](#fn_4119) His disciples and
apostles, saying:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p274"></span>The Deacons say: <span
id="fr_4120"></span>[4121](#fn_4120)  

<span id="xii.ii-p276"></span>For the remission of sins and life
everlasting.  

<span id="xii.ii-p277"></span>Then he says aloud:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p278"></span>Take, eat: this is my body, broken for
you, and given for remission of sins.  

<span id="xii.ii-p279"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p280"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p281"></span>Then he takes the cup, and says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p282"></span>In like manner, after supper, He took the
cup, and having mixed wine and water, lifting up His eyes to heaven, and
presenting it to Thee, His God and Father, He gave thanks, and hollowed
and blessed it, and filled it with the Holy Spirit, and gave it to us
His disciples, saying, Drink ye all of it; this is my blood of the new
testament shed for you and many, and distributed for the remission of
sins.  

<span id="xii.ii-p283"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p284"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p285"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p286"></span>This do in remembrance of me; for as often
as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lord’s
death, and confess His resurrection, till He come.  

<span id="xii.ii-p287"></span>The Deacons say:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p288"></span>We believe and confess:  

<span id="xii.ii-p289"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p290"></span>We show forth Thy death, O Lord, and
confess Thy resurrection.  

<span id="xii.ii-p291"></span>The Priest (Oblation).  

<span id="xii.ii-p292"></span><span id="xii.ii-p292.1"></span>XXXI.
Remembering, therefore, His life-giving sufferings, His saving cross,
His death and His burial, and resurrection from the dead on the third
day, and His ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of
Thee, our God and Father, and His second glorious and awful appearing,
when He shall come with glory to judge the quick and the dead, and
render to every one according to His works; even we, sinful men, offer
unto Thee, O Lord, this dread and bloodless sacrifice, praying that Thou
wilt not deal with us after our sins, nor reward us according to our
iniquities;  

<span id="xii.ii-p293"></span>But that Thou, according to Thy mercy and
<span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span id="xii.ii-Page_545"></span>Thy
unspeakable loving-kindness, passing by and blotting out the handwriting
against us Thy suppliants, wilt grant to us Thy heavenly and eternal
gifts (which eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and which have
not entered into the heart of man <span
id="fr_4121"></span>[4122](#fn_4121) ) that thou hast prepared, O God,
for those who love Thee; and reject not, O loving Lord, the people for
my sake, or for my sin’s sake:  

<span id="xii.ii-p295"></span>Then he says, thrice:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p296"></span>For Thy people and Thy Church supplicate
Thee.  

<span id="xii.ii-p297"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p298"></span>Have mercy on us, O Lord our God, Father
Almighty.  

<span id="xii.ii-p299"></span>Again the Priest says (Invocation):—  

<span id="xii.ii-p300"></span><span id="xii.ii-p300.1"></span>XXXII.
Have mercy upon us, O God Almighty.  

<span id="xii.ii-p301"></span>Have mercy upon us, O God our Saviour.  

<span id="xii.ii-p302"></span>Have mercy upon us, O God, according to
Thy great mercy, and send forth on us, and on these offered gifts, Thy
all-holy Spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p303"></span>Then, bowing his neck, he says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p304"></span>The sovereign and quickening Spirit, that
sits upon the throne with Thee, our God and Father, and with Thy
only-begotten Son, reigning with Thee; the consubstantial <span
id="fr_4122"></span>[4123](#fn_4122) and co-eternal; that spoke in the
law and in the prophets, and in Thy New Testament; that descended in the
form of a dove on our Lord <span id="xii.ii-p305.1"></span>Jesus Christ
at the river Jordan, and abode on Him; that descended on Thy apostles in
the form of tongues of fire in the upper room of the holy and glorious
Zion on the day of Pentecost: this Thine all-holy Spirit, send down, O
Lord, upon us, and upon these offered holy gifts;  

<span id="xii.ii-p306"></span>And rising up, he says aloud:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p307"></span>That coming, by His holy and good and
glorious appearing, He may sanctify this bread, and make it the holy
body of Thy Christ. <span id="fr_4123"></span>[4124](#fn_4123)  

<span id="xii.ii-p309"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p310"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p311"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p312"></span>And this cup the precious blood of Thy
Christ.  

<span id="xii.ii-p313"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p314"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p315"></span>The Priest by himself standing.  

<span id="xii.ii-p316"></span><span id="xii.ii-p316.1"></span>XXXIII.
That they may be to all that partake of them for remission of sins, and
for life everlasting, for the sanctification of souls and of bodies, for
bearing the fruit of good works, for the stablishing of Thy Holy
Catholic Church, which Thou hast founded on the Rock of Faith, <span
id="fr_4124"></span>[4125](#fn_4124) that the gates of hell may not
prevail against it; delivering it from all heresy and scandals, and from
those who work iniquity, keeping it till the fulness of the time.  

<span id="xii.ii-p318"></span>And having bowed, he says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p319"></span><span id="xii.ii-p319.1"></span>XXXIV. We
present them to Thee also, O Lord, for the holy places, which Thou hast
glorified by the divine appearing of Thy Christ, and by the visitation
of Thy all-holy Spirit; especially for the glorious Zion, the mother of
all the churches; <span id="fr_4125"></span>[4126](#fn_4125) and for Thy
Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church throughout the world: even now, O
Lord, bestow upon her the rich gifts of Thy all-holy Spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p321"></span>Remember also, O Lord, our holy fathers
and brethren in it, and the bishops in all the world, who rightly divide
the word of Thy truth.  

<span id="xii.ii-p322"></span>Remember also, O Lord, every city and
country, and those of the true faith dwelling in them, their peace and
security.  

<span id="xii.ii-p323"></span>Remember, O Lord, Christians sailing,
travelling, sojourning in strange lands; our fathers and brethren, who
are in bonds, prison, captivity, and exile; who are in mines, and under
torture, and in bitter slavery. Remember, O Lord, the sick and
afflicted, and those troubled by unclean spirits, their speedy healing
from Thee, O God, and their salvation.  

<span id="xii.ii-p324"></span>Remember, O Lord, every Christian soul in
affliction and distress, needing Thy mercy and succour, O God; and the
return of the erring.  

<span id="xii.ii-p325"></span>Remember, O Lord, our fathers and
brethren, toiling hard, and ministering unto us, for Thy holy name’s
sake.  

<span id="xii.ii-p326"></span>Remember all, O Lord, for good: have mercy
on all, O Lord, be reconciled to us all: give peace to the multitudes of
Thy people: put away scandals: bring wars to an end: make the uprising
of heresies to cease: grant Thy peace and Thy love to us, O God our
Saviour, the hope of all the ends of the earth.  

<span id="xii.ii-p327"></span>Remember, O Lord, favourable weather,
peaceful showers, beneficent dews, abundance of fruits, and to crown the
year with Thy goodness; for the eyes of all wait on Thee, and Thou
givest their food in due season: thou openest Thy hand, and fillest
every living thing with gladness.  

<span id="xii.ii-p328"></span>Remember, O Lord, those who bear fruit,
and labour honourably in the holy <span
id="fr_4126"></span>[4127](#fn_4126) of Thy Church; <span
id="page_546">p. 546</span> <span id="xii.ii-Page_546"></span>and those
who forget not the poor, the widows, the orphans, the strangers, and the
needy; and all who have desired us to remember them in our prayers.  

<span id="xii.ii-p330"></span>Moreover, O Lord, be pleased to remember
those who have brought these offerings this day to Thy holy altar, and
for what each one has brought them or with what mind, and those persons
who have just now been mentioned to Thee.  

<span id="xii.ii-p331"></span>Remember, O Lord, according to the
multitude of Thy mercy and compassion, me also, Thy humble and
unprofitable servant; and the deacons who surround Thy holy altar, and
graciously give them a blameless life, keep their ministry undefiled,
and purchase for them a good degree, that we may find mercy and grace,
with all the saints that have been well pleasing to Thee since the world
began, to generation and generation—grandsires, sires, patriarchs,
prophets, apostles, martyrs, confessors, teachers, saints, and every
just spirit made perfect in the faith of Thy Christ.  

<span id="xii.ii-p332"></span>XXXV. <span
id="fr_4127"></span>[4128](#fn_4127) Hail, Mary, highly favoured: the
Lord is with Thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed the fruit
of thy womb, for thou didst bear the Saviour of our souls. <span
id="fr_4128"></span>[4129](#fn_4128)  

<span id="xii.ii-p341"></span>The Deacons.  

<span id="xii.ii-p342"></span><span id="xii.ii-p342.1"></span>XXXVI.
Remember us, O Lord God.  

<span id="xii.ii-p343"></span>The Priest, bowing, says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p344"></span>Remember, O Lord God, the spirits and all
flesh, of whom we have made mention, and of whom we have not made
mention, who are of the true faith, from righteous <span
id="xii.ii-p344.1"></span>Abel unto this day: unto them do Thou give
rest there in the land of the living, in Thy kingdom, in the joy of
paradise, in the bosom of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, our holy
fathers; whence pain, and grief, and lamentation have fled: there the
light of Thy countenance looks upon them, and enlightens them for
ever. <span id="fr_4129"></span>[4130](#fn_4129)  

<span id="xii.ii-p346"></span>Make the end of our lives Christian,
acceptable, blameless, and peaceful, O Lord, gathering us together, O
Lord, under the feet of Thine elect, when Thou wilt, and as Thou wilt;
only without shame and transgressions, through Thy only-begotten Son,
our Lord and God and Saviour <span id="xii.ii-p346.1"></span>Jesus
Christ: for He is the only sinless one who hath appeared on the earth.  

<span id="xii.ii-p347"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p348"></span>And <span id="xii.ii-p348.1"></span>let us
pray:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p349"></span>For the peace and establishing of the
whole world, and of the holy churches of God, and for the purposes for
which each one made his offering, or according to the desire he has: and
for the people standing round, and for all men, and all women:  

<span id="xii.ii-p350"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p351"></span>And for all men and all women. (<span
id="xii.ii-p351.1"></span>Amen.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p352"></span>The Priest says aloud:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p353"></span>Wherefore, both to them and to us, do Thou
in Thy goodness and love:  

<span id="xii.ii-p354"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p355"></span>Forgive, remit, pardon, O God, our
transgressions, voluntary and involuntary: in deed and in word: in
knowledge and in ignorance: by night and by day: in thought and intent:
in Thy goodness and love, forgive us them all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p356"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p357"></span>Through the grace and compassion and love
of Thy only-begotten Son, with whom Thou art blessed and glorified,
together with the all-holy, and good, and quickening Spirit, now and
ever, and to all eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p358"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p359"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p360"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p361"></span><span id="xii.ii-p361.1"></span>XXXVII.
Peace be to all:  

<span id="xii.ii-p362"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p363"></span>And to thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p364"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p365"></span>Again, and continually, in peace let us
pray to the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p366"></span>For the gifts to the Lord God presented
and sanctified, precious, heavenly, unspeakable, pure, glorious, dread,
awful, divine;  

<span id="xii.ii-p367"></span>Let us pray.  

<span id="xii.ii-p368"></span>That the Lord our God, having graciously
received them to His altar that is holy and above the heavens, rational
and spiritual, for the odour of a sweet spiritual savour, may send down
in answer upon us the divine grace and the gift of the all-holy Spirit;
 

<span id="xii.ii-p369"></span>Let us pray.  

<span id="xii.ii-p370"></span><span id="page_547">p. 547</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_547"></span>Having prayed for the unity of the faith,
and the communion of His all-holy and adorable Spirit;  

<span id="xii.ii-p371"></span>Let us commend ourselves and one another,
and our whole life, to Christ our God:  

<span id="xii.ii-p372"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p373"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p374"></span>The Priest prays.  

<span id="xii.ii-p375"></span> <span id="xii.ii-p375.1"></span>XXXVIII.
God and Father of our Lord and God and Saviour <span
id="xii.ii-p375.2"></span>Jesus Christ, the glorious Lord, the blessed
essence, the bounteous goodness, the God and Sovereign of all, who art
blessed to all eternity, who sittest upon the cherubim, and art
glorified by the seraphim, before whom stand thousand thousands and ten
thousand times ten thousand hosts of angels and archangels: Thou hast
accepted the gifts, offerings, and fruits brought unto Thee as an odour
of a sweet spiritual smell, and hast been pleased to sanctify them, and
make them perfect, O good One, by the grace of Thy Christ, and by the
presence of Thy all-holy Spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p376"></span>Sanctify also, O Lord, our souls, and
bodies, and spirits, and touch our understandings, and search our
consciences, and cast out from us every evil imagination, every impure
feeling, every base desire, every unbecoming thought, all envy, and
vanity, and hypocrisy, all lying, all deceit, every worldly affection,
all covetousness, all vainglory, all indifference, all vice, all
passion, all anger, all malice, all blasphemy, every motion of the flesh
and spirit that is not in accordance with Thy holy will:  

<span id="xii.ii-p377"></span> (Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p378"></span>And count us worthy, O loving Lord, with
boldness, without condemnation, in a pure heart, with a contrite spirit,
with unshamed face, with sanctified lips, to dare to call upon Thee, the
holy God, Father in heaven, and to say,  

<span id="xii.ii-p379"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p380"></span>Our Father, which art in heaven: hollowed
be Thy name; <span id="xii.ii-p380.1"></span>and so on to the doxology.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p381"></span>The Priest, bowing, says (the
Embolism <span id="fr_4130"></span>[4131](#fn_4130) ):—  

<span id="xii.ii-p383"></span>And lead us not into temptation, Lord,
Lord of Hosts, who knowest our frailty, but deliver us from the evil one
and his works, and from all his malice and craftiness, for the sake of
Thy holy name, which has been placed upon our humility:  

<span id="xii.ii-p384"></span>(Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p385"></span>For Thine is the kingdom, the power, and
the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p386"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p387"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p388"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p389"></span><span id="xii.ii-p389.1"></span>XXXIX.
Peace be to all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p390"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p391"></span>And to thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p392"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p393"></span>Let us bow our heads to the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p394"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p395"></span>To Thee, O Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p396"></span>The Priest prays, speaking thus:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p397"></span>To Thee, O Lord, we Thy servants have
bowed our heads before Thy holy altar, waiting for the rich mercies that
are from Thee.  

<span id="xii.ii-p398"></span>Send forth upon us, O Lord, Thy plenteous
grace and Thy blessing; and sanctify our souls, bodies, and spirits,
that we may become worthy communicants and partakers of Thy holy
mysteries, to the forgiveness of sins and life everlasting:  

<span id="xii.ii-p399"></span>(Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p400"></span>For adorable and glorified art Thou, our
God, and Thy only-begotten Son, and Thy all-holy Spirit, now and ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p401"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p402"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p403"></span>The Priest says aloud:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p404"></span>And the grace and the mercies of the holy
and consubstantial, and uncreated, and adorable Trinity, shall be with
us all. <span id="fr_4131"></span>[4132](#fn_4131)  

<span id="xii.ii-p406"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p407"></span>And with thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p408"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p409"></span>In the fear of God, let us attend.  

<span id="xii.ii-p410"></span>The Priest says secretly:— <span
id="fr_4132"></span>[4133](#fn_4132)  

<span id="xii.ii-p412"></span>O holy Lord, that abidest in holy places,
sanctify us by the word of Thy grace, and by the visitation of Thy
all-holy Spirit: for Thou, O Lord, hast said, Ye will be holy, for I am
holy. O Lord our God, incomprehensible Word of God, one in substance
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, co-eternal and indivisible, accept
the pure hymn, in Thy holy and bloodless sacrifices; with the cherubim,
and seraphim, and from me, a sinful man, crying and saying:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p413"></span>He takes up the gifts and saith aloud:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p414"></span><span id="xii.ii-p414.1"></span>XL. The
holy things unto holy.<span id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_548"></span>  

<span id="xii.ii-p415"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p416"></span>One <span id="xii.ii-p416.1"></span>only
is holy, one Lord <span id="xii.ii-p416.2"></span>Jesus Christ, to the
glory of God the Father, to whom be glory to all eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p417"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p418"></span><span id="xii.ii-p418.1"></span>XLI. For
the remission of our sins, and the propitiation of our souls, and for
every soul in tribulation and distress, needing the mercy and succour of
God, and for the return of the erring, the healing of the sick, the
deliverance of the captives, the rest of our fathers and brethren who
have fallen asleep aforetime;  

<span id="xii.ii-p419"></span>Let us all say fervently, Lord, have
mercy:  

<span id="xii.ii-p420"></span>The People (twelve times).  

<span id="xii.ii-p421"></span>Lord, have mercy. <span
id="fr_4133"></span>[4134](#fn_4133)  

<span id="xii.ii-p423"></span>Then the Priest breaks the bread, and
holds the half in his right hand, and the half in his left, and dips
that in his right hand in the chalice, saying:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p424"></span>The union of the all-holy body and
precious blood of our Lord and God and Saviour, <span
id="xii.ii-p424.1"></span>Jesus Christ.  

<span id="xii.ii-p425"></span>Then he makes the sign of the cross on
that in his left hand: then with that which has been signed the other
half: then forthwith he begins to divide, and before all to give to each
chalice a single piece, saying:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p426"></span>It has been made one, and sanctified, and
perfected, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, now and ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p427"></span>And when he makes the sign of the cross on
the bread, he says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p428"></span>Behold the Lamb of God, the Son of the
Father, that taketh away the sin of the world, sacrificed for the life
and salvation of the world.  

<span id="xii.ii-p429"></span>And when he gives a single piece to each
chalice he says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p430"></span>A holy portion of Christ, full of grace
and truth, of the Father, and of the Holy Spirit, to whom be the glory
and the power to all eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p431"></span>Then he begins to divide, and to say:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p432"></span><span id="xii.ii-p432.1"></span>XLII. The
Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. In green pastures, <span
id="xii.ii-p432.2"></span>and so on. <span
id="fr_4134"></span>[4135](#fn_4134)  

<span id="xii.ii-p434"></span>Then,  

<span id="xii.ii-p435"></span>I will bless the Lord at all times, <span
id="xii.ii-p435.1"></span>and so on. <span
id="fr_4135"></span>[4136](#fn_4135)  

<span id="xii.ii-p437"></span>Then,  

<span id="xii.ii-p438"></span>I will extol Thee, my God, O King, <span
id="xii.ii-p438.1"></span>and so on. <span
id="fr_4136"></span>[4137](#fn_4136)  

<span id="xii.ii-p440"></span>Then,  

<span id="xii.ii-p441"></span>O praise the Lord, all ye nations, <span
id="xii.ii-p441.1"></span>and so on. <span
id="fr_4137"></span>[4138](#fn_4137)  

<span id="xii.ii-p443"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p444"></span>Sir, pronounce the blessing.  

<span id="xii.ii-p445"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p446"></span>The Lord will bless us, and keep us
without condemnation for the communion of His pure gifts, now and
always, and for ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p447"></span>And when they have filled, <span
id="fr_4138"></span>[4139](#fn_4138) the Deacon says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p449"></span>Sir, pronounce the blessing.  

<span id="xii.ii-p450"></span>The Priest says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p451"></span>The Lord will bless us, and make us worthy
with the pure touchings of our fingers to take the live coal, and place
it upon the mouths of the faithful for the purification and renewal of
their souls and bodies, now and always.  

<span id="xii.ii-p452"></span>Then,  

<span id="xii.ii-p453"></span>O taste and see that the Lord is good; who
is parted and not divided; distributed to the faithful and not expended;
for the remission of sins, and the life everlasting; now and always, and
for ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p454"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p455"></span>In the peace of Christ, let us sing:  

<span id="xii.ii-p456"></span>The Singers.  

<span id="xii.ii-p457"></span>O taste and see that the Lord is good.  

<span id="xii.ii-p458"></span>The Priest says the prayer before the
communion.  

<span id="xii.ii-p459"></span>O Lord our God, the heavenly bread, the
life of the universe, I have sinned against Heaven, and before Thee, and
am not worthy to partake of Thy pure mysteries; but as a merciful God,
make me worthy by Thy grace, without condemnation to partake of Thy holy
body and precious blood, for the remission of sins, and life
everlasting. <span id="fr_4139"></span>[4140](#fn_4139)  

<span id="xii.ii-p461"></span>XLIII. Then he distributes to the clergy;
and when the deacons take the disks <span
id="fr_4140"></span>[4141](#fn_4140) and the chalices for distribution
to the people, the Deacon, who takes the first disk, says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p463"></span>Sir, pronounce the blessing.  

<span id="xii.ii-p464"></span>The Priest replies:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p465"></span>Glory to God who has sanctified and is
sanctifying us all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p466"></span>The Deacon says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p467"></span>Be Thou exalted, O God, over the heavens,
and Thy glory over all the earth, and Thy kingdom endureth to all
eternity. <span id="fr_4141"></span>[4142](#fn_4141) <span
id="page_549">p. 549</span> <span id="xii.ii-Page_549"></span>  

<span id="xii.ii-p469"></span>And when the Deacon is about to put it on
the side-table <span id="fr_4142"></span>[4143](#fn_4142) the Priest
says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p471"></span>Blessed be the name of the Lord our God
for ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p472"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p473"></span>In the fear of God, and in faith and love,
draw nigh.  

<span id="xii.ii-p474"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p475"></span>Blessed is He that cometh in the name of
the Lord. <span id="fr_4143"></span>[4144](#fn_4143)  

<span id="xii.ii-p477"></span>And again, when he sets down the disk upon
the side-table, he says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p478"></span>Sir, pronounce the blessing.  

<span id="xii.ii-p479"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p480"></span>Save Thy people, O God, and bless Thine
inheritance.  

<span id="xii.ii-p481"></span>The Priest again. <span
id="fr_4144"></span>[4145](#fn_4144)  

<span id="xii.ii-p483"></span>Glory to our God, who has sanctified us
all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p484"></span>And when he has put the chalice back on
the holy table, the Priest says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p485"></span>Blessed be the name of the Lord to all
eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p486"></span>The Deacons and the People say:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p487"></span>Fill our mouths with Thy praise, O Lord,
and fill our lips with joy, that we may sing of Thy glory, of Thy
greatness all the day.  

<span id="xii.ii-p488"></span>And again:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p489"></span>We render thanks to Thee, Christ our God,
that Thou hast made us worthy to partake of Thy body and blood, for the
remission of sins, and for life everlasting. Do Thou, in Thy goodness
and love, keep us, we pray Thee, without condemnation.  

<span id="xii.ii-p490"></span>The prayer of incense at the last
entrance.  

<span id="xii.ii-p491"></span><span id="xii.ii-p491.1"></span>XLIV. We
render thanks to Thee, the Saviour and God of all, for all the good
things Thou hast given us, and for the participation of Thy holy and
pure mysteries, and we offer to Thee this incense, praying: Keep us
under the shadow of Thy wings, and count us worthy till our last breath
to partake of Thy holy rites for the sanctification of our souls and
bodies, for the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven: for Thou, O God,
art our sanctification, and we send up praise and thanksgiving to Thee,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p492"></span>The Deacon begins in the entrance.  

<span id="xii.ii-p493"></span>Glory to Thee, glory to Thee, glory to
Thee, O Christ the King, only-begotten Word of the Father, that Thou
hast counted us, Thy sinful and unworthy servants, worthy to enjoy thy
pure mysteries for the remission of sins, and for life everlasting:
glory to Thee. <span id="fr_4145"></span>[4146](#fn_4145)  

<span id="xii.ii-p495"></span>And when he has made the entrance, the
Deacon begins to speak thus:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p496"></span><span id="xii.ii-p496.1"></span>XLV. Again
and again, and at all times, in peace, let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p497"></span>That the participation of His Holy rites
may be to us for the turning away from every wicked thing, for our
support on the journey to life everlasting, for the communion and gift
of the Holy Spirit;  

<span id="xii.ii-p498"></span>Let us pray.  

<span id="xii.ii-p499"></span>The Priest prays.  

<span id="xii.ii-p500"></span>Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most
glorious, blessed Lady, the God-Mother and Ever-Virgin Mary, <span
id="fr_4146"></span>[4147](#fn_4146) and all the saints that have been
well-pleasing to Thee since the world began, let us devote ourselves,
and one another, and our whole life, to Christ our God:  

<span id="xii.ii-p502"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p503"></span>To Thee, O Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p504"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p505"></span><span id="xii.ii-p505.1"></span>XLVI. O
God, who through Thy great and unspeakable love didst condescend to the
weakness of Thy servants, and hast counted us worthy to partake of this
heavenly table, condemn not us sinners for the participation of Thy pure
mysteries; but keep us, O good One, in the sanctification of Thy Holy
Spirit, that being made holy, we may find part and inheritance with all
Thy saints that have been well-pleasing to Thee since the world began,
in the light of Thy countenance, through the mercy of Thy only-begotten
Son, our Lord and God and Saviour <span id="xii.ii-p505.2"></span>Jesus
Christ, with whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy all-holy, and
good, and quickening Spirit: for blessed and glorified is Thy
all-precious and glorious name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and to all eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p506"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p507"></span>Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p508"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p509"></span>Peace be to all.  

<span id="xii.ii-p510"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p511"></span>And to thy spirit.  

<span id="xii.ii-p512"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p513"></span><span id="xii.ii-p513.1"></span>XLVII. Let
us bow our heads to the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p514"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p515"></span>O God, great and marvellous, look upon Thy
servants, for we have bowed our heads to Thee. Stretch forth Thy hand,
strong and full of blessings, <span id="page_550">p. 550</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_550"></span>and bless Thy people. Keep Thine
inheritance, that always and at all times we may glorify Thee, our only
living and true God, the holy and consubstantial <span
id="fr_4147"></span>[4148](#fn_4147) Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, now and ever, and to all eternity.  

<span id="xii.ii-p517"></span> (Aloud.)  

<span id="xii.ii-p518"></span>For unto Thee is becoming and is due
praise from us all, and honour, and adoration, and thanksgiving, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p519"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p520"></span><span id="xii.ii-p520.1"></span>XLVIII. In
the peace of Christ let us sing:  

<span id="xii.ii-p521"></span>And again he says:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p522"></span>In the peace of Christ let us go on:  

<span id="xii.ii-p523"></span>The People.  

<span id="xii.ii-p524"></span>In the name of the Lord. Sir, pronounce
the blessing. <span id="fr_4148"></span>[4149](#fn_4148)  

<span id="xii.ii-p526"></span>Dismission prayer, spoken by the Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p527"></span>Going on from glory to glory, we praise
Thee, the Saviour of our souls. Glory to Father, and Son, and Holy
Spirit now and ever, and to all eternity. We praise Thee, the Saviour of
our souls.  

<span id="xii.ii-p528"></span>The Priest says a prayer from the altar to
the sacristy.  

<span id="xii.ii-p529"></span><span id="xii.ii-p529.1"></span>XLIX.
Going on from strength to strength, and having fulfilled all the divine
service in Thy temple, even now we beseech Thee, O Lord our God, make us
worthy of perfect loving-kindness; make straight our path: root us in
Thy fear, and make us worthy of the heavenly kingdom, in Christ <span
id="xii.ii-p529.2"></span>Jesus our Lord, with whom Thou art blessed,
together with Thy all-holy, and good, and quickening Spirit, now and
always, and for ever.  

<span id="xii.ii-p530"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p531"></span><span id="xii.ii-p531.1"></span>L. Again
and again, and at all times, in peace let us beseech the Lord.  

<span id="xii.ii-p532"></span>Prayer said in the sacristy after the
dismissal.  

<span id="xii.ii-p533"></span>Thou hast given unto us, O Lord,
sanctification in the communion of the all-holy body and precious blood
of Thy only-begotten Son, our Lord <span id="xii.ii-p533.1"></span>Jesus
Christ; give unto us also the grace of Thy good Spirit, and keep us
blameless in the faith, lead us unto perfect adoption and redemption,
and to the coming joys of eternity; for Thou art our sanctification and
light, O God, and Thy only-begotten Son, and Thy all-holy Spirit, now
and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p534"></span>The Deacon.  

<span id="xii.ii-p535"></span>In the peace of Christ let us keep watch.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p536"></span>The Priest.  

<span id="xii.ii-p537"></span>Blessed is God, who blesseth and
sanctifieth through the communion of the holy, and quickening, and pure
mysteries, now and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.  

<span id="xii.ii-p538"></span>Then the prayer of propitiation.  

<span id="xii.ii-p539"></span>O Lord <span
id="xii.ii-p539.1"></span>Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, Lamb and
Shepherd, who takest away the sin of the world, who didst freely forgive
their debt to the two debtors, and gavest remission of her sins to the
woman that was a sinner, who gavest healing to the paralytic, with the
remission of his sins; forgive, remit, pardon, O God, our offences,
voluntary and involuntary, in knowledge and in ignorance, by
transgression and by disobedience, which Thy all-holy Spirit knows
better than Thy servants do:  

<span id="xii.ii-p540"></span>And if men, carnal and dwelling in this
world, have in aught erred from Thy commandments, either moved by the
devil, whether in word or in deed, or if they have come under a curse,
or by reason of some special vow, I entreat and beseech Thy unspeakable
loving-kindness, that they may be set free from their word, and released
from the oath and the special vow, according to Thy goodness.  

<span id="xii.ii-p541"></span>Verily, O Sovereign Lord, hear my
supplication on behalf of Thy servants, and do Thou pass by all their
errors, remembering them no more; forgive them every transgression,
voluntary and involuntary; deliver them from everlasting punishment: for
Thou art He that hast commanded us, saying, Whatsoever things ye bind
upon earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever things ye loose
upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven: for, thou art our God, a God able
to pity, and to save and to forgive sins; and glory is due unto Thee,
with the eternal Father, and the quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to
all eternity. Amen.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4085"></span>[537:4086](0070480.htm#fr_4085) <span
id="xii.ii-p0.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span> \[This title is misleading, as we have no
copies of the originals of these liturgies, and they are encrusted with
the ideas of later ages. I shall distinguish between the interpolations
legitimately made by councils and the manifest corruptions which
contradict Scripture and ancient authors. N.B.: I print the deacon’s
parts as such.\]  

<span id="fn_4086"></span>[537:4087](0070480.htm#fr_4086) <span
id="xii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span> \[<span class="Foreign"><span
id="xii.ii-p3.1"></span>A Lavabo</span>: he prepares himself by the
prayer for purification.  

<span id="fn_4087"></span>[537:4088](0070480.htm#fr_4087) <span
id="xii.ii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span> \[Here is a token of theological but
legitimate interpolation.\]  

<span id="fn_4088"></span>[537:4089](0070480.htm#fr_4088) <span
id="xii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span> \[On the lawful and unlawful additions to
these additions to these liturgies, see <span
id="xii.ii-p9.1"></span>Hickes' <span id="xii.ii-p9.2"></span>Christian
Priesthood (Oxford, 1847), p. 151.\]  

<span id="fn_4089"></span>[538:4090](0070480.htm#fr_4089) <span
id="xii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span> This is addressed to the priest. Some
translate, “O Lord, bless us.” \[This latter is the more primitive
idea.\]  

<span id="fn_4090"></span>[538:4091](0070480.htm#fr_4090) <span
id="xii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span> \[The <span
id="xii.ii-p25.1"></span>Lesser Entrance with the Holy Gospels.\]  

<span id="fn_4091"></span>[538:4092](0070480.htm#fr_4091) <span
id="xii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p27"></span> \[The <span class="Foreign"><span
id="xii.ii-p27.1"></span>Theotoce</span> or <span class="Foreign"><span
id="xii.ii-p27.2"></span>Deipara</span> Of course, added after the
Council of Chalcedon.\]  

<span id="fn_4092"></span>[538:4093](0070480.htm#fr_4092) <span
id="xii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p37"></span> \[See a specimen of the unlimited capacity
for extension of these prayers, in vol. v. p. 412, Elucidation VI., this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_4093"></span>[539:4094](0070480.htm#fr_4093) <span
id="xii.ii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p57"></span> \[At great length. Cf. <span
id="xii.ii-p57.1"></span>Justin Martyr, vol. i. p. 186, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_4094"></span>[539:4095](0070480.htm#fr_4094) <span
id="xii.ii-p57.4"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p58"></span> \[The reading of the Scriptures in the
common tongue is a very precious part of the daily offices in the
East.\]  

<span id="fn_4095"></span>[539:4096](0070480.htm#fr_4095) <span
id="xii.ii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p61"></span> \[Frequent <span
id="xii.ii-p61.1"></span>Amens are to be supposed.\]  

<span id="fn_4096"></span>[539:4097](0070480.htm#fr_4096) <span
id="xii.ii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p92"></span> \[Here there is an evident interpolation,
not Mariolatrous, yet not primitive, as follows:\]—  

<span id="xii.ii-p93"></span><span id="xii.ii-p93.1"></span>The Priest.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p94"></span>Commemorating with all the holy and just,
our all-holy, pure, most glorious Lady, the God-mother, and ever-virgin
Mary, let us devote ourselves, and one another, and our whole life, to
Christ our God.  

<span id="xii.ii-p95"></span><span id="xii.ii-p95.1"></span>The People.
 

<span id="xii.ii-p96"></span>To Thee, Lord.  

<span id="fn_4097"></span>[540:4098](0070480.htm#fr_4097) <span
id="xii.ii-p118.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p119"></span> \[So as to be sure no enemy was among the
faithful.\]  

<span id="fn_4098"></span>[540:4099](0070480.htm#fr_4098) <span
id="xii.ii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p121"></span> These clauses are elliptical. After
“prayer” supply “remain;” the door is for “shut the door;” and “all
erect,” for “stand all erect.”  

<span id="fn_4099"></span>[540:4100](0070480.htm#fr_4099) <span
id="xii.ii-p121.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p122"></span> \[Here begins the Liturgy of the
Faithful.\]  

<span id="fn_4100"></span>[540:4101](0070480.htm#fr_4100) <span
id="xii.ii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p129"></span> \[Here is the <span
id="xii.ii-p129.1"></span>Great Entrance, or bringing-in of the
unconsecrated elements. It has a symbolical meaning ([Heb. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span id="xii.ii-p129.2"></span>) now
forgotten; and here, instead of the glorified Christ, no doubt the
superstitious do adore bread and wine in ignorance.\]  

<span id="fn_4101"></span>[540:4102](0070480.htm#fr_4101) <span
id="xii.ii-p155.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p156"></span> \[The sexes sat apart, the salutations of
each confined to its own: an apostolic feature. [1 Pet. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#014)<span id="xii.ii-p156.1"></span>
<span id="xii.ii-p156.2"></span>et alibi; and see Clementine, p. 486,
<span id="xii.ii-p156.4"></span>supra. \[Note that beautiful tribute of
<span id="xii.ii-p156.5"></span>Augustine to the purity of primitive
rites, “<span id="xii.ii-p156.6"></span>Honesta utrinsque sexus
discretione,” <span id="xii.ii-p156.7"></span>Civ. Dei, lib. ii. cap.
xxviii. p. 77, ed. Migne.\] See vol. ii. 291 and iii. 686, this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_4102"></span>[540:4103](0070480.htm#fr_4102) <span
id="xii.ii-p183.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p184"></span> \[A token of the Ante-Nicene age, though
some think of the later asceticism.\]  

<span id="fn_4103"></span>[542:4104](0070480.htm#fr_4103) <span
id="xii.ii-p197.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p198"></span> \[Here an interpolation as follows: “Let
us commemorate our all-holy, pure, most glorious, blessed lady,
God-mother, and ever-virgin Mary, and all the holy and just, that we may
all find mercy through their prayers and intercessions.” On which, and
like interpolations (the Clementine free from all this), see <span
id="xii.ii-p198.1"></span>Scudamore, p. 381.\]  

<span id="fn_4104"></span>[542:4105](0070480.htm#fr_4104) <span
id="xii.ii-p204.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p205"></span> \[Strongly censured by <span
id="xii.ii-p205.1"></span>Hickes as a superstitious innovation (p. 153),
with other evils introduced after the pseudo-Council of Nice <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.ii-p205.2"></span>a.d.</span> 787, of which
this is the least.\]  

<span id="fn_4105"></span>[542:4106](0070480.htm#fr_4105) <span
id="xii.ii-p213.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p214"></span> \[The Gospel and the Epistle sides.\]  

<span id="fn_4106"></span>[542:4107](0070480.htm#fr_4106) <span
id="xii.ii-p217.1"></span> <span
id="fn_4107"></span>[542:4108](0070480.htm#fr_4107) <span
id="xii.ii-p217.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p218"></span> \[“And Mary said, My soul doth magnify,”
etc.\]  

<span id="fn_4108"></span>[542:4109](0070480.htm#fr_4108) <span
id="xii.ii-p224.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p225"></span> \[In such places <span
id="xii.ii-p225.1"></span>Amens are to be supposed.\]  

<span id="fn_4109"></span>[543:4110](0070480.htm#fr_4109) <span
id="xii.ii-p227.8"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p228"></span> \[Propitiation, not expiation.\]  

<span id="fn_4110"></span>[543:4111](0070480.htm#fr_4110) <span
id="xii.ii-p228.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p229"></span> \[See vol. v. pp. 222–223.\]  

<span id="fn_4111"></span>[543:4112](0070480.htm#fr_4111) <span
id="xii.ii-p230.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p231"></span> \[See <span
id="xii.ii-p231.1"></span>Field on “the meaning of the veil,” p. 294,
where he differs from authors who make it a late innovation; also pp.
448, 449.\]  

<span id="fn_4112"></span>[543:4113](0070480.htm#fr_4112) <span
id="xii.ii-p232.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p233"></span> \[This great primitive thought has been
frittered away by references to the veil covering the oblation.\]  

<span id="fn_4113"></span>[543:4114](0070480.htm#fr_4113) <span
id="xii.ii-p234.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p235"></span> \[Based on [Heb. v.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)<span id="xii.ii-p235.1"></span>.\]
 

<span id="fn_4114"></span>[543:4115](0070480.htm#fr_4114) <span
id="xii.ii-p247.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p248"></span> \[See more on the veil in <span
id="xii.ii-p248.1"></span>Field, p. 492.\]  

<span id="fn_4115"></span>[543:4116](0070480.htm#fr_4115) <span
id="xii.ii-p254.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p255"></span> \[The <span class="Foreign"><span
id="xii.ii-p255.1"></span>Sursum corda</span>, found in all liturgies.\]
 

<span id="fn_4116"></span>[544:4117](0070480.htm#fr_4116) <span
id="xii.ii-p264.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p265"></span> \[See <span
id="xii.ii-p265.1"></span>Hammond’s <span id="xii.ii-p265.2"></span>Lit.
of Antioch, etc., p. 15, note 29.\]  

<span id="fn_4117"></span>[544:4118](0070480.htm#fr_4117) <span
id="xii.ii-p266.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p267"></span> \[Compare the Clementine, p. 488; and
note differences.\]  

<span id="fn_4118"></span>[544:4119](0070480.htm#fr_4118) <span
id="xii.ii-p269.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p270"></span> \[A token of Post-Nicene origin. Vol. v.
p. 259, Elucid. I.\]  

<span id="fn_4119"></span>[544:4120](0070480.htm#fr_4119) <span
id="xii.ii-p272.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p273"></span> \[Supposed by some to be a relic of the
original formula as the Apostles delivered it. On the <span
id="xii.ii-p273.1"></span>synaxis, see vol. v. p. 259. Elucid. II.\].  

<span id="fn_4120"></span>[544:4121](0070480.htm#fr_4120) <span
id="xii.ii-p274.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p275"></span> \[These abrupt interjections of the
deacon are made while the priest proceeds. This logically <span
id="xii.ii-p275.1"></span>follows what the priest subjoins.\]  

<span id="fn_4121"></span>[545:4122](0070480.htm#fr_4121) <span
id="xii.ii-p293.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p294"></span> To conceive. \[A feeble interpolation in
the Edinburgh edition.\]  

<span id="fn_4122"></span>[545:4123](0070480.htm#fr_4122) <span
id="xii.ii-p304.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p305"></span> \[Post-Nicene, but legitimate.\]  

<span id="fn_4123"></span>[545:4124](0070480.htm#fr_4123) <span
id="xii.ii-p307.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p308"></span> \[Understood mystically and spiritually
down to a late period, even in the West. See <span
id="xii.ii-p308.1"></span>Ratramni <span id="xii.ii-p308.2"></span>De
Corpore et Sanguine, Oxon., 1838. Note the inference as to time of
sanctification.\]  

<span id="fn_4124"></span>[545:4125](0070480.htm#fr_4124) <span
id="xii.ii-p316.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p317"></span> \[See vol. v. Elucidation VII. p. 561.\]
 

<span id="fn_4125"></span>[545:4126](0070480.htm#fr_4125) <span
id="xii.ii-p319.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p320"></span> \[An honorary title conceded to Jerusalem
by the Second General Council: <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ii-p320.1"></span>τη̑ς δέ γε μητρὸς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.ii-p320.2"></span>ἁπασω̑ν τω̑ ν
ἐκκλησιω̑ν</span>.\]  

<span id="fn_4126"></span>[545:4127](0070480.htm#fr_4126) <span
id="xii.ii-p328.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p329"></span> Services. \[Otherwise, “who do good works
in Thy holy churches.”\]  

<span id="fn_4127"></span>[546:4128](0070480.htm#fr_4127) <span
id="xii.ii-p332.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p333"></span> \[The Angelical Salutation is here an
evident interpolation, marring the grand unities of the liturgy.\]  

<span id="fn_4128"></span>[546:4129](0070480.htm#fr_4128) <span
id="xii.ii-p333.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p334"></span> \[I place in a note what follows:\]—  

<span id="xii.ii-p335"></span><span id="xii.ii-p335.1"></span>Then the
Priest says aloud:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p336"></span>Hail in the highest, our all-holy, pure,
most blessed, glorious lady, the God-mother and ever-virgin Mary.  

<span id="xii.ii-p337"></span><span id="xii.ii-p337.1"></span>The
Singers.  

<span id="xii.ii-p338"></span>Verily it is becoming to bless Thee, the
God-bearing, the ever-blessed, and all-blameless, and mother of our God,
more honourable than the cherubim, and incomparably more glorious than
the seraphim: thee, who didst bear with purity God the Word, thee the
true God-mother, we magnify.  

<span id="xii.ii-p339"></span><span id="xii.ii-p339.1"></span>And again
they sing:—  

<span id="xii.ii-p340"></span>In thee, highly favoured, all creation
rejoices, the host of angels, and the race of men; hallowed temple, and
spiritual paradise, pride of virgins, of whom God was made flesh and our
God, who was before eternity, became a little child: for He made Thy
womb His throne, and Thy bowels <span id="xii.ii-p340.1"></span>more
capacious than the heavens. In thee, O highly favoured one, all creation
rejoices: glory unto thee.  

<span id="fn_4129"></span>[546:4130](0070480.htm#fr_4129) <span
id="xii.ii-p344.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p345"></span> \[A prayer entirely corresponding with
the primitive ideas. See vol. vi. p. 488, and elucidation, p. 541.\]  

<span id="fn_4130"></span>[547:4131](0070480.htm#fr_4130) <span
id="xii.ii-p381.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p382"></span> \[In all early liturgies always following
the Lord’s Prayer, to accentuate the petition against the evil one. It
hurls back his “fiery darts,” as it were; whence this name.\]  

<span id="fn_4131"></span>[547:4132](0070480.htm#fr_4131) <span
id="xii.ii-p404.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p405"></span> \[Duplicated, with other parts, in the
Greek copies.\]  

<span id="fn_4132"></span>[547:4133](0070480.htm#fr_4132) <span
id="xii.ii-p410.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p411"></span> \[The taking-up of the gifts is here
erroneously introduced in the Edinburgh edition.\]  

<span id="fn_4133"></span>[548:4134](0070480.htm#fr_4133) <span
id="xii.ii-p421.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p422"></span> \[The publican’s prayer, adapted to the
Christian worship: <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ii-p422.1"></span>ἰλάσθητί μοι</span>, is the plea for mercy
through propitiation. [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="xii.ii-p422.2"></span>.\]
 

<span id="fn_4134"></span>[548:4135](0070480.htm#fr_4134) <span
id="xii.ii-p432.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p433"></span> [Ps.
xxiii](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#000)<span id="xii.ii-p433.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_4135"></span>[548:4136](0070480.htm#fr_4135) <span
id="xii.ii-p435.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p436"></span> [Ps.
xxxiv](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#000)<span id="xii.ii-p436.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_4136"></span>[548:4137](0070480.htm#fr_4136) <span
id="xii.ii-p438.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p439"></span> [Ps.
cxlv](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#000)<span id="xii.ii-p439.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_4137"></span>[548:4138](0070480.htm#fr_4137) <span
id="xii.ii-p441.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p442"></span> [Ps.
cxvii](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#000)<span id="xii.ii-p442.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_4138"></span>[548:4139](0070480.htm#fr_4138) <span
id="xii.ii-p447.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p448"></span> \[Here the chalice is filled for
participation.\]  

<span id="fn_4139"></span>[548:4140](0070480.htm#fr_4139) <span
id="xii.ii-p459.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p460"></span> \[Here the presbyter receives.\]  

<span id="fn_4140"></span>[548:4141](0070480.htm#fr_4140) <span
id="xii.ii-p461.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p462"></span> Or <span
id="xii.ii-p462.1"></span>patens.  

<span id="fn_4141"></span>[548:4142](0070480.htm#fr_4141) <span
id="xii.ii-p467.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p468"></span> \[Here are difficulties explained by Drs.
<span id="xii.ii-p468.1"></span>Neale and <span
id="xii.ii-p468.2"></span>Littledale in their <span
id="xii.ii-p468.3"></span>Translation, etc., p. 60.\]  

<span id="fn_4142"></span>[549:4143](0070480.htm#fr_4142) <span
id="xii.ii-p469.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p470"></span> \[The side-table or credence.\]  

<span id="fn_4143"></span>[549:4144](0070480.htm#fr_4143) <span
id="xii.ii-p475.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p476"></span> \[Here the laity are communicated.\]  

<span id="fn_4144"></span>[549:4145](0070480.htm#fr_4144) <span
id="xii.ii-p481.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p482"></span> \[Compare <span
id="xii.ii-p482.1"></span>Neale’s <span
id="xii.ii-p482.2"></span>Tetralogia Liturgica, p. 192.\]  

<span id="fn_4145"></span>[549:4146](0070480.htm#fr_4145) <span
id="xii.ii-p493.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p494"></span> \[Here are confusions; but see <span
id="xii.ii-p494.1"></span>Neale and <span
id="xii.ii-p494.2"></span>Littledale, p. 62, note 20.\]  

<span id="fn_4146"></span>[549:4147](0070480.htm#fr_4146) <span
id="xii.ii-p500.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p501"></span> \[Interpolated, but not Mariolatrous; the
<span class="Foreign"><span id="xii.ii-p501.1"></span>Theotoce</span> is
commemorated, not adored.\]  

<span id="fn_4147"></span>[550:4148](0070480.htm#fr_4147) <span
id="xii.ii-p515.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p516"></span> \[A legitimate addition, according to the
primitive laws.\]  

<span id="fn_4148"></span>[550:4149](0070480.htm#fr_4148) <span
id="xii.ii-p524.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p525"></span> \[Which must here be given.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Divine Liturgy of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist Mark, The
Disciple of the Holy Peter.](0070481)
