[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070034)  [Next](0070036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p0.1"></span>Chap. v.—that god only, the creator of all things, is to be worshipped, and not the elements or heavenly bodies; and the opinion of the stoics is refuted, who think that the stars and planets are gods.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p1"></span>How much better, therefore, is it,
leaving vain and insensible objects, to turn our eyes in that direction
where is the seat and dwelling-place of the true God; who suspended the
earth <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) on a firm foundation, who
bespangled the heaven with shining stars; who lighted up the sun, the
most bright and matchless light for the affairs of men, in proof of His
own single majesty; who girded the earth with seas, and ordered the
rivers to flow with perpetual course!  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p2.2"></span> “He also commanded the plains to
> extend themselves, the valleys to sink down, the woods to be covered
> with foliage, the stony mountains to rise.” <span
> id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p4"></span>All these things truly were not the
work of <span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p4.1"></span>Jupiter, who was born
seventeen hundred years ago; but of the same, “that framer of all
things, the origin of a better world,” <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) who is called God, whose beginning
cannot be comprehended, and ought not to be made the subject of inquiry.
It is sufficient for man, to his full and perfect wisdom, if he
understands the existence of God: the force and sum of which
understanding is this, that he look up to and honour the common Parent
of the human race, and the Maker of wonderful things. Whence some
persons of dull and obtuse mind adore as gods the elements, which are
both created objects and are void of sensibility; who, when they admired
the works of God, that is, the heaven with its various lights, the earth
with its plains and mountains, the seas with their rivers and lakes and
fountains, struck with admiration of these things, and forgetting the
Maker Himself, whom they were unable to see, began to adore and worship
His works. Nor were they able at all to understand how much greater and
more wonderful He is, who made these things out of nothing. And when
they see that these things, in obedience to divine laws, by a perpetual
necessity are subservient to the uses and interests of men, they
nevertheless regard them as gods, being ungrateful towards the divine
bounty, so that they preferred their own works to their most indulgent
God and Father. But what wonder is it if uncivilized or ignorant men
err, since even philosophers of the Stoic sect are of the same opinion,
so as to judge that all the heavenly bodies which have motion are to be
reckoned in the number of gods; inasmuch as the Stoic <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p5.3"></span>Lucilius thus speaks in <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p5.4"></span>Cicero: <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) “This regularity, therefore, in the
stars, this great agreement of the times in such various courses during
all eternity, are unintelligible to me with out the exercise of mind,
reason, and design; and when we see these things in the constellations,
we cannot but place these very objects in the number of the gods.” And
he thus speaks a little before: “It remains,” he says, “that the motion
of the stars is voluntary; and he who sees these things, would act not
only unlearnedly, but also impiously, if he should deny it.” We in truth
firmly deny it; and we prove that you, O philosophers, are not only
unlearned and impious, but also blind, foolish, and senseless, who have
surpassed in shallowness the ignorance of the uneducated. For they
regard as gods <span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p6.2"></span>only the sun and moon,
but you the stars also.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p7"></span>Make known to us, therefore, the
mysteries of the stars, that we may erect altars and temples to each;
that we may know with what rites and on what day to worship each, with
what names and with what prayers we should call on them; unless perhaps
we ought to worship gods so innumerable without any discrimination, and
gods so minute in a mass. Why should I mention that the argument by
which they infer that all the heavenly bodies are gods, tends to the
opposite conclusion? For if they imagine that they are gods on this
account, because they have their courses fixed and in accordance with
reason, <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-Page_48"></span>they are in error. For it is evident
from this that they are not gods, because it is not permitted them to
deviate <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) from their prescribed
orbits. But if they were gods, they would be borne hither and thither in
all directions without any necessity, as living creatures on the earth,
who wander hither and thither as they please, because their wills are
unrestrained, and each is borne wherever inclination may have led it.
Therefore the motion of the stars is not voluntary, but of necessity,
because they obey <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) the laws
appointed for them. But when he was arguing about the courses of the
stars, while he understood from the very harmony of things and times
that they were not by chance, he judged that they were voluntary; as
though they could not be moved with such order and arrangement, unless
they contained within them an understanding acquainted with its own
duty. Oh, how difficult is truth to those who are ignorant of it! how
easy to those who know it! If, he says, the motions of the stars are not
by chance, nothing else remains but that they are voluntary; nay, in
truth, as it is plain that they are not by chance, so is it clear that
they are not voluntary. Why, then, in completing their courses, do they
preserve their regularity? Undoubtedly God, the framer of the universe,
so arranged and contrived them, that they might run through their
courses <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) in the heaven with a
divine and wonderful order, to accomplish the variations of the
successive seasons. Was Archimedes <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) of Sicily able to contrive a likeness
and representation of the universe in hollow brass, in which he so
arranged the sun and moon, that they effected, as it were every day,
motions unequal and resembling the revolutions of the heavens, and that
sphere, while it revolved, <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)
exhibited not only the approaches and withdrawings of the sun, or the
increase and waning of the moon, but also the unequal courses of the
stars, whether fixed or wandering? Was it then impossible for God to
plan and create the originals, <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)
when the skill of man was able to represent them by imitation? Would the
Stoic, therefore, if he should have seen the figures of the stars
painted and fashioned in that brass, say that they moved by their own
design, and not by the genius of the artificer? There is therefore in
the stars design, adapted to the accomplishment of their courses; but it
is the design of God, who both made and governs all things, not of the
stars themselves, which are thus moved. For if it had been His will that
the sun should remain <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) fixed, it
is plain that there would be perpetual day. Also if the stars had no
motions, who doubts that there would have been eternal night? But that
there might be vicissitudes of day and night, it was His will that the
stars should move, and move with such variety that there might not only
be mutual interchanges of light and darkness, by which alternate
courses <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) of labour and rest might
be established, but also <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p15.1"></span>interchanges of cold and heat, that the
power and influence of the different seasons might be adapted either to
the production or the ripening of the crops. And because philosophers
did not see this skill of the divine power in contriving the movements
of the stars, they supposed them to be living, as though they moved with
feet and of their own accord, and not by the divine intelligence. But
who does not understand why God contrived them? Doubtless lest, as the
light of the sun was withdrawn, a night of excessive darkness should
become too oppressive with its foul and dreadful gloom, and should be
injurious to the living. And so He both bespangled the heaven with
wondrous variety, and tempered the darkness itself with many and minute
lights. How much more wisely therefore does Naso judge, than they who
think that they are devoting themselves to the pursuit of wisdom, in
thinking that those lights were appointed by God to remove the gloom of
darkness! He concludes the book, in which he briefly comprises the
phenomena <span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p15.2"></span>of nature, with these
three verses:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p15.3"></span> “These images, so many in number,
> and of such a figure, God placed in the heaven; and having scattered
> them through the gloomy darkness, He ordered them to give a bright
> light to the frosty night.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p16"></span>But if it is impossible that the stars
should be gods, it follows that the sun and moon cannot be gods, since
they differ from the light of the stars in magnitude only, and not in
their design. And if these are not gods, the same is true of the heaven,
which contains them all.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[47:156](0070035.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p2"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#006)<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p2.1"></span>:
“He hath established them for ever and ever.”  

<span id="fn_156"></span>[47:157](0070035.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>Ovid, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p3.2"></span>Metam., lib. i. \[79. Jussit et extendi
campos, etc.\].  

<span id="fn_157"></span>[47:158](0070035.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p5.1"></span>Ovid, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p5.2"></span>Metam., lib. i. \[79. Jussit et extendi
campos, etc.\].  

<span id="fn_158"></span>[47:159](0070035.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p5.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p6"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p6.1"></span>De Nat. Deor., ii. cap. 21.\]  

<span id="fn_159"></span>[48:160](0070035.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p8"></span> Exorbitare, “to wander from their
orbits.”  

<span id="fn_160"></span>[48:161](0070035.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p9"></span> Deserviunt, “they are devoted to.”  

<span id="fn_161"></span>[48:162](0070035.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p10"></span> Spatium; a word borrowed frown the
chariot-course, and applied with great beauty to the motions of the
stars.  

<span id="fn_162"></span>[48:163](0070035.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p11.1"></span>Archimedes was the greatest of ancient
mathematicians, and possessed in an eminent degree inventive genius. He
constructed various engines of war, and greatly assisted in the defence
of Syracuse when it was besieged by the Romans. His most celebrated
work, however, was the construction of a sphere, or “orrery,”
representing the movements of the heavenly bodies. To this <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p11.2"></span>Lactantius refers.  

<span id="fn_163"></span>[48:164](0070035.htm#fr_163) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p12"></span> Dum vertitur.  

<span id="fn_164"></span>[48:165](0070035.htm#fr_164) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p13"></span> Illa vera. \[Newton showed his <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p13.1"></span>orrery</span> to
<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p13.2"></span>Halley the atheist, who was charmed
with the contrivance, and asked the name of the maker. “Nobody,” was the
<span class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p13.3"></span>ad
hominem</span> retort.\]  

<span id="fn_165"></span>[48:166](0070035.htm#fr_165) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p14"></span> Staret.  

<span id="fn_166"></span>[48:167](0070035.htm#fr_166) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.v-p15"></span> Spatia.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VI.—That neither the whole universe nor the elements are
God, nor are they possessed of life](0070036)
