[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070159)  [Next](0070161.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXII.—Of the Pleasures of Taste and Smell.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxii-p1"></span>But with regard to the pleasures of
taste and smell, which two senses relate only to the body, there is
nothing to be discussed by us; unless by chance any one requires us to
say that it is disgraceful to a wise and good man if he is the slave of
his appetite, if he walks along besmeared with unguents and crowned with
flowers: and he who does these things is plainly foolish and senseless,
and is worthless, and one whom not even a notion of virtue has reached.
Perhaps some one will say, Why, then, have these things been made,
except that we may enjoy them? However, it has often been said that
there would have been no virtue unless it had things which it <span
id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxii-Page_189"></span>might overpower. Therefore God made
all things to supply a contest between two things. Those enticements of
pleasures, then, are the instruments of that whose only business it is
to subdue virtue, and to shut out justice from men. With these soothing
influences and enjoyments it captivates their souls; for it knows that
pleasure is the contriver of death. For as God calls man to life only
through virtue and labour, so the other calls us to death by delights
and pleasures; and as men arrive at real good through deceitful evils,
so they arrive at real evil through deceitful goods. Therefore those
enjoyments are to be guarded against, as snares or nets, lest,
captivated by the softness of enjoyments, we should be brought under the
dominion of death with the body itself, to which we have enslaved
ourselves.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXIII.—De tactus voluptate et libidine, atque de matrimonio
et continentiâ](0070161.md)
