[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070099)  [Next](0070101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVIII.—Of the Lord’s Passion, and that It Was Foretold.

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p1"></span>When, therefore, Christ fulfilled
these things which God would have done, and which He foretold many ages
before by His prophets, incited by these things, and ignorant of the
sacred Scriptures, they conspired together to condemn their God. And
though He knew that this would come to pass, and repeatedly <span
id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732) said that He must suffer and be put to
death for the salvation of many, nevertheless He withdrew Himself with
His disciples, not that He might avoid that which it was necessary for
Him to undergo and endure, but that He might show what ought to take
place in every persecution, that no one should appear to have fallen
into it through his own fault: and He announced that it would come to
pass that He should be betrayed by one of them. And thus <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p2.2"></span>Judas, induced by a bribe, delivered up
to the Jews the Son of God. But they took and brought Him before <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p2.3"></span>Pontius Pilate, who at that time was
administering the province of Syria as governor, <span
id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733) and demanded that He should be
crucified, though they laid nothing else to His charge except that He
said that He was the Son of God, the King of the Jews; also His own
saying, <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734) “Destroy this temple,
which was forty-six years in building, and in three days I will raise it
up again without hands,”<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-Page_120"></span>—signifying that His passion would
shortly take place, and that He, having been put to death by the Jews,
would rise again on the third day. For He Himself was the true temple of
God. They inveighed against these expressions of His, as ill-omened and
impious. And when <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p4.5"></span>Pilate had
heard these things, and He said nothing in His own defence, he gave
sentence that there appeared nothing deserving of condemnation in Him.
But those most unjust accusers, together with the people whom they had
stirred up, began to cry out, and with loud voices to demand His
crucifixion.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p5"></span>Then <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p5.1"></span>Pontius <span
id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735) was overpowered both by their
outcries, and by the instigation of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p6.1"></span>Herod the tetrarch, <span
id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736) who feared lest he should be deposed
from his sovereignty. He did not, however, himself pass sentence, but
delivered Him up to the Jews, that they themselves might judge Him
according to their law. <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737)
Therefore they led Him away when He had been scourged with rods, and
before they crucified Him they mocked Him; for they put upon Him a
scarlet <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738) robe, and a crown of
thorns, and saluted Him as King, and gave Him gall for food, and mingled
for Him vinegar to drink. After these things they spat upon His face,
and struck Him with the palms of their hands; and when the
executioners <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) themselves
contended about His garments, they cast lots among themselves for His
tunic and mantle. <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740) And while all
these things were doing, He uttered no voice from His mouth, as though
He were dumb. Then they lifted Him up in the midst between two
malefactors, who had been condemned for robbery, and fixed Him to the
cross. What can I here deplore in so great a crime? or in what words can
I lament such great wickedness? For we are not relating the crucifixion
of <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p11.6"></span>Gavius, <span
id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) which <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p12.6"></span>Marcus Tullius followed up with all
the spirit and strength of his eloquence, pouring forth as it were the
fountains of all his genius, proclaiming that it was an unworthy deed
that a Roman citizen should be crucified in violation of all laws. And
although He was innocent, and undeserving of that punishment, yet He was
put to death, and that, too, by an impious man, who was ignorant of
justice. What shall I say respecting the indignity of this cross, on
which the Son of God was suspended and nailed? <span
id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742) Who will be found so eloquent, and
supplied with so great an abundance of deeds and words, what speech
flowing with such copious exuberance, <span
id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743) as to lament in a befitting manner
that cross, which the world itself, and all the elements of the world,
bewailed?  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p15"></span>But that these things were thus
about to happen, was announced both by the utterances of the prophets
and by the predictions of the Sibyls. In Isaiah it is found thus
written: <span id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744) “I am not rebellious,
nor do I oppose: I gave my back to the scourge, and my cheeks to the
hand: <span id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) I turned not away my face
from the foulness of spitting.” In like manner <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17.7"></span>David, in the thirty-fourth
Psalm: <span id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746) “The abjects <span
id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747) were gathered together against
me, <span id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748) and they knew me not: <span
id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749) they were dispersed, nor did they feel
remorse; they tempted me, and greatly <span
id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750) derided me; and they gnashed upon me
with their teeth.” The <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p22.5"></span>Sibyl
also showed that the same things would happen:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p22.6"></span> “He shall afterwards come
> into the hands of the unjust and the faithless; and they shall inflict
> on God blows with impure hands, and with polluted mouths they shall
> send forth poisonous spittle; and He shall then absolutely <span
> id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751) give His holy back to stripes.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p24"></span>Likewise respecting His silence,
which He perseveringly maintained even to His death, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p24.1"></span>Isaiah thus spoke again: <span
id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752) “He was led as a sheep to the
slaughter; and as a lamb before the shearer is dumb, so He opened not
His mouth.” And the above-mentioned <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p25.2"></span>Sibyl said:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p25.3"></span> “And being beaten, He shall
> be silent, lest any one should know what the Word is, or whence it
> came, that it may speak with mortals; and He shall wear the crown of
> thorns.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p26"></span>But respecting the food and the
drink which they offered to Him before they fastened Him to the cross,
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p26.1"></span>David thus speaks in the
sixty-eighth Psalm: <span id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753) “And they
gave me gall for my meat; <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-Page_121"></span>and in my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink.” The <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p27.2"></span>Sibyl
foretold that this also would happen:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p27.3"></span> “They gave me gall for my
> food, and for my thirst vinegar; this inhospitable table they will
> show.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p28"></span>And another <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p28.1"></span>Sibyl rebukes the land of Judæa in
these verses:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p28.2"></span> “For you, entertaining
> hurtful thoughts, did not recognise your God sporting <span
> id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754) with mortal thoughts; but crowned
> Him with a crown of thorns, and mingled dreadful gall.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p30"></span>Now, that it would come to pass
that the Jews would lay hands upon their God, and put Him to death,
these testimonies of the prophets foretold. In Esdras it is thus
written: <span id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755) “And <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p31.6"></span>Ezra said to the people, This passover
is our Saviour and our refuge. Consider and let it come into your heart,
that we have to abase Him in a figure; and after these things we will
hope in Him, lest this place be deserted for ever, saith the Lord God of
hosts. If you will not believe Him, nor hear His announcement, ye shall
be a derision among the nations.” From which it appears that the Jews
had no other hope, unless they purified themselves from blood, and put
their hopes in that very person whom they denied. <span
id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p32.3"></span>Isaiah also points out their deed, and
says: <span id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) “In His humiliation His
judgment was taken away. Who shall declare His generation? for His life
shall be taken away from the earth; from the transgressions of my people
He was led away to death. And I will give Him the wicked for His burial,
and the rich for His death, because He did no wickedness, nor spoke
guile with His mouth. Wherefore He shall obtain <span
id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758) many, and shall divide the spoils of
the strong; because He was delivered up to death, and was reckoned among
the transgressors; and He bore the sins of many, and was delivered up on
account of their transgressions.” <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p34.3"></span>David also, in the ninety-third
Psalm: <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) “They will hunt after the
soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood; and the Lord is
become my refuge.” Also <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p35.2"></span>Jeremiah: <span
id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760) “Lord, declare it unto me, and I shall
know. Then I saw their devices; I was led as an innocent <span
id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761) lamb to the sacrifice; <span
id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762) they meditated a plan against me,
saying, Come, let us send wood into his bread, <span
id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763) and let us sweep away his life from
the earth, and his name shall no more be remembered.” Now the wood <span
id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764) signifies the cross, and the bread His
body; for He Himself is the food and the life of all who believe in the
flesh which He bare, and on the cross upon which He was suspended.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p41"></span>Respecting this, however, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p41.1"></span>Moses himself more plainly spoke to
this effect, in Deuteronomy: <span id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765)
“And Thy life shall hang <span id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766) before
Thine eyes; and Thou shall fear day and night, and shalt have no
assurance of Thy life.” And the same again in Numbers: <span
id="fr_767"></span>[768](#fn_767) “God is not in doubt as a man, nor
does He suffer threats <span id="fr_768"></span>[769](#fn_768) as the
son of man.” <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p45.2"></span>Zechariah also thus
wrote: <span id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769) “And they shall look on
me, whom they pierced.” Also <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p46.2"></span>David in the twenty-first Psalm: <span
id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770) “They pierced my hands and my feet;
they numbered all my bones; they themselves looked and stared upon me;
they divided my garments among them; and upon my vesture they did cast
lots.” It is evident that the prophet did not speak these things
concerning himself. For he was a king, and never endured these
sufferings; but the Spirit of God, who was about to suffer these things,
after <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p47.3"></span>ten hundred and fifty
years, spoke by him. For this is the number of years from the reign of
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p47.4"></span>David to the crucifixion of
Christ. But <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p47.5"></span>Solomon also, his
son, who built Jerusalem, prophesied that this very city would perish in
revenge for the sacred cross: <span id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771)
“But if ye turn away from me, saith the Lord, and will not keep my
truth, I will drive Israel from the land which I have given them; and
this house which I have built for them in my name, I will cast it out
from all: <span id="fr_772"></span>[773](#fn_772) and Israel shall be
for perdition <span id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773) and a reproach to
the people; and this house shall be desolate, and every one that shall
pass by it shall be astonished, and shall say, Why hath God done these
evils to this land and to this house? And they shall say, Because they
forsook the Lord their God, and persecuted their King most beloved by
God, and crucified Him with great degradation, <span
id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774) therefore hath God brought upon them
these evils.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_732"></span>[119:733](0070100.htm#fr_732) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>Subinde, “from time to time.”  

<span id="fn_733"></span>[119:734](0070100.htm#fr_733) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p3.1"></span>Legatus. This title was given, in the
time of the Roman emperors, to the governors sent by them into the
provinces. <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p3.2"></span>Pontius Pilate was
procurator of Judæa, which was not a separate province, but a dependency
of the province of Syria, which was at this time governed by <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p3.3"></span>Silanus.  

<span id="fn_734"></span>[119:735](0070100.htm#fr_734) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p4"></span> [John
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#020)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>. The forty-six years spoken of were
not occupied with the rebuilding of the temple, which was completed in
nine years, but with the additional works which <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p4.2"></span>Herod the Great and his successors were
continually carrying on for the adorning and beautifying of the temple.
See <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p4.3"></span>Prideaux. \[I regret the
loose references of the translator, and yet more that the inexorable
demands of the press give me time to supply only the more important
ones. See <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p4.4"></span>Connections, book ix.
vol. ii. p. 394.\]  

<span id="fn_735"></span>[120:736](0070100.htm#fr_735) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p6"></span> \[It is probable, that, owing to
the perpetual and universal recitation of the Creed, this unhappy name
has been more frequently uttered and recalled to human memory than that
of any other human being.\]  

<span id="fn_736"></span>[120:737](0070100.htm#fr_736) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p7.1"></span>Herod Antipas the tetrarch of Galilee.
According to St. Luke (xxiii. 15), Herod agreed with <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p7.2"></span>Pilate in declaring the innocency of
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p7.3"></span>Jesus.  

<span id="fn_737"></span>[120:738](0070100.htm#fr_737) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p8"></span> This statement requires some
modification. <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p8.1"></span>Pilate did indeed
say to the Jews, “Take ye Him, and judge Him according to your law;” but
they declared that it was not lawful for them to put any man to death.
The punishment was entirely Roman, the mode of death Roman, the
executioners Roman soldiers. There were two distinct trials,—one before
the Jewish Sanhedrim on a charge of impiety, the other before the Roman
governor on a charge of treason.  

<span id="fn_738"></span>[120:739](0070100.htm#fr_738) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>Punicei coloris. The colour was a kind
of red, not purple. \[It was mixed with blue, so as to be at once purple
and in some reflections scarlet.\]  

<span id="fn_739"></span>[120:740](0070100.htm#fr_739) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p10"></span> The <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p10.1"></span>quaternion of Roman soldiers who
carried out the execution.  

<span id="fn_740"></span>[120:741](0070100.htm#fr_740) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p11.1"></span>De tunicâ et pallio. The “<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p11.2"></span>tunica” was the inner garment, the
“<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p11.3"></span>pallium” a mantle or cloak.
Thus the proverbial phrase, “<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p11.4"></span>tunica proprior pallio.” \[Vol. iv. p.
13, Elucidation I., this series.\]  

<span id="fn_741"></span>[120:742](0070100.htm#fr_741) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p11.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p12.1"></span>Gavius was crucified by <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p12.2"></span>Verres. \[<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p12.3"></span>In Verrem, act ii. cap. 62. This event
providentially illustrated the extreme wickedness of what was done to
our Lord, but so quickened the Roman conscience that it prevented like
injustice to St. <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p12.4"></span>Paul, although
a Roman citizen, over and over again. [Acts
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#038)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p12.5"></span>, and xxii. 24, 25.\]  

<span id="fn_742"></span>[120:743](0070100.htm#fr_742) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p12.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p13.1"></span>Suffixus.  

<span id="fn_743"></span>[120:744](0070100.htm#fr_743) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p14.1"></span>Tantæ affluentiæ ubertate. \[Compare
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p14.2"></span>Cicero (<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p14.3"></span>ut supra): <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p14.4"></span>Crux, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p14.5"></span>crux<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p14.6"></span>!<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p14.7"></span> inquam infelici et ærumnoso, qui
nunquam istam potestatem viderat comparabatur.\]  

<span id="fn_744"></span>[120:745](0070100.htm#fr_744) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p16"></span> [Isa.
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p16.1"></span>, quoted from the Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_745"></span>[120:746](0070100.htm#fr_745) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17"></span> i.e., of the smiters; Gr. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17.1"></span>εἰς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17.2"></span>ρ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17.3"></span>̔</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17.4"></span>απι</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17.5"></span>́</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17.6"></span>σματα</span>,
“blows with the hand.”  

<span id="fn_746"></span>[120:747](0070100.htm#fr_746) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p17.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p18"></span> [Ps.
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#016)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p18.1"></span>. The quotation is from the
Septuagint, and differs widely from the authorized English version.  

<span id="fn_747"></span>[120:748](0070100.htm#fr_747) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p19.1"></span>Flagella, said to be used for men
deserving the scourge; wicked men.  

<span id="fn_748"></span>[120:749](0070100.htm#fr_748) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p20.1"></span>Super me, “over me.”  

<span id="fn_749"></span>[120:750](0070100.htm#fr_749) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p21.1"></span>Ignoraverunt. Others read “<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p21.2"></span>ignoravi,” I knew it not.  

<span id="fn_750"></span>[120:751](0070100.htm#fr_750) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p22"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p22.1"></span>Deriserunt me derisu. So the Greek,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p22.2"></span>ἐξεμυκτήρισάν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p22.3"></span>με</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p22.4"></span>μυκτηρισμόν</span>
 

<span id="fn_751"></span>[120:752](0070100.htm#fr_751) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p22.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p23.1"></span>ἁπλω</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p23.2"></span>̑</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p23.3"></span>ς</span>.  

<span id="fn_752"></span>[120:753](0070100.htm#fr_752) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p25"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p25.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_753"></span>[120:754](0070100.htm#fr_753) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p27"></span> [Ps. lxix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p27.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_754"></span>[121:755](0070100.htm#fr_754) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p28.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p29.1"></span>παιζοντα</span>. Another reading is
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p29.2"></span>πταίοντα</span>, which would imply
that they regarded Christ as a transgressor.  

<span id="fn_755"></span>[121:756](0070100.htm#fr_755) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p31"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p31.1"></span>Justin Martyr quotes this passage in
his <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p31.2"></span>Dialogue with Trypho, and
complains that it had been expunged by the Jews. \[See vol. i. p. 234,
and remarks of <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p31.4"></span>Bishop Kaye,
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p31.5"></span>Justin Martyr, p. 44, on
passages suppressed by the Jews.\]  

<span id="fn_756"></span>[121:757](0070100.htm#fr_756) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p31.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p32"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p32.1"></span>Negaverunt. Another reading is “<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p32.2"></span>necaverunt,” they put to death.  

<span id="fn_757"></span>[121:758](0070100.htm#fr_757) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p32.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p33"></span> [Isa. liii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p33.1"></span>, 12. The quotation is made from the
Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_758"></span>[121:759](0070100.htm#fr_758) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p34"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p34.1"></span>Consequetur. In the Greek, <span
class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p34.2"></span>κληρονομήσει</span>, “shall inherit.”
 

<span id="fn_759"></span>[121:760](0070100.htm#fr_759) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p34.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p35"></span> [Ps.
94:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#022)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p35.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_760"></span>[121:761](0070100.htm#fr_760) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p36"></span> [Jer.
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p36.1"></span>, quoted from the Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_761"></span>[121:762](0070100.htm#fr_761) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p37"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p37.1"></span>Sine malitiâ. Another reading is
“<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p37.2"></span>sine maculâ,” without spot.  

<span id="fn_762"></span>[121:763](0070100.htm#fr_762) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p38"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p38.1"></span>Ad victimam.  

<span id="fn_763"></span>[121:764](0070100.htm#fr_763) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39"></span> For the various explanations, see
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39.1"></span>Pole’s <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39.2"></span>Synopsis Some suppose that there is a
reference to the corruption of food by poisonous wood; others that the
meaning is a substitution of wood for bread. Another explanation is,
that the word translated bread denotes fruit, as in the English
authorized version, “Let us destroy the tree, with the fruit thereof.”
But see <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39.3"></span>Pole on the passage.
\[[Jer xi. 19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39.4"></span>. Here is a very insufficient note,
the <span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39.5"></span>typology of Scripture not
being duly observed. Compare <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39.6"></span>Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 166,
especially at note 10, which illustrates the uniform spirit of the
Fathers in dealing with the Jews. And note <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39.8"></span>Bishop Kaye’s remark, vol. ii. p. 206,
note 5, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_764"></span>[121:765](0070100.htm#fr_764) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p39.10"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p40"></span> This explanation appears
altogether fanciful and unwarranted.  

<span id="fn_765"></span>[121:766](0070100.htm#fr_765) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p42"></span> [Deut. xxviii.
66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p42.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_766"></span>[121:767](0070100.htm#fr_766) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p43"></span> So the Septuagint. The English
authorized version appears accurately to express the idea intended to be
conveyed: “Thy life shall hang in doubt before Thee.”  

<span id="fn_767"></span>[121:768](0070100.htm#fr_767) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p44"></span> The idea is that God is not in
doubt, as a man, as to His conduct, nor is He liable to change His mind,
or to be influenced by threats or in any other way.  

<span id="fn_768"></span>[121:769](0070100.htm#fr_768) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p45"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p45.1"></span>Minas patitur.  

<span id="fn_769"></span>[121:770](0070100.htm#fr_769) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p46"></span> [Zech. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p46.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_770"></span>[121:771](0070100.htm#fr_770) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p47"></span> [Ps. xxii.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p47.1"></span>. \[Compare vol. i. p. 176, note 4,
this series.\]  

<span id="fn_771"></span>[121:772](0070100.htm#fr_771) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p47.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p48"></span> [1 Kings ix.
6-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#006)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p48.1"></span>, with some additions and omissions;
and [1 Chron. vii. 19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#019)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p48.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_772"></span>[121:773](0070100.htm#fr_772) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p49"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p49.1"></span>Ex omnibus. The English authorized
version has, “out of my sight.”  

<span id="fn_773"></span>[121:774](0070100.htm#fr_773) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p50"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p50.1"></span>In perditionem et improperium.  

<span id="fn_774"></span>[121:775](0070100.htm#fr_774) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xviii-p51"></span> This is not taken from the
passages cited, nor from the Old Testament.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIX.—Of the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus; and
the predictions of these events](0070101)
