[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070066)  [Next](0070068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVI.—That the Philosophers Who Give Good Instructions Live Badly, by the Testimony of Cicero; Therefore We Should Not So Much Devote Ourselves to the Study of Philosophy as to Wisdom.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p1"></span>But when they give themselves up to
perpetual sloth, and undertake no exercise of virtue, and pass their
whole life in the practice of speaking, in what light ought they to be
regarded rather than as triflers? For wisdom, unless it is engaged on
some action on which it may exert its force, is empty and false; and
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Tullius rightly <span
id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-Page_85"></span>gives
the preference, above teachers of philosophy, to those men employed in
civil affairs, who govern the state, who found new cities or maintain
with equity those already founded, who preserve the safety and liberty
of the citizens either by good laws or wholesome counsels, or by weighty
judgments. For it is right to make men good rather than to give precepts
about duty to those shut up in corners, which precepts are not observed
even by those who speak them; and inasmuch as they have withdrawn
themselves from true actions, it is manifest that they invented the
system of philosophy itself, for the purpose of exercising the tongue,
or for the sake of pleading. But they who merely teach without acting,
of themselves detract from the weight of their own precepts; for who
would obey, when they who give the precepts themselves teach
disobedience? Moreover, it is a good thing to give right and honourable
precepts; but unless you also practice them it is a deceit, and it is
inconsistent and trifling to have goodness not in the heart, but on the
lips.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p2"></span>It is not therefore utility, but
enjoyment, which they seek from philosophy. And this <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Cicero indeed testified. “Truly,” he
says, “all their disputation, although it contains most abundant
fountains of virtue and knowledge, yet, when compared with their actions
and accomplishments, I fear lest it should seem not to have brought so
much advantage to the business of men as enjoyment to their times of
relaxation.” He ought not to have feared, since he spoke the truth; but
as if he were afraid lest he should be arraigned by the philosophers on
a charge of betraying a mystery, he did not venture confidently to
pronounce that which was true, that they do not dispute for the purpose
of teaching, but for their own enjoyment in their leisure; and since
they are the advisers of actions, and do not themselves act at all, they
are to be regarded as mere talkers. <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425.md) But assuredly, because they
contributed no advantage to life, they neither obeyed their own decrees,
nor has any one been found, through so many ages, who lived in
accordance with their laws. Therefore philosophy <span
id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426.md) must altogether be laid aside, because
we are not to devote ourselves to the pursuit of wisdom, for this has no
limit or moderation; but we must be wise, and that indeed quickly. For a
second life is not granted to us, so that when we seek wisdom in this
life we may be wise in that; each result must be brought about in this
life. It ought to be quickly found, in order that it may be quickly
taken up, lest any part of life should pass away, the end of which is
uncertain. <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p4.4"></span>Hortensius in <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p4.5"></span>Cicero, contending against philosophy,
is pressed by a clever argument; inasmuch as, when he said that men
ought not to philosophize, he seemed nevertheless to philosophize, since
it is the part of the philosophers to discuss what ought and what ought
not to be done in life. We are free and exempt from this calumny, who
take away philosophy, because it is the invention of human thought; we
defend wisdom, because it is a divine tradition, and we testify that it
ought to be taken up by all. He, when he took away philosophy without
introducing anything better, was supposed to take away wisdom; and on
that account was more easily driven from his opinion, because it is
agreed upon that man is not born to folly, but to wisdom.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p5"></span>Moreover, the argument which the
same <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>Hortensius employed has great
weight also against philosophy,—namely, that it may be understood from
this, that philosophy is not wisdom, since its beginning and origin are
apparent. When, he says, did philosophers begin to exist? <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p5.2"></span>Thales, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p5.3"></span>as I imagine, was the first, and his age
was recent. Where, then, among the more ancient men did that love of
investigating the truth lie hid? <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p5.4"></span>Lucretius also says: <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427.md) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p6.2"></span> “Then, too, this nature and
> system of things has been discovered lately, and I the very first of
> all have only now been found able to transfer it into native words.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p7"></span>And <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p7.1"></span>Seneca says: “There are not yet a
thousand years since the beginnings of wisdom were undertaken.”
Therefore mankind for many generations lived without system. In ridicule
of which, <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p7.2"></span>Persius says: <span
id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428.md) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p8.3"></span> “When wisdom came to the
> city,  
> Together with pepper and palms;”  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p9"></span>as though wisdom had been introduced
into the city together with savoury merchandise. <span
id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429.md) For if it is in agreement with the
nature of man, it must have had its commencement together with man; but
if it is not in agreement with it, human nature would be incapable of
receiving it. But, inasmuch as it has received it, it follows that
wisdom has existed from the beginning: therefore philosophy, inasmuch as
it has not existed from the beginning, is not the same true wisdom. But,
in truth, the Greeks, because they had not attained to the sacred
letters of truth, did not know how wisdom was corrupted. And, therefore,
since they thought that human life was destitute of wisdom, they
invented philosophy; that is, they wished by discussion to tear up the
truth which was lying hid and unknown to them: and this employment,
through ignorance of the truth, they thought to be wisdom. <span
id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-Page_86"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_425"></span>[85:426](0070067.htm#fr_425.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p3"></span> \[See p. 83, note 2, and p. 84,
note 1.\]  

<span id="fn_426"></span>[85:427](0070067.htm#fr_426.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p4.1"></span>Lactantius must be understood as
speaking of that kind of philosophy which teaches errors and deceits, as
St. <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p4.2"></span>Paul speaks, [Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p4.3"></span>: “Beware lest any man spoil you through
philosophy and vain deceit.”  

<span id="fn_427"></span>[85:428](0070067.htm#fr_427.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p5.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p6.1"></span>Lucretius, v. 336.  

<span id="fn_428"></span>[85:429](0070067.htm#fr_428.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p8.1"></span>Persius, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p8.2"></span>Sat., vi 38.  

<span id="fn_429"></span>[85:430](0070067.htm#fr_429.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p10"></span> \[The force of the poet’s satire
is in this <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvi-p10.1"></span>petty merchandise.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVII.—He passes from philosophy to the philosophers,
beginning with Epicurus; and how he regarded Leucippus and Democritus as
authors of error](0070068.md)
