[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070054)  [Next](0070056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chap. IV.—That Knowledge is Taken Away by Socrates, and Conjecture by Zeno.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Zeno and the Stoics, then, were right in
repudiating conjecture. For to conjecture that you know that which you
do not know, is not the part of a wise, but rather of a rash and foolish
man. Therefore if nothing can be known, as <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p1.2"></span>Socrates taught, or ought to be
conjectured, as <span id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p1.3"></span>Zeno taught,
philosophy is entirely removed. Why should I say that it is not only
overthrown by these two, who were the chiefs of philosophy, but by all,
so that it now appears to have been long ago destroyed by its own arms?
Philosophy has been divided into many sects; and they all entertain
various sentiments. In which do we place the truth? It certainly cannot
be in <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-Page_72"></span>all. Let us point out some one; it
follows that all the others will be without wisdom. Let us pass through
them separately; in the same manner, whatever we shall give to one we
shall take away from the others. For each particular sect overturns all
others, to confirm itself and its own <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p1.4"></span>doctrines<span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p1.5"></span>: nor does it allow wisdom to any other,
lest it should confess that it is itself foolish; but as it takes away
others, so is it taken away itself by all others. For they are
nevertheless philosophers who accuse it of folly. Whatever sect you
shall praise and pronounce true, that is censured by philosophers as
false. Shall we therefore believe one which praises itself and its
doctrine, or the many which blame the ignorance of each other? That must
of necessity be better which is held by great numbers, than that which
is held by one only. For no one can rightly judge concerning himself, as
the renowned poet testifies; <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) for
the nature of men is so arranged, that they see and distinguish the
affairs of others better than their own. Since, therefore, all things
are uncertain, we must either believe all or none: if we are to believe
no one, then the wise have no existence, because while they separately
affirm different things they think themselves wise; if all, it is
equally true that there are no wise men, because all deny the wisdom of
each individually. Therefore all are in this manner destroyed; and as
those fabled <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p2.3"></span>sparti</span> <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) of the poets, so these men mutually
slay one another, so that no one remains of all; which happens on this
account, because they have a sword, but have no shield. If, therefore,
the sects individually are convicted of folly by the judgment of many
sects, it follows that all are found to be vain and empty; and thus
philosophy consumes and destroys itself. And since <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p3.2"></span>Arcesilas the founder of the Academy
understood this, he collected together the mutual censures of all, and
the confession of ignorance made by distinguished philosophers, and
armed himself against all. Thus he established a new philosophy of not
philosophizing. From this founder, therefore, there began to be two
kinds of philosophy: one the old one, which claims to itself knowledge;
the other a new one, opposed to the former, and which detracts from it.
Between these two kinds of philosophy I see that there is disagreement,
and as it were civil war. On which side shall we place wisdom, which
cannot be torn asunder? <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377)  <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) If the nature of things can be known,
this troop of recruits will perish; if it cannot, the veterans will be
destroyed: if they shall be equal, nevertheless philosophy, the guide of
all, will still perish, because it is divided; for nothing can be
opposed to itself without its own destruction. But if, as I have shown,
there can be no inner and peculiar knowledge in man on account of the
frailty of the human condition, the party of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p4.3"></span>Arcesilas prevails. But not even will
this stand firm, because it cannot be the case that nothing at all is
known.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_375"></span>[72:376](0070055.htm#fr_375) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p1.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>Terent., <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p2.2"></span>Heautont., iii. sec. 97.  

<span id="fn_376"></span>[72:377](0070055.htm#fr_376) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>σπαρτοί</span>, those who sprung from the
dragon’s teeth.  

<span id="fn_377"></span>[72:378](0070055.htm#fr_377) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p3.3"></span> <span
id="fn_378"></span>[72:379](0070055.htm#fr_378) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>Distrahi, which is the reading of some
editions, is here followed in preference to the common reading, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iv-p4.2"></span>detrahi.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. V.—That the knowledge of many things is necessary](0070056)
