[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070093)  [Next](0070095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XII.—Of the Birth of Jesus from the Virgin; Of His Life, Death, and Resurrection, and the Testimonies of the Prophets Respecting These Things.

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p1"></span>Therefore the Holy Spirit of God,
descending from heaven, chose the holy Virgin, that He might enter into
her womb. <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) But she, being filled
by the possession <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) of the Divine
Spirit, conceived; and without any intercourse with a man, her virgin
womb was suddenly impregned. But if it is known to all that certain
animals are accustomed to conceive <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) by the wind and the breeze, why should
any one think it wonderful when we say that a virgin was made fruitful
by the Spirit of God, to whom whatever He may wish is easy? And this
might have appeared incredible, had not the prophets many ages
previously foretold its occurrence. Thus <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p5.2"></span>Solomon speaks: <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) “The womb of a virgin was
strengthened, and conceived; and a virgin was made fruitful, and became
a mother in great pity.” Likewise the prophet <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p6.1"></span>Isaiah, <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) whose words are these: “Therefore God
Himself shall give you a sign: Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear
a son; and ye shall call His name Emmanuel.” What can be more manifest
than this? This was read by the Jews, who denied Him. If any one thinks
that these things are invented by us, let him inquire of them, let him
take especially from them: the testimony is sufficiently strong to prove
the truth, when it is alleged by enemies themselves. But He was never
called Emmanuel, but <span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p7.2"></span>Jesus, who in
Latin is called Saving, or Saviour, <span
id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) because He comes bringing salvation to
all nations. But by this name the prophet declared that God incarnate
was about to come to men. For Emmanuel signifies God with us; because
when He was born of a virgin, men ought to confess that God was with
them, that is, on the earth and in mortal flesh. Whence <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p8.2"></span>David <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) says in the eighty-fourth Psalm,
“Truth has sprung out of the earth;” because God, in whom is truth, hath
taken a body of earth, that He might open a way of salvation to those of
the earth. In like manner Isaiah also: <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) “But they disbelieved, and vexed His
Holy <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-Page_111"></span>Spirit; and He was turned to be their
enemy. And He Himself fought against them, and He remembered the days of
old, <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) who raised up from the
earth a shepherd of the sheep.” But who this shepherd was about to be,
he declared in another place, <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607)
saying: “Let the heavens rejoice, and let the clouds put on
righteousness; let the earth open, and put forth a Saviour. For I the
Lord have begotten Him.” But the Saviour is, as we have said before,
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p12.2"></span>Jesus. But in another place the
same prophet also thus proclaimed: <span
id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) “Behold, unto us a child is born, unto
us a Son is given, whose dominion is upon His shoulders, and His name is
called Messenger of great counsel.” For on this account He was sent by
God the Father, that He might reveal to all the nations which are under
heaven the sacred mystery of the only true God, which was taken away
from the perfidious people, who ofttimes sinned against God. <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p13.2"></span>Daniel also foretold similar
things: <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) “I saw,” he said, “in a
vision of the night, and, behold, one like the Son of man coming with
the clouds of heaven, and He came even to the Ancient of days. And they
who stood by brought Him near <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610)
before Him. And there was given unto Him a kingdom, and glory, and
dominion; and all people, tribes, and languages shall serve Him: and His
dominion is everlasting, which shall never pass away, and His kingdom
shall not be destroyed.” How then do the Jews both confess and expect
the Christ of God? who rejected Him on this account, because He was born
of man. For since it is so arranged by God that the same Christ should
twice come to the earth, once to announce to the nations the one God,
then again to reign, why do they who did not believe in His first advent
believe in the second?  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p16"></span>But the prophet comprises both His
advents in few words. Behold, he says, one like the Son of man coming
with the clouds of heaven. He did not say, like the Son of God, but the
Son of man, that he might show that He had <span
id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) to be clothed with flesh on the earth,
that having assumed the form of a man and the condition of mortality, He
might teach men righteousness; and when, having completed the commands
of God, He had revealed the truth to the nations, He might also suffer
death, that He might overcome and lay open <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) the other world also, and thus at
length rising again, He might proceed to His Father borne aloft on a
cloud. <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) For the prophet said in
addition: And came even to the Ancient of days, and was presented to
Him. He called the Most High God the Ancient of days, whose age and
origin cannot be comprehended; for He alone was from generations, and He
will be always to generations. <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614)
But that Christ, after His passion and resurrection, was about to ascend
to God the Father, <span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p20.2"></span>David bore
witness in these words in the cixth Psalm: <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) “The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou
at my right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool.” Whom could
this prophet, being himself a king, call his Lord, who sat at the right
hand of God, but Christ the Son of God, who is King of kings and Lord of
lords? And this is more plainly shown by Isaiah, <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) when he says: “Thus saith the Lord God
to my Lord Christ, whose right hand I have holden; I will subdue nations
before Him, and will break the strength of kings. I will open before Him
gates, and the cities shall not be closed. I will go before Thee, and
will make the mountains level; and I will break in pieces the gates of
brass, and shatter the bars of iron; and I will give Thee the hidden and
invisible treasures, that Thou mayest know that I am the Lord God, which
call Thee by Thy name, the God of Israel.” Lastly, on account of the
goodness and faithfulness which He displayed towards God on earth, there
was given to Him a kingdom, and glory, and dominion; and all people,
tribes, and languages shall serve Him; and His dominion is everlasting,
and that which shall never pass away, and His kingdom shall not be
destroyed. And this is understood in two ways: that even now He has an
everlasting dominion, when all nations and all languages adore His name,
confess His majesty, follow His teaching, and imitate His goodness: He
has power and glory, in that all tribes of the earth obey His precepts.
And also, when He shall come again with majesty and glory to judge every
soul, and to restore the righteous to life, then He shall truly have the
government of the whole earth: then, every evil having been removed from
the affairs of men, a golden age (as the poets call it), that is, a time
of righteousness and peace, will arise. But we will speak of these
things more fully in the last book, when we shall speak of His second
advent; now let us treat of His first advent, as we began.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_598"></span>[110:599](0070094.htm#fr_598) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p2.1"></span>Se insinuaret.  

<span id="fn_599"></span>[110:600](0070094.htm#fr_599) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p3.1"></span>Divino spiritu hausto.  

<span id="fn_600"></span>[110:601](0070094.htm#fr_600) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p4"></span> So <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p4.1"></span>Virgil, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p4.2"></span>Georgic iii. 274:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p4.3"></span> <span
> id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p4.5"></span>“Et sæpe sine ullis   
> <span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p4.7"></span>Conjugiis vento gravidæ, mirabile
> dictu.”   

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p5"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>This theory of the impregnation of mares
by the wind was general among the ancients.  

<span id="fn_601"></span>[110:602](0070094.htm#fr_601) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p6"></span> This passage does not occur in the
writings of Solomon, or in the Old Testament. \[Possibly from some copy
(North African) of the “Book of Wisdom,” interpolated from a marginal
comment.\]  

<span id="fn_602"></span>[110:603](0070094.htm#fr_602) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p7"></span> [Isa. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p7.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_603"></span>[110:604](0070094.htm#fr_603) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p8.1"></span>Salutaris, sive Salvator.  

<span id="fn_604"></span>[110:605](0070094.htm#fr_604) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p9"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#012)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p9.1"></span>, quoted from the Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_605"></span>[110:606](0070094.htm#fr_605) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p10"></span> [Isa. lxiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p10.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_606"></span>[111:607](0070094.htm#fr_606) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p11"></span> The days of the age. In the next
clause the text differs both from the Hebrew and the Septuagint—which
the English authorized version follows—“who raised up out of the sea.”  

<span id="fn_607"></span>[111:608](0070094.htm#fr_607) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p12"></span> [Isa. xlv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p12.1"></span>, quoted from the Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_608"></span>[111:609](0070094.htm#fr_608) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p13"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p13.1"></span>, from the Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_609"></span>[111:610](0070094.htm#fr_609) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p14"></span> [Dan.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p14.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_610"></span>[111:611](0070094.htm#fr_610) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p15"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p15.1"></span>Obtulerunt eum, “presented Him.”  

<span id="fn_611"></span>[111:612](0070094.htm#fr_611) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p17.1"></span>Quod carne indui haberet in terrâ.
Another reading is “<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p17.2"></span>deberet,” but
the present is in accordance with the style of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p17.3"></span>Lactantius.  

<span id="fn_612"></span>[111:613](0070094.htm#fr_612) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p18.1"></span>Inferos resignaret.  

<span id="fn_613"></span>[111:614](0070094.htm#fr_613) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p19"></span> [Acts i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p19.1"></span>: “A cloud received Him out of their
sight.”  

<span id="fn_614"></span>[111:615](0070094.htm#fr_614) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p20"></span> [Ps. xc.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p20.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_615"></span>[111:616](0070094.htm#fr_615) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p21"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p21.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_616"></span>[111:617](0070094.htm#fr_616) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p22"></span> [Isa. xlv.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p22.1"></span>. The quotation is from the Septuagint.
It expressly refers to <span id="iii.ii.iv.xii-p22.2"></span>Cyrus, whom
God raised up to accomplish His will; but the prophecy may have a
further reference to Christ, as is here supposed.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIII.—Of Jesus, God and man; and the testimonies of the
prophets concerning him](0070095)
