[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070455)  [Next](0070457) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p0.1"></span>Sec. IV.—Of the Law.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p1"></span>By whom also we exhort you in the Lord to
abstain from your old conversation, vain bonds, separations,
observances, distinction of meats, and daily washings: for “old things
are passed away; behold, all things are become new.” <span
id="fr_3256"></span>[3257](#fn_3256)  

##### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p2.2"></span>To Those that Speak Evil of the Law.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.iv-p3.1"></span>XIX</span>. For since ye have known God
through <span id="ix.vii.iv-p3.2"></span>Jesus Christ, and all His
dispensation, as it has been from the beginning, that He gave a plain
law to assist the law of nature, <span
id="fr_3257"></span>[3258](#fn_3257) such a one as is pure, saving, and
holy, in which His own name was inscribed, <span
id="fr_3258"></span>[3259](#fn_3258) perfect, which is never to fail,
being complete in ten commands, unspotted, converting souls; <span
id="fr_3259"></span>[3260](#fn_3259) which, when the Hebrews forgot, He
put them in mind of it by the prophet Malachi, saying, “Remember ye the
law of <span id="ix.vii.iv-p6.2"></span>Moses, the man of God, who gave
you in charge commandments and ordinances.” <span
id="fr_3260"></span>[3261](#fn_3260) Which law is so very holy and
righteous, that even our Saviour, when on a certain time He healed one
leper, and afterwards nine, said to the first, “Go, show thyself to the
high priest, and offer the gift which <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p7.2"></span>Moses commanded for a testimony unto
them;” <span id="fr_3261"></span>[3262](#fn_3261) and afterwards to the
nine, “Go, show yourselves to the priests.” <span
id="fr_3262"></span>[3263](#fn_3262) For He nowhere has dissolved the
law, as <span id="ix.vii.iv-p9.2"></span>Simon pretends, but fulfilled
it; for He says: “One iota, or one tittle, shall not pass from the law
until all be fulfilled.” For says He, “I come not to dissolve the law,
but to fulfil it.” <span id="fr_3263"></span>[3264](#fn_3263) For <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p10.2"></span>Moses himself, who was at once the lawgiver,
and the high priest, and the prophet, and the king, and <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p10.3"></span>Elijah, the zealous follower of the
prophets, were present at our Lord’s transfiguration in the
mountain, <span id="fr_3264"></span>[3265](#fn_3264) and witnesses of
His incarnation and of His sufferings, as the intimate friends of
Christ, but not as enemies and strangers. Whence it is demonstrated that
the law is good and holy, as also the prophets.  

##### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p11.2"></span>Which is the Law of Nature, and Which is that Afterwards Introduced, and Why It Was Introduced.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.iv-p12.1"></span>XX</span>. Now the law is the decalogue,
which the Lord promulgated to them with an audible voice, <span
id="fr_3265"></span>[3266](#fn_3265) before the people made that calf
which represented the Egyptian Apis. <span
id="fr_3266"></span>[3267](#fn_3266) And the law is righteous, and
therefore is it called the law, because judgments are thence made
according <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="ix.vii.iv-Page_459"></span>to the law of nature, which the followers
of <span id="ix.vii.iv-p14.2"></span>Simon abuse, supposing they shall
not be judged thereby, and so shall escape punishment. This law is good,
holy, and such as lays no compulsion in things positive. For He says:
“If thou wilt make me an altar, thou shalt make it of earth.” <span
id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267) It does not say, “Make one,” but,
“If thou wilt make.” It does not impose a necessity, but gives leave to
their own free liberty. For God does not stand in need of sacrifices,
being by nature above all want. But knowing that, as of old, <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p15.2"></span>Abel, beloved of God, and <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p15.3"></span>Noah and <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p15.4"></span>Abraham, and those that succeeded, without
being required, but only moved of themselves by the law of nature, did
offer sacrifice to God out of a grateful mind; so He did now permit the
Hebrews, not commanding, but, if they had a mind, permitting them; and
if they offered from a right intention, showing Himself pleased with
their sacrifices. Therefore He says: “If thou desirest to offer, do not
offer to me as to one that stands in need of it, for I stand in need of
nothing; for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof.” <span
id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268) But when this people became
forgetful of that, and called upon a calf as God, instead of the true
God, and to him did ascribe the cause of their coming out of Egypt,
saying, “These are thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee out of
the land of Egypt;” <span id="fr_3269"></span>[3270](#fn_3269) and when
these men had committed wickedness with the “similitude of a calf that
eateth hay;” and denied God who had visited them by <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p17.2"></span>Moses <span
id="fr_3270"></span>[3271](#fn_3270) in their afflictions, and had done
signs with his hand and rod, and had smitten the Egyptians with ten
plagues; who had divided the waters of the Red Sea into two parts; who
had led them in the midst of the water, as a horse upon the ground; who
had drowned their enemies, and those that laid wait for them; who at
Marah had made sweet the bitter fountain; who had brought water out of
the sharp rock till they were satisfied; who had overshadowed them with
a pillar of a cloud on account of the immoderate heat, and with a pillar
of fire which enlightened and guided them when they knew not which way
they were to go; who gave them manna from heaven, and gave them quails
for flesh from the sea; <span id="fr_3271"></span>[3272](#fn_3271) who
gave them the law in the mountain; whose voice He had vouchsafed to let
them hear; Him did they deny, and said to <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p19.2"></span>Aaron, “Make us gods who shall go before
us;” <span id="fr_3272"></span>[3273](#fn_3272) and they made a molten
calf, and sacrificed to an idol;—then was God angry, as being
ungratefully treated by them, and bound them with bonds which could not
be loosed, with a mortifying burden and a hard collar, and no longer
said, “If thou makest,” but, “Make an altar,” and sacrifice perpetually;
for thou art forgetful and ungrateful. Offer burnt-offerings therefore
continually, that thou mayest be mindful of me. For since thou hast
wickedly abused thy power, I lay a necessity upon thee for the time to
come, and I command thee to abstain from certain meats; and I ordain
thee the distinction of clean and unclean creatures, although every
creature is good, as being made by me; and I appoint thee several
separations, purgations, frequent washings and sprinklings, several
purifications, and several times of rest; and if thou neglectest any of
them, I determine that punishment which is proper to the disobedient,
that being pressed and galled by thy collar, thou mayest depart from the
error of polytheism, and laying aside that, “These are thy gods, O
Israel,” <span id="fr_3273"></span>[3274](#fn_3273) mayest be mindful of
that, “Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord;” <span
id="fr_3274"></span>[3275](#fn_3274) and mayest run back again to that
law which is inserted by me in the nature of all men, “that there is
only one God in heaven and on earth, and to love Him with all thy heart,
and all thy might, and all thy mind,” and to fear none but Him, nor to
admit the names of other gods into thy mind, nor to let thy tongue utter
them out of thy mouth. He bound them for the hardness of their hearts,
that by sacrificing, and resting, and purifying themselves, and by
similar observances, they might come to the knowledge of God, who
ordained these things for them.  

##### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p22.2"></span>That We Who Believe in Christ are Under Grace, and Not Under the Servitude of that Additional Law.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p23"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.iv-p23.1"></span>XXI</span>. “But blessed are your eyes, for
they see; and your ears, for they hear.” <span
id="fr_3275"></span>[3276](#fn_3275) Yours, I say, who have believed in
the one God, not by necessity, but by a sound understanding, in
obedience to Him that called you. For you are released from the bonds,
and freed from the servitude. For says He: <span
id="fr_3276"></span>[3277](#fn_3276) “I call you no longer servants, but
friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father have I made known
unto you.” <span id="fr_3277"></span>[3278](#fn_3277) For to them that
would not see nor hear, not for the want of those senses, but for the
excess of their wickedness, “I gave statutes that were not good, and
judgments whereby they would not live;” <span
id="fr_3278"></span>[3279](#fn_3278) they are looked upon as not good,
as burnings and a sword, and medicines are esteemed enemies by the sick,
and impossible to be observed on account of their <span id="page_460">p.
460</span> <span id="ix.vii.iv-Page_460"></span>obstinacy: whence also
they brought death upon them being not obeyed.  

##### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p27.2"></span>That the Law for Sacrifices is Additional, Which Christ When He Came Took Away.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p28"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.iv-p28.1"></span>XXII</span>. You therefore are blessed who
are delivered from the curse, For Christ, the Son of God, by His coming
has confirmed and completed the law, but has taken away the additional
precepts, although not all of them, yet at least the more grievous ones;
having confirmed the former, and abolished the latter, and has again set
the free-will of man at liberty, not subjecting him to the penalty of a
temporal death, but giving laws to him according to another
constitution. Wherefore He says: “If any man will come after me, let him
come.” <span id="fr_3279"></span>[3280](#fn_3279) And again: “Will ye
also go away?” <span id="fr_3280"></span>[3281](#fn_3280) And besides,
before His coming He refused the sacrifices of the people, while they
frequently offered them, when they sinned against Him, and thought He
was to be appeased by sacrifices, but not by repentance. For thus He
speaks: “Why dost thou bring to me frankincense from Saba, and cinnamon
from a remote land? Your burnt-offerings are not acceptable, and your
sacrifices are not sweet to me.” <span
id="fr_3281"></span>[3282](#fn_3281) And afterwards: “Gather your
burnt-offerings, together with your sacrifices, and eat flesh. For I did
not command you, when I brought you out of the land of Egypt, concerning
burnt-offerings and sacrifices.” <span
id="fr_3282"></span>[3283](#fn_3282) And He says by Isaiah: “To what
purpose do ye bring me a multitude of sacrifices? saith the Lord. I am
full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and I will not accept the fat of
lambs, and the blood of bulls and of goats. Nor do you come and appear
before me; for who hath required these things at your hands? Do not go
on to tread my courts any more. If you bring me fine flour, it is vain:
incense is an abomination unto me: your new moons, and your Sabbaths,
and your great day, I cannot bear them: your fasts, and your rests, and
your feasts, my soul hateth them; I am over-full of them.” <span
id="fr_3283"></span>[3284](#fn_3283) And He says by another: “Depart
from me; the sound of thine hymns, and the psalms of thy musical
instruments, I will not hear.” <span
id="fr_3284"></span>[3285](#fn_3284) And <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p34.2"></span>Samuel says to <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p34.3"></span>Saul, when he thought to sacrifice:
“Obedience is better than sacrifice, and hearkening than the fat of
rams. For, behold, the Lord does not so much delight in sacrifice, as in
obeying Him.” <span id="fr_3285"></span>[3286](#fn_3285) And He says by
<span id="ix.vii.iv-p35.2"></span>David: “I will take no calves out of
thine house, nor he-goats out of thy flock. If I should be hungry, I
would not tell thee; for the whole world is mine, and the fulness
thereof. Shall I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
Sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows to the Most
High.” <span id="fr_3286"></span>[3287](#fn_3286) And in all the
Scriptures in like manner He refuses their sacrifices on account of
their sinning against Him. For “the sacrifices of the impious are an
abomination with the Lord, since they offer them in an unlawful
manner.” <span id="fr_3287"></span>[3288](#fn_3287) And again: “Their
sacrifices are to them as bread of lamentation; all that eat of them
shall be defiled.” <span id="fr_3288"></span>[3289](#fn_3288) If,
therefore, before His coining He sought for “a clean heart and a
contrite spirit” <span id="fr_3289"></span>[3290](#fn_3289) more than
sacrifices, much rather would He abrogate those sacrifices, I mean those
by blood, when He came. Yet He so abrogated them as that He first
fulfilled them. For He was both circumcised, and sprinkled, and offered
sacrifices and whole burnt-offerings, and made use of the rest of their
customs. And He that was the Lawgiver became Himself the fulfilling of
the law; not taking away the law of nature, but abrogating those
additional laws that were afterwards introduced, although not all of
them neither.  

##### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p39.2"></span>How Christ Became a Fulfiller of the Law, and What Parts of It He Put a Period To, or Changed, or Transferred.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p40"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.iv-p40.1"></span>XXIII</span>. For He did not take away the
law of nature, but confirmed it. For He that said in the law, “The Lord
thy God is one Lord;” <span id="fr_3290"></span>[3291](#fn_3290) the
same says in the Gospel, “That they might know Thee, the only true
God.” <span id="fr_3291"></span>[3292](#fn_3291) And He that said, “Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,” <span
id="fr_3292"></span>[3293](#fn_3292) says in the Gospel, renewing the
same precept, “A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
another.” <span id="fr_3293"></span>[3294](#fn_3293) He who then forbade
murder, does now forbid causeless anger. <span
id="fr_3294"></span>[3295](#fn_3294) He that forbade adultery, does now
forbid all unlawful lust. He that forbade stealing, now pronounces him
most happy who supplies those that are in want out of his own
labours. <span id="fr_3295"></span>[3296](#fn_3295) He that forbade
hatred, now pronounces him blessed that loves his enemies. <span
id="fr_3296"></span>[3297](#fn_3296) He that forbade revenge, now
commands long-suffering; <span id="fr_3297"></span>[3298](#fn_3297) not
as if just revenge were an unrighteous thing, but because long-suffering
is more excellent. Nor did He make laws to root out our natural
passions, but only to forbid the excess of them. <span
id="fr_3298"></span>[3299](#fn_3298) <span id="page_461">p. 461</span>
<span id="ix.vii.iv-Page_461"></span>He who had commanded to honour our
parents, was Himself subject to them. <span
id="fr_3299"></span>[3300](#fn_3299) He who had commanded to keep the
Sabbath, by resting thereon for the sake of meditating on the laws, has
now commanded us to consider of the law of creation, and of providence
every day, and to return thanks to God. He abrogated circumcision when
He had Himself fulfilled it. For He it was “to whom the inheritance was
reserved, who was the expectation of the nations.” <span
id="fr_3300"></span>[3301](#fn_3300) He who made a law for swearing
rightly, and forbade perjury, has now charged us not to swear at
all. <span id="fr_3301"></span>[3302](#fn_3301) He has in several ways
changed baptism, sacrifice, the priesthood, and the divine service,
which was confined to one place: for instead of daily baptisms, He has
given only one, which is that into His death. Instead of one tribe, He
has appointed that out of every nation the best should be ordained for
the priesthood; and that not their bodies should be examined for
blemishes, but their religion and their lives. Instead of a bloody
sacrifice, He has appointed that reasonable and unbloody mystical one of
His body and blood, which is performed to represent the death of the
Lord by symbols. Instead of the divine service confined to one place, He
has commanded and appointed that He should be glorified from sunrising
to sunsetting in every place of His dominion. <span
id="fr_3302"></span>[3303](#fn_3302) He did not therefore take away the
law from us, but the bonds. For concerning the law <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p53.4"></span>Moses says: “Thou shalt meditate on the word
which I command thee, sitting in thine house, and rising up, and walking
in the way.” <span id="fr_3303"></span>[3304](#fn_3303) And <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p54.2"></span>David says: “His delight is in the law of
the Lord, and in His law will he meditate day and night.” <span
id="fr_3304"></span>[3305](#fn_3304) For everywhere would he have us
subject to His laws, but not transgressors of them. For says He:
“Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.
Blessed are they that search out His testimonies; with their whole heart
shall they seek Him.” <span id="fr_3305"></span>[3306](#fn_3305) And
again: “Blessed are we, O Israel, because those things that are pleasing
to God are known to us.” <span id="fr_3306"></span>[3307](#fn_3306) And
the Lord says: “If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them.” <span id="fr_3307"></span>[3308](#fn_3307)  

##### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p58.2"></span>That It Pleased the Lord that the Law of Righteousness Should Be Demonstrated by the Romans.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p59"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.iv-p59.1"></span>XXIV</span>. Nor does He desire that the law
of righteousness should only be demonstrated by us; but He is pleased
that it should appear and shine by means of the Romans. For these
Romans, believing in the Lord, left off their polytheism and injustice,
and entertain the good, and punish the bad. But they hold the Jews under
tribute, and do not suffer them to make use of their own ordinances.  

##### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p59.2"></span>How God, on Account of Their Impiety Towards Christ, Made the Jews Captives, and Placed Them Under Tribute.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p60"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.iv-p60.1"></span>XXV</span>. Because, indeed, they drew
servitude upon themselves voluntarily, when they said, “We have no king
but Cæsar;” <span id="fr_3308"></span>[3309](#fn_3308) and, “If we do
not slay Christ, all men will believe in Him, and the Romans will come
and will take away both our place and nation.” <span
id="fr_3309"></span>[3310](#fn_3309) And so they prophesied unwittingly.
For accordingly the nations believed on Him, and they themselves were
deprived by the Romans of their power, and of their legal worship; and
they have been forbidden to slay whom they please, and to sacrifice when
they will. Wherefore they are accursed, as not able to perform the
things they are commanded to do. For says He: “Cursed be he that does
not continue in all things that are written in the book of the law to do
them.” <span id="fr_3310"></span>[3311](#fn_3310) Now it is impossible
in their dispersion, while they are among the heathen, for them to
perform all things in their law. For the divine <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p63.4"></span>Moses forbids both to rear an altar out of
Jerusalem, and to read the law out of the bounds of Judea. <span
id="fr_3311"></span>[3312](#fn_3311) Let us therefore follow Christ,
that we may inherit His blessings. Let us walk after the law and the
prophets by the Gospel. Let us eschew the worshippers of many gods, and
the murderers of Christ, and the murderers of the prophets, and the
wicked and atheistical heretics. Let us be obedient to Christ as to our
King, as having authority to change several constitutions, and having,
as a legislator, wisdom to make new constitutions in different
circumstances; yet so that everywhere the laws of nature be immutably
preserved.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3256"></span>[458:3257](0070456.htm#fr_3256) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p2"></span> [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p2.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3257"></span>[458:3258](0070456.htm#fr_3257) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p4"></span> [Isa. viii.
20](../../../bib/sep/isa008.htm#020)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p4.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_3258"></span>[458:3259](0070456.htm#fr_3258) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p5"></span> [Deut. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p5.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3259"></span>[458:3260](0070456.htm#fr_3259) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p6"></span> [Ps. xix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p6.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3260"></span>[458:3261](0070456.htm#fr_3260) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p7"></span> [Mal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p7.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3261"></span>[458:3262](0070456.htm#fr_3261) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p8"></span> [Matt.
viii.](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p8.1"></span><span id="ix.vii.iv-p8.2"></span>4; [Mark i.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#044)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p8.3"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3262"></span>[458:3263](0070456.htm#fr_3262) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p9"></span> [Luke xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#014)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p9.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3263"></span>[458:3264](0070456.htm#fr_3263) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p10"></span> [Matt.
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p10.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3264"></span>[458:3265](0070456.htm#fr_3264) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p11"></span> [Luke ix.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#030)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p11.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3265"></span>[458:3266](0070456.htm#fr_3265) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p13"></span> [Ex.
xx](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#000)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p13.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3266"></span>[458:3267](0070456.htm#fr_3266) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p14"></span> [Ex.
xxxii.](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#000)<span
id="ix.vii.iv-p14.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[459:3268](0070456.htm#fr_3267) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p15"></span> [Ex. xx.
24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p15.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[459:3269](0070456.htm#fr_3268) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p15.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p16"></span> [Ps. l.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#012)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p16.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3269"></span>[459:3270](0070456.htm#fr_3269) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p17"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p17.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3270"></span>[459:3271](0070456.htm#fr_3270) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p18"></span> [Ex.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#000)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p18.1"></span>.,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3271"></span>[459:3272](0070456.htm#fr_3271) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p19"></span> [Num. xi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p19.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3272"></span>[459:3273](0070456.htm#fr_3272) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p20"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p20.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3273"></span>[459:3274](0070456.htm#fr_3273) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p21"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p21.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3274"></span>[459:3275](0070456.htm#fr_3274) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p22"></span> [Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p22.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3275"></span>[459:3276](0070456.htm#fr_3275) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p24"></span> [Matt. xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p24.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3276"></span>[459:3277](0070456.htm#fr_3276) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p25"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.iv-p25.1"></span>ms</span>. reads: “Thus also said the Lord
to us His disciples.”  

<span id="fn_3277"></span>[459:3278](0070456.htm#fr_3277) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p26"></span> [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p26.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3278"></span>[459:3279](0070456.htm#fr_3278) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p27"></span> [Ezek. xx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p27.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3279"></span>[460:3280](0070456.htm#fr_3279) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p29"></span> [Matt. xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p29.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3280"></span>[460:3281](0070456.htm#fr_3280) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p30"></span> [John vi.
67](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#067)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p30.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3281"></span>[460:3282](0070456.htm#fr_3281) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p31"></span> [Jer. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p31.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3282"></span>[460:3283](0070456.htm#fr_3282) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p32"></span> [Jer.
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p32.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3283"></span>[460:3284](0070456.htm#fr_3283) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p33"></span> [Isa. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p33.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3284"></span>[460:3285](0070456.htm#fr_3284) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p34"></span> [Amos v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#023)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p34.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3285"></span>[460:3286](0070456.htm#fr_3285) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p34.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p35"></span> [1 Sam. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p35.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3286"></span>[460:3287](0070456.htm#fr_3286) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p36"></span> [Ps.
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#009),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#012)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p36.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3287"></span>[460:3288](0070456.htm#fr_3287) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p37"></span> [Prov. xxi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#027)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p37.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3288"></span>[460:3289](0070456.htm#fr_3288) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p38"></span> [Hos. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p38.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3289"></span>[460:3290](0070456.htm#fr_3289) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p39"></span> [Ps.
51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p39.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_3290"></span>[460:3291](0070456.htm#fr_3290) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p41"></span> [Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p41.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3291"></span>[460:3292](0070456.htm#fr_3291) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p42"></span> [John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p42.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3292"></span>[460:3293](0070456.htm#fr_3292) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p43"></span> [Lev. xix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p43.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3293"></span>[460:3294](0070456.htm#fr_3293) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p44"></span> [John xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p44.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3294"></span>[460:3295](0070456.htm#fr_3294) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p45"></span> [Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p45.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3295"></span>[460:3296](0070456.htm#fr_3295) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p46"></span> [Acts xx.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p46.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3296"></span>[460:3297](0070456.htm#fr_3296) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p47"></span> [Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p47.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3297"></span>[460:3298](0070456.htm#fr_3297) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p48"></span> [Matt. v.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p48.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3298"></span>[460:3299](0070456.htm#fr_3298) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p49"></span> [Matt. v.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p49.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3299"></span>[461:3300](0070456.htm#fr_3299) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p50"></span> [Luke ii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p50.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3300"></span>[461:3301](0070456.htm#fr_3300) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p51"></span> [Gen. xlix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p51.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3301"></span>[461:3302](0070456.htm#fr_3301) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p52"></span> [Matt. v.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p52.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3302"></span>[461:3303](0070456.htm#fr_3302) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p53"></span> [Ps.
cxiii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p53.1"></span><span id="ix.vii.iv-p53.2"></span>3; [Mal.
i. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="ix.vii.iv-p53.3"></span>  

<span id="fn_3303"></span>[461:3304](0070456.htm#fr_3303) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p53.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p54"></span> [Deut. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p54.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3304"></span>[461:3305](0070456.htm#fr_3304) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p54.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p55"></span> [Ps. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p55.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3305"></span>[461:3306](0070456.htm#fr_3305) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p56"></span> [Ps.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p56.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3306"></span>[461:3307](0070456.htm#fr_3306) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p57"></span> [Bar. iv.
4](../../../bib/apo/bar004.htm#004)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p57.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3307"></span>[461:3308](0070456.htm#fr_3307) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p58"></span> [John xiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#017)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p58.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3308"></span>[461:3309](0070456.htm#fr_3308) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p61"></span> [John xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p61.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3309"></span>[461:3310](0070456.htm#fr_3309) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p62"></span> [John xi.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p62.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3310"></span>[461:3311](0070456.htm#fr_3310) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p63"></span> [Deut.
xxvii.](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p63.1"></span><span id="ix.vii.iv-p63.2"></span>26; [Gal.
iii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vii.iv-p63.3"></span>  

<span id="fn_3311"></span>[461:3312](0070456.htm#fr_3311) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p63.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p64"></span> [Deut.
xii](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#000)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p64.1"></span>.
\[See on Liturgies, <span id="ix.vii.iv-p64.2"></span>infra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. V.—The Teaching of the Apostles in Opposition to Jewish and
Gentile Superstitions, Especially in Regard to Marriage and
Funerals](0070457)
