[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070158)  [Next](0070160.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXI.—Of the Pleasures of the Ears, and of Sacred Literature.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p1"></span>Pleasure of the ears is received from
the sweetness of voices and strains, which indeed is as productive of
vice as that delight of the eyes of which we have spoken. For who would
not deem him luxurious and worthless who should have scenic arts at his
house? But it makes no difference whether you practice luxury alone at
home, or with the people in the theatre. But we have already spoken of
spectacles: <span id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250.md) there remains one
thing which is to be overcome by us, that we be not captivated by those
things which penetrate to the innermost perception. For all those things
which are unconnected with words, that is, pleasant sounds of the air
and of strings, may be easily disregarded, because they do not adhere to
us, and cannot be written. But a well-composed poem, and a speech
beguiling with its sweetness, captivate the minds of men, and impel them
in what direction they please. Hence, when learned men have applied
themselves to the religion of God, unless they have been
instructed <span id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251.md) by some skilful
teacher, they do not believe. For, being accustomed to sweet and
polished speeches or poems, they despise the simple and common language
of the sacred writings as mean. For they seek that which may soothe the
senses. But whatever is pleasant to the ear effects persuasion, and
while it delights fixes itself deeply within the breast. Is God,
therefore, the contriver both of the mind, and of the voice, and of the
tongue, unable to speak eloquently? Yea, rather, with the greatest
foresight, He wished those things which are divine to be without
adornment, that all might understand the things which He Himself spoke
to all.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p4"></span>Therefore he who is anxious for the
truth, who does not wish to deceive himself, must lay aside hurtful and
injurious pleasures, which would bind the mind to themselves, as
pleasant food does the body: true things must be preferred to false,
eternal things to those which are of short duration, useful things to
those which are pleasant. Let nothing be pleasing to the sight but that
which you see to be done with piety and justice; let nothing be
agreeable to the hearing but that which nourishes the soul and makes you
a better man. And especially this sense ought not to be distorted to
vice, since it is given to us for this purpose, that we might gain the
knowledge of God. Therefore, if it be a pleasure to hear melodies and
songs, let it be pleasant to sing and hear the praises of God. This is
true pleasure, which is the attendant and companion of virtue. This is
not frail and brief, as those which they desire, who, like cattle, are
slaves to the body; but lasting, and affording delight without any
intermission. And if any one shall pass its limits, and shall seek
nothing else from pleasure but pleasure itself, he designs <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p4.1"></span>for himself death; for as there is
perpetual life in virtue, so there is death in pleasure. For he who
shall choose temporal things will be without things eternal; he who
shall prefer earthly things will not have heavenly things.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[188:1251](0070159.htm#fr_1250.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p2"></span> \[See p. 187, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p2.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[188:1252](0070159.htm#fr_1251.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>Fundati, having the foundation well laid,
trained. Some read, “<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxi-p3.2"></span>Ab aliquo
imperito doctore fundati.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXII.—Of the pleasures of taste and smell](0070160.md)
