[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070398)  [Next](0070400.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.i"></span>

#### <span id="vii.ii.i-p0.1"></span>elucidations.

#### <span id="vii.ii.i-p0.2"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p0.3"></span>I.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>The
Confession, improperly called the “Creed of <span
id="vii.ii.i-p1.2"></span>Athanasius,” is acknowledged to embody the
(Athanasian) doctrine of the Nicene Council; and I append it here as an
index to the state of theology at the period which is the limit of our
series. Nothing is properly a “creed” which has never been accepted as
such by the whole Church, and the Greeks knew no other creed than that
called <span id="vii.ii.i-p1.3"></span>Nicene. The Anglo-American Church
has ceased to recite this Confession in public worship, but does not
depart from it as doctrine. The “Reformed” communion in America <span
id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351.md) retains it among her liturgical
forms, and I suppose the same is true of the Lutherans. It is a Western
Confession, and, like the <span id="vii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>Te Deum, is a
hymn rather than a symbol, though breathing the spirit of the Creed.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p3"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Usher
adopts <span id="vii.ii.i-p3.2"></span>a.d. 447 as its date, and <span
id="vii.ii.i-p3.3"></span>Beveridge assigns it to the fourth century.
<span id="vii.ii.i-p3.4"></span>Dupin gives it a later origin than <span
id="vii.ii.i-p3.5"></span>Usher, and a considerable number of eminent
authorities agree with him in the date <span
id="vii.ii.i-p3.6"></span>a.d. 484.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p4"></span>What are called the anathemas are the
<span id="vii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>enacting clauses (so to speak), and,
like the same in the Nicene Creed, may be regarded as no part of the
Confession itself. If they have disappeared from the Great Symbol
itself, as unsuitable to liturgical recitation, why not apply the same
rule here?  

#### <span id="vii.ii.i-p4.2"></span>confession of our christian faith, commonly called the creed of st. athanasius.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p5"></span>Quicunque vult.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p6"></span>¶ Whosoever will be saved: before all
things it is necessary that he hold the Catholick Faith. Which Faith
except everyone do keep whole and undefiled: without doubt he shall
perish everlastingly.  

#### <span id="vii.ii.i-p6.1"></span>i.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p7"></span>And the Catholick Faith is this: That we
worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity;  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p8"></span>Neither confounding the Persons: nor
dividing the Substance.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p9"></span>For there is one Person of the Father,
another of the Son: and another of the Holy Ghost.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p10"></span>But the God-head of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is all one: the Glory equal, the Majesty
co-eternal.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p11"></span>Such as the Father is, such is the Son:
and such is the Holy Ghost.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p12"></span>The Father un-create, the Son un-create:
and the Holy Ghost un-create.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p13"></span>The Father incomprehensible, the Son
incomprehensible: and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p14"></span>The Father eternal, the Son eternal: and
the Holy Ghost eternal.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p15"></span>And yet they are not three eternals: but
one eternal.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p16"></span>As also there are not three
incomprehensibles, nor three un-created: but one un-created, and one
incomprehensible.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p17"></span>So likewise the Father is Almighty, the
Son Almighty: and the Holy Ghost Almighty.<span id="page_367">p.
367</span> <span id="vii.ii.i-Page_367"></span>  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p18"></span>And yet they are not three Almighties:
but one Almighty.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p19"></span>So the Father is God, the Son is God: and
the Holy Ghost is God.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p20"></span>And yet they are not three Gods: but one
God.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p21"></span>So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son
is Lord: and the Holy Ghost is Lord.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p22"></span>And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p23"></span>For like as we are compelled by the
Christian verity: to acknowledge every Person by Himself to be God and
Lord;  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p24"></span>So we are forbidden by the Catholick
Religion: to say, there be three Gods, or three Lords.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p25"></span>The Father is made of none: neither
created, nor begotten.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p26"></span>The Son is of the Father alone: not made,
nor created, but begotten.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p27"></span>The Holy Ghost is of the Father <span
id="vii.ii.i-p27.1"></span>and of the Son: <span
id="fr_2352"></span>[2353](#fn_2352.md) neither made, nor created, nor
begotten, but proceeding.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p29"></span>So there is one Father, not three
Fathers; one Son, not three Sons: one Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts.
 

<span id="vii.ii.i-p30"></span>And in this Trinity none is afore, or
after other: none is greater, or less than another;  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p31"></span>But the whole three Persons are
co-eternal together: and co-equal.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p32"></span>So that in all things, as is aforesaid:
the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity, is to be worshipped.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p33"></span>¶ He therefore that will be saved: must
thus think of the Trinity.  

#### <span id="vii.ii.i-p33.1"></span>ii.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p34"></span>Furthermore, it is necessary to
everlasting salvation: that he also believe rightly the Incarnation of
our Lord Jesus Christ.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p35"></span>For the right Faith is, that we believe
and confess; that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and Man;
 

<span id="vii.ii.i-p36"></span>God, of the Substance of the Father,
begotten before the worlds: and Man, of the Substance of His Mother,
born in the world;  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p37"></span>Perfect God, and perfect Man: of a
reasonable soul and human flesh subsisting;  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p38"></span>Equal to the Father, as touching His
God-head: and inferior to the Father, as touching His Manhood.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p39"></span>Who although He be God and Man: yet He is
not two, but one Christ;  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p40"></span>One; not by conversion of the God-head
into flesh: but by taking of the Manhood into God;  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p41"></span>One altogether; not by confusion of
Substance: but by unity of Person.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p42"></span>For as the reasonable soul and flesh is
one man: so God and Man is one Christ;  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p43"></span>Who suffered for our Salvation: descended
into hell, rose again the third day from the dead.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p44"></span>He ascended into heaven, He sitteth on
the right hand of the Father, God Almighty: from whence He shall come to
judge the quick and the dead.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p45"></span>At whose coming all men shall rise again
with their bodies: and shall give account for their own works.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p46"></span>And they that have done good shall go
into life everlasting: and they that have done evil into everlasting
fire.  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p47"></span> ¶ This is the Catholick Faith: which
except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved.  

#### <span id="vii.ii.i-p47.1"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p47.2"></span>ii.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p48"></span>It is with regret that I am forced to
take exception to the most useful <span
id="vii.ii.i-p48.1"></span>Ecclesiastical History of the learned
Professor <span id="vii.ii.i-p48.2"></span>Schaff, in this connection. I
quote from that work <span id="fr_2353"></span>[2354](#fn_2353.md) as
follows:—  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p50"></span>“He, <span
id="vii.ii.i-p50.1"></span>Dionysius, maintained distinctly, in (<span
id="vii.ii.i-p50.2"></span>a) controversy with <span
id="vii.ii.i-p50.3"></span>Dionysius of Alexandria, at once the unity of
essence and the real personal distinction, etc., . . . and avoided
tritheism, Sabellianism, and (<span id="vii.ii.i-p50.4"></span>b) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p50.5"></span>subordination, with the instinct of
orthodoxy, and also with the art of anathematizing, (<span
id="vii.ii.i-p50.6"></span>c) already familiar to (<span
id="vii.ii.i-p50.7"></span>d) the popes.”  

<span id="vii.ii.i-p51"></span>Such a paragraph must convey to the
youthful student a great confusion of ideas; all the greater, because
the same valuable work elsewhere invites him to conclusions quite the
reverse. Thus, (<span id="vii.ii.i-p51.1"></span>a) there was no <span
id="vii.ii.i-p51.2"></span>controversy whatever between the two
Dionysii; with a holy jealousy they entered into fraternal explanations
of the same truth, held by each, but by neither very <span
id="vii.ii.i-p51.3"></span>technically elucidated. The <span
id="vii.ii.i-p51.4"></span>mere reader would probably infer that the
greater of the two was guilty of tritheism or Sabellianism, although
that is not the meaning of these unguarded expressions. But (<span
id="vii.ii.i-p51.5"></span>b) the “subordinationism” which he repudiated
was the doctrine of the <span id="vii.ii.i-p51.6"></span>subjection of
the Son, not of the <span id="vii.ii.i-p51.7"></span>subordination,
which orthodoxy has always maintained. Again, (<span
id="vii.ii.i-p51.8"></span>c) I see no such “anathematizing” <span
id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span id="vii.ii.i-Page_368"></span>in the
letter of <span id="vii.ii.i-p51.9"></span>Dionysius as is here charged;
indeed, it contains no <span id="vii.ii.i-p51.10"></span>anathema <span
id="fr_2354"></span>[2355](#fn_2354.md) whatever, much less the artificial
cursing of the Papacy which is thus assumed. And last, (<span
id="vii.ii.i-p52.4"></span>d) what can be meant by the expression,
“already familiar <span id="vii.ii.i-p52.5"></span>to the popes?” The
learned pages of the same author sufficiently prove that there were no
such things <span id="fr_2355"></span>[2356](#fn_2355.md) as “popes” till a
much later period of history; and, as to the “art of anathematizing,” if
it existed at all in those days, we find it much more freely exemplified
by the Greek Fathers than by bishops of Rome. I say, <span
id="vii.ii.i-p53.1"></span>if it existed at all, because the <span
id="vii.ii.i-p53.2"></span>primitive anathema was a purely scriptural
enforcement of St. <span id="vii.ii.i-p53.3"></span>Paul’s great canon
([Gal. 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="vii.ii.i-p53.4"></span>.md);
while the “<span id="vii.ii.i-p53.5"></span>art of anathematizing,” so
justly credited to “the popes,” was a vindictive and monstrous
assertion, at a later date, of prerogatives which they impiously
arrogated to themselves, against other churches.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[366:2352](0070399.htm#fr_2351.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p1.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p2"></span> Commonly called “the Dutch Church;” i.e.,
the Church of Holland.  

<span id="fn_2352"></span>[367:2353](0070399.htm#fr_2352.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p28"></span> The words italicized have never been
accepted by the whole Church.  

<span id="fn_2353"></span>[367:2354](0070399.htm#fr_2353.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p48.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p49"></span> Vol. ii. p. 570.  

<span id="fn_2354"></span>[368:2355](0070399.htm#fr_2354.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p51.11"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p52"></span> “<span
id="vii.ii.i-p52.1"></span>Culpandi sunt” is quite strong enough for the
original, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.i-p52.2"></span>καταμέμφοιτο</span>. Routh, <span
id="vii.ii.i-p52.3"></span>R. S., iii. p. 374.  

<span id="fn_2355"></span>[368:2356](0070399.htm#fr_2355.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p52.6"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p53"></span> The word existed, but then, and long
afterwards, was universally applied to all bishops.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles](0070400.md)
