[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070033)  [Next](0070035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chap. iv.—of images, and the ornaments of temples, and the contempt in which they are held even by the heathens themselves.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p1"></span>What majesty, then, can images have,
which were altogether in the power of puny man, either <span
id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-Page_45"></span>that
they should be formed into something else, or that they should not be
made at all? On which account <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Priapus thus speaks in <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p1.2"></span>Horace: <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md)  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p2.2"></span> “Formerly I was the trunk of a
> fig-tree, <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) a useless log, when
> the carpenter, at a loss whether he should make a bench or a <span
> id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>Priapus, decided that it should be a
> god. Accordingly I am a god, a very great terror to thieves and
> birds.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p4"></span>Who would not be at ease with such a
guardian as this? For thieves are so foolish as to fear the figure of
<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>Priapus; though the very birds,
which they imagine to be driven away by fear of his scythe, settle upon
the images which are skilfully made, that is, which altogether resemble
men, build their nests there, and defile them. But <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p4.2"></span>Flaccus, as a writer of satire, ridiculed
the folly of men. But they who make the images fancy that they are
performing a serious business. In short, that very great poet, a man of
sagacity in other things, in this alone displayed folly, not like a
poet, but after the manner of an old woman, when even in those most
highly-finished <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) books he orders
this to be done:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p5.3"></span> “And let the guardianship of
> <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p5.5"></span>Priapus of the Hellespont, <span
> id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) who drives away thieves and birds
> with his willow scythe, preserve them.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p7"></span>Therefore they adore mortal things, as
made by mortals. For they may be broken, or burnt, or be destroyed. For
they are often apt to be broken to pieces, when houses fall through age,
and when, consumed by conflagration, they waste away to ashes; and in
many instances, unless aided by their own magnitude, or protected by
diligent watchfulness, they become the prey of thieves. What madness is
it, then, to fear those objects for which either the downfall of a
building, or fires, or thefts, may be feared! What folly, to hope for
protection from those things which are unable to protect themselves!
What perversity, to have recourse to the guardianship of those which,
when injured, are themselves unavenged, unless vengeance is exacted by
their worshippers! Where, then, is truth? Where no violence can be
applied to religion; where there appears to be nothing which can be
injured; where no sacrilege can be committed.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p8"></span>But whatever is subjected to the eyes
and to the hands, that, in truth, because it is perishable, is
inconsistent with the whole subject of immortality. It is in vain,
therefore, that men set off and adorn their gods with gold, ivory, and
jewels, as though they were capable of deriving any pleasure from these
things. What is the use of precious gifts to insensible objects? Is it
the same which the dead have? For as they embalm the bodies of the dead,
wrap them in spices and precious garments, and bury them in the earth,
so they honour the gods, who when they were made did not perceive it,
and when they are worshipped have no knowledge of it; for they did not
receive sensibility on their consecration. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>Persius was displeased that golden vessels
should be carried into the temples, since he thought it superfluous that
that should be reckoned among religious offerings which was not an
instrument of sanctity, but of avarice. For these are the things which
it is better to offer as a gift to the god whom you would rightly
worship:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p8.2"></span> “Written law <span
> id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) and the divine law of the
> conscience, and the sacred recesses of the mind, and the breast imbued
> with nobleness.” <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p11"></span>A noble and wise sentiment. But he
ridiculously added this: that there is this gold in the temples, as
there are dolls <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) presented to
<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.6"></span>Venus by the virgin; which perhaps
he may have despised on account of their smallness. For he did not see
that the very images and statues of the gods, wrought in gold and ivory
by the hand of <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.7"></span>Polycletus, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.8"></span>Euphranor, and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.9"></span>Phidias, were nothing more than large
dolls, not dedicated by virgins, to whose sports some indulgence may be
granted, but by bearded men. Therefore <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.10"></span>Seneca deservedly laughs at the folly
even of old men. We are not (he says) boys twice, <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) as is commonly said, but are always
so. But there is this difference, that <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>when men we have greater subjects of
sport. Therefore men offer to these dolls, which are of large size, and
adorned as though for the stage, both perfumes, and incense, and odours:
they sacrifice to these costly and fattened victims, which have a
mouth, <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) but one that is not
suitable for eating; to these they bring robes and costly garments,
though they have no need of clothing; to these they dedicate gold and
silver, of which they who receive them are as destitute <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) as they who have given them.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p16"></span>And not without reason did <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>Dionysius, the despot of Sicily, when
after a victory he had become master of Greece, <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) despise, and plunder and jeer at such
gods, for he followed up his sacrilegious acts by jesting words. For
when he <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-Page_46"></span>had taken off a golden robe from the
statue of the <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.6"></span>Olympian Jupiter, he
ordered that a woollen garment should be placed upon him, saying that a
golden robe was heavy in summer and cold in winter, but that a woollen
one was adapted to each season. He also took off the golden beard from
<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.7"></span>Æsculapius, saying that it was
unbecoming and unjust, that while his father <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.8"></span>Apollo was yet smooth and beardless, the
son should be seen to wear a beard before his father. He also took away
the bowls, and spoils, and some little images <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) which were held in the extended hands
of the statues, and said that he did not take them away, but received
them: for that it would be very foolish and ungrateful to refuse to
receive good things, when offered voluntarily by those from whom men
were accustomed to implore them. He did these things with impunity,
because he was a king and victorious. Moreover, his usual good fortune
also followed him; for he lived even to old age, and handed down the
kingdom in succession to his son. In his case, therefore, because men
could not punish his sacrilegious deeds, it was befitting that the gods
should be their own avengers. But if any humble person shall have
committed any such crime, there are at hand for his punishment the
scourge, fire, the rack, <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) the
cross, and whatever torture men can invent in their anger and rage. But
when they punish those who have been detected in the act of sacrilege,
they themselves distrust the power of their gods. For why should they
not leave to them especially the opportunity of avenging themselves, if
they think that they are able to do so? Moreover, they also imagine that
it happened through the will of the deities that the sacrilegious
robbers were discovered and arrested; and their cruelty is instigated
not so much by anger as by fear, lest they themselves should be visited
with punishment if they failed to avenge the injury done to the gods.
And, in truth, they display incredible shallowness in imagining that the
gods will injure them on account of the guilt of others, who by
themselves were unable to injure those very persons by whom they were
profaned and plundered. But, in fact, they have often themselves also
inflicted punishment on the sacrilegious: that may have occurred even by
chance, which has sometimes happened, but not always. But I will show
presently how that occurred. Now in the meantime I will ask, Why did
they not punish so many and such great acts of sacrilege in <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>Dionysius, who insulted the gods openly,
and not in secret? Why did they not repel this sacrilegious man,
possessed of such power, from their temples, their ceremonies, and their
images? Why, even when he had carried off their sacred things, had he a
prosperous voyage—as he himself, according to his custom, testified in
joke? Do you see, he said to his companions who feared shipwreck, how
prosperous a voyage the immortal gods themselves give to the
sacrilegious? But perhaps he had learnt from <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p19.2"></span>Plato that the gods have no <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md) power.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21"></span>What of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.1"></span>Caius Verres? whom his accuser <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.2"></span>Tully compares to this same <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.3"></span>Dionysius, and to <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.4"></span>Phalaris, and to all tyrants. Did he not
pillage the whole of Sicily, carrying away the images of the gods, and
the ornaments of the temples? It is idle to follow up each particular
instance: I would fain make mention of one, in which the accuser, with
all the force of eloquence—in short, with every effort of voice and of
body—lamented about <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.5"></span>Ceres of
Catina, or of <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.6"></span>Henna: the one of
whom was of such great sanctity, that it was unlawful for men to enter
the secret recesses of her temple; the other was of such great
antiquity, that all accounts relate that the goddess herself first
discovered grain in the soil of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.7"></span>Henna, and that her virgin daughter was
carried away from the same place. Lastly, in the times of the <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.8"></span>Gracchi, when the state was disturbed
both by seditions and by portents, on its being discovered in the
Sibylline predictions that the most ancient <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.9"></span>Ceres ought to be appeased, ambassadors
were sent to <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.10"></span>Henna. This <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.11"></span>Ceres, then, either the most holy one,
whom it was unlawful for men to behold even for the sake of adoration,
or the most ancient one, whom the senate and people of Rome had appeased
with sacrifices and gifts, was carried away with impunity by <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.12"></span>Caius Verres from her secret and ancient
recesses, his robber slaves having been sent in. The same <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.13"></span>orator, in truth, when he affirmed that
he had been entreated by the Sicilians to undertake the cause of the
province, made use of these words: “That they had now not even any gods
in their cities to whom they might betake themselves, since <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.14"></span>Verres had taken away the most sacred
images from their most venerable shrines.” As though, in truth, if <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.15"></span>Verres had taken them away from the
cities and shrines, he had also taken them from heaven. From which it
appears that those gods have nothing in them more than the material of
which they are made. And not without reason did the Sicilians have
recourse to you, O <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.16"></span>Marcus Tullius,
that is, to a man; since they had for three years experienced that those
gods had no power. For they would have been most foolish if they had
fled for protection against the injuries of men, to those who were
unable to be angry with <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.17"></span>Caius
Verres on their own behalf. But, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.18"></span>it will be urged, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.19"></span>Verres was condemned on account of these
deeds. Therefore he was not punished by the gods, but by the energy of
<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.20"></span>Cicero, by which he either <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-Page_47"></span>crushed
his defenders or withstood his influence. <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) Why should I say that, in the case of
<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22.5"></span>Verres himself, that was not so
much a condemnation as a respite from labour? So that, as the immortal
gods had given a prosperous voyage to <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22.6"></span>Dionysius when he was carrying off the
spoils of gods, so also they appear to have bestowed on <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22.7"></span>Verres quiet repose, in which he might
with tranquility enjoy the fruits of his sacrilege. For when civil wars
afterwards raged, being removed from all danger and apprehension, under
the cloak of condemnation he heard of the disastrous misfortunes and
miserable deaths of others; and he who appeared to have fallen while all
retained their position, he alone, in truth, retained his position while
all fell; until the proscription of the triumvirs,—that very
proscription, indeed, which carried off <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22.8"></span>Tully, the avenger of the violated
majesty of the gods,—carried him off, satiated at once with the
enjoyment of the wealth which he had gained by sacrilege, and with life,
and worn out by old age. Moreover, he was fortunate in this very
circumstance, that before his own death he heard of the most cruel end
of his accuser; the gods doubtless providing that this sacrilegious man
and spoiler of their worship should not die before he had received
consolation from revenge.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_140"></span>[45:141](0070034.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>Horat., 1 Serm. 8. 1.  

<span id="fn_141"></span>[45:142](0070034.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p3"></span> The wood of the fig-tree is
proverbially used to denote that which is worthless and contemptible.  

<span id="fn_142"></span>[45:143](0070034.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p5"></span> The <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>Georgics, which are much more elaborately
finished than the other works of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p5.2"></span>Virgil.  

<span id="fn_143"></span>[45:144](0070034.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p5.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p6.1"></span>Priapus was especially worshipped at
Lampsacus on the Hellespont; hence he is styled Hellespontiacus.  

<span id="fn_144"></span>[45:145](0070034.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p9"></span> Compositum jus, fasque animi. <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>Compositum
jus</span> is explained as “the written and ordained laws of men;” <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p9.2"></span>fas</span>, “divine
and sacred law.” Others read <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p9.3"></span>animo</span>, “human and divine law
settled in the mind.”  

<span id="fn_145"></span>[45:146](0070034.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>Persius, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>Sat., ii. 73.  

<span id="fn_146"></span>[45:147](0070034.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12"></span> Pupæ, dolls or images worn by girls,
as <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>bull</span><span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.2"></span>æ were by boys. On arriving at maturity,
they dedicated these images to <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.3"></span>Venus. See <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.4"></span>Jahn’s note on the passage from <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.5"></span>Persius.  

<span id="fn_147"></span>[45:148](0070034.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p12.11"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p13"></span> The allusion is to the proverb that
“old age is second childhood.”  

<span id="fn_148"></span>[45:149](0070034.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p14"></span> An allusion to [Ps. cxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>: “They have mouths, but they speak not.”
 

<span id="fn_149"></span>[45:150](0070034.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p15"></span> Quæ tam non habent qui accipiunt,
quam qui illa donarunt. The senseless images can make no use of the
treasures.  

<span id="fn_150"></span>[45:151](0070034.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.1"></span>Justin relates that Græcia Magna, a part
of Italy, was subdued by <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.2"></span>Dionysius.
<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.3"></span>Cicero says that he sailed to
Peloponnesus, and entered the temple of the <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.4"></span>Olympian Jupiter. \[<span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.5"></span>De Nat. Deor., iii. 34.\]  

<span id="fn_151"></span>[46:152](0070034.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p17.9"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p18"></span> Sigilla. The word is also used to
denote seals, or signets.  

<span id="fn_152"></span>[46:153](0070034.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p19"></span> Equuleus: an instrument of torture
resembling a horse, on which slaves were stretched and tortured.  

<span id="fn_153"></span>[46:154](0070034.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p20"></span> Nihil esse \[= are nothing.\]  

<span id="fn_154"></span>[47:155](0070034.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p21.21"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22"></span> The allusion is to the efforts made
by the partisans of <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>Verres to
prevent <span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>Cicero from obtaining the
necessary evidence for the condemnation of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22.3"></span>Verres. But all these efforts were
unavailing: the evidence was overwhelming, and before the trial was over
<span id="iii.ii.ii.iv-p22.4"></span>Verres went into exile.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. V.—That God only, the creator of all things, is to be
worshipped, and not the elements or heavenly bodies; and the opinion of
the stoics is refuted, who think that the stars and planets are
gods](0070035.md)
