[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070329)  [Next](0070331.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXI.

<span id="iii.v.xxi-p1"></span>Having thus attained to the highest
power, he bent his mind to afflict that empire into which he had opened
his way. It is the manner and practice of the Persians for the people to
yield themselves slaves to their kings, and for the kings to treat their
people as slaves. This flagitious man, from the time of his victories
over the Persians, was not ashamed incessantly to extol such an
institution, and he resolved to establish it in the Roman dominions; and
because he could not do this by an express law, he so acted, in
imitation of the Persian kings, as to bereave men of their liberties. He
first of all degraded those whom he meant to punish; and then not only
were inferior magistrates put to the torture by him, but also the chief
men in cities, and persons of the most eminent rank, and this too in
matters of little moment, and in civil questions. Crucifixion was the
punishment ready prepared in capital cases; and for lesser crimes,
fetters. Matrons of honourable station were dragged into workhouses; and
when any man was to be scourged, there were four posts fixed in the
ground, and to them he was tied, after a manner unknown in the
chastisement of slaves. What shall I say of his apartment for sport, and
of his favourite diversions? He kept bears, most resembling himself in
fierceness and bulk, whom he had collected together during the course of
his reign. As often as he chose to indulge his humour, he ordered some
particular bear to be brought in, and men were thrown to that savage
animal, rather to be swallowed up than devoured; and when their limbs
were torn asunder, he laughed with excessive complacency: nor did he
ever sup without being spectator of the effusion of human blood. Men of
private station were condemned to be burnt alive; and he began this mode
of execution by edicts against the Christians, commanding that, after
torture and condemnation, they should be burnt at a slow fire. They were
fixed to a stake, and first a moderate flame was applied to the soles of
their feet, until the muscles, contracted by burning, were torn from the
bones; then torches, lighted and put out again, were directed to all the
members of their bodies, so that no part had any exemption. Meanwhile
cold water was continually poured on their faces, and their mouths
moistened, lest, by reason of their jaws being parched, they should
expire. At length they did expire, when, after many hours, the violent
heat had consumed their skin and penetrated into their intestines. The
dead carcases were laid on a <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="iii.v.xxi-Page_310"></span>funeral pile, and wholly burnt; their
bones were gathered, ground to powder, and thrown into the river, or
into the sea.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXII](0070331.md)
