[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070011)  [Next](0070013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VI.—Of divine testimonies, and of the sibyls and their predictions.

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1"></span>Now let us pass to divine testimonies;
but I will previously bring forward one which resembles a divine
testimony, both on account of its very great antiquity, and because he
whom I shall name was taken from men and placed among the gods.
According to <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1.2"></span>Caius Cotta the pontiff, while disputing
against the Stoics concerning superstitions, and the variety of opinions
which prevail respecting the gods, in order that he might, after the
custom of the Academics, make everything uncertain, says that there were
five Mercuries; and having enumerated four in order, says that the fifth
was he by whom <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1.3"></span>Argus was slain, and
that on this account he fled into Egypt, and gave laws and letters to
the Egyptians. The Egyptians call him <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1.4"></span>Thoth; and from him the first month of
their year, that is, September, received its name among them. He also
built a town, which is even now called in Greek Hermopolis (the town of
<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1.5"></span>Mercury), and the inhabitants of
<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1.6"></span>Phenæ honour him with religious
worship. And although he was a man, yet he was of great antiquity, and
most fully imbued with every kind of learning, so that the knowledge of
many subjects and arts acquired for him the name of <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1.7"></span>Trismegistus. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) He wrote books, and those in great
numbers, relating to the knowledge of divine things, in which be asserts
the majesty of the supreme and only God, and makes mention of Him by the
same names which we use—God and Father. And that no one might inquire
His name, he said that He was without name, and that on account of His
very unity He does not require the peculiarity of a name. These are his
own words: “God is one, but He who is one only does not need a name; for
He who is self-existent is without a name.” God, therefore, has no name,
because He is alone; nor is there any need of a proper name, except in
cases where a multitude of persons requires a distinguishing mark, so
that you may designate each person by his own mark and appellation. But
God, because He is always one, has no peculiar name.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p3"></span>It remains for me to bring forward
testimonies respecting the sacred responses and predictions, which are
much more to be relied upon. For perhaps they against whom we are
arguing may think that no credence is to be given to poets, as though
they invented fictions, nor to philosophers, inasmuch as they were
liable to err, being themselves but men. <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p3.1"></span>Marcus Varro, than whom no man of greater
learning ever lived, even among the Greeks, much less among the Latins,
in those books respecting divine subjects which he addressed to Caius
Cæsar the chief pontiff, when he was speaking of the
Quindecemviri, <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) says that the
Sibylline books were not the production of one <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.2"></span>Sibyl only, but that they were called by
one name Sibylline, because all prophetesses were called by the ancients
<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.3"></span>Sibyls, either from the name of one,
the Delphian priestess, or from their proclaiming the counsels of the
gods. For in the Æolic dialect they used to call the gods by the word
<span class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.4"></span>Sioi</span>,
not <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.5"></span>Theoi;</span> and for counsel they used
the word <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.6"></span>bule</span>, not <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.7"></span>boule;</span>—and so
the <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.8"></span>Sibyl received her name as
though <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.9"></span>Siobule</span>. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) But he says that the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.3"></span>Sibyls <span id="page_16">p. 16</span>
<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-Page_16"></span>were ten in number, and he
enumerated them all under the writers, who wrote an account of each:
that the <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.4"></span>first was from the
Persians, and of her <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.5"></span>Nicanor made
mention, who wrote the exploits of <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.6"></span>Alexander of Macedon;—the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.7"></span>second of Libya, and of her <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.8"></span>Euripides makes mention in the prologue of
the Lamia;—the <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.9"></span>third of Delphi,
concerning whom <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.10"></span>Chrysippus speaks
in that book which he composed concerning divination;—the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.11"></span>fourth a Cimmerian in Italy, whom <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.12"></span>Nævius mentions in his books of the Punic
war, and <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.13"></span>Piso in his annals;—the
<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.14"></span>fifth of Erythræa, whom <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.15"></span>Apollodorus of Erythræa affirms to have
been his own countrywoman, and that she foretold to the Greeks when they
were setting out for Ilium, both that Troy was doomed to destruction,
and that Homer would write falsehoods;—the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.16"></span>sixth of Samos, respecting whom <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.17"></span>Eratosthenes writes that he had found a
written notice in the ancient annals of the Samians. The <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.18"></span>seventh was of Cumæ, by name <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.19"></span>Amalthæa, who is termed by some <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.20"></span>Herophile, or <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.21"></span>Demophile, and <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.22"></span>they say that she brought nine books to
the king <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.23"></span>Tarquinius Priscus, and
asked for them three hundred philippics, and that the king refused so
great a price, and derided the madness of the woman; that she, in the
sight of the king, burnt three of the books, and demanded the same price
for those which were left; that Tarquinias much more considered the
woman to be mad; and that when she again, having burnt three other
books, persisted in asking the same price, the king was moved, and
bought the remaining books for the three hundred pieces of gold: and the
number of these books was afterwards increased, after the rebuilding of
the Capitol; because they were collected from all cities of Italy and
Greece, and especially from those of Erythræa, and were brought to Rome,
under the name of whatever <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.24"></span>Sibyl
they were. <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.25"></span>Further, that the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.26"></span>eighth was from the Hellespont, born in
the Trojan territory, in the village of Marpessus, about the town of
Gergithus; and <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.27"></span>Heraclides of Pontus
writes that she lived in the times of <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.28"></span>Solon and <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.29"></span>Cyrus;—the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.30"></span>ninth of Phrygia, who gave oracles at
Ancyra;—the <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.31"></span>tenth of Tibur, by name
Albunea, who is worshipped at Tibur as a goddess, near the banks of the
river Anio, in the depths of which her statue is said to have been
found, holding in her hand a book. The senate transferred her oracles
into the Capitol.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p6"></span>The predictions of all these <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p6.1"></span>Sibyls <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) are both brought forward and esteemed as
such, except those of the Cumæan <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.6"></span>Sibyl, whose books are concealed by the
Romans; nor do they consider it lawful for them to be inspected by any
one but the <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.7"></span>Quindecemviri</span>. And there are
separate books the production of each, but because these are inscribed
with the name of the <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.8"></span>Sibyl they are
believed to be the work of one; and they are confused, nor can the
productions of each be distinguished and assigned to their own authors,
except in the case of the Erythræan <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.9"></span>Sibyl, for she both inserted her own true
name in her verse, and predicted that she would be called Erythræan,
though she was born at Babylon. But we also shall speak of the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.10"></span>Sibyl without any distinction, wherever
we shall have occasion to use their testimonies. All these <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.11"></span>Sibyls, then, proclaim one God, and
especially the Erythræan, who is regarded among the others as more
celebrated and noble; since <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.12"></span>Fenestella, a most diligent writer,
speaking of the <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.13"></span>Quindecemviri</span>, says that, after
the rebuilding of the Capitol, <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.14"></span>Caius Curio the consul proposed to the
senate that ambassadors should be sent to Erythræ to search out and
bring to Rome the writings of the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.15"></span>Sibyl; and that, accordingly, <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.16"></span>Publius Gabinius, <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.17"></span>Marcus Otacilius, and <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.18"></span>Lucius Valerius were sent, who conveyed
to Rome about a thousand verses written out by private persons. We have
shown before that <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.19"></span>Varro made the
same statement. Now in these verses which the ambassadors brought to
Rome, are these testimonies respecting the one God:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.20"></span> 1. “One God, who is alone, most
> mighty, uncreated.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p8"></span>This is the only supreme God, who made
the heaven, and decked it with lights.  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p8.1"></span> 2. “But there is one only God of
> pre-eminent power, who made the heaven, and sun, and stars, and moon,
> and fruitful earth, and waves of the water of the sea.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p9"></span>And since He alone is the framer of
the universe, and the artificer of all things of which it consists or
which are contained in it, it testifies that He alone ought to be
worshipped:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p9.1"></span> 3. “Worship Him who is alone the
> ruler of the world, who alone was and is from age to age.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p10"></span>Also another <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p10.1"></span>Sibyl, whoever she is, when she said that
she conveyed the voice of God to men, thus spoke:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p10.2"></span> 4. “I am the one only God, and
> there is no other God.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p11"></span>I would now follow up the testimonies
of the others, were it not that these are sufficient, and that I reserve
others for more befitting opportunities. But since we are defending the
cause of truth before those who err from the truth and serve false
religions, what kind of proof ought we to bring forward <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) against them, rather than to refute them
by the testimonies of their own gods? <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>
<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-Page_17"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[15:37](0070012.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p1.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p2"></span> \[See vol. i. p. 289 note 2, this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_37"></span>[15:38](0070012.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4"></span> The Quindecemviri were the fifteen
men to whom the care of the Sibylline books was entrusted. At first two
(Duumviri) were appointed. The number was afterwards increased to ten,
and subsequently to fifteen. It appears probable that this last change
was made by <span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.1"></span>Sulla.  

<span id="fn_38"></span>[15:39](0070012.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p4.10"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5"></span> \[i.e., Counsel of God. See p. 14
<span class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.1"></span>supra</span>,
and 16 <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p5.2"></span>infra</span>.\]  

<span id="fn_39"></span>[16:40](0070012.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7"></span> \[Concerning the <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.1"></span>Sibyls, see also, fully, <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.2"></span>Lardner, <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.3"></span>Credib., ii. 258, 334, etc. On the use
here and elsewhere made of them by our author, <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.4"></span>Ibid</span>., p.
343, and iii. 544; also pp. 14 and 15,<span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p7.5"></span> supra.</span>\]  

<span id="fn_40"></span>[16:41](0070012.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.ii.i.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.vii-p12"></span> \[Vol. ii. cap. 28, p. 143.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VII.—Concerning the testimonies of Apollo and the
gods](0070013)
