[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070281)  [Next](0070283.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIX.—Of the Soul and Body, and of Providence.

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p1"></span>But since he is made up, as we have
said, of two parts, soul and body, the virtues are <span
id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="iii.iii.xix-Page_276"></span>contained in the one, and vices in the
other, and they mutually oppose each other. For the good properties of
the soul, which consist in restraining lusts, are contrary to the body;
and the good properties of the body, which consist in every kind of
pleasure, are hostile to the soul. But if the virtue of the soul shall
have resisted the desires, and suppressed them, he will be truly like to
God. From which it is evident that the soul of man, which is capable of
divine virtue, is not mortal. But there is this distinction, that since
virtue is attended with bitterness, and the attraction of pleasure is
sweet, great numbers are overcome and are drawn aside to the
pleasantness; but they who have given themselves up to the body and
earthly things are pressed to the earth, and are unable to attain to the
favour of the divine bounty, because they have polluted themselves with
the defilements of vices. But they who, following God, and in obedience
to Him, have despised the desires of the body, and, preferring virtue to
pleasures, have preserved innocence and righteousness, these God
recognises as like to Himself.  

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p2"></span>Since, therefore, He has laid down a
most holy law, and wishes all men to be innocent and beneficent, is it
possible that He should not be angry when He sees that His law is
despised, that virtue is rejected, and pleasure made the object of
pursuit? But if He is the governor of the world, as He might to be, He
surely does not despise that which is even of the greatest importance in
the whole world. If He has foresight, as it is befitting that God should
have, it is plain that He consults the interests of the human race, in
order that our life may be more abundantly supplied, and better, and
safer. If He is the Father and God of all, He is undoubtedly delighted
with the virtues of men, and provoked by their vices. Therefore He loves
the just, and hates the wicked. There is no need (one says) of hatred;
for He once for all has fixed a reward for the good, and punishment for
the wicked. But if any one lives justly and innocently, and at the same
time neither worships God nor has any regard for Him, as <span
id="iii.iii.xix-p2.1"></span>Aristides, and <span
id="iii.iii.xix-p2.2"></span>Timon, <span
id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764.md) and others of the philosophers,
will he escape <span id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765.md) with impunity,
because, though he has obeyed the law of God, he has nevertheless
despised God Himself? There is therefore something on account of which
God may be angry with one rebelling against Him, as it were, in reliance
upon His integrity. If He can be angry with this man on account of his
pride, why not more so with the sinner, who has despised the law
together with the Lawgiver? The judge cannot pardon offences, because he
is subject to the will of another. But God can pardon, because He is
Himself the arbitrator <span id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766.md) and
judge of His own law; and when He laid down this, He did not surely
deprive Himself of all power, but He has the liberty of bestowing
pardon.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[276:1765](0070282.htm#fr_1764.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xix-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p3"></span> Others read “Cimon.” If the reading
<span id="iii.iii.xix-p3.1"></span>Timon be retained, the reference is
not to Timon who is called “the Misanthrope,” but to Timon the
philosopher of Phlius, who lived in the time of <span
id="iii.iii.xix-p3.2"></span>Ptolemy Philadelphus, and belonged to the
sect of the Sceptics.  

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[276:1766](0070282.htm#fr_1765.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xix-p4.1"></span>Cedetne huic impune.  

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[276:1767](0070282.htm#fr_1766.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xix-p5.1"></span>Disceptator.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XX.—Of offences, and the mercy of God](0070283.md)
