[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070474)  [Next](0070476) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii"></span>

### <span id="x.ii-p0.1"></span>Introductory Notice by Professor M. B. Riddle, D.D.

##### <span id="x.ii-p0.2"></span>section 1.—text.

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>In</span> this volume, pp. 372–376, will be found
a brief account of the Codex discovered by <span
id="x.ii-p1.3"></span>Bryennios, now Metropolitan of Nicomedia. It
remains in the library of the Jerusalem Monastery of the Holy Sepulchre
at Constantinople. While the publication of the Greek text of the
Teaching awakened unusual interest, the recovery of that document has
not been the only valuable result of this important discovery. The
Codex, as was speedily known, contains the only complete copy of the
Greek text of the two Epistles of Clement. The <span
id="x.ii-p1.4"></span>lacunæ previously existing in the genuine Epistle
were not extensive; but, as now appears, the Alexandrian manuscript
contains only three-fifths of the second Epistle. The entire Greek text
of both Epistles was given to the public by <span
id="x.ii-p1.5"></span>Bryennios <span
id="fr_3838"></span>[3839](#fn_3838) in 1875.  

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span>This at once led to a revision of some recent
editions, notably those of <span id="x.ii-p3.1"></span>Hilgenfeld, <span
id="fr_3839"></span>[3840](#fn_3839) and of <span
id="x.ii-p4.2"></span>Gebhardt and <span
id="x.ii-p4.3"></span>Harnack. <span
id="fr_3840"></span>[3841](#fn_3840) Many monographs soon appeared. But
the discovery of a new (Syriac) source for the text in 1876, while not
affecting the general problem, gave to patristic scholars more abundant
critical material. Bishop <span id="x.ii-p5.2"></span>Lightfoot’s
Appendix <span id="fr_3841"></span>[3842](#fn_3841) contains the most
convenient and accessible collation of this material, as well as the
most clear statements on all points affected by the two discoveries. The
Syriac manuscript, containing a version of the two Epistles of Clement,
was purchased by the Cambridge University Library in 1876, from the
collection of “the late Oriental scholar <span id="x.ii-p6.3"></span>M.
Jules Mohl of Paris” (<span id="x.ii-p6.4"></span>Lightfoot). It
embraces the entire New Testament, except the Apocalypse, in the <span
id="x.ii-p6.5"></span>Harkleian recension of the Philoxenian (or later)
Syriac version; but the scribe has inserted the two Epistles of Clement
(entire) between the Catholic and Pauline Epistles. The value of the
manuscript for New-Testament criticism is great, and the phenomena it
presents interesting, as bearing on the discussion of the New-Testament
canon; but the paucity of sources for the text of the Clementine
Epistles gives special importance to the discovery of a version of these
writings so soon after the recovery of the entire Greek text. A
discussion of the textual questions is forbidden by the limits of this
Introductory Notice, but a few points may be stated:—  

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span>1. A comparison of the three authorities (the
Alexandrian, the Constantinopolitan, and the Syriac), in the parts they
in common contain, shows that the first is most trustworthy, and that
the Syriac is usually more correct than the Constantinopolitan.  

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span>2. Hence, in the recovered portions, the
authority of the Syriac is very valuable in correcting the obvious
blunders of the Greek copy. This should teach caution in accepting the
text of the <span id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>Teaching, where the same Greek
manuscript is our only authority.  

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span>3. The genuine Epistle of Clement, which
stands next in age to the canonical books of the New Testament, now
stands next in accuracy of text also. Doubt in regard to textual
questions decreases as the critical material increases. <span
id="page_513">p. 513</span> <span id="x.ii-Page_513"></span>  

##### <span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>section 2.—place and date of composition; author.

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>The recovery of the entire text of the <span
id="x.ii-p10.1"></span>Second Epistle settles the question as to the
<span id="x.ii-p10.2"></span>purpose of the work. As was previously
surmised, it is a homily (comp. chaps. xvii., xix., xx.); moreover, it
was “read” by the author at public worship after the Scripture lesson
(see Chap. xix). But as to <span id="x.ii-p10.3"></span>place, <span
id="x.ii-p10.4"></span>date, and <span id="x.ii-p10.5"></span>author,
there is still diversity of opinion. The three questions are closely
related. The view of Bishop <span id="x.ii-p10.6"></span>Lightfoot
seems, on the whole, most tenable. He regards the homily as of
Corinthian origin, delivered, in all probability, between <span
id="x.ii-p10.7"></span>a. d. 120 and 140, but the work of an unknown
author, who seems to have been one of the presbyters of the
church,—possibly the bishop. The allusions to the athletic games are in
favour of Corinth. On this theory the title is thus accounted for: The
genuine Epistle of Clement was addressed to the Corinthians, and read in
the church of that city from time to time. This homily was probably read
in the same manner, and at length united in a manuscript copy with the
other. Each was “to the Corinthians:” hence it was gradually inferred
that both were Epistles of <span id="x.ii-p10.8"></span>Clement. Of this
succession or movement <span id="x.ii-p10.9"></span>Lightfoot finds some
indications in the manuscript authorities.  

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>The internal evidence of an early date has
been increased by the discovery of the concluding portion, but there is
nothing to determine the exact time of composition. The distinction made
in Chap. xiv. between the Old and New Testaments, as well as the use of
the Gospel of the Egyptians (at the close of chap. xii.), taken in
connection with the unmistakeable citations of New-Testament passages as
of Divine authority, point to the first half of the second century as
the probable period. The absence of all direct opposition to Gnosticism
points to an origin within the same limits. All these considerations
make against the view of <span id="x.ii-p11.1"></span>Hilgenfeld, who
attributes the homily to <span id="x.ii-p11.2"></span>Clement of
Alexandria, thus assigning it to the latter half of the second century.
 

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span>In regard to the author, nothing further is
learned from the newly recovered portion, except the fact that he was a
preacher. Even this does not determine his ecclesiastical position,
since at that early date much freedom of utterance was permitted in
Christian assemblies. It is, however, very probable that the author was
a presbyter; and it is not improbable that he was the chief presbyter,
or local bishop.  

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span>The homily is still attributed to a person
named <span id="x.ii-p13.1"></span>Clement, but there are three theories
as to what <span id="x.ii-p13.2"></span>Clement. (1) <span
id="x.ii-p13.3"></span>Bryennios stands almost alone in claiming that
the document is the work of <span id="x.ii-p13.4"></span>Clemens
Romanus. The internal evidence against this view was quite sufficient
before the full text of the two Epistles was known; now it is to be
regarded as abundantly conclusive. Even the English version of the two
writings will suggest to the intelligent reader the points of
difference. (2) As intimated above, <span
id="x.ii-p13.5"></span>Hilgenfeld regards <span
id="x.ii-p13.6"></span>Clement of Alexandria as the author; but this
places the homily too late. Moreover, the writings of the Alexandrian
Father stand immensely above this feeble, commonplace, and chaotic
production. Even the citation from the Gospel of the Egyptians, common
to both, <span id="fr_3842"></span>[3843](#fn_3842) is differently used
by the two authors; <span id="x.ii-p14.4"></span>Clement of Alexandria
opposing the interpretation favoured in this homily, as well as
objecting to the authority of that apocryphal Gospel. <span
id="x.ii-p14.5"></span>Hilgenfeld’s argument from the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii-p14.6"></span>φιλοσοφει̑ν</span> in chap.
xix., is invalidated by the improbability of that reading; see note
<span id="x.ii-p14.7"></span>in loco. (3) The most plausible view, as
Bishop <span id="x.ii-p14.8"></span>Lightfoot admits, is that of <span
id="x.ii-p14.9"></span>Harnack. He assigns the homily to a third <span
id="x.ii-p14.10"></span>Clement, referred to, as he supposes, in the
<span id="x.ii-p14.11"></span>Shepherd of Hermas, <span
id="fr_3843"></span>[3844](#fn_3843) and living somewhat later than
<span id="x.ii-p15.1"></span>Clement of Rome. In favour of this may be
urged: some similarity to the <span id="x.ii-p15.2"></span>Shepherd of
Hermas, the probability that at the date of the later writing <span
id="x.ii-p15.3"></span>Clement of Rome was not living, and the easy
explanation it affords of the traditional title. But, while a third
<span id="x.ii-p15.4"></span>Clement may have lived at Rome, we have no
evidence other than the doubtful hint in the <span
id="x.ii-p15.5"></span>Shepherd. The allusion in that work seems far
more appropriate to the well-known <span id="x.ii-p15.6"></span>Clement
of Rome. The argument from the later date of the <span
id="x.ii-p15.7"></span>Shepherd proves very little; not only is the date
uncertain, but the visions are placed <span id="page_514">p. 514</span>
<span id="x.ii-Page_514"></span>quite early. The editor of this series,
while accepting <span id="x.ii-p15.8"></span>a. d. 160 as the probable
date of the <span id="x.ii-p15.9"></span>Shepherd, regards it as a
compilation, introducing “<span id="x.ii-p15.10"></span>Hermas and <span
id="x.ii-p15.11"></span>Clement to identify the times which are
idealized in his allegory.” <span id="fr_3844"></span>[3845](#fn_3844)
The view of Bishop <span id="x.ii-p16.3"></span>Lightfoot, therefore,
seems to be the safest.  

##### <span id="x.ii-p16.4"></span>section 3.—character and contents.

<span id="x.ii-p17"></span>The style of the homily is poor. It abounds
in connectives, which link unconnected ideas; its thought is feeble, its
theology peculiar though not false, its arrangement confused. While it
furnishes some historical data for practical theology, it is, in
homiletical method and matter, in sharp contrast with the Apostolic
writings and with the homilies of <span id="x.ii-p17.1"></span>Origen.
Though referring to Scripture, it has none of the virtues of the
expository discourse; though hortatory in tone, it has little of the
unity and directness of better sermons of that class. Its chief
excellence is its brevity.  

<span id="x.ii-p18"></span>It is difficult to make an analysis of the
contents. The theme is the duty of fulfilling the commands of Christ.  

<span id="x.ii-p19"></span>(1) This obedience is the true confession of
Christ, answering to the greatness of His salvation; mainly in chaps.
i.-iv.  

<span id="x.ii-p20"></span>(2) Thus the Christian shows his opposition
to the world; chaps. v.-viii.  

<span id="x.ii-p21"></span>(3) This obedience will be rewarded in the
future world; chaps. ix.-xvii.  

<span id="x.ii-p22"></span>(4) The conclusion: the preacher’s confession
(xviii.), justification of his exhortation (xix.); concluding word of
consolation, with doxology (xx.). But the treatment is not strictly
logical, nor are the parts clearly distinguished.  

<span id="x.ii-p23"></span>The theology shows no traces of heresy, nor
does it sharply oppose any false doctrinal views. It lacks the dogmatic
precision of a later age, but emphasizes rigid views of the relation of
the sexes. “Repentance and good works seem to be the main articles of
its creed. Of regeneration there seems to be no definite idea: to be
called is the same as to be saved. The Church is pre-existent; the
kingdom of God is in the future; no worth is left to this world or to
the life in it. The principal argument urged in favour of standing firm
in faith is the good issue of it in the next life” (<span
id="x.ii-p23.1"></span>C. J. H. Ropes).  

<span id="x.ii-p24"></span>The hints given in regard to public worship
agree with the famous description of Justin Martyr, <span
id="fr_3845"></span>[3846](#fn_3845) and there are indications that the
early freedom of exhortation had not yet disappeared. Bishop Lightfoot
aptly concludes his dissertation with these words: “the homily itself,
as a literary work, is almost worthless. As the earliest example of its
kind, however, and as the product of an important age of which we
possess only the scantiest remains, it has the highest value. Nor will
its intellectual poverty blind us to its true grandeur, as an example of
the lofty moral earnestness and the triumphant faith which subdued a
reluctant world, and laid it prostrate at the foot of the cross.”  <span
id="fr_3846"></span>[3847](#fn_3846)  

##### <span id="x.ii-p26.4"></span>section 4.—the version in this volume.

<span id="x.ii-p27"></span>Greater unity would have been secured by a
new translation of the entire work. Since, however, this was not
possible, the aim of the editor has been to give the reader, as far as
practicable, the benefit of the light shed upon the whole by the
recently discovered authorities. The portion already translated in the
Edinburgh volume has been supplied with critical annotations, and a few
exegetical points have been treated. The recent editions of the Greek
text have, of course, been consulted. The newly recovered portion has
been re-translated. Bishop <span id="x.ii-p27.1"></span>Lightfoot’s
version is so excellent <span id="page_515">p. 515</span> <span
id="x.ii-Page_515"></span>that the temptation to use it was very great.
It has, of course, influenced the editor in many places. But the
following version differs from it mainly in two respects: (1) An effort
has been made to preserve the verbal correspondences between the
language of the homily and that of the New Testament: hence the English
word used in the Revised Version as an equivalent of a Greek term is
given here as a similar equivalent. (2) The view of the Greek tenses
indicated in <span id="x.ii-p27.2"></span>Lightfoot’s renderings does
not always accord with that of the editor.  

<span id="x.ii-p28"></span>It may be added, that Professor <span
id="x.ii-p28.1"></span>C. J. H. Ropes of Bangor, Me., kindly sent, for
use in the preparation of the Epistle for this volume, his manuscript
translation and notes. These have been very helpful, and are entitled to
this acknowledgment. It will be found that the American translation is
less paraphrastic than the Edinburgh. The new portions, both text and
notes, have been printed without brackets when they are the work of the
editor. The rare additions of the general editor are always bracketed,
that the reader may readily recognise to whom the literary
responsibility in each case properly belongs.  

<span id="x.ii-p29"></span>  

<span id="x.ii-p30"></span>The following is the Edinburgh <span
class="sc"><span id="x.ii-p30.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>:—  

<span id="x.ii-p31"></span>  

<span id="x.ii-p32"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ii-p32.1"></span>The</span> first certain reference which is made
by any early writer to this so-called Epistle of Clement is found in
these words of <span id="x.ii-p32.2"></span>Eusebius (<span
id="x.ii-p32.3"></span>Hist. Eccl., iii. 38): “We must know that there
is also a second Epistle of Clement. But we do not regard it as being
equally notable with the former, since we know of none of the ancients
that have made use of it.” Several critics in modern times have
endeavoured to vindicate the authenticity of this Epistle. But it is now
generally regarded as one of the many writings which have been falsely
ascribed to <span id="x.ii-p32.4"></span>Clement. Besides the want of
external evidence, indicated even by <span
id="x.ii-p32.5"></span>Eusebius in the above extract, the diversity of
style clearly points to a different writer from that of the first
Epistle. A commonly accepted opinion among critics at the present day
is, that this is not an Epistle at all, but a fragment of one of the
many homilies falsely ascribed to <span id="x.ii-p32.6"></span>Clement.
There can be no doubt, however, that in the catalogue of writings
contained in the Alexandrian <span id="x.ii-p32.7"></span>ms. it is both
styled an Epistle, and, as well as the other which accompanies it, is
attributed to <span id="x.ii-p32.8"></span>Clement. As the <span
id="x.ii-p32.9"></span>ms. is certainly not later than the fifth
century, the opinion referred to must by that time have taken firm root
in the Church; but in the face of internal evidence, and in want of all
earlier testimony, such a fact goes but a small way to establish its
authenticity. <span id="page_516">p. 516</span> <span
id="x.ii-Page_516"></span> <span id="page_517">p. 517</span> <span
id="x.ii-Page_517"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3838"></span>[512:3839](0070475.htm#fr_3838) <span
id="x.ii-p1.6"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span> The full title of his edition, in English
form, is as follows: “The two Epistles of our holy father <span
id="x.ii-p2.1"></span>Clement Bishop of Rome to the Corinthians; from a
manuscript in the Library of the Most Holy Sepulchre in Fanar of
Constantinople; now for the first time published complete, with
prolegomena and notes, by <span id="x.ii-p2.2"></span>Philotheos
Bryennios, Metropolitan of Serræ. Constantinople, 1875.”  

<span id="fn_3839"></span>[512:3840](0070475.htm#fr_3839) <span
id="x.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span> <span id="x.ii-p4.1"></span>Novum Test. extra
canonem receptum (2d ed., Leipzig, 1876). Pp. xliv.-xlix., 69–106,
contain prolegomena, text, and notes, 2 Clement.  

<span id="fn_3840"></span>[512:3841](0070475.htm#fr_3840) <span
id="x.ii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span> <span id="x.ii-p5.1"></span>Patrum Apost.
Opera, 2d ed., Leipzig, 1876.  

<span id="fn_3841"></span>[512:3842](0070475.htm#fr_3841) <span
id="x.ii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span> <span id="x.ii-p6.1"></span>St. Clement of
<span id="x.ii-p6.2"></span>Rome An Appendix containing the newly
recovered portions, with introductions, notes, and translations. London,
1877. The original volume, London, 1869.  

<span id="fn_3842"></span>[513:3843](0070475.htm#fr_3842) <span
id="x.ii-p13.7"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span> See chap. xii., and <span
id="x.ii-p14.1"></span>Clem. <span id="x.ii-p14.2"></span>Alex., <span
id="x.ii-p14.3"></span>Stromata, iii. 13, vol. ii. p. 398.  

<span id="fn_3843"></span>[513:3844](0070475.htm#fr_3843) <span
id="x.ii-p14.12"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span> See Vision II. 4, vol. ii. p. 12.  

<span id="fn_3844"></span>[514:3845](0070475.htm#fr_3844) <span
id="x.ii-p15.12"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p16"></span> See vol. ii. p. 4; and comp. <span
id="x.ii-p16.1"></span>Lightfoot, <span id="x.ii-p16.2"></span>Appendix,
pp. 316, 317.  

<span id="fn_3845"></span>[514:3846](0070475.htm#fr_3845) <span
id="x.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p25"></span> <span id="x.ii-p25.1"></span>First Apology,
ch. lxvii. (vol. i. p. 186).  

<span id="fn_3846"></span>[514:3847](0070475.htm#fr_3846) <span
id="x.ii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p26"></span> <span id="x.ii-p26.1"></span>St.<span
id="x.ii-p26.2"></span> Clement, <span id="x.ii-p26.3"></span>Appendix,
p. 317.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Homily](0070476)
