[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070084)  [Next](0070086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p0.1"></span>Chap. III.—Wisdom and Religion Cannot Be Separated: the Lord of Nature Must Necessarily Be the Father of Every One.

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p1"></span>The worship of the gods, as I have
taught in the former book, does not imply wisdom; not only because it
gives up man, who is a divine animal, to earthly and frail things, but
because nothing is fixed in it which may avail for the cultivation of
the character and the framing of the life; nor does it contain any
investigation of the truth, but only the rite of worship, which does not
consist in the service of the mind, but in the employment of the body.
And therefore that is not to be deemed true religion, because it
instructs and improves men by no precepts of righteousness and virtue.
Thus philosophy, inasmuch as it does not possess true religion, that is,
the highest piety, is not true wisdom. For if the divinity which governs
this world supports mankind with incredible beneficence, and cherishes
it as with paternal indulgence, wishes truly that gratitude should be
paid, and honour given to itself, man cannot preserve his piety if he
shall prove ungrateful for the heavenly benefits; and this is certainly
not the part of a wise man. Since, therefore, as I have said, philosophy
and the religious system of the gods are separated, and far removed from
each other; seeing that some are professors of wisdom, through whom it
is manifest that there is no approach to the gods, and that others are
priests of religion, through whom wisdom is not learned; it is manifest
that the one is not true wisdom, and that the other is not true
religion. Therefore philosophy was not able to conceive the truth, nor
was the religious system of the gods able to give an account of itself,
since it is without it. But where wisdom is joined by an inseparable
connection with religion, both must necessarily be true; because in our
worship we ought to be wise, that is, to know the proper object and mode
of worship, and in our wisdom to worship, that is, to complete our
knowledge by deed and action.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p2"></span>Where, then, is wisdom joined with
religion? There, indeed, where the one God is worshipped, where life and
every action is referred to one <span id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-Page_103"></span>source, and to one supreme authority:
in short, the teachers of wisdom are the same, who are also the priests
of God. <span id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) Nor, however, let it
affect any one, because it often has happened, and may happen, that some
philosopher may undertake a priesthood of the gods; and when this
happens, philosophy is not, however, joined with religion; but
philosophy will both be unemployed amidst sacred rites, and religion
will be unemployed when philosophy shall be treated of. For that system
of religious rites is dumb, not only because it relates to gods who are
dumb, but also because its observance is by the hand and the fingers,
not by the heart and tongue, as is the case with ours, which is true.
Therefore religion is contained in wisdom, and wisdom in religion. The
one, then, cannot be separated from the other; because wisdom is nothing
else but the worship of the true God with just and pious adoration. But
that the worship of many gods is not in accordance with nature, may be
inferred and conceived even by this argument: that every god who is
worshipped by man must, amidst the solemn rites and prayers, be invoked
as father, not only for the sake of honour, but also of reason; because
he is both more ancient than man, and because he affords life, safety,
and sustenance, as a father does. Therefore <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p3.2"></span>Jupiter is called father by those who
pray to him, as is <span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p3.3"></span>Saturnus, and
<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p3.4"></span>Janus, and <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p3.5"></span>Liber, and the rest in order; which <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p3.6"></span>Lucilius <span
id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) laughs at in the council of the gods:
“So that there is none of us who is not called excellent father of the
gods; so that father <span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4.3"></span>Neptunus,
<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4.4"></span>Liber, father <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4.5"></span>Saturnus, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4.6"></span>Mars, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4.7"></span>Janus, father <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4.8"></span>Quirinus, are called after one name.” But
if nature does not permit that one man should have many fathers (for he
is produced from one only), therefore the worship of many gods is
contrary to nature, and contrary to piety.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p5"></span>One only, therefore, is to be
worshipped, who can truly be called Father. He also must of necessity be
Lord, because as He has power to indulge, so also has He power to
restrain. He is to be called Father on this account, because He bestows
upon us many and great things; and Lord on this account, because He has
the greatest power of chastising and punishing. But that He who is
Father is also Lord, is shown even by reference to civil law. <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) For who will be able to bring up sons,
unless he has the power of a lord over them? Nor without reason is he
called father of a household, <span id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508)
although he only has sons: for it is plain that the name of father
embraces also slaves, because “household” follows; and the name of
“household” comprises also sons, because the name of “father” precedes:
from which it is evident, that the same person is both father of his
slaves <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) and lord of his sons.
Lastly, the son is set at liberty as if he were a slave; and the
liberated slave receives the name <span
id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510) of his patron, as if he were a son.
But if a man is named father of a household, that it may appear that he
is possessed of a double power, because as a father he ought to indulge,
and as a lord to restrain, it follows that he who is a son is also a
slave, and that he who is a father is also a lord. As, therefore, by the
necessity of nature, there cannot be more than one father, so there can
only be one lord. For what will the slave do if many lords <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) shall give commands at variance with
each other? Therefore the worship of many gods is contrary to reason and
to nature, since there cannot be many fathers or lords; but it is
necessary to consider the gods both as fathers and lords.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p11"></span>Therefore the truth cannot be held
where the same man is subject to many fathers and lords, where the mind,
drawn in different directions to many objects, wanders to and fro,
hither and thither. Nor can religion have any firmness, when it is
without a fixed and settled dwelling-place. Therefore there can be no
true worship of many gods; just as that cannot be called matrimony, in
which one woman has many husbands, but she will either be called a
harlot or an adulteress. For when a woman is destitute of modesty,
chastity, and fidelity, she must of necessity be without virtue. Thus
also the religious system of the gods is unchaste and unholy, because it
is destitute of faith, for that unsettled and uncertain honour has no
source or origin.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_505"></span>[103:506](0070085.htm#fr_505) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p3"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>Iidem sunt doctores sapientiæ qui et De.
sacerdotes.\]  

<span id="fn_506"></span>[103:507](0070085.htm#fr_506) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p3.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4"></span> \[The satirist, not <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>Cicero’s friend; <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p4.2"></span>Nat. Deor., iii.\]  

<span id="fn_507"></span>[103:508](0070085.htm#fr_507) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p6"></span> Fathers in ancient times had the
greatest power over their children, so that they had the right of life
and death, as masters had over their slaves.  

<span id="fn_508"></span>[103:509](0070085.htm#fr_508) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p7.1"></span>Pater familias—a title given to the
master of a household, whether he had sons or not; the slaves of a house
were called <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p7.2"></span>familia</span>  

<span id="fn_509"></span>[103:510](0070085.htm#fr_509) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p8"></span> It has been judged better to keep
the words “slave” and “lord” throughout the passage, for the sake of
uniformity of expression, though in some places “servant” and “master”
might seem more appropriate.  

<span id="fn_510"></span>[103:511](0070085.htm#fr_510) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p9"></span> Among the Romans slaves had no <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p9.1"></span>prænomen or distinguishing name; when a
slave was set at liberty, he was allowed to assume the name of his
master as a <span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p9.2"></span>prænomen. Thus, in
<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p9.3"></span>Persius (<span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p9.4"></span>Sat., v.), “Dama,” the liberated slave,
becomes “<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p9.5"></span>Marcus Dama.”  

<span id="fn_511"></span>[103:512](0070085.htm#fr_511) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p9.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p10"></span> Thus the slave in <span
id="iii.ii.iv.iii-p10.1"></span>Terence wished to know how many masters
he had.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—Of wisdom likewise, and religion, and of the right of
father and lord](0070086)
