[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070341)  [Next](0070343.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXXIII.

<span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p1"></span>And now, when <span
id="iii.v.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Galerius was in the eighteenth year of his
reign, God struck him with an incurable plague. A malignant ulcer formed
itself low down in his secret parts, and spread by degrees. The
physicians attempted to eradicate it, and healed up the place affected.
But the sore, after having been skinned over, broke out again; a vein
burst, and the blood flowed in such quantity as to endanger his life.
The blood, however, was stopped, although with difficulty. The
physicians had to undertake their operations anew, and at length they
cicatrized the wound. In consequence of some slight motion of his body,
<span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p1.2"></span>Galerius received a hurt, and the
blood streamed more abundantly than before. He grew emaciated, pallid,
and feeble, and the bleeding then stanched. The ulcer began to be
insensible to the remedies applied, and a gangrene seized all the
neighbouring parts. It diffused itself the wider the more the corrupted
flesh was cut away, and everything employed as the means of cure served
but to aggravate the disease.  

> <span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p1.3"></span> “The masters of the healing art
> withdrew.”  

<span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p2"></span>Then famous physicians were brought in
from all quarters; but no human means had any success. <span
id="iii.v.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>Apollo and <span
id="iii.v.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>Æsculapius were besought importunately for
remedies: <span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p2.3"></span>Apollo did prescribe, and
the distemper augmented. Already approaching to its deadly crisis, it
had occupied the lower regions of his body: his bowels came out, and his
whole seat putrefied. The luckless physicians, although without hope of
overcoming the malady, ceased not to apply fomentations and administer
medicines. The humours having been repelled, the distemper attacked his
intestines, and worms were generated in his body. The stench was so foul
as to pervade not only the palace, but even the whole city; and no
wonder, for by that time the passages from his bladder and bowels,
having been devoured by the worms, became indiscriminate, and his body,
with intolerable anguish, was dissolved into one mass of
corruption. <span id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985.md)  

> <span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p3.2"></span> “Stung to the soul, he bellowed
> with the pain,  
> So roars the wounded bull.”—<span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p3.5"></span>Pitt  

<span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p4"></span>They applied warm flesh of animals to
the chief seat of the disease, that the warmth might draw out those
minute worms; and accordingly, when the dressings were removed, there
issued forth an innumerable swarm: nevertheless the <span
id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="iii.v.xxxiii-Page_315"></span>prolific disease had hatched swarms
much more abundant to prey upon and consume his intestines. Already,
through a complication of distempers, the different parts of his body
had lost their natural form: the superior part was dry, meagre, and
haggard, and his ghastly-looking skin had settled itself deep amongst
his bones while the inferior, distended like bladders, retained no
appearance of joints. These things happened in the course of a complete
year; and at length, overcome by calamities, he was obliged to
acknowledge God, and he cried aloud, in the intervals of raging pain,
that he would re-edify the Church which he had demolished, and make
atonement for his misdeeds; and when he was near his end, he published
an edict of the tenor following:—  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[314:1986](0070342.htm#fr_1985.md) <span
id="iii.v.xxxiii-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xxxiii-p3"></span> \[[Acts xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.v.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXIV](0070343.md)
