[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070248)  [Next](0070250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXI.—Of the Passions.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p1"></span>There are three passions, or, so
to speak, three furies, which excite such great perturbations in the
souls of men, and sometimes compel them to offend in such a manner, as
to permit them to have regard neither for their reputation nor for their
personal safety: these are anger, which desires vengeance; love of gain,
which longs for riches; lust, which seeks for pleasures. We must above
all things resist these vices: these <span id="page_248">p. 248</span>
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-Page_248"></span>trunks must be rooted up,
that virtues may be implanted. The Stoics are of opinion that these
passions must be cut off; the Peripatetics think that they must be
restrained. Neither of them judge rightly, because they cannot entirely
be taken away, since they are implanted by nature, and have a sure and
great influence; nor can they be diminished, since, if they are evil, we
ought to be without them, even though restrained and used with
moderation; if they are good, we ought to use them in their
completeness. <span id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) But we say that
they ought not to be taken away nor lessened. For they are not evil of
themselves, since God has reasonably implanted them in us; but inasmuch
as they are plainly good by nature,—for they are given us for the
protection of life,—they become evil by their evil use. And as bravery,
if you fight in defence of your country, is a good, if against your
country, is an evil, so the passions, if you employ them to good
purposes, will be virtues, if to evil uses, they will be called vices.
Anger therefore has been given by God for the restraining of offences,
that is, for controlling the discipline of subjects, that fear may
suppress licentiousness and restrain audacity. But they who are ignorant
of its limits are angry with their equals, or even with their superiors.
Hence they rush to deeds of cruelty, hence they rise to slaughters,
hence to wars. The love of gain also has been given that we may desire
and seek for the necessaries of life. But they who are unacquainted with
its boundaries strive insatiably to heap up riches. Hence poisoning,
hence defraudings, <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582) hence
false wills, hence all kinds of frauds have burst forth. Moreover, the
passion of lust is implanted and innate in us for the procreation of
children; but they who do not fix its limits in the mind use it for
pleasure only. Thence arise unlawful loves, thence adulteries and
debaucheries, thence all kinds of corruption. These passions, therefore,
must be kept within their boundaries and directed into their right
course, in which, even though they should be vehement, they cannot incur
blame.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[248:1582](0070249.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p2.1"></span>Integris abutendum est. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p2.2"></span>Lactantius sometimes uses “<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p2.3"></span>abuti” for “<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p2.4"></span>uti.”  

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[248:1583](0070249.htm#fr_1582) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p2.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lvii-p3.1"></span>Circumscriptiones.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXII.—Of restraining the pleasures of the senses](0070250)
