[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070123)  [Next](0070125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p0.1"></span>Chap XI.—Of the Cruelty of the Heathens Against the Christians.

<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p1"></span>Therefore, because justice is
burthensome and unpleasant to those men who agree with the character of
their gods, they exercise with violence against the righteous the same
impiety which they show in other things. And not without reason are they
spoken of by the prophets as beasts. Therefore it is excellently said by
<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Marcus Tullius: <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005) “For if there is no one who would
not prefer to die than to be changed into the figure of a beast,
although he is about to have the mind of a man, how much more wretched
is it to be of a brutalized mind in the figure of a man! To me, indeed,
it seems as much worse as the mind is more excellent than the body.”
Therefore they view with disdain the bodies of beasts, though they are
themselves more cruel than these; and they pride themselves on this
account, that they were born men, <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>
<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-Page_147"></span>though they have nothing
belonging to man except the features and the eminent figure. For what
Caucasus, what India, what Hyrcania ever nourished beasts so savage and
so bloodthirsty? For the fury of all wild beasts rages until their
appetite is satisfied; and when their hunger is appeased, immediately is
pacified. That is truly a beast by whose command alone  

> <span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p2.2"></span> “With rivulets of slaughter
> reeks  
> The stern embattled field.”  
> “Dire agonies, wild terrors swarm,  
> And Death glares grim in many a form.” <span
> id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006)  

<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p4"></span>No one can befittingly describe the
cruelty of this beast, which reclines in one place, and yet rages with
iron teeth throughout the world, and not only tears in pieces the limbs
of men, but also breaks their very bones, and rages over their ashes,
that there may be no place for their burial, as though they who confess
God aimed at this, that their tombs should be visited, and not rather
that they themselves may reach the presence of God.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p5"></span>What brutality is it, what fury, what
madness, to deny light to the living, earth to the dead? I say,
therefore, that nothing is more wretched than those men whom necessity
has either found or made the ministers of another’s fury, the satellites
of an impious command. For that was no honour, or exaltation of dignity,
but the condemnation of a man to torture, and also to the everlasting
punishment of God. But it is impossible to relate what things they
performed individually throughout the world. For what number of volumes
will contain so infinite, so varied kinds of cruelty? For, having gained
power, every one raged according to his own disposition. Some, through
excessive timidity, proceeded to greater lengths than they were
commanded; others thus acted through their own particular hatred against
the righteous; some by a natural ferocity of mind; some through a desire
to please, and that by this service they might prepare the way to higher
offices: some were swift to slaughter, as an individual in Phrygia, who
burnt a whole assembly of people, together with their place of meeting.
But the more cruel he was, so much the more merciful <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007) is he found to be. But that is the
worst kind <span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p6.2"></span>of persecutors whom a
false appearance of clemency flatters; he is the more severe, he the
more cruel torturer, who determines to put no one to death. Therefore it
cannot be told what great and what grievous modes of tortures judges of
this kind devised, that they might arrive at the accomplishment of their
purpose. But they do these things not only on this account, that they
may be able to boast that they have slain none of the innocent,—for I
myself have heard some boasting that their administration has been in
this respect without bloodshed,—but also for the sake of envy, lest
either they themselves should be overcome, or the others should obtain
the glory due to their virtue. And thus, in devising modes of
punishment, they think of nothing else besides victory. For they know
that this is a contest and a battle. I saw in Bithynia the præfect
wonderfully elated with joy, as though he had subdued some nation of
barbarians, because one who had resisted for two years with great spirit
appeared at length to yield. They contend, therefore, that they may
conquer and inflict exquisite <span id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008)
pains on their bodies, and avoid nothing else but that the victims may
not die under the torture: as though, in truth, death alone could make
them happy, and as though tortures also in proportion to their severity
would not produce greater glory of virtue. But they with obstinate folly
give orders that diligent care shall be given to the tortured, that
their limbs may be renovated for other tortures, and fresh blood be
supplied for punishment. What can be so pious, so beneficent, so humane?
They would not have bestowed such anxious care on any whom they loved.
This is the discipline of the gods: to these deeds they train their
worshippers; these are the sacred rites which they require. Moreover,
most wicked murderers have invented impious laws against the pious. For
both sacrilegious ordinances and unjust disputations of jurists are
read. <span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p7.2"></span>Domitius, in his seventh book,
concerning the office of the proconsul, has collected wicked rescripts
of princes, that he might show by what punishments they ought to be
visited who confessed themselves to be worshippers of God.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[146:1006](0070124.htm#fr_1005) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p2"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p2.1"></span>De Republica, iv. i. 3.\]  

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[147:1007](0070124.htm#fr_1006) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p2.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p3.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p3.2"></span>Æn., xi. 646, ii. 368. \[[Dan. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p3.3"></span><span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p3.4"></span><span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p3.5"></span><span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p3.6"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[147:1008](0070124.htm#fr_1007) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p6"></span> The more severe torture, as causing
immediate death, may be regarded as merciful, in comparison with a slow
and lingering punishment. \[This by an eye-witness of <span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p6.1"></span>Diocletian’s day.\]  

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[147:1009](0070124.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xi-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xi-p7.1"></span>Exquisitis, “carefully studied.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XII.—Of true virtue; and of the estimation of a good or bad
citizen](0070125)
