[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070356)  [Next](0070358.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xlviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xlviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XLVIII.

<span id="iii.v.xlviii-p1"></span>Not many days after the victory, <span
id="iii.v.xlviii-p1.1"></span>Licinius, having received part of the
soldiers of <span id="iii.v.xlviii-p1.2"></span>Daia into his service,
and properly distributed them, transported his army into Bithynia, and
having made his entry into Nicomedia, he returned thanks to God, through
whose aid he had overcome; and on the ides of June, <span
id="fr_1995"></span>[1996](#fn_1995.md) while he and <span
id="iii.v.xlviii-p2.2"></span>Constantine were consuls for the third
time, he commanded the following edict for the restoration of the
Church, directed to the president of the province, to be promulgated:—  

<span id="iii.v.xlviii-p3"></span>“When we, <span
id="iii.v.xlviii-p3.1"></span>Constantine and <span
id="iii.v.xlviii-p3.2"></span>Licinius, emperors, had an interview at
Milan, and conferred together with respect to the good and security of
the commonweal, it seemed to us that, amongst those things that are
profitable to mankind in general, the reverence paid to the Divinity
merited our first and chief attention, and that it was proper that the
Christians and all others should have liberty to follow that mode of
religion which to each of them appeared best; so that that God, who is
seated in heaven, might be benign and propitious to us, and to every one
under our government. And therefore we judged it a salutary measure, and
one highly consonant to right reason, that no man should be denied leave
of attaching himself to the rites of the Christians, or to whatever
other religion his mind directed him, that thus the supreme Divinity, to
whose worship we freely devote ourselves, might continue to vouchsafe
His favour and beneficence to us. And accordingly we give you to know
that, without regard to any provisos in our former orders to you
concerning the Christians, all who choose that religion are to be
permitted, freely and absolutely, to remain in it, and not to be
disturbed any ways, or molested. And we thought fit to be thus special
in the things committed to your charge, that you might understand that
the indulgence which we have granted in matters of religion to the
Christians is ample and unconditional; and perceive at the same time
that the open and free exercise of their respective religions is granted
to all others, as well as to the Christians. For it befits the
well-ordered state and the tranquillity of our times that each
individual be allowed, according to his own choice, to worship the
Divinity; and we mean not to derogate aught from the honour due to any
religion or its votaries. Moreover, with respect to the Christians, we
formerly gave certain orders concerning the places appropriated for
their religious assemblies; but now we will that all persons who have
purchased such places, either from our exchequer or from any one else,
do restore them to the Christians, without money demanded or price
claimed, and that this be performed peremptorily and unambiguously; and
we will also, that they who have obtained any right to such places by
form of gift do forthwith restore them to the Christians: reserving
always to such persons, who have either purchased for a price, or
gratuitously acquired them, to make application to the judge of the
district, if they look on themselves as entitled to any equivalent from
our beneficence.  

<span id="iii.v.xlviii-p4"></span>“All those places are, by your
intervention, to be immediately restored to the Christians. And because
it appears that, besides the places appropriated to religious worship,
the Christians did possess other places, which belonged not to
individuals, but to their society in general, that is, to their
churches, we comprehend all such within the regulation aforesaid, and we
will that you cause them all to be restored to the society or churches,
and <span id="iii.v.xlviii-p4.1"></span>that without hesitation or
controversy: Provided always, that the persons making restitution
without a price paid shall be at liberty to seek indemnification from
our bounty. In furthering all which things for the behoof of the
Christians, you are to use your utmost diligence, to the end that our
orders be speedily obeyed, and our gracious purpose in securing the
public tranquillity promoted. So shall that divine favour which, in
affairs of the mightiest importance, we have already experienced,
continue to give success to us, and in our successes make the commonweal
happy. And that the tenor of this our gracious ordinance may be made
known unto all, we will that you cause it by your authority to be
published everywhere.”  

<span id="iii.v.xlviii-p5"></span><span
id="iii.v.xlviii-p5.1"></span>Licinius having issued this ordinance,
made an harangue, in which he exhorted the Christians to rebuild their
religious edifices.  

<span id="iii.v.xlviii-p6"></span>And thus, from the overthrow of the
Church <span id="page_321">p. 321</span> <span
id="iii.v.xlviii-Page_321"></span>until its restoration, there was a
space of ten years and about four months.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[320:1996](0070357.htm#fr_1995.md) <span
id="iii.v.xlviii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xlviii-p2"></span> 13th of June. \[Note the rise of
<span id="iii.v.xlviii-p2.1"></span>general toleration.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XLIX](0070358.md)
