[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070057)  [Next](0070059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VII.—Of Moral Philosophy, and the Chief Good.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p1"></span>Let us now pass to the other part of
philosophy, which they themselves call moral, in which is contained the
method of the whole of philosophy, since in natural philosophy there is
only delight, in this there is utility also. And since it is more
dangerous to commit a fault in arranging the condition of life and in
forming the character, greater diligence must be used, that we may know
how we ought to live. For in the former subject <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) some indulgence may be granted: for
whether they say anything, they bestow no advantage; or if they
foolishly rave, they do no injury. But in this subject there is no room
for difference of opinion, none for error. All must entertain the same
sentiments, and philosophy itself must give instructions as it were with
one mouth; because if any error shall be committed, life is altogether
overthrown. In that former part, as there is less danger, so there is
more difficulty; because the obscurity of the subject compels us to
entertain different and various opinions. But in this, as there is more
danger, so there is less difficulty; because the very use of the
subjects and daily experiments are able to teach what is truer and
better. Let us see, therefore, whether they agree, or what <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>assistance they give us for the better
guidance of life. It is not necessary to enlarge on every point; let us
select one, and especially that which is the chief and principal thing,
in which the whole of wisdom centres and depends. <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>Epicurus deems that the chief good
consists in pleasure of mind, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.2"></span>Aristippus in pleasure of the body.
<span id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.3"></span>Callipho and <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.4"></span>Dinomachus united virtue with pleasure,
<span id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.5"></span>Diodorus with the privation of
pain, <span id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.6"></span>Hieronymus placed the chief
good in the absence of pain; the Peripatetics, again, in the goods of
the mind, the body, and fortune. The chief good of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.7"></span>Herillus is knowledge; that of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.8"></span>Zeno, to live agreeably to nature; that
of certain Stoics, to follow virtue. <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3.9"></span>Aristotle placed the chief good in
integrity and virtue. These are the sentiments of nearly all. In such a
difference of opinions, whom do we follow? whom do we believe? All are
of equal authority. If we are able to select that which is better, it
follows that philosophy is not necessary for us; because we are already
wise, inasmuch as we judge respecting the opinions of the wise. But
since we come for the sake of learning wisdom, how can we judge, who
have not yet begun to be wise? especially when the Academic is close at
hand, to draw us back by the cloak, and forbid us to believe any one,
without bringing forward that which we may follow.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_384"></span>[74:385](0070058.htm#fr_384) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p2"></span> Natural philosophy.  

<span id="fn_385"></span>[74:386](0070058.htm#fr_385) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.vii-p3"></span> The hinge of wisdom altogether
turns.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VIII.—Of the chief good, and the pleasures of the soul and
body, and of virtue](0070059)
