[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070009)  [Next](0070011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.v"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.v-p0.1"></span>Chap. IV.—That the one god was foretold even by the prophets.

<span id="iii.ii.i.v-p1"></span>The prophets, who were very many,
proclaim and declare the one God; for, being filled with the inspiration
of the one God, they predicted things to come, with agreeing and
harmonious voice. But those who are ignorant of the truth do not think
that these prophets are to be believed; for they say that those voices
are not divine, but human. Forsooth, because they proclaim one God, they
were either madmen or deceivers. But truly we see that their predictions
have been fulfilled, and are in course of fulfilment daily; and their
foresight, agreeing as it does to one opinion, teaches that they were
not under the impulse of madness. For who possessed of a frenzied mind
would be able, I do not say to predict the future, but even to speak
coherently? Were they, therefore, who spoke such things deceitful? What
was so utterly foreign to their nature as a system of deceit, when they
themselves restrained others from all fraud? For to this end were they
sent by God, that they should both be heralds of His majesty, and
correctors of the wickedness of man.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.v-p2"></span>Moreover, the inclination to feign and
speak falsely belongs to those who covet riches, and eagerly desire
gains,—a disposition which was far removed from those holy men. For they
so discharged the office entrusted to them, that, disregarding all
things necessary for the maintenance of life, they were so far from
laying up store for the future, that they did not even labour for the
day, content with the unstored food which God had supplied; and these
not only had no gains, but even endured torments and death. For the
precepts of righteousness are distasteful to the wicked, and to those
who lead an unholy life. Wherefore they, whose sins were brought to
light and forbidden, most cruelly tortured and slew them. They,
therefore, who had no desire for gain, had neither the inclination nor
the motive for deceit. Why should I say that some of them were princes,
or even kings, <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) upon whom the
suspicion of covetousness and fraud could not possibly fall, and yet
they proclaimed the one God with the same prophetic foresight as the
others?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[13:28](0070010.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.v-p3"></span> \[Not <span
id="iii.ii.i.v-p3.1"></span>David merely, nor only other kings of the
Hebrews. Elucidation I.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. V.—Of the testimonies of poets and philosophers](0070011.md)
