[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070212)  [Next](0070214.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXV.—Of the Golden Age, of Images, and Prometheus, Who First Fashioned Man.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p1"></span>The poets, therefore, with good
reason say that the golden age, which existed in the reign of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Saturnus, was changed. For at that time
no gods were worshipped, but they knew of one God only. After that they
subjected themselves to frail and earthly things, worshipping idols of
wood, and brass, and stone, a change took place from the golden age to
that of iron. For having lost the knowledge of God, and broken off that
one bond of human society, they began to harass one another, to plunder
and subdue. But if they would raise their eyes aloft and behold God, who
raised them up to the sight of heaven and Himself, they never would bend
and prostrate themselves by worshipping earthly things, whose folly
<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p1.2"></span>Lucretius severely rebukes,
saying: <span id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474.md)  

> <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p2.2"></span> “And they abase their souls
> with fear of the gods, and weigh and press them down to the
> earth.” <span id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p4"></span>Wherefore they tremble, and do not
understand how foolish it is to fear those things which you have made,
or to hope for any protection from those things which are dumb and
insensible, and neither see nor hear the suppliant. What majesty,
therefore, or deity can they have, which were in the power of a man,
that they should not be made, or that they should be made into some
other thing, and are so even now? For they are liable to injury and
might be carried off by theft, were it not that they are protected by
the law and the guardianship of man. Does he therefore appear to be in
possession of his senses, who sacrifices to such deities the choicest
victims, consecrates gifts, offers costly garments, as if they who are
without motion could use them? With reason, then, did <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p4.1"></span>Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily plunder
and deride the gods of Greece when he had taken possession of it as
conqueror; and after the sacrilegious acts which he had committed, he
returned to Sicily with a prosperous voyage, and held the kingdom even
to his old age: nor were the injured gods able to punish him.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p5"></span>How much better is it to despise
vanities, and to turn to God, to maintain the condition which you have
received from God, to maintain your name! For on this account he is
called <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p5.1"></span>anthropos, <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476.md) because he looks upward. But he
looks upward who looks up to the true and living God, who is in heaven;
who seeks after the Maker and Parent of his soul, not only with his
perception and mind, but also with his countenance and eyes raised
aloft. But he who enslaves himself to earthly and humble things, plainly
prefers to himself that which is below him. For since he himself is the
workmanship of God, whereas an image is the workmanship of man, the
human workmanship cannot be preferred to the divine; and as God is the
parent of man, so is the man of the statue. Therefore he is foolish and
senseless who adores that which he himself has made, of which detestable
and foolish handicraft <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.10"></span>Prometheus was the author, who was
born from <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.11"></span>Iapetus the uncle of
<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.12"></span>Jupiter. For when first of all
<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.13"></span>Jupiter, having obtained supreme
dominion, wished to establish himself as a god, and to found temples,
and was seeking for some one who was able to imitate the human figure,
at that time <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.14"></span>Prometheus lived,
who fashioned the image of a man from thick clay with such close
resemblance, that the novelty and cleverness of the art was a wonder. At
length the men of his own time, and afterwards the poets, handed him
down as the maker of a true and living man; and we, as often as we
praise wrought statues, say that they live and breathe. And he indeed
was the inventor of earthenware images. But posterity, following him,
both carved them out of marble, and moulded them <span id="page_231">p.
231</span> <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-Page_231"></span>out of bronze;
then in process of time ornament was added of gold and ivory, so that
not only the likenesses, but also the gleam itself, might dazzle the
eyes. Thus ensnared by beauty, and forgetful of true majesty, sensible
beings considered that insensible objects, rational beings that
irrational objects, living beings that lifeless objects, were to be
worshipped and reverenced by them.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[230:1475](0070213.htm#fr_1474.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p2.1"></span>De Nat. Deor., vi. 52.  

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[230:1476](0070213.htm#fr_1475.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p3.1"></span>Quare tremunt. Another reading is, “qua
reddunt,” which is unintelligible.  

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[230:1477](0070213.htm#fr_1476.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.1"></span>ἅνθοωπος</span>, man; said to be
compounded of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.2"></span>ἅνω</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.3"></span>, </span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.4"></span>τρε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.5"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.6"></span>πω</span>, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.7"></span>ὤψ</span>, to turn
the face upwards. \[Needlessly repeated from p. 41, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxi-p6.9"></span>supra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXVI.—Of the worship of the elements and stars](0070214.md)
