[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070215)  [Next](0070217) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXVIII.—Of the Demons, and Their Evil Practices.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p1"></span>These are the demons, of whom the
poets often speak in their poems, whom <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Hesiod calls the guardians of men. For
they so persuaded men by their enticements and deceits, that they
believed that the same were gods. In fine, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p1.2"></span>Socrates used to give out that he had
a demon as the guardian and director of his life from his first
childhood, and that he could do nothing without his assent and command.
They attach themselves, therefore, to individuals, and occupy houses
under the name of Genii or Penates. To these temples are built, to these
libations are daily offered as to the <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p1.3"></span>Lares, to these honour is paid as to
the averters of evils. These from the beginning, that they might turn
away men from the knowledge of the true God, introduced new
superstitions and worship of gods. These taught that the memory of dead
kings should be consecrated, temples be built, and images made, not that
they might lessen the honour of God, or increase their own, which they
lost by sinning, but that they might take away life from men, deprive
them of the hope of true light, lest men should arrive at that heavenly
reward of immortality from which they fell. They also brought to light
astrology, and augury, and divination; and though these things are in
themselves false, yet they themselves, the authors of evils, so govern
and regulate them that they are believed to be true. They also invented
the tricks of the magic art, to deceive the eyes. By their aid it comes
to pass, that that which is appears not to be, and that which is not
appears to be. They themselves invented necromancies, responses, and
oracles, to delude the minds of men with lying divination by means of
ambiguous issues. They are present in the temples and at all sacrifices;
and by the exhibition of some deceitful prodigies, to the surprise of
those who are present, they so deceive men, that they believe that a
divine power is present in images and statues. They even enter secretly
into bodies, as being slight spirits; and they excite diseases in the
vitiated limbs, which when appeased with sacrifices and vows they may
again remove. They send dreams either full of terror, <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) that they themselves may be
invoked, or the issues of which may correspond with the truth, that they
may increase the veneration paid to themselves. Sometimes also they put
forth something of vengeance against the sacrilegious, that whoever sees
it may become more timid and superstitious. Thus by their frauds they
have drawn darkness over the human race, that truth might be oppressed,
and the name of the supreme and matchless God might be forgotten.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[232:1485](0070216.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p1.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Plena terroris. Another reading is,
“<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>aut plane terrores.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXIX.—Of the patience and providence of God](0070217)
