[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070255)  [Next](0070257.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXVIII.—Of the World, Man, and the Providence of God.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p1"></span>Let us therefore consider what was
the plan of making this so great and so immense a work. God made the
world, as <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p1.1"></span>Plato thought, but he
does not show why He made it. Because He is good, he says, and envying
no one, He made the things which are good. But we see that there are
both good and evil things in the system of nature. Some perverse person
may stand forth, such as that atheist <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p1.2"></span>Theodorus was, and answer <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p1.3"></span>Plato: Nay, because He is evil, He
made the things which are evil. How will he refute him? If God made the
things which are good, whence have such great evils burst forth, which,
for the most part, even prevail over those which are good? They were
contained, he says, in the matter. If there were evil, therefore there
were also good things; so that either God made nothing, or if He made
only good things, the evil things which were not made are more eternal
than <span id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-Page_252"></span>the good things which had a
beginning. Therefore the things which at one time began will have an
end, and those which always existed will be permanent. Therefore evils
are preferable. But if they cannot be preferable, they cannot indeed be
more eternal. Therefore they either always existed, and God has been
inactive, <span id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595.md) or they both flowed
from one source. For it is more in accordance with reason that God made
all things, than that He made nothing.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p3"></span>Therefore, according to the
sentiments of <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p3.1"></span>Plato, the same
God is both good, because He made good things, and evil, because He made
evil things. And if this cannot be so, it is evident that the world was
not made by God on this account, because He is good. For He comprised
all things, both good and evil; nor did He make anything for its own
sake, but on account of something else. A house is built not for this
purpose only, that there may be a house, but that it may receive and
shelter an inhabitant. Likewise a ship is built not for this purpose,
that it may appear only to be a ship, but that men may be able to sail
in it. Vessels also are made, not only that the vessels may exist, but
that they may receive things which are necessary for use. Thus also God
must have made the world for some use. The Stoics say that it was made
for the sake of men; and rightly so. For men enjoy all these good things
which the world contains in itself. But they do not explain why men
themselves were made, or what advantage Providence, the Maker of all
things, has in them.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p4"></span><span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p4.1"></span>Plato also affirms that souls are
immortal, but why, or in what manner, or at what time, or by whose
instrumentality they attain to immortality, or what is the nature of
that great mystery, why those who are about to become immortal are
previously born mortal, and then, having completed the course <span
id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596.md) of their temporal life, and having
laid aside the covering <span id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597.md) of
their frail bodies, are transferred to that eternal blessedness,—of all
this he has no comprehension. Finally, he did not explain the judgment
of God, nor the distinction between the just and the unjust, but
supposed that the souls which have plunged themselves into crimes are
condemned thus far, that they may be reproduced in the lower animals,
and thus atone for their offences, until they again return to the forms
of men, and that this is always taking place, and that there is no end
of this transmigration. In my opinion, he introduces some sport
resembling a dream, in which there appears to be neither plan, nor
government of God, nor any design.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[252:1596](0070256.htm#fr_1595.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p1.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p2.1"></span>Otiosus.  

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[252:1597](0070256.htm#fr_1596.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p5.1"></span>Decurso…spatio. The expression is
borrowed from a chariot race.  

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[252:1598](0070256.htm#fr_1597.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiv-p6.1"></span>Corporum exuviis.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXIX.—That the world was made on account of man, and man on
account of God](0070257.md)
