[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070155)  [Next](0070157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVIII.—Of Some Commands of God, and of Patience.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p1"></span>But let us leave the philosophers,
who either know nothing at all, and hold forth this very ignorance as
the greatest knowledge; or who, inasmuch as they think they know that of
which they are ignorant, are absurdly and arrogantly foolish. Let us
therefore (that we may return to our purpose), to whom alone the truth
has been revealed by God, and wisdom has been sent from heaven, practice
those things which God who enlightens us commands: let us sustain and
endure the labours of life, by mutual assistance towards each other;
nor, however, if we shall have done any good work, let us aim at glory
from it. For God admonishes us that the doer of justice ought not to be
boastful, lest he should appear to have discharged the duties of
benevolence, not so much from a desire of obeying the divine commands,
as of pleasing men, and should already have the reward of glory which he
has aimed at, and should not receive the recompense of that heavenly and
divine reward. The other things which the worshipper of God ought to
observe are easy, when these virtues are comprehended, that no one
should ever speak falsely for the sake of deceiving or injuring. For it
is unlawful for him who cultivates truth to be deceitful in anything,
and to depart from the truth itself which he follows. In this path of
justice and all the virtues there is no place for falsehood. Therefore
the true and just traveller will not use the saying of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>Lucilius: <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p2.1"></span> “It is not for me to speak
> falsely to a man who is a friend and acquaintance;”  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p3"></span>but he will think that it is not
his part to speak falsely even to an enemy and a stranger; nor will he
at any time so act, that his tongue, which is the interpreter of his
mind, should be at variance with his feeling and thought. If he shall
have lent any money, he will not receive interest, that the benefit may
be unimpaired which succours necessity, and that he may entirely abstain
from the property of another. For in this kind of duty he ought to be
content with that which is his own; since it is his duty in other
respects not to be sparing of his property, in order that he may do
good; but to receive more than he has given is unjust. And he who does
this lies in wait in some manner, that he may gain booty from the
necessity of another.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p4"></span>But the just man will omit no
opportunity of doing anything mercifully: nor will he pollute himself
with gain of this kind; but he will so act that without any loss to
himself, that which he lends may be reckoned among his good works. He
must not receive a gift from a poor man; so that if he himself has
afforded anything, it may be good, inasmuch as it is gratuitous. If any
one reviles, he must answer him with a blessing; <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207) he himself must never revile, that
no evil word may proceed out of the mouth of a man who reverences the
good Word. <span id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208) Moreover, he must
also diligently take care, lest by any fault of his he should at any
time make an enemy; and if any one should be so shameless as to inflict
injury on a good and just man, he must bear it with calmness and
moderation, and not take upon himself his revenge, but reserve it for
the judgment of God. <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209) He must
at all times and in all places guard innocence. And this precept is not
limited to this, that he should not himself inflict injury, but that he
should not avenge it when inflicted on himself. For there sits on the
judgment-seat a very great and impartial Judge, the observer and witness
of all. Let him prefer Him to man; let him rather <span id="page_184">p.
184</span> <span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-Page_184"></span>choose that He
should pronounce judgment respecting his cause, whose sentence no one
can escape, either by the advocacy of any one or by favour. Thus it
comes to pass, that a just man is an object of contempt to all; and
because it will be thought that he is unable to defend himself, he will
be regarded as slothful and inactive; but if any one shall have avenged
himself upon his enemy, he is judged a man of spirit and activity—all
honour and reverence him. And although the good man has it in his power
to profit many, yet they look up to him who is able to injure, rather
than to him who is able to profit. But the depravity of men will not be
able to corrupt the just man, so that he will not endeavour to obey God;
and he would prefer to be despised, provided that he may always
discharge the duty of a good man, and never of a bad man. <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p7.3"></span>Cicero says in those same books
respecting Offices: “But if any one should wish to unravel this
indistinct conception of his soul, <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210) let him at once teach himself that
he is a good man who profits those whom he can, and injures no one <span
id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) unless provoked by injury.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p10"></span>Oh how he marred a simple and true
sentiment by the addition of two words! For what need was there of
adding these words, “unless provoked by injury?” that he might append
vice as a most disgraceful tail to a good man and might represent him as
without patience, which is the greatest of all the virtues. He said that
a good man would inflict injuries if he were provoked: now he must
necessarily lose the name of a good man from this very circumstance, if
he shall inflict injury. For it is not less the part of a bad man to
return an injury than to inflict it. For from what source do contests,
from what source do fightings and contentions, arise among men, except
that impatience opposed to injustice often excites great tempests? But
if you meet injustice with patience, than which virtue nothing can be
found more true, nothing more worthy of a man, it will immediately be
extinguished, as though you should pour water upon a fire. But if that
injustice which provokes opposition has met with impatience equal <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212) to itself, as though overspread
with oil, it will excite so great a conflagration, that no stream can
extinguish it, but only the shedding of blood. Great, therefore, is the
advantage of patience, of which the wise man has deprived the good man.
For this alone causes that no evil happens; and if it should be given to
all, there will be no wickedness and no fraud in the affairs of men.
What, therefore, can be so calamitous to a good man, so opposed to his
character, as to let loose the reins to anger, which deprives him not
only of the title of a good man, but even of a man; since to injure
another, as he himself most truly says, is not in accordance with the
nature of man? For if you provoke cattle or horses, <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213) they turn against you either with
their hoof or their horn; and serpents and wild beasts, unless you
pursue them that you may kill them, give no trouble. And to return to
examples of men, even the inexperienced and the foolish, if at any time
they receive an injury, are led by a blind and irrational fury, and
endeavour to retaliate upon those who injure them. In what respect,
then, does the wise and good man differ from the evil and foolish,
except that he has invincible patience, of which the foolish are
destitute; except that he knows how to govern himself, and to mitigate
his anger, which those, because they are without virtue, are unable to
curb? But this circumstance manifestly deceived him, because, when
inquiry is made respecting virtue, he thought that it is the part of
virtue to conquer in every kind of contention. Nor was he able in any
way to see, that a man who gives way to grief and anger, and who
indulges these affections, against which he ought rather to struggle,
and who rushes wherever injustice shall have called him, does not fulfil
the duty of virtue. For he who endeavours to return an injury, desires
to imitate that very person by whom he has been injured. Thus he who
imitates a bad man can by no means be good.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p13"></span>Therefore by two words he has
taken away from the good and wise man two of the greatest virtues,
innocence and patience. But, as <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p13.1"></span>Sallustius relates was said by <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p13.2"></span>Appius, because he himself practised
that canine <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214) eloquence, be
wished man also to live after the manner of a dog, so as, when attacked,
to bite in return. And to show how pernicious this repayment of insult
is, and what carnage it is accustomed to produce, from what can a more
befitting example be sought, than from the most melancholy disaster of
the teacher himself, who, while he desired to obey these precepts of the
philosophers, destroyed himself? For if, when attacked with injury, he
had preserved patience—if he had learned that it is the part of a good
man to dissemble and to endure insult, and his impatience, vanity, and
madness had not poured forth those noble orations, inscribed with a name
derived from another source, <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215)
he would never, by his head affixed to them, have polluted the <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p15.4"></span>rostra on which he had formerly
distinguished himself, nor would that proscription have utterly
destroyed <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-Page_185"></span>the state. Therefore it is not the
part of a wise and good man to wish to contend, and to commit himself to
danger, since to conquer is not in our power, and every contest is
doubtful; but it is the part of a wise and excellent man not to wish to
remove his adversary, which cannot be done without guilt and danger, but
to put an end to the contest itself, which may be done with advantage
and with justice. Therefore patience is to be regarded as a very great
virtue; and that the just man might obtain this, God willed, as has been
before said, that he should be despised as sluggish. For unless he shall
have been insulted, it will not be known what fortitude he has in
restraining himself. Now if, when provoked by injury, he has begun to
follow up his assailant with violence, he is overcome. But if he shall
have repressed that emotion by reasoning, he altogether has command over
himself: he is able to rule himself. And this restraining <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216) of oneself is rightly named
patience, which single virtue is opposed to all vices and affections.
This recalls the disturbed and wavering mind to its tranquillity; this
mitigates, this restores a man to himself. Therefore, since it is
impossible and useless to resist nature, so that we are not excited at
all; before, however, the emotion bursts forth to the infliction of
injury, as far <span id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217) as is possible
let it be calmed <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218) in time. God
has enjoined us not to let the sun go down upon our wrath, <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219) lest he should depart as a witness
of our madness. Finally, <span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p19.2"></span>Marcus
Tullius, in opposition to his own precept, concerning which I have
lately spoken, gave the greatest praises to the forgetting of injuries.
“I entertain hopes,” he says, “O Cæsar, who art accustomed to forget
nothing except injuries.” <span id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220) But
if he thus acted—a man most widely removed not only from heavenly, but
also from public and civil justice—how much more ought we to do this,
who are, as it were, candidates for immortality?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[183:1207](0070156.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p2"></span> \[Homini amico ac familiari non
est mentiri meum.\]  

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[183:1208](0070156.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p5"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p5.1"></span>; [Luke vi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#028)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p5.2"></span>; [Rom. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p5.3"></span>.  

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[183:1209](0070156.htm#fr_1208) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p6"></span> i.e., <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p6.1"></span>Jesus Christ the Son of God = the Word
of God.  

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[183:1210](0070156.htm#fr_1209) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p7"></span> [Rom. xii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p7.1"></span>; [Heb. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#030)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p7.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[184:1211](0070156.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p8.1"></span>Animi sui complicitam notionem
evolvere.  

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[184:1212](0070156.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p9"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p9.1"></span>Nisi lacessitus injuria.\]  

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[184:1213](0070156.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p11.1"></span>Comparem. Injustice and impatience are
here represented as a pair of gladiators well matched against each
other.  

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[184:1214](0070156.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p12.1"></span>Pecudes, including horses and cattle.
 

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[184:1215](0070156.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p14.1"></span>Caninam, i.e., resembling a dog,
cutting.  

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[184:1216](0070156.htm#fr_1215) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p15"></span> The allusion is to the <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p15.1"></span>Philippics of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p15.2"></span>Cicero, a title borrowed from <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p15.3"></span>Demosthenes.  

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[185:1217](0070156.htm#fr_1216) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p16.1"></span>Sustentatio sui.  

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[185:1218](0070156.htm#fr_1217) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p17.1"></span>Quoad fieri potest. Others read,
“<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p17.2"></span>quod fieri potest.”  

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[185:1219](0070156.htm#fr_1218) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p18.1"></span>Maturius sopiatur.  

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[185:1220](0070156.htm#fr_1219) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p19"></span> [Eph. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p19.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[185:1221](0070156.htm#fr_1220) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p20.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xviii-p20.2"></span>Pro Ligar., 12.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIX.—Of the affections and their use; and of the three
furies](0070157)
