[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070134)  [Next](0070136.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXII.—Of the Rage of the Demons Against Christians, and the Error of Unbelievers.

<span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p1"></span>They do not therefore rage against us
on this account, because their gods are not worshipped by us, but
because the truth is on our side, which (as it has been said most truly)
produces hatred. What, then, shall we think, but that they <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-Page_159"></span>are
ignorant of what they suffer? For they act <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[1064](#fn_1063.md) with a blind and unreasonable fury,
which we see, but of which they are ignorant. For it is not the men
themselves who persecute, for they have no cause of anger against the
innocent; but those contaminated and abandoned spirits by whom the truth
is both known and hated insinuate themselves into their minds, and goad
them in their ignorance to fury. For these, as long as there is peace
among the people of God, flee from the righteous, and fear them; and
when they seize upon the bodies of men, and harass their souls, they are
adjured by them, and at the name of the true God are put to flight. For
when they hear this name they tremble, cry out, and assert that they are
branded and beaten; and being asked who they are, whence they are come,
and how they have insinuated themselves into a man, confess it. Thus,
being tortured and excruciated by the power of the divine name, they
come out of the man. <span id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064.md) On
account of these blows and threats, they always hate holy and just men;
and because they are unable of themselves to injure them, they pursue
with public hatred those whom they perceive to be grievous to them, and
they exercise cruelty, with all the violence which they can employ, that
they may either weaken their faith by pain, or, if they are unable to
effect that, may take them away altogether from the earth, that there
may be none to restrain their wickedness. It does not escape my notice
what reply can be made on the other side. Why, then, does that God of
surpassing power, that mighty One, whom you confess to preside over all
things, and to be Lord of all, permit these things to be done, and
neither avenge nor defend His worshippers? Why, in short, are they who
do not worship Him rich, and powerful, and happy? and why do they enjoy
honours and kingly state, and have these very persons <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[1066](#fn_1065.md) subject to their power and sway?  

<span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p5"></span>We must also give a reason for this,
that no error may remain. For this is especially the cause why it is
thought that religion has not the power of God, because men are
influenced by the appearance of earthly and present goods, which in no
way have reference to the care of the mind; and because they see that
the righteous are without these goods, and that the unrighteous abound
in them, they both judge that the worship of God is worthless, in which
they do not see these things contained, and they imagine that the rites
of other gods are true, since their worshippers enjoy riches and honours
and kingdoms. But they who are of this opinion do not attentively
consider the power and method of man, which consists altogether in the
mind, and not in the body. For they see nothing more than is seen,
namely the body; and because this is to be seen and handled, <span
id="fr_1066"></span>[1067](#fn_1066.md) it is weak, frail, and mortal; and
to this belong all those goods which are their desire and admiration,
wealth, honours, and governments, since they bring pleasures to the
body, and therefore are as liable to decay as the body itself. But the
soul, in which alone man consists since it is not exposed to the sight
of the eyes, and its goods cannot be seen, for they are placed in virtue
only, must therefore be as firm, and constant, and lasting as virtue
itself, in which the good of the soul consists.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[159:1064](0070135.htm#fr_1063.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p2.1"></span>Pergitur enim…furore. Another reading is,
“<span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p2.2"></span>Perciti enim perferuntur…furore.”
 

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[159:1065](0070135.htm#fr_1064.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p3.1"></span>Exsulantur. Other readings are, “<span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p3.2"></span>exsolantur,” “<span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p3.3"></span>expelluntur,” “<span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p3.4"></span>exultantur.” \[Compare p. 393, note 1,
vol. v., this series.\]  

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[159:1066](0070135.htm#fr_1065.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p4.1"></span>Eos ipsos, i.e., Christians.  

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[159:1067](0070135.htm#fr_1066.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xxii-p6.1"></span>Quia oculis manuque tractabile est.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXIII.—Of the justice and patience of the
Christians](0070136.md)
