[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070335)  [Next](0070337) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXVII.

<span id="iii.v.xxvii-p1"></span>But <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Maximian, who knew the outrageous temper of
<span id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.2"></span>Galerius, began to consider that,
fired with rage on hearing of the death of <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.3"></span>Severus, he would march into Italy, and
that possibly he might be joined by <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.4"></span>Daia, and so bring into the field forces
too powerful to be resisted. Having therefore fortified Rome, and made
diligent provision for a defensive war, <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.5"></span>Maximian went into Gaul, that he might give
his younger daughter <span id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.6"></span>Fausta in
marriage to <span id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.7"></span>Constantine, and thus win
over that prince to his interest. Meantime <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.8"></span>Galerius assembled his troops, invaded
Italy, and advanced towards Rome, resolving to extinguish the senate and
put the whole people to the sword. But he found everything shut and
fortified against him. There was no hope of carrying the place by storm,
and to besiege it was an arduous undertaking; for <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.9"></span>Galerius had not brought with him an army
sufficient to invest the walls. Probably, having never seen Rome, he
imagined it to be little superior in size to those cities with which be
was acquainted. But some of his legions, detesting the wicked enterprise
of a father against his son-in-law, and of Romans against Rome,
renounced his authority, and carried over their ensigns to the enemy.
Already had his remaining soldiers begun to waver, when <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.10"></span>Galerius, dreading a fate like that of
<span id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.11"></span>Severus, and having his haughty
spirit broken and humiliated, threw himself at the feet of his soldiers,
and continued to beseech them that he might not be delivered to the foe,
until, by the promise of mighty largesses, he prevailed on them. Then he
retreated from Rome, and fled in great disorder. Easily might he have
been cut off in his flight, had any one pursued him even with a small
body of troops. He was aware of his danger, and allowed his soldiers to
disperse themselves, and to plunder and destroy far and wide, that, if
there were any pursuers, they might be deprived of all means of
subsistence in a ruined country. So the parts of Italy through which
that pestilent band took its course were wasted, all things pillaged,
matrons forced, virgins violated, parents and husbands compelled by
torture to disclose where they had concealed their goods, and their
wives and daughters; flocks and herds of cattle were driven off like
spoils taken from barbarians. And thus did he, once a Roman emperor, but
now the ravager of Italy, retire into his own territories, after having
afflicted all men indiscriminately with the calamities of war. Long ago,
indeed, and at the very time of his obtaining sovereign power, he had
avowed himself the enemy of the Roman name; and he proposed that the
empire should be called, not the <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.12"></span>Roman, but the <span
id="iii.v.xxvii-p1.13"></span>Dacian empire.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXVIII](0070337)
