[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070377)  [Next](0070379) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="vi.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>from the third chapter.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p1"></span>The fifth class, company, or association
of saints, sets forth men who are careless, and who are carrying on in
the world other transactions than those which they ought—Christians only
in name. And therefore He exhorts them that by any means they should be
turned away from negligence, and be saved; and to this effect He says:—
 

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>2. “Be
watchful, and strengthen the other things which were ready to die; for I
have not found thy works perfect before God.”\] For it is not enough for
a tree to live and to have no fruit, even as it is not enough to be
called a Christian and to confess Christ, but not to have Himself in our
work, that is, not to do His precepts.  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p3"></span>The sixth class is the mode of life of
the best election. The habit of saints is set forth; of those, to wit,
who are lowly in the world, and unskilled in the Scriptures, and who
hold the faith immoveably, and are not at all broken down by any chance,
or withdrawn from the faith by any fear. Therefore He says to them:—  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p4"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>8. “I
have set before thee an open door, because thou hast kept the word of my
patience.”\] In such little strength.  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p5"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>10. “And
I will keep thee from the hour of temptation.”\] That they may know His
glory to be of this kind, that they are not indeed permitted to be given
over to temptation.  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p6"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>12. “He
that overcometh shall be made a pillar in the temple of God.”\] For even
as a pillar is an ornament of the building, so he who perseveres shall
obtain a nobility in the Church.  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p7"></span>Moreover, the seventh association of the
Church declares that they are rich men placed in positions of dignity,
but believing that they are rich, among whom indeed the Scriptures are
discussed in their bedchamber, while the faithful are outside; and they
are understood by none, although they boast themselves, and say that
they know all things,—endowed with the confidence of learning, but
ceasing from its labour. And thus He says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p8"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>15.
“That they are neither cold nor hot.”\] That is, neither unbelieving nor
believing, for they are all things to all men. And because he who is
neither cold nor hot, but lukewarm, gives nausea, He says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p9"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>16. “I
will vomit thee out of My mouth.”\] Although nausea is hateful, still it
hurts no one; so also is it with men of this kind when they have been
cast forth. But because there is time of repentance, He says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p10"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>18. “I
persuade thee to buy of Me gold tried in the fire.”\] That is, that in
whatever manner you can, you should suffer for the Lord’s name
tribulations and passions.  

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p11"></span>“And anoint thine eyes with
eye-salve.”\] That what you gladly know by the Scripture, you should
strive also to do the work of the same. And because, if in these ways
men return out of great destruction to great repentance, they are not
only useful to themselves, but they are able also to be of advantage to
many, He promised them no small reward,—to sit, namely, on the throne of
judgment.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From the fourth chapter](0070379)
