[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070055)  [Next](0070057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chap. V.—That the Knowledge of Many Things is Necessary.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.v-p1"></span>For there are many things which nature
itself, and frequent use, and the necessity of life, compel us to know.
Accordingly you must perish, unless you know what things are useful for
life, in order that you may seek them; and what are dangerous, that you
may shun and avoid them. Moreover, there are many things which
experience finds out. For the various courses of the sun and moon, and
the motions of the stars, and the computation of times, have been
discovered, and the nature of bodies, and the strength of herbs by
students of medicine, and by the cultivators of the land the nature of
soils, and signs of future rains and tempests have been collected. In
short, there is no art which is not dependent on knowledge. Therefore
<span id="iii.ii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Arcesilas ought, if he had any
wisdom, to have distinguished the things which were capable of being
known, and those which were incapable. But if he had done this, he would
have reduced himself to the common herd. For the common people have
sometimes more wisdom, because they are only so far wise as is
necessary. And if you inquire of them whether they know anything or
nothing, they will say that they know the things which they know, and
will confess that they are ignorant of what they are ignorant. He was
right, therefore, in taking away the systems of others, but he was not
right in laying the foundations of his own. For ignorance of all things
cannot be wisdom, the peculiar property of which is knowledge. And thus,
when he overcame the philosophers, and taught that they knew nothing, he
himself also lost the name of philosopher, because his system is to know
nothing. For he who blames others because they are ignorant, ought
himself to have knowledge; but when he knows nothing, what perverseness
or what insolence it is, to constitute himself a philosopher on account
of that very thing for which he takes away the others! For it is in
their power to answer thus: If you convict us of knowing nothing, and
therefore of being unwise because we know nothing, does it follow that
you are not wise, because you confess that you know nothing? What
progress, therefore, did <span id="iii.ii.iii.v-p1.2"></span>Arcesilas
make, except that, having despatched all the philosophers, he pierced
himself also with the same sword?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VI.—Of wisdom, and the academics, and natural
philosophy](0070057.md)
