[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070453)  [Next](0070455) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p0.1"></span>Sec. II.—History and Doctrines of Heresies.

##### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p0.2"></span>That Schism is Made, Not by Him Who Separates Himself from the Ungodly, But Who Departs from the Godly.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>IV</span>. If therefore God inflicted
punishment immediately on those that made a schism on account of their
ambition, how much rather will He do it upon those who are the leaders
of impious heresies! Will not He inflict severer punishment on those
that blaspheme His providence or His creation? But do you, brethren, who
are instructed out of the Scripture, take care not to make divisions in
opinion, nor divisions in unity. For those who set up unlawful opinions
are marks of perdition to the people. In like manner, do not you of the
laity come near to such as advance doctrines contrary to the mind of
God; nor be you partakers of their impiety. For says God: “Separate
yourselves from the midst of these men, lest you perish together with
them.” <span id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180) And again: “Depart
from the midst of them, and separate yourselves, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.” <span
id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181)  

##### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p3.2"></span>Upon What Account Israel, Falsely So Named, is Rejected by God, Demonstrated from the Prophetic Predictions.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p4.1"></span>V.</span> For those are most certainly to be
avoided who blaspheme God. The greatest part of the ungodly, indeed, are
ignorant of God; but these men, as fighters against God, are possessed
with a wilful evil disposition, as with a disease. For from the
wickedness of these heretics “pollution is gone out upon all the
earth,” <span id="fr_3182"></span>[3183](#fn_3182) as says the prophet
Jeremiah. For the wicked synagogue is now cast off by the Lord God, and
His house is rejected by Him, as He somewhere speaks: “I have forsaken
mine house, I have left mine inheritance.” <span
id="fr_3183"></span>[3184](#fn_3183) And again, says Isaiah: “I will
neglect my vineyard, and it shall not be pruned nor digged, and thorns
shall spring up upon it, as upon a desert; and I will command the clouds
that they rain no rain upon it.” <span
id="fr_3184"></span>[3185](#fn_3184) He has therefore “left His people
as a tent in a vineyard, and as a garner in a fig or olive yard, and as
a besieged city.” <span id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185) He has
taken away from them the Holy Spirit, and the prophetic rain, and has
replenished His Church with spiritual grace, as the “river of Egypt in
the time of first-fruits;” <span id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186)
and has advanced the same “as an house upon an hill, or as an high
mountain; as a mountain fruitful for milk and fatness, wherein it has
pleased God to dwell. For the Lord will inhabit therein to the
end.” <span id="fr_3187"></span>[3188](#fn_3187) And He says in
Jeremiah: “Our sanctuary is an exalted throne of glory.” <span
id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188) And He says in Isaiah: “And it
shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord shall
be glorious, and the house of the Lord shall <span id="page_452">p.
452</span> <span id="ix.vii.ii-Page_452"></span>be upon the top of the
mountains, and shall be advanced above the hills.” <span
id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189) Since, therefore, He has forsaken
His people, He has also left His temple desolate, and rent the veil of
the temple, and took from them the Holy Spirit; for says He, “Behold,
your house is left unto you desolate.” <span
id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190) And He has bestowed upon you, the
converted of the Gentiles, spiritual grace, as He says by Joel: “And it
shall come to pass after these things, saith God, that I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons shall prophesy, and your
daughters shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.” <span
id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191) For God has taken away all the
power and efficacy of His word, and such like visitations, from that
people, and has transferred it to you, the converted of the Gentiles.
For on this account the devil himself is very angry at the holy Church
of God: he is removed to you, and has raised against you adversities,
seditions, and reproaches, schisms, and heresies. For he had before
subdued that people to himself, by their slaying of Christ. But you who
have left his vanities he tempts in different ways, as he did the
blessed <span id="ix.vii.ii-p14.2"></span>Job. <span
id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192) For indeed he opposed that great
high priest <span id="ix.vii.ii-p15.2"></span>Joshua the son of
Josedek; <span id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193) and he oftentimes
sought to sift us, that our faith might fail. <span
id="fr_3194"></span>[3195](#fn_3194) But our Lord and Master, having
brought him to trial, said unto him: “The Lord rebuke thee, O devil; and
the Lord, who hath chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee. Is not this plucked
out of the fire as a brand?” <span id="fr_3195"></span>[3196](#fn_3195)
And who said then to those that stood by the high priest, “Take away his
ragged garments from him;” and added, “Behold, I have taken thine
iniquities away from thee;” He will say now, as He said formerly of us
when we were assembled together, “I have prayed that your faith may not
fail.” <span id="fr_3196"></span>[3197](#fn_3196)  

##### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p19.2"></span>That Even Among the Jews There Arose the Doctrine of Several Heresies Hateful to God.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p20"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>VI</span>. For even the Jewish nation had
wicked heresies: for of them were the Sadducees, who do not confess the
resurrection of the dead; and the Pharisees, who ascribe the practice of
sinners to fortune and fate; and the Basmotheans, who deny providence,
and say that the world is made by spontaneous motion, and take away the
immortality of the soul; and the Hemerobaptists, who every day, unless
they wash, do not eat,—nay, and unless they cleanse their beds and
tables, or platters and cups and seats, do not make use of any of them;
and those who are newly risen amongst us, the Ebionites, who will have
the Son of God to be a mere man, begotten by human pleasure, and the
conjunction of <span id="ix.vii.ii-p20.2"></span>Joseph and <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p20.3"></span>Mary. There are also those that separate
themselves from all these, and observe the laws of their fathers, and
these are the Essenes. These, therefore, arose among the former people.
And now the evil one, who is wise to do mischief, and as for goodness,
knows no such good thing, has cast out some from among us, and has
wrought by them heresies and schisms.  

##### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p20.4"></span>Whence the Heresies Sprang, and Who Was the Ringleader of Their Impiety.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p21"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p21.1"></span>VII</span>. Now the original of the new
heresies began thus: the devil entered into one <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p21.2"></span>Simon, of a village called Gitthæ, a
Samaritan, by profession a magician, and made him the minister of his
wicked design. <span id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197) For when
Philip our fellow-apostle, <span id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198) by
the gift of the Lord and the energy of His Spirit, performed the
miracles of healing in Samaria, insomuch that the Samaritans were
affected, and embraced the faith of the God of the universe, and of the
Lord <span id="ix.vii.ii-p23.4"></span>Jesus, and were baptized into His
name; nay, and that <span id="ix.vii.ii-p23.5"></span>Simon himself,
when he saw the signs and wonders which were done without any magic
ceremonies, fell into admiration, and believed, and was baptized, and
continued in fasting and prayer,—we heard of the grace of God which was
among the Samaritans by <span id="ix.vii.ii-p23.6"></span>Philip, and
came down <span id="fr_3199"></span>[3200](#fn_3199) to them; and
enlarging much upon the word of doctrine, we laid our hands upon all
that were baptized, and we conferred upon them the participation of the
Spirit. But when <span id="ix.vii.ii-p24.2"></span>Simon saw that the
Spirit was given to believers by the imposition of our hands, he took
money, and offered it to us, saying, “Give me also the power, that on
whomsoever I also shall lay my hand, he may receive the Holy
Ghost;” <span id="fr_3200"></span>[3201](#fn_3200) being desirous that
as the devil <span id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201) deprived <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p26.2"></span>Adam by his tasting of the tree of that
immortality which was promised him, so also that <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p26.3"></span>Simon might entice us by the receiving of
money, and might thereby cut us off from the gift of God, <span
id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202) that so by exchange we might sell
to him for money the inestimable gift of the Spirit. But as we were all
troubled at this offer, I <span id="ix.vii.ii-p27.3"></span>Peter, with
a fixed attention on that malicious serpent which was in him, said to
<span id="ix.vii.ii-p27.4"></span>Simon: “Let thy money go with thee to
perdition, because thou hast thought to purchase the gift of God with
money. Thou hast no part in this matter, nor lot in this faith; <span
id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span id="ix.vii.ii-Page_453"></span>for thy
heart is not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray to the Lord, if perhaps the thought of thine heart
may be forgiven thee. For I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness
and the bond of iniquity.” <span id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203)
But then <span id="ix.vii.ii-p28.2"></span>Simon was terrified, and
said: “I entreat you, pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of those
things which ye have spoken come upon me.” <span
id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204)  

##### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p29.3"></span>Who Were the Successors of Simon’s Impiety, and What Heresies They Set Up.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p30"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.1"></span>VIII.</span> But when we went forth among
the Gentiles to preach the word of life, then the devil wrought in the
people to send after us false apostles to the corrupting of the word;
and they sent forth one <span id="ix.vii.ii-p30.2"></span>Cleobius, and
joined him with <span id="ix.vii.ii-p30.3"></span>Simon, and these
became disciples to one <span id="ix.vii.ii-p30.4"></span>Dositheus,
whom they despising, put him down from the principality. Afterwards also
others were the authors of absurd doctrines: <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.5"></span>Cerinthus, and <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.6"></span>Marcus, and <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.7"></span>Menander, and <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.8"></span>Basilides, and <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.9"></span>Saturnilus. Of these some own the doctrine
of many gods, some only of three, but contrary to each other, without
beginning, and ever with one another, and some of an infinite number of
them, and those unknown ones also. And some reject marriage; and their
doctrine is, that it is not the appointment of God; and others abhor
some kinds of food: some are impudent in uncleanness, such as those who
are falsely called Nicolaitans. And <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.10"></span>Simon meeting me <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.11"></span>Peter, first at Cæsarea Stratonis (where
the faithful <span id="ix.vii.ii-p30.12"></span>Cornelius, a Gentile,
believed on the Lord <span id="ix.vii.ii-p30.13"></span>Jesus by me),
endeavoured to pervert the word of God; there being with me the holy
children, <span id="ix.vii.ii-p30.14"></span>Zacchæus, who was once a
publican, and <span id="ix.vii.ii-p30.15"></span>Barnabas; and <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.16"></span>Nicetas and <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.17"></span>Aquila, brethren of Clement the bishop and
citizen of Rome, who was the disciple of <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p30.18"></span>Paul, our fellow-apostle and fellow-helper
in the Gospel. I thrice discoursed before them with him concerning the
true Prophet, and concerning the monarchy of God; and when I had
overcome him by the power of the Lord, and had put him to silence, I
drove him away into Italy.  

##### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p30.19"></span>How Simon, Desiring to Fly by Some Magical Arts, Fell Down Headlong from on High at the Prayers of Peter, and Brake His Feet, and Hands, and Ankle-Bones.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p31"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p31.1"></span>IX</span>. Now when he was in Rome, he
mightily disturbed the Church, and subverted many, and brought them over
to himself, and astonished the Gentiles with his skill in magic,
insomuch that once, in the middle of the day, he went into their
theatre, and commanded the people that they should bring me also by
force into the theatre, and promised he would fly in the air; and when
all the people were in suspense at this, I prayed by myself. And indeed
he was carried up into the air by demons, and did fly on high in the
air, saying that he was returning into heaven, and that he would supply
them with good things from thence. And the people making acclamations to
him, as to a god, I stretched out my hands to heaven, with my mind, and
besought God through the Lord <span id="ix.vii.ii-p31.2"></span>Jesus to
throw down this pestilent fellow, and to destroy the power of those
demons that made use of the same for the seduction and perdition of men,
to dash him against the ground, and bruise him, but not to kill him. And
then, fixing my eyes on <span id="ix.vii.ii-p31.3"></span>Simon, I said
to him: “If I be a man of God, and a real apostle of <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p31.4"></span>Jesus Christ, and a teacher of piety, and
not of deceit, as thou art, <span id="ix.vii.ii-p31.5"></span>Simon, I
command the wicked powers of the apostate from piety, by whom <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p31.6"></span>Simon the magician is carried, to let go
their hold, that he may fall down headlong from his height, that he may
be exposed to the laughter of those that have been seduced by him.” When
I had said these words, <span id="ix.vii.ii-p31.7"></span>Simon was
deprived of his powers, and fell down headlong with a great noise, and
was violently dashed against the ground, and had his hip and ankle-bones
broken; and the people cried out, saying, “There is one only God, whom
<span id="ix.vii.ii-p31.8"></span>Peter rightly preaches in truth.” And
many left him; but some who were worthy of perdition continued in his
wicked doctrine. And after this manner the most atheistical heresy of
the Simonians was first established in Rome; and the devil wrought by
the rest of the false apostles <span
id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205) also.  

##### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p32.4"></span>How the Heresies Differ from Each Other, and from the Truth.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p33"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p33.1"></span>X</span>. Now all these had one and the same
design of atheism, to blaspheme Almighty God, to spread their doctrine
that He is an unknown being, and not the Father of Christ, nor the
Creator of the world; but one who cannot be spoken of, ineffable, not to
be named, and begotten by Himself; that we are not to make use of the
law and the prophets; that there is no providence and no resurrection to
be believed; that there is no judgment nor retribution; that the soul is
not immortal; that we must only indulge our pleasures, and turn to any
sort of worship without distinction. Some of them say that there are
many gods, some that there are three gods without beginning, some that
there are two unbegotten gods, some that there are innumerable Æons.
Further, some of them teach that men are not to marry, and must abstain
<span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="ix.vii.ii-Page_454"></span>from flesh and wine, affirming that
marriage, and the begetting of children, and the eating of certain
foods, are abominable; that so, as sober persons, they may make their
wicked opinions to be received as worthy of belief. And some of them
absolutely prohibit the eating of flesh, as being the flesh not of brute
animals, but of creatures that have a rational soul, as though those
that ventured to slay them would be charged with the crime of murder.
But others of them affirm that we must only abstain from swine’s flesh,
but may eat such as are clean by the law; and that we ought to be
circumcised, according to the law, and to believe in <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p33.2"></span>Jesus as in an holy man and a prophet. But
others teach that men ought to be impudent in uncleanness, and to abuse
the flesh, and to go through all unholy practices, as if this were the
only way for the soul to avoid the rulers of this world. Now all these
are the instruments of the devil, and the children of wrath.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[451:3181](0070454.htm#fr_3180) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p2"></span> [Num. xvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#021)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p2.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[451:3182](0070454.htm#fr_3181) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p3"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3182"></span>[451:3183](0070454.htm#fr_3182) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p5"></span> [Jer. xxiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#015)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p5.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3183"></span>[451:3184](0070454.htm#fr_3183) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p6"></span> [Jer. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p6.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3184"></span>[451:3185](0070454.htm#fr_3184) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p7"></span> [Isa. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p7.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[451:3186](0070454.htm#fr_3185) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p8"></span> [Isa. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p8.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[451:3187](0070454.htm#fr_3186) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p9"></span> See [Ecclus. xxiv.
25](../../../bib/apo/sir024.htm#025)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p9.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3187"></span>[451:3188](0070454.htm#fr_3187) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p10"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[451:3189](0070454.htm#fr_3188) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p11"></span> [Jer. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p11.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[452:3190](0070454.htm#fr_3189) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p12"></span> [Isa. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p12.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[452:3191](0070454.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p13"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[452:3192](0070454.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p14"></span> [Joel ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p14.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[452:3193](0070454.htm#fr_3192) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p15"></span> [Job
i.](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#000)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[452:3194](0070454.htm#fr_3193) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p16"></span> [Zech. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p16.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3194"></span>[452:3195](0070454.htm#fr_3194) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p17"></span> [Luke xxii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p17.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3195"></span>[452:3196](0070454.htm#fr_3195) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p18"></span> [Zech. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002)<span
id="ix.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>,etc.  

<span id="fn_3196"></span>[452:3197](0070454.htm#fr_3196) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p19"></span> [Luke xxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p19.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[452:3198](0070454.htm#fr_3197) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p22"></span> [Acts
viii](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#000)<span
id="ix.vii.ii-p22.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[452:3199](0070454.htm#fr_3198) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p23"></span> \[Either an ignorant error or a
peculiar use of a technical word (p. 383, <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p23.2"></span>supra) to signify a missionary. See the
note, book viii. sec. 3, cap. 17, <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p23.3"></span>infra.\]  

<span id="fn_3199"></span>[452:3200](0070454.htm#fr_3199) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p23.7"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p24"></span> \[Were sent, rather. See [Acts viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vii.ii-p24.1"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_3200"></span>[452:3201](0070454.htm#fr_3200) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p25"></span> [Acts viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p25.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[452:3202](0070454.htm#fr_3201) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p26"></span> “The devil:” this reading is adopted
from the V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p26.1"></span>mss.</span>  

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[452:3203](0070454.htm#fr_3202) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p26.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p27"></span> The V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii.ii-p27.1"></span>mss.</span> insert here: “<span
id="ix.vii.ii-p27.2"></span>Simon, therefore, being moved by the devil,
brought the money.”  

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[453:3204](0070454.htm#fr_3203) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p27.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p28"></span> [Acts viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[453:3205](0070454.htm#fr_3204) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p29"></span> [Acts
viii.](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p29.1"></span><span id="ix.vii.ii-p29.2"></span>24.  

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[453:3206](0070454.htm#fr_3205) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p31.9"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p32"></span> \[[2 Cor. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#013)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p32.1"></span>.
See p. 457, <span id="ix.vii.ii-p32.3"></span>infra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. III.—The Heresies Attacked by the Apostles](0070455)
