[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070165)  [Next](0070167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chap. II.—Of the Error of the Philosophers, and of the Divine Wisdom, and of the Golden Age.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p1"></span>Now let us instruct those who are
ignorant of the truth. It has been so determined by the <span
id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-Page_196"></span>arrangement of the Most High God,
that this unrighteous age, having run the course <span
id="fr_1292"></span>[1293](#fn_1292) of its appointed times, should come
to an end; and all wickedness being immediately extinguished, and the
souls of the righteous being recalled to a happy life, a quiet,
tranquil, peaceful, in short, golden age, as the poets call it, should
flourish, under the rule of God Himself. This was especially the cause
of all the errors of the philosophers, that they did not comprehend the
system of the world, which comprises the whole of wisdom. But it cannot
be comprehended by our own perception and innate intelligence, which
they wished to do by themselves without a teacher. Therefore they fell
into various and ofttimes contradictory opinions, out of which they had
no way of escape,  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p2.4"></span> And they remained fixed in the
> same mire,  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p3"></span>as the comic writer <span
id="fr_1293"></span>[1294](#fn_1293) says, since their conclusion does
not correspond with their assumptions; <span
id="fr_1294"></span>[1295](#fn_1294) inasmuch as they had assumed things
to be true which could not be affirmed, and proved without the knowledge
of the truth and of heavenly things. And this knowledge, as I have often
said already, cannot exist in a man unless it is derived from the
teaching of God. For if a man is able to understand divine things, he
will be able also to perform them; for to understand is, as it were, to
follow in their track. But he is not able to do the things which God
does, because he is clothed with a mortal body; therefore he cannot even
understand those things which God does. And whether this is possible is
easy for every one to measure, from the immensity of the divine actions
and works. For if you will contemplate the world, with all the things
which it contains, you will assuredly understand how much the work of
God surpasses the works of men. Thus, as great as is the difference
between divine and human works, so great must be the distance between
the wisdom of God and man. For because God is incorruptible and
immortal, and therefore perfect because He is everlasting, His wisdom
also is perfect, as He Himself is; nor can anything oppose it, because
God Himself is subject to nothing.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p6"></span>But because man is subject to
passion, his wisdom also is subject to error; and as many things hinder
the life of man, so that it cannot be perpetual, so also his wisdom must
be hindered by many things: so that it is not perfect in entirely
perceiving the truth. Therefore there is no human wisdom, if it strives
by itself to attain to the conception and knowledge of the truth;
inasmuch as the mind of man, being bound up with a frail body, and
enclosed in a dark abode, is neither able to wander at large, nor
clearly to perceive the truth, the knowledge of which belongs to the
divine nature. For His works are known to God alone. But man cannot
attain this knowledge by reflection or disputation, but by learning and
hearing from Him who alone is able to know and to teach. Therefore <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p6.1"></span>Marcus Tullius, <span
id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295) borrowing from <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p7.3"></span>Plato the sentiment of <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p7.4"></span>Socrates, who said that the time had come
for himself to depart from life, but that they before whom he was
pleading his cause were still alive, says: Which is better is known to
the immortal gods; but I think that no man knows. Wherefore all the
sects of philosophers must be far removed from the truth, because they
who established them were men; nor can those things have any foundation
or firmness which are unsupported by any utterances of divine voices.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[196:1293](0070166.htm#fr_1292) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p2.1"></span>Decurso temporum spatio. A metaphor taken
from the chariot course; <span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p2.2"></span>spatium
being used for the length of the course, between the <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p2.3"></span>metæ, or goals.  

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[196:1294](0070166.htm#fr_1293) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p4.1"></span>Ter., <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p4.2"></span>Phorm., v. 2.  

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[196:1295](0070166.htm#fr_1294) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p5.1"></span>Assumptio: often used for the minor
proposition in a syllogism.  

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[196:1296](0070166.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p7.1"></span>Tusc. Disp.<span
id="iii.ii.vii.ii-p7.2"></span>, i. 41.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. III.—Of nature, and of the world; and a censure of the
Stoics and Epicureans](0070167)
