[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070346)  [Next](0070348.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxxviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXXVIII.

<span id="iii.v.xxxviii-p1"></span>But <span
id="iii.v.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>that which distinguished his character,
and in which he transcended all former emperors, was his desire of
debauching women. What else can I call it but a blind and headstrong
passion? Yet such epithets feebly express my indignation in reciting his
enormities. The magnitude of the guilt overpowers my tongue, and makes
it unequal to its office. <span id="iii.v.xxxviii-p1.2"></span>Eunuchs
and panders made search everywhere, and no sooner was any comely face
discovered, than husbands and parents were obliged to withdraw. Matrons
of quality and virgins were stripped of their robes, and all their limbs
were inspected, lest any part should be unworthy of the bed of the
emperor. Whenever a woman resisted, death by drowning was inflicted on
her; as if, under the reign of this adulterer, chastity had been
treason. Some men there were, who, beholding the violation of wives whom
for virtue and fidelity they affectionately loved, could not endure
their anguish of mind, and so killed themselves. While this monster
ruled, it was singular deformity alone which could shield the honour of
any female from his savage desires. At length he introduced a custom
prohibiting marriage unless with the imperial permission; and he made
this an instrument to serve the purposes of his lewdness. After having
debauched freeborn maidens, he gave them for wives to his slaves. His
conflicts also imitated the example of the emperor, and violated with
impunity the beds of their dependants. For who was there to punish such
offences? As for the daughters of men of middle rank, any who were
inclined took them by force. Ladies of quality, who could not be taken
by force, were petitioned for, and obtained from the emperor by way of
free gift. Nor could a father oppose this; for the imperial warrant
having been once signed, he had no alternative but to die, or to receive
some barbarian as his son-in-law. For hardly was there any person in the
lifeguard except of those people, who, having been driven from their
habitations by the Goths in the twentieth year of <span
id="iii.v.xxxviii-p1.3"></span>Diocletian, yielded themselves to <span
id="iii.v.xxxviii-p1.4"></span>Galerius and entered into his service. It
was ill for humankind, that men who had fled from the bondage of
barbarians should thus come to lord it over the Romans. Environed by
such guards, <span id="iii.v.xxxviii-p1.5"></span>Daia oppressed and
insulted the Eastern empire.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXIX](0070348.md)
