[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070167)  [Next](0070169) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chap. IV.—That All Things Were Created for Some Use, Even Those Things Which Appear Evil; On What Account Man Enjoys Reason in So Frail a Body.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p1"></span>But we have spoken sufficiently on
the subject of providence in the first book. For if it has any
existence, as appears from the wonderful nature of its works, it must be
that the same providence created man and the other animals. Let us
therefore see what reason there was for the creation of the human race,
since it is evident, as the Stoics say, that the world was made for the
sake of men, although they make no slight error in this very matter, in
saying it was not made for the sake of man, but of men. For the naming
of one individual comprehends the whole human race. But this arises from
the fact that they are ignorant that one man only was made by God, and
they think that men were produced in all lands and fields like
mushrooms. But <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>Hermes was not
ignorant that man was both made by God and after the likeness of God.
But I return to my subject. There is nothing, as I imagine, which was
made on its own account; but whatever is made at all must necessarily be
made for some purpose. For who is there either so senseless or so
unconcerned as to attempt to do anything at random, from which he
expects no utility, no advantage? He who builds a house does not build
it merely for this purpose, that it may be a house, but that it may be
inhabited. He who builds a ship does not bestow his labour on this
account, only that the ship may be visible, but that men may sail in it.
Likewise he who designs and forms any vessel does not do it on this
account, that he may only appear to have done it, but that the vessel
when made may contain something necessary for use. In like manner, other
things, whatever are made, are plainly not made superfluously, but for
some useful purposes.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p2"></span>It is plain, therefore, that the
world was made by God, not on account of the world itself; for since it
is without sensibility, it neither needs the warmth of the sun, or
light, or the breath of the winds, or the moisture of showers, or the
nourishment of fruits. But it cannot even be said that God made the
world for His own sake, since He can exist without the world, as He did
before it was made; and God Himself does not make use of all those
things which are contained in it, and which are produced. It is evident,
therefore, that the world was constructed for the sake of living beings,
since living beings enjoy those things of which it consists; and that
these may live and exist, all things necessary for them are supplied at
fixed times. Again, that the other living beings were made for the sake
of man, is plain from this, that they are subservient <span
id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-Page_199"></span>to
man, and were given for his protection and service; since, whether they
are of the earth or of the water, they do not perceive the system of the
world as man does. We must here reply to the philosophers, and
especially to <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p2.1"></span>Cicero, who says:
“Why should God, when He made all things on our account, make so large a
quantity of snakes and vipers? why should He scatter so many pernicious
things by land and by sea?” A very wide subject for discussion, but it
must be briefly touched upon, as in passing. Since man is formed of
different and opposing elements, soul and body, that is, heaven and
earth, that which is slight and that which is perceptible to the senses,
that which is eternal and that which is temporal, that which has
sensibility and that which is senseless, that which is endued with light
and that which is dark, reason itself and necessity require that both
good and evil things should be set before man—good things which he may
use, and evil things which he may guard against and avoid.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p3"></span>For wisdom has been given to him on
this account, that, knowing the nature of good and evil things, he may
exercise the force of his reason in seeking the good and avoiding the
evil. For because wisdom was not given to the other animals, they were
both defended with natural clothing and were armed; but in the place of
all these He gave to man that which was most excellent, reason only.
Therefore He formed him naked and unarmed, that wisdom might be both his
defence and covering. He placed his defence and ornament not without,
but within not in the body, but in the heart. Unless, therefore, there
were evils which he might guard against, and which he might distinguish
from good and useful things, wisdom was not necessary for him. Therefore
let <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p3.1"></span>Marcus Tullius know that reason
was either given to man that he might take fishes on account of his own
use, and avoid snakes and vipers for the sake of his own safety; or that
good and evil things were set before him on this account, because he had
received wisdom, the whole force of which is occupied in distinguishing
things good and evil. <span id="fr_1310"></span>[1311](#fn_1310) Great,
therefore, and right, and admirable is the force, and reason, and power
of man, for whose sake God made the world itself and all things, as many
as exist, and gave him so much honour that He set him over all things,
since he alone could admire the works of God. Most excellently,
therefore, does our <span
id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p4.6"></span>Asclepiades, <span
id="fr_1311"></span>[1312](#fn_1311) in discussing the providence of the
Supreme God in that book which he wrote to me, say: “And on this account
any one may with good reason think that the divine providence gave the
place nearest to itself to him who was able to understand its
arrangement. For that is the sun: who so beholds it as to understand why
it is the sun, and what amount of influence it has upon the other parts
of the system? this is the heaven, who looks up to it? this is the
earth, who inhabits it? this is the sea, who sails upon it? this is
fire, who makes use of it?” Therefore the Supreme God did not arrange
these things on account of Himself, because He stands in need of
nothing, but on account of man, who might fitly make use of them.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[199:1311](0070168.htm#fr_1310) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p4"></span> \[The parables of nature are
admirably expounded by <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p4.1"></span>Jones of
Nayland. See his <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p4.2"></span>Zoologica Ethica,
his <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p4.3"></span>Book of Nature, and his <span
id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p4.4"></span>Moral Character of the Monkey, vols.
iii., xi., and xii., <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p4.5"></span>Works, London,
1801.\]  

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[199:1312](0070168.htm#fr_1311) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p4.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p5.1"></span>Asclepiades was a Christian writer, and
contemporary of <span id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p5.2"></span>Lactantius, to whom
he wrote a book on the providence of God. \[According to <span
id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p5.3"></span>Eusebius, a bishop of this name presided
at Antioch from <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.vii.iv-p5.4"></span>a.d.</span> 214 to 220; but this is
evidently another.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. V.—Of the creation of man, and of the arrangement of the
world, and of the chief good](0070169)
