[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070082)  [Next](0070084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p0.1"></span>Chap. I.—Of the Former Religion of Men, and How Error Was Spread Over Every Age, and of the Seven Wise Men of Greece.

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>When</span> I reflect, O Emperor <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p1.2"></span>Constantine, and often revolve in my mind
the original condition of men, it is accustomed to appear alike
wonderful and unworthy that, by the folly of one age embracing various
superstitions, and believing in the existence of many gods, they
suddenly arrived at such ignorance of themselves, that the truth being
taken away from their eyes, the religion of the true God was not
observed, nor the condition of human nature, since men did not seek the
chief good in heaven, but on earth. And on this account assuredly the
happiness of the ancient ages was changed. For, having left God, the
parent and founder of all things, men began to worship the senseless
works <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494.md) of their own hands. And
what were the effects of this corruption, or what evils it introduced,
the subject itself sufficiently declares. For, turning away from the
chief good, which is blessed and everlasting on this account, because it
cannot be seen, <span id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495.md) or touched, or
comprehended, and from the virtues which are in agreement with that
good, and which are equally immortal, gliding down to these corrupt and
frail gods, and devoting themselves to those things by which the body
only is adorned, and nourished, and delighted, they sought eternal death
for themselves, together with their gods and goods relating to the body,
because all bodies are subject to death. Superstitions of this kind,
therefore, were followed by injustice and impiety, as must necessarily
be the case. For men ceased to raise their countenances to the heaven;
but, their minds being depressed downwards, clung to goods of the earth,
as they did to earth-born superstitions. There followed the disagreement
of mankind, and fraud, and all wickedness; because, despising eternal
and incorruptible goods, which alone ought to be desired by man, they
rather chose temporal and short-lived things, and greater trust was
placed by men in evil, inasmuch as they preferred vice to virtue,
because it had presented itself as nearer at hand. <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p5"></span>Thus human life, which in former ages
had been occupied with the clearest light, was overspread with gloom and
darkness; and in conformity with this depravity, when wisdom was taken
away, then at length men began to claim for themselves the name of wise.
For at the time when all were wise, no one was called by that name. And
would that this name, once common to all the class, though reduced to a
few, still retained its power! For those few might perhaps be able,
either by talent, or by authority, or by continual exhortations, to free
the people from vices and errors. But so entirely had wisdom died out,
that it is evident, from the very arrogance of the name, that no one of
those who were so called was really wise. And yet, before the discovery
of this philosophy, as it is termed, there are said to have been
seven, <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497.md) who, because they
ventured to inquire into and discuss natural subjects, deserved to be
esteemed and called wise men.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p7"></span>O wretched and calamitous age, in which
through the whole world there were only seven who were called by the
name of men, for no one can justly be called a man unless he is wise!
But if all the others besides themselves were foolish, even they
themselves were not wise, because no one can be truly wise in the
judgment of the foolish. So far were they removed from wisdom, that not
even afterwards, when learning increased, and many and great intellects
were always intent upon this very subject, could the <span
id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="iii.ii.iv.i-Page_102"></span>truth
be perceived and ascertained. For, after the renown of those seven wise
men, it is incredible with how great a desire of inquiring into the
truth all Greece was inflamed. And first of all, they thought <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498.md) the very name of wisdom arrogant, and
did not call themselves wise men, but desirous of wisdom. By which deed
they both condemned those who had rashly arrogated to themselves the
name of wise men, of error and folly, and themselves also of ignorance,
which indeed they did not deny. For wherever the nature of the subject
had, as it were, laid its hands upon their minds, so that they were
unable to give any account, they were accustomed to testify that, they
knew nothing, and discerned nothing. Wherefore they are found to be much
wiser, who in some degree saw themselves, than those who had believed
that they were wise.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_494"></span>[101:495](0070083.htm#fr_494.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>Figmenta. \[[Rom. i.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p2.2"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_495"></span>[101:496](0070083.htm#fr_495.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p3"></span> Thus St. Paul, [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p3.1"></span>:
“Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him.”  

<span id="fn_496"></span>[101:497](0070083.htm#fr_496.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p4"></span> In its rewards.  

<span id="fn_497"></span>[101:498](0070083.htm#fr_497.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6"></span> The seven wise men were, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.1"></span>Thales, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.2"></span>Pittacus, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.3"></span>Bias, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.4"></span>Solon, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.5"></span>Cleobulus, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.6"></span>Chilo, and <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.7"></span>Periander. To these some add <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.8"></span>Anacharsis the Scythian. \[Vol. v. p. 11,
<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p6.10"></span>supra. For Thales, vol. ii. p.
140.\]  

<span id="fn_498"></span>[102:499](0070083.htm#fr_498.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.i-p8"></span> This was the opinion of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.i-p8.1"></span>Pythagoras. See Book iii. 2.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. II.—Where wisdom is to be found; why Pythagoras and Plato
did not approach the Jews](0070084.md)
