[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070380)  [Next](0070382) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="vi.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>from the sixth chapter.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>1, 2. “And
when the Lamb had opened one of the seven seals, I saw, and heard one of
the four living creatures saying, Come and see. And, lo, a white horse,
and He who sat upon him had a bow.” \] The first seal being opened, he
says that he saw a white horse, and a crowned horseman having a bow. For
this was at first done by Himself. For after the Lord ascended into
heaven and opened all things, He sent the Holy Spirit, whose words the
preachers sent forth as arrows reaching to the human heart, that they
might overcome unbelief. And the crown on the head is promised to the
preachers by the Holy Spirit. The other three horses very plainly
signify the wars, famines, and pestilences announced by our Lord in the
Gospel. And thus he says that one of the four living creatures said
(because all four are one), “Come and see.” “Come” is said to him that
is invited to faith; “see” is said to him who saw not. Therefore the
white horse is the word of preaching with the Holy Spirit sent into the
world. For the Lord says, “This Gospel shall be preached <span
id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="vi.ii.vi-Page_351"></span>throughout the whole world for a testimony
to all nations, and then shall come the end.” <span
id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275)  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p3"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>3, 4. “And
when He had opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature
saying, Come and see. And there went out another horse that was red, and
to him that sat upon him was given a great sword.”\] The red horse, and
he that sat upon him, having a sword, signify the coming wars, as we
read in the Gospel: “For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom
against kingdom; and there shall be great earthquakes in <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p3.2"></span>divers places.” <span
id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) This is the ruddy horse.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p5"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>5. “And
when He had opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature
saying, Come and see. And, lo, a black horse; and he who sat upon it had
a balance in his hand.”\] The black horse signifies famine, for the Lord
says, “There shall be famines in <span id="vi.ii.vi-p5.2"></span>divers
places;” but the word is specially extended to the times of Antichrist,
when there shall be a great famine, and when all shall be injured.
Moreover, the balance in the hand is the examining scales, wherein He
might show forth the merits of every individual. He then says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p6"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>6. “Hurt
not the wine and the oil.”\] That is, strike not the spiritual man with
thy inflictions. This is the black horse.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>7, 8. “And
when He had opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature
saying, Come and see. And, lo, a pale horse; and he who sat upon him was
named Death.”\] For the pale horse and he who sat upon him bore the name
of Death. These same things also the Lord had promised among the rest of
the coming destructions—great pestilences and deaths; since, moreover,
he says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p8"></span>“And hell followed him.”\] That is, it was
waiting for the devouring of many unrighteous souls. This is the pale
horse.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p9"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p9.1"></span>9. “And
when He had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of
them that were slain.”\] He relates that he saw under the altar of God,
that is, under the earth, the souls of them that were slain. For both
heaven and earth are called God’s altar, as saith the law, commanding in
the symbolical form of the truth two altars to be made,—a golden one
within, and a brazen one without. But we perceive that the golden altar
is thus called heaven, by the testimony that our Lord bears to it; for
He says, “When thou bringest thy gift to the altar” (assuredly our gifts
are the prayers which we offer), “and there rememberest that thy brother
hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar.” <span
id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277) Assuredly prayers ascend to heaven.
Therefore heaven is understood to be the golden altar which was within;
for the priests also were accustomed to enter once in the year—as they
who had the anointing—to the golden altar, the Holy Spirit signifying
that Christ should do this once for all. As the golden altar is
acknowledged to be heaven, so also by the brazen altar is understood the
earth, under which is the Hades,—a region withdrawn from punishments and
fires, and a place of repose for the saints, wherein indeed the
righteous are seen and heard by the wicked, but they cannot be carried
across to them. He who sees all things would have us to know that these
saints, therefore—that is, the souls of the slain—are asking for
vengeance for their blood, that is, of their body, from those that dwell
upon the earth; but because in the last time, moreover, the reward of
the saints will be perpetual, and the condemnation of the wicked shall
come, it was told them to wait. And for a solace to their body, there
were given unto each of them white robes. They received, says he, white
robes, that is, the gift of the Holy Spirit.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p11"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>12. “And
I saw, when he had opened the sixth seal, there was a great
earthquake.”\] In the sixth seal, then, was a great earthquake: this is
that very last persecution.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p12"></span>“And the sun became black as sackcloth of
hair.”\] The sun becomes as sackcloth; that is, the brightness of
doctrine will be obscured by unbelievers.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p13"></span>“And the entire moon became as blood.”\]
By the moon of blood is set forth the Church of the saints as pouring
out her blood for Christ.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p14"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>13. “And
the stars fell to the earth.”\] The falling of the stars are the
faithful who are troubled for Christ’s sake.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p15"></span>“Even as a fig-tree casteth her untimely
figs.”\] The fig-tree, when shaken, loses its untimely figs—when men are
separated from the Church by persecution.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p16"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>14. “And
the heaven withdrew as a scroll that is rolled up.”\] For the heaven to
be rolled away, that is, that the Church shall be taken away.  

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p17"></span>“And every mountain and the islands were
moved from their places.”\] Mountains and islands removed from their
places intimate that in the last persecution all men departed from their
places; that is, that the good will be removed, seeking to avoid the
persecution.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[351:2276](0070381.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p2"></span> [Matt.
xxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#000) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p2.1"></span><span id="vi.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>14  

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[351:2277](0070381.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p4"></span> [Luke
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#011)<span id="vi.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[351:2278](0070381.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="vi.ii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p10"></span> [Matt.
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span id="vi.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From the seventh chapter](0070382)
