[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070127)  [Next](0070129.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XV.—Of Folly, Wisdom, Piety, Equity, and Justice.

<span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1"></span>But the reason on account of which they
imagine those who are wise to be foolish has strong grounds of support
(for they are not deceived without reason). And this must be diligently
explained by us, that they may at length (if it is possible) recognise
their errors. Justice by its own nature has a certain appearance of
folly, and I am able to confirm this both by divine and human
testimonies. But perhaps we should not succeed with them, unless we
should teach them from their own authorities that no one can be just, a
matter which is united with true wisdom, unless he also appears to be
foolish. <span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Carneades was a philosopher
of the Academic sect; and one who knows not what power he had in
discussion, what eloquence, what sagacity, will nevertheless understand
the character of the man himself from the praises of <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.2"></span>Cicero or of <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.3"></span>Lucilius, in whose writings <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.4"></span>Neptune, discoursing on a subject of the
greatest difficulty, shows that it cannot be explained, even if <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.5"></span>Orcus should restore <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.6"></span>Carneades himself to life. This <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.7"></span>Carneades, when he had been sent by the
Athenians as ambassador to Rome, disputed copiously on the subject of
justice, in the hearing of <span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.8"></span>Galba and
<span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.9"></span>Cato, who had been censor, who were
at that time the greatest of orators. But on the next day the same man
overthrew his own argument by a disputation to the contrary effect, and
took away the justice which he had praised on the preceding day, not
indeed with the gravity of a philosopher, whose prudence ought to be
firm and his opinion settled, but as it were by an oratorical kind of
exercise of disputing on both sides. And he was accustomed to do this,
that he might be able to refute others who asserted anything. L. <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.10"></span>Furius, in <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.11"></span>Cicero, makes mention of that discussion
in which justice is overthrown. <span
id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024.md) I believe, inasmuch as he was
discussing the subject of the state, he did it that he might introduce
the defence and praise of that without which he thought that a state
could not be governed. But <span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p2.2"></span>Carneades,
that he might refute <span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p2.3"></span>Aristotle and
<span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p2.4"></span>Plato, the advocates of justice, in
that first disputation collected all the arguments which were alleged in
behalf of justice, that he might be able to overthrow them, as he did.
For it was very easy to shake justice, having no roots, inasmuch as
there was then none on the earth, that its nature or qualities might be
perceived by philosophers. And I could wish that men, so many and of
such a character, had possessed knowledge also, in proportion to their
eloquence and spirit, for completing the defence of this greatest
virtue, which has its origin in religion, its principle in equity! But
those who were ignorant of that first part could not possess the second.
But I wish first to show, summarily and concisely, what it is, that it
may be understood that the philosophers were ignorant of justice, and
were unable to defend that with which they were unacquainted. Although
justice embraces all the virtues together, yet there are two, the chief
of all, which cannot be torn asunder and separated from it—piety and
equity. For fidelity, temperance, uprightness, innocence, integrity, and
the other things of this kind, either naturally or through the training
of parents, may exist in those men who are ignorant of justice, as they
have always existed; for the ancient Romans, who were accustomed to
glory in justice, used evidently to glory in those virtues which (as I
have said) may proceed from justice, and be separated from the very
fountain itself. But piety and equity are, as it were, its veins: for in
these two fountains the whole of justice is contained; but its source
and origin is in the first, all its force and method in the second. But
piety is nothing else but the conception <span
id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025.md) of God, as <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p3.2"></span>Trismegistus most truly defined it, as we
have said in another place. If, therefore, it is piety to know God, and
the sum of this knowledge is that you worship Him, it is plain that he
is ignorant of justice who does not possess the knowledge of God. For
how can he know justice itself, who is ignorant of the source from which
it arises? <span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p3.3"></span>Plato, indeed, spoke many
things respecting the one God, by whom he said that the world was
framed; but he spoke nothing respecting religion: for he had dreamed of
God, but had not known Him. But if either he himself or any other person
had wished to complete the defence of justice, he ought first of all to
have overthrown the religions of the gods, because they are opposed to
piety. And because <span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p3.4"></span>Socrates indeed
tried to do this, he was thrown into prison; that even then it might be
seen what was about to happen to those men who had begun to defend true
justice, and to serve the only God.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p4"></span>The other part of justice, therefore,
is equity; and it is plain that I am not speaking of the equity of
judging well, though this also is praiseworthy in a just man, but of
making himself equal to others, which <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p4.1"></span>Cicero calls equability. <span
id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026.md) For God, who produces and gives
breath to <span id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-Page_151"></span>men, willed that all should be equal,
that is, equally matched. <span id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027.md) He
has imposed on all the same condition of living; He has produced all to
wisdom; He has promised immortality to all; no one is cut off from His
heavenly benefits. For as He distributes to all alike His one light,
sends forth His fountains to all, supplies food, and gives the most
pleasant rest of sleep; so He bestows on all equity and virtue. In His
sight no one is a slave, no one a master; for if all have the same
Father, by an equal right we are all children. No one is poor in the
sight of God, but he who is without justice; no one is rich, but he who
is full of virtues; no one, in short, is excellent, but he who has been
good and innocent; no one is most renowned, but he who has abundantly
performed works of mercy; no one is most perfect, but he who has filled
all the steps of virtue. Therefore neither the Romans nor the Greeks
could possess justice, because they had men differing from one another
by many degrees, from the poor to the rich, from the humble to the
powerful; in short, from private persons to the highest authorities of
kings. For where all are not equally matched, there is not equity; and
inequality of itself excludes justice, the whole force of which consists
in this, that it makes those equal who have by an equal lot arrived at
the condition of this life.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[150:1025](0070128.htm#fr_1024.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p1.12"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p2"></span> \[See <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p2.1"></span>Rep., iii. cap. 6, part iv. vol. 2, p. 300,
ed. Klotz.\]  

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[150:1026](0070128.htm#fr_1025.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p2.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p3.1"></span>Notio.  

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[150:1027](0070128.htm#fr_1026.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p5"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p5.1"></span>De Officiis, i. 26; and see vol. ii. p.
421, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[151:1028](0070128.htm#fr_1027.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xv-p6"></span> \[A striking parallel to <span
id="iii.ii.v.xv-p6.1"></span>Cyprian’s saying, vol. v. note 2, p. 460,
this series.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVI.—Of the duties of the just man, and the equity of
Christians](0070129.md)
