[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070261)  [Next](0070263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p0.1"></span>Elucidations.

##### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p0.2"></span><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p0.3"></span>I.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p1"></span>(Princes and kings, p. 13.)  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p2.1"></span>How</span> memorable the histories,
moreover, of <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p2.2"></span>Nebuchadnezzar <span
id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) and his decrees; of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p3.2"></span>Darius <span
id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609) and his also; but especially of
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p4.2"></span>Cyrus and his great monumental
edict! <span id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610) The beautiful
narratives of the <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p5.2"></span>Queen of Sheba
and of the Persian consort of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p5.3"></span>Queen Esther (probably <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p5.4"></span>Xerxes) are also manifestations of the
ways of Providence in giving light to the heathen world through that
“nation of priests” in Israel.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p6"></span>But <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p6.1"></span>Lactantius, who uses the Sibyls so
freely, should not have omitted to show what Sibylline oracles God drew
forth from “the princes of this world” also, by the illumination of the
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p6.2"></span>pharos which he established in
Sion, “to be a light to lighten the Gentiles” until the great Epiphany
should rise upon them in “the dayspring from on high.”  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p7"></span>I extract from a paradoxical but
most entertaining author, whom I have often quoted, certain extracts
from <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p7.1"></span>Philo, which I translate
from his note in the <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p7.2"></span>Soirées.
Thus:—  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p8"></span>“<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p8.1"></span>Agrippa,” says <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p8.2"></span>Philo, <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611) “having visited Jerusalem in <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p9.2"></span>Herod’s time, was enchanted by the
religion of the Jews, and could never cease to speak of it.…<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p9.3"></span>Augustus ordered that every day, <span
id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-Page_256"></span>at his own expense, and under the
legal forms, a bull and <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p9.4"></span>two lambs
should be offered in holocaust to the Most High God on the altar at
Jerusalem, though he knew that it contained no image, whether exposed or
within the veil; for this great prince, surpassed by none in the
philosophic spirit, felt the actual necessity in this world of an altar
dedicated to a God invisible.”  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p10"></span><span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p10.1"></span>Philo also says:—  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p11"></span>“Your great-grandmother <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p11.1"></span>Julia <span
id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612) also made superb presents to the
temple; and although women very reluctantly detach themselves from
images, and rarely conceive of anything apart from sensation, this lady,
nevertheless, greatly superior to her sex in culture and in natural
endowments, arrived at that point in which she preferred to contemplate
such things in the mind rather than in sensible objects, regarding these
as mere shadows of the realities.”  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13"></span>In the same discourse, wasting
words on <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.1"></span>Caligula, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.2"></span>Philo reminds him that <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.3"></span>Augustus “not only <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.4"></span>admired, nay, rather, he adored (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.5"></span>εθαύμαζε καὶ
προσέκυνει, κ.τ.λ.</span>), this custom of employing <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.6"></span>no sort of image to represent,
materially, a nature invisible in itself.” Poor <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.7"></span>De Maistre, who quotes this testimony
against images from <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.8"></span>Philo with
intense appreciation, will yet sophisticate himself and others into the
very contrary in behalf of his one predominant idea of (<span
class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.9"></span>προσκύνησις</span>) canine
self-abasement to the decrees of the Vatican. On this account I am
forced to consider him a sophist as well as a fanatic; but I delight to
render justice to his genius, for, wherever he talks and reasons <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.10"></span>as a Christian merely, he fascinates
and instructs me. He never conceived of “Catholicity,” and lived under
the delusion of the Decretals, a disciple of the Jesuits.  

##### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.11"></span><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p13.12"></span>II.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p14"></span>(Therefore they were neglected for
many ages, p. 116.)  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p15"></span>The explicit statements of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p15.1"></span>Lactantius, and his profuse quotations
from the <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p15.2"></span>Sibyllina, persuade me
that these curious fragments deserve a degree of scientific attention
which they have not yet received. The Fathers all cite them, when it
must have exposed them to scorn and overwhelming refutation had their
quotations not been found in the <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p15.3"></span>Sibylline books of their adversaries.
The influence of the Jewish religion upon the Gentiles under the
Babylonian and Medo-Persian monarchies must have been considerable, but
after <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p15.4"></span>Alexander’s time it was
vastly increased. Many versions of select prophets were doubtless
produced in Greek before the authorized Septuagint. These were soon
embedded in the Sibyls’ books; and I cannot think the interpolations of
early Christians were all frauds, by any means. Their numerous marginal
annotations crept into other copies; and very likely, in the time of our
author, they were inextricably confused with the text in the greater
part of the “editions,” so to speak, then current with booksellers.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p16"></span>But in vol. viii. we shall have
occasion to recur again to this interesting inquiry.  

##### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p16.1"></span><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p16.2"></span>III.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p17"></span>(We made proclamation before him
as children, p. 117.)  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p18"></span>“<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p18.1"></span>Sicut pueri.” This is <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p18.2"></span>not according to the Septuagint, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p18.3"></span>ὡς παιδίον.</span>
It is not the Vulgate, of course; but its radical difference with that
raises interesting inquiries: Is it a specimen of one of many African or
old Italic versions? Does our author endeavour to translate from the
Septuagint? May he not have had in hand a copy of Isaiah from among
those which preceded the Septuagint?  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p19"></span>The Septuagint reading finds its
key in cap. lii. 7, and in the tenth verse, where the “Arm of the Lord”
(“His Holy Arm”) is introduced as the personal Logos Incarnate. The
thirteenth and fourteenth verses predict the amazing sequel, and its
practical and blessed results; and then <span id="page_257">p.
257</span> <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-Page_257"></span>begins cap. liii.,
“Who hath believed” our message. To whom is “the Arm of the Lord”
revealed? “<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p19.1"></span>Going before Him
(i.e., as heralds), we have proclaimed <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p19.2"></span>Him as a child, and, as <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p19.3"></span>it were, a root in a thirsty land; He
has no form nor glory,” etc. In other words, “We have prophesied of Him
who is elsewhere predicted (“unto us a child is born”) as one who from
His childhood is as a rush without water,—prematurely withered,—a man of
sorrows, and the Carpenter’s Son.”  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p20"></span>It does not hint, therefore, the
“obscurity” of the Messiah’s birth, but rather what <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p20.1"></span>Irenæus insists upon, i.e., His
(premature) old age; the worn and stricken appearance of senility in
comparative youth. <span id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613) This is
just what the messengers ([Isa. lii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p21.2"></span>) had said in their proclamation
([Isa. lii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p21.3"></span>) just before: “His visage was so
marred more than any man, and His form more than the sons of men.”  

##### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p21.4"></span><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p21.5"></span>IV.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p22"></span>(There was darkness, etc., pp.
122, 240.)  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p23"></span>In former instances, where thought
has turned to <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p23.1"></span>Phlegon the
Trallian, <span id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614) I have failed to
refer to an author whose excess of candour sometimes gives away more
than is called for, in questions on which adversaries have contrived to
fasten undue importance, in order to elicit indiscreet defences. But it
is due to my readers that I should refer them to a most learned work, to
be found in public libraries only, by my revered friend and instructor
Dr. <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p24.2"></span>Jarvis. The sixth chapter
(part ii.) of his <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p24.3"></span>Chronological
Introduction to Church History <span
id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615) is devoted to this matter, and I
can do no better than give the summary of its contents as follows:—  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26"></span>“Who <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.1"></span>Phlegon was; his work lost; extracts
from it by <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.2"></span>Julius Africanus and
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.3"></span>Eusebius; their works,
containing these extracts, lost; all we know is from versions and later
writers; collation of extracts as given by the Armenian version of the
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.4"></span>Chronicon of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.5"></span>Eusebius, St. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.6"></span>Jerome’s Latin version, the <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.7"></span>Chronographia of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.8"></span>Syncellus, and the <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.9"></span>Chronicon Paschale; extract by <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.10"></span>Syncellus from <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.11"></span>Julius Africanus; remarks upon it;
testimony of <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.12"></span>Origen concerning
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.13"></span>Phlegon’s account; of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.14"></span>John Philoponus (St. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.15"></span>Maximus) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.16"></span>Malala; summary of the whole; account
of <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.17"></span>Phlegon’s testimony; not
noticed by the learned and voluminous writers of the fourth and fifth
centuries when they speak of the darkness, etc.; Dr. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.18"></span>Lardner’s judgment <span
id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616) adopted.”  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p28"></span><span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p28.1"></span>Lardner’s view, it will be observed,
is thus sustained by an independent and most competent critic. This
decision puts honour on the early writers: he thinks they were unwilling
to claim a corroboration from evidence about which they were not well
assured.  

##### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p28.2"></span><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p28.3"></span>V.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p29"></span>(Divine and ethnic oracles, p.
210, note 2; p. 112, note 9.)  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p30"></span>The whole subject of ethnic
oracles needs fresh study and illustration. Nothing would be more
fascinating in theological inquiry, and Divine Inspiration might be
richly illustrated by it, as anatomical science is clarified by
“comparative anatomy.” I commend this subject to men of faith, learning,
and intellectual vigour. Notably, let it be observed: (1) That <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p30.1"></span>Balaam’s ass is instanced by St. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p30.2"></span>Peter as miraculously enabled to
rebuke the madness of his master; and the same Apostle shortly before
gives us the law as to divine inspiration in contrast. <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617) (2) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p31.1"></span>Balaam himself, as mechanically as the
beast he rode, <span id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618) had his own
mouth opened (see [Num. xxiv.
16-19](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#016)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p32.3"></span>). (3) The wicked <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p32.4"></span>Caiaphas in like manner (St. [John
11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p32.5"></span>) spoke prophetically, “not of
himself.” (4) St. <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p32.6"></span>Paul ([Acts
xvii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p32.7"></span>) quotes a heathen oracle very much as
does our author. <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619) <span
id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-Page_258"></span>Now, in view of the boldness with
which the early Christians follow the example of the Apostle in quoting
the <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p33.3"></span>Orphica and <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p33.4"></span>Sibyllina, I cannot imagine that these
citations were not honestly believed by them to be oracles of a certain
sort, by which God permitted the heathen to be enlightened. <span
id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620) Observe our author’s moderate but
most pregnant remark about such inspiration (on p. 170, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p34.2"></span>supra, note 8), “<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p34.4"></span>almost with a divine voice;” then (on
p. 192) compare other <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p34.6"></span>almost
inspired words of poor <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p34.7"></span>Tully (at
note 2), and of <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p34.9"></span>Seneca
also. <span id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621)  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p36"></span>Finally, and to close the subject,
the reader will readily forgive me for introducing the following
citations from the “Warburton Lecture” of Dr. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p36.1"></span>Edersheim, on <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p36.2"></span>Prophecy and History <span
id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p37.1"></span> in Relation to the Messiah Discussing
the <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p37.2"></span>pseudepigraphic writings (in
Lecture Eleventh), he says as follows: <span
id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623) —  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p39"></span>“The Sibylline oracles, in Greek
hexameters, consist, in their present form, of twelve books. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p39.1"></span>They are full of interpolations, the
really ancient portions forming part of the first two books and the
largest part of book third (verses 97–807). These sections <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p39.2"></span>are deeply <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p39.3"></span>imbued with the Messianic
spirit. <span id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624) They date from about
the year 140 before our era, while another small portion of the same
book is supposed to date from the year 32 <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p40.1"></span>b.c.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p41"></span>“As regards the promise of the
Messiah, we turn in the first place, and with special interest, to the
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p41.1"></span>Sibylline Oracles. In the third
book of these (such portions as I shall quote date from about 140 <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p41.2"></span>b.c.) the Messiah is described as ‘the
King sent from heaven, who would judge every man in blood and splendour
of fire.’ And the Vision of Messianic times opens with a reference to
‘the King whom God will send from the Sun,’ where we cannot fail to
perceive a reference to the Seventy-second Psalm, <span
id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625) especially as we remember that the
Greek of the Seventy, <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p42.1"></span>which must
have been present to the Hellenist <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p42.2"></span>Sibyl, fully adapted the Messianic
application of the passage to a <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p42.3"></span>premundane Messiah. We also think of
the picture drawn in the prophecies of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p42.4"></span>Isaiah. According to the Sibylline
books, King Messiah was not only to come, but He was to be specifically
sent of God. He is <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p42.5"></span>supermundane,
a King and a Judge <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626) of
superhuman glory and splendour. And, indeed, that a superhuman kingdom,
such as the Sibylline oracles paint, should have a superhuman king,
seems only a natural and necessary inference.…If, as certain modern
critics contend, the book of Daniel is not authentic, <span
id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627) but dates from Maccabean times, …it
may well be asked <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p44.3"></span>to what king
the Sibylline oracles point, for they certainly date from that period;
and what is the relationship between the (supposed Maccabean) prophecies
of the book of Daniel and the <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p44.4"></span>certainly Messianic anticipations of
the undoubted literature of that period?”  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p45"></span>Dr. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p45.1"></span>Edersheim gives us the reference in
the margin, to which I would call attention, as directing to the whole
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p45.2"></span>pseudepigraphic
literature. <span id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628) But who can
wonder, after what we thus learn, that <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.12"></span>Constantine <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629) was so profoundly impressed with
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p47.4"></span>Virgil’s <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p47.5"></span>Pollio? In spite of all that has been
said, <span id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630) I cannot but see <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p48.2"></span>Isaiah in its entire spirit.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[255:1609](0070262.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p3"></span> [Dan. ii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p3.1"></span>, iii. 29, and iv.  

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[255:1610](0070262.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p4"></span> [Dan. vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p4.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[255:1611](0070262.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p5"></span> [Ezra i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[255:1612](0070262.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p9"></span> In his <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p9.1"></span>Discourse to Caligula  

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[256:1613](0070262.htm#fr_1612) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p12"></span> i.e., <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p12.1"></span>Livia, wife and empress of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p12.2"></span>Augustus.  

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[257:1614](0070262.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p21"></span> Vol. i. p. 391, note 12, this
series.  

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[257:1615](0070262.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p24"></span> See vol. iii. Elucidation V. p.
58.  

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[257:1616](0070262.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p24.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p25"></span> P. 419.  

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[257:1617](0070262.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p26.19"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p27"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p27.1"></span>Works, ed. London, 1788, vol. vii. p.
385.  

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[257:1618](0070262.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p31"></span> Comp. 2 Pet. i. 18–21 with ii.
16.  

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[257:1619](0070262.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p32"></span> P. 174, note 2, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p32.2"></span>supra.  

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[257:1620](0070262.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p32.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p33"></span> See p. 140, note 10, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p33.2"></span>supra.  

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[258:1621](0070262.htm#fr_1620) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p33.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p34"></span> See p. 219, note 3.  

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[258:1622](0070262.htm#fr_1621) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p34.10"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p35"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p35.1"></span>Cyprian (vol. v. p. 502, this series),
and note his judicious reference to the inspiration of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p35.3"></span>Balaam by the extreme instance of the
miraculous voice of a dumb beast. Also, see vol. ii. Elucidation XIII.
p. 346, this series.  

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[258:1623](0070262.htm#fr_1622) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p37"></span> Republished, New York, Randolph,
1885.  

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[258:1624](0070262.htm#fr_1623) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p38"></span> Pp. 339, 343.  

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[258:1625](0070262.htm#fr_1624) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p39.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p40"></span> Note, these are the “really
ancient” portions.  

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[258:1626](0070262.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p42"></span> Verses 5, 6, etc., to the end.  

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[258:1627](0070262.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p42.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p43"></span> [Ps.
72:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#002)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p43.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[258:1628](0070262.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p44"></span> An absurdity <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p44.1"></span>pulverized by the faith and learning
of Dr. <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p44.2"></span>Pusey.  

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[258:1629](0070262.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.1"></span>Pseudepigrapha <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.2"></span>O. F. Fritzsche, Lips., 1871, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.3"></span>Codex Pseudepigr. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.4"></span>Vet. Test., ed. 1722.; <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.5"></span>J. A. Fabricius, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.6"></span>Messias Judæorum<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.7"></span>, Hilgenfeld, Lips., 1869; also <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.8"></span>Drummond, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.9"></span>The Jewish Messiah; and compare <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.10"></span>Jellinek, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.11"></span>Bet-ha-Midrash, six parts, 1857–73.  

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[258:1630](0070262.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p46.13"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p47"></span> See the Greek of <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p47.1"></span>Constantine’s quotations in <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p47.2"></span>Heyne’s <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p47.3"></span>Virgil, excursus i. tom. i. p. 164.  

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[258:1631](0070262.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p47.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p48"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxx-p48.1"></span>Heyne (Lips., 1788), vol. i. pp.
66–70.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Treatise on the Anger of God Addressed to Donatus](0070263)
