[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070334)  [Next](0070336.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXVI.

<span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1"></span>Things seemed to be arranged in some
measure to the satisfaction of <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Galerius, when another alarm was brought,
that his son-in-law <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.2"></span>Maxentius had been
declared <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.3"></span>emperor at Rome. The cause
was this: <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.4"></span>Galerius having resolved by
permanent taxes to devour the empire, soared to such extravagance in
folly, as not to allow an exemption from that thraldom even to the Roman
people. Tax-gatherers therefore were appointed to go to Rome, and make
out lists of the citizens. Much about the same time <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.5"></span>Galerius had reduced the Pretorian Guards.
There remained at Rome a few soldiers of that body, who, profiting of
the opportunity, put some magistrates to death, and, with the
acquiescence of the tumultuary populace, clothed <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.6"></span>Maxentius in the imperial purple. <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.7"></span>Galerius, on receiving this news, was
disturbed at the strangeness of the event, but not much dismayed. He
hated <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.8"></span>Maxentius, and he could not
bestow on him the dignity of <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.9"></span>Cæsar
already enjoyed by two (<span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.10"></span>Daia and
<span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.11"></span>Constantine); besides, he thought it
enough for him to have once bestowed that dignity against his
inclination. So he sent for <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.12"></span>Severus,
exhorted him to regain his dominion and sovereignty, and he put under
his command that army which <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.13"></span>Maximian
Herculius had formerly commanded, that he might attack <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.14"></span>Maxentius at Rome. <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.15"></span>There the soldiers of <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p1.16"></span>Maximian had been oftentimes received with
every sort of luxurious accommodation, so that they were not only
interested to preserve the city, but they also longed to fix their
residence in it.  

<span id="iii.v.xxvi-p2"></span><span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.1"></span>Maxentius well knew the enormity of his own
offences; and although he had as it were an hereditary claim to the
services of his father’s army, and might have hoped to draw it over to
himself, yet he reflected that this consideration might occur to <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.2"></span>Galerius also, and induce him to leave <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.3"></span>Severus in Illyricum, and march in person
with his own army against Rome. Under such apprehensions, <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.4"></span>Maxentius sought to protect himself from the
danger that hung over him. To his father, who since his abdication
resided in Campania, he sent the purple, and saluted him again <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.5"></span>Augustus. <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.6"></span>Maximian, given to change, <span
id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-Page_312"></span>eagerly resumed that purple of which he
had unwillingly divested himself. Meanwhile <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.7"></span>Severus marched on, and with his troops
approached the walls of the city. Presently the soldiers raised up their
ensigns, abandoned <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.8"></span>Severus, and
yielded themselves to <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.9"></span>Maxentius,
against whom they had come. What remained but flight for <span
id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.10"></span>Severus, thus deserted? He was encountered
by <span id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.11"></span>Maximian, who had resumed the
imperial dignity. On this he took refuge in Ravenna, and shut himself up
<span id="iii.v.xxvi-p2.12"></span>there with a few soldiers. But
perceiving that he was about to be delivered up, he voluntarily
surrendered himself, and restored the purple to him from whom he had
received it; and after this he obtained no other grace but that of an
easy death, for he was compelled to open his veins, and in that gentle
manner expired.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXVII](0070336.md)
