[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070461)  [Next](0070463) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.viii.iii-p0.1"></span>Sec. III.—On the Instruction of Catechumens, and Their Initiation into Baptism.

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p1"></span>Now, after what manner those ought to
live that are initiated into Christ, and what thanksgivings they ought
to send up to God through Christ, has been said in the foregoing
directions. But it is reasonable not to leave even those who are not yet
initiated without assistance.  

##### <span id="ix.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>How the Catechumens are to Be Instructed in the Elements.

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.1"></span>XXXIX</span>. Let him, therefore, who is to
be taught the truth in regard to piety be instructed before his baptism
in the knowledge of the unbegotten God, in the understanding of His only
begotten Son, in the assured acknowledgment of the Holy Ghost. Let him
learn the order of the several parts of the creation, the series of
providence, the different dispensations of Thy laws. Let him be
instructed why the world was made, and why man was appointed to be a
citizen therein; <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="ix.viii.iii-Page_476"></span>let him also know his own nature, of
what sort it is; let him be taught how God punished the wicked with
water and fire, and did glorify the saints in every generation—I mean
<span id="ix.viii.iii-p2.2"></span>Seth, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.3"></span>Enos, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.4"></span>Enoch, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.5"></span>Noah, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.6"></span>Abraham and his posterity, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.7"></span>Melchizedek, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.8"></span>Job, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.9"></span>Moses, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.10"></span>Joshua, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.11"></span>Caleb, and <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.12"></span>Phineas the priest, and those that were
holy in every generation; and how God still took care of and did not
reject mankind, but called them from their error and vanity to the
acknowledgment of the truth at various seasons, reducing them from
bondage and impiety unto liberty and piety, from injustice to
righteousness, from death eternal to everlasting life. Let him that
offers himself to baptism learn these and the like things during the
time that he is a catechumen; and let him who lays his hands upon him
adore God, the Lord of the whole world, and thank Him for His creation,
for His sending Christ His only begotten Son, that He might save man by
blotting out his transgressions, and that He might remit ungodliness and
sins, and might “purify him from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit,” <span id="fr_3526"></span>[3527](#fn_3526) and sanctify man
according to the good pleasure of His kindness, that He might inspire
him with the knowledge of His will, and enlighten the eyes of his heart
to consider of His wonderful works, and make known to him the judgments
of righteousness, that so he might hate every way of iniquity, and walk
in the way of truth, that he might be thought worthy of the laver of
regeneration, to the adoption of sons, which is in Christ, that “being
planted together in the likeness of the death of Christ,” <span
id="fr_3527"></span>[3528](#fn_3527) in hopes of a glorious
communication, he may be mortified to sin, and may live to God, as to
his mind, and word, and deed, and may be numbered together in the book
of the living. And after this thanksgiving, let him instruct him in the
doctrines concerning our Lord’s incarnation, and in those concerning His
passion, and resurrection from the dead, and assumption.  

##### <span id="ix.viii.iii-p4.2"></span>A Constitution How the Catechumens are to Be Blessed by the Priests in Their Initiation, and What Things are to Be Taught Them.

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p5.1"></span>XL</span>. And when it remains that the
catechumen is to be baptized, let him learn what concerns the
renunciation of the devil, and the joining himself with Christ; for it
is fit that he should first abstain from things contrary, and then be
admitted to the mysteries. He must beforehand purify his heart from all
wickedness of disposition, from all spot and wrinkle, and then partake
of the holy things; for as the skilfullest husbandman does first purge
his ground of the thorns which are grown up therein, and does then sow
his wheat, so ought you also to take away all impiety from them, and
then to sow the seeds of piety in them, and vouchsafe them baptism. For
even our Lord did in this manner exhort us, saying first, “Make
disciples of all nations;” <span id="fr_3528"></span>[3529](#fn_3528)
and then He adds this, “and baptize them into the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” Let, therefore, the candidate
for baptism declare thus in his renunciation: <span
id="fr_3529"></span>[3530](#fn_3529) —  

##### <span id="ix.viii.iii-p7.3"></span>The Renunciation of the Adversary, and the Dedication to the Christ of God.

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p8.1"></span>XLI</span>. I renounce Satan, and his
works, and his pomps, and his worships, and his angels, and his
inventions, and all things that are under him. And after his
renunciation let him in his consociation say: And I associate myself to
Christ, and believe, and am baptized into one unbegotten Being, the only
true God Almighty, the Father of Christ, the Creator and Maker of all
things, from whom are all things; and into the Lord <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p8.2"></span>Jesus Christ, His only begotten Son, the
First-born of the whole creation, who before the ages was begotten by
the good pleasure of the Father, by whom all things were made, both
those in heaven and those on earth, visible and invisible; who in the
last days descended from heaven, and took flesh, and was born of the
holy Virgin Mary, and did converse holily according to the laws of His
God and Father, and was crucified under <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p8.3"></span>Pontius Pilate, and died for us, and rose
again from the dead after His passion the third day, and ascended into
the heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father, and again is
to come at the end of the world with glory to judge the quick and the
dead, of whose kingdom there shall be no end. And I am baptized into the
Holy Ghost, that is, the Comforter, who wrought in all the saints from
the beginning of the world, but was afterwards sent to the apostles by
the Father, according to the promise of our Saviour and Lord, <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p8.4"></span>Jesus Christ; and after the apostles, to
all those that believe in the Holy Catholic Church; into the
resurrection of the flesh, and into the remission of sins, and into the
kingdom of heaven, and into the life of the world to come. And after
this vow, he comes in order to the anointing with oil.  

##### <span id="ix.viii.iii-p8.5"></span>A Thanksgiving Concerning the Anointing with the Mystical Oil.

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p9.1"></span>XLII</span>. Now this is blessed by the
high priest for the remission of sins, and the first preparation for
baptism. For he calls thus upon the unbegotten God, the Father of
Christ, the King of all sensible and intelligible natures, that He would
sanctify the oil in the name of the Lord <span id="page_477">p.
477</span> <span id="ix.viii.iii-Page_477"></span><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p9.2"></span>Jesus, and impart to it spiritual grace and
efficacious strength, the remission of sins, and the first preparation
for the confession of baptism, that so the candidate for baptism, when
he is anointed may be freed from all ungodliness, and may become worthy
of initiation, according to the command of the Only-begotten.  

##### <span id="ix.viii.iii-p9.3"></span>A Thanksgiving Concerning the Mystical Water.

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p10.1"></span>XLIII</span>. After this he comes to the
water, and blesses and glorifies the Lord God Almighty, the Father of
the only begotten God; <span id="fr_3530"></span>[3531](#fn_3530) and
the priest returns thanks that He has sent His Son to become man on our
account, that He might save us; that He has permitted that He should in
all things become obedient to the laws of that incarnation, to preach
the kingdom of heaven, the remission of sins, and the resurrection of
the dead. Moreover, he adores the only begotten God Himself, after His
Father, and for Him, giving Him thanks that He undertook to die for all
men by the cross, the type of which He has appointed to be the baptism
of regeneration. He glorifies Him also, for that God who is the Lord of
the whole world, in the name of Christ and by His Holy Spirit, has not
cast off mankind but has suited His providence to the difference of
seasons: at first giving to <span id="ix.viii.iii-p11.7"></span>Adam
himself paradise for an habitation of pleasure, and afterwards giving a
command on account of providence, and casting out the offender justly,
but through His goodness not utterly casting him off, but instructing
his posterity in succeeding ages after various manners; on whose
account, in the conclusion of the world, He has sent His Son to become
man for man’s sake, and to undergo all human passions without sin. Him,
therefore, let the priest even now call upon in baptism, and let him
say: Look down from heaven, and sanctify this water, and give it grace
and power, that so he that is to be baptized, according to the command
of Thy Christ, may be crucified with Him, and may die with Him, and may
be buried with Him, and may rise with Him to the adoption which is in
Him, that he may be dead to sin and live to righteousness. And after
this, when he has baptized him in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, he shall anoint him with ointment, and shall
add as follows:—  

##### <span id="ix.viii.iii-p11.8"></span>A Thanksgiving Concerning the Mystical Ointment.

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p12.1"></span>XLIV</span>. O Lord God, who art without
generation, and without a superior, the Lord of the whole world, who
hast scattered the sweet odour of the knowledge of the Gospel among all
nations, do Thou grant at this time that this ointment may be
efficacious upon him that is baptized, that so the sweet odour of Thy
Christ may continue upon him firm and fixed; and that now he has died
with Him, he may arise and live with Him. Let him say these and the like
things, for this is the efficacy of the laying on of hands on every one;
for unless there be such a recital made by a pious priest over every one
of these, the candidate for baptism does only descend into the water as
do the Jews, and he only puts off the filth of the body, not the filth
of the soul. After this let him stand up, and pray that prayer which the
Lord taught us. But, of necessity, he who is risen again ought to stand
up and pray, because he that is raised up stands upright. Let him,
therefore, who has been dead with Christ, and is raised up with Him,
stand up. But let him pray towards the east. <span
id="fr_3531"></span>[3532](#fn_3531) For this also is written in the
second book of the Chronicles, that after the temple of the Lord was
finished by King <span id="ix.viii.iii-p13.3"></span>Solomon, in the
very feast of dedication the priests and the Levites and the singers
stood up towards the east, praising and thanking God with cymbals and
psalteries, and saying, “Praise the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy
endureth for ever.” <span id="fr_3532"></span>[3533](#fn_3532)  

##### <span id="ix.viii.iii-p14.2"></span>A Prayer for the New Fruits.

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p15"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p15.1"></span>XLV</span>. But let him pray thus after
the foregoing prayer, and say: O God Almighty, the Father of Thy Christ,
Thy only begotten Son, give me a body undefiled, a heart pure, a mind
watchful, an unerring knowledge, the influence of the Holy Ghost for the
obtaining and assured enjoying of the truth, through Thy Christ, by
whom <span id="fr_3533"></span>[3534](#fn_3533) glory be to Thee, in the
Holy Spirit, for ever. Amen. We have thought it reasonable to make these
constitutions concerning the catechumens.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3526"></span>[476:3527](0070462.htm#fr_3526) <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p2.13"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p3"></span> [2 Cor. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span id="ix.viii.iii-p3.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3527"></span>[476:3528](0070462.htm#fr_3527) <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p4"></span> [Rom. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span id="ix.viii.iii-p4.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3528"></span>[476:3529](0070462.htm#fr_3528) <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p6"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ix.viii.iii-p6.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3529"></span>[476:3530](0070462.htm#fr_3529) <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p7"></span> \[Compare <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p7.1"></span>Justin Martyr, vol. i. p. 183, this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_3530"></span>[477:3531](0070462.htm#fr_3530) <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p11"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p11.1"></span>ms</span>. has “Son” instead of “God.”
<span id="ix.viii.iii-p11.2"></span>Cotelerius remarks that this change
was made in the interests of orthodoxy; for the expression “only
begotten God” had become common with the Arians. \[Comp. [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="ix.viii.iii-p11.3"></span>., where the most weighty ancient
authorities read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p11.4"></span>μονογενὴς θεός</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.iii-p11.5"></span>ὁ μονογενὴς
υιός</span>; see Revised Version, margins <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p11.6"></span>in loco.—R.\]  

<span id="fn_3531"></span>[477:3532](0070462.htm#fr_3531) <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p13"></span> \[Compare vol. ii. p. 535 and vol.
iii. p. 31.\]  

<span id="fn_3532"></span>[477:3533](0070462.htm#fr_3532) <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p14"></span> [2 Chron. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#013)<span
id="ix.viii.iii-p14.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3533"></span>[477:3534](0070462.htm#fr_3533) <span
id="ix.viii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.iii-p16"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.iii-p16.1"></span>ms</span>. reads, “with whom glory be to
Thee, along with the Holy Spirit.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. IV.—Enumeration Ordained by Apostles](0070463)
