[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070326)  [Next](0070328) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVIII.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p1"></span>Within a few days <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Galerius Cæsar arrived, not to congratulate
his father-in-law on the re-establishment of his health, but to force
him to resign the empire. Already he had urged <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p1.2"></span>Maximian Herculius to the like purpose, and
by the alarm of civil wars terrified the old man into compliance; and he
now assailed <span id="iii.v.xviii-p1.3"></span>Diocletian. At first, in
gentle and friendly terms, he said that age and growing infirmities
disabled <span id="iii.v.xviii-p1.4"></span>Diocletian for the charge of
the commonweal, and that he had need to give himself some repose after
his labours. <span id="iii.v.xviii-p1.5"></span>Galerius, in
confirmation of his argument, produced the example of <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p1.6"></span>Nerva, who laid the weight of empire on
<span id="iii.v.xviii-p1.7"></span>Trajan.  

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p2"></span>But <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p2.1"></span>Diocletian made answer, that it was unfit
for one who had held a rank, eminent above all others and conspicuous,
to sink into the obscurity of a low station; neither indeed was it safe,
because in the course of so long a reign he must unavoidably have made
many enemies. That the case of <span id="iii.v.xviii-p2.2"></span>Nerva
was very different: he, after <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iii.v.xviii-Page_308"></span>having reigned a single year, felt
himself, either from age or from inexperience in business, unequal to
affairs so momentous, and therefore threw aside the helm of government,
and returned to that private life in which he had already grown old. But
<span id="iii.v.xviii-p2.3"></span>Diocletian added, that if <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p2.4"></span>Galerius wished for the title of emperor,
there was nothing to hinder its being conferred on him and <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p2.5"></span>Constantius, as well as on <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p2.6"></span>Maximian Herculius.  

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p3"></span><span
id="iii.v.xviii-p3.1"></span>Galerius, whose imagination already grasped
at the whole empire, saw that little but an unsubstantial name would
accrue to him from this proposal, and therefore replied that the
settlement made by <span id="iii.v.xviii-p3.2"></span>Diocletian himself
ought to be inviolable; a settlement which provided that there should be
two of higher rank vested with supreme power, and two others of
inferior, to assist them. Easily might concord be preserved between
<span id="iii.v.xviii-p3.3"></span>two equals, never amongst <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p3.4"></span>four; <span
id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980) that he, if <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p4.3"></span>Diocletian would not resign, must consult
his own interests, so as to remain no longer in an inferior rank, and
the last of that rank; that for fifteen years past he had been confined,
as an exile, to Illyricum and the banks of the Danube, perpetually
struggling against barbarous nations, while others, at their ease,
governed dominions more extensive than his, and better civilized.  

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p5"></span><span
id="iii.v.xviii-p5.1"></span>Diocletian already knew, by letters from
<span id="iii.v.xviii-p5.2"></span>Maximian Herculius, all that <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p5.3"></span>Galerius had spoken at their conference,
and also that he was augmenting his army; and now, on hearing his
discourse, the spiritless old man burst into tears, and said, “Be it as
you will.”  

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p6"></span>It remained to choose <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p6.1"></span>Cæsars by common consent. “But,” said <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p6.2"></span>Galerius, “why ask the advice of <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p6.3"></span>Maximian and <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p6.4"></span>Constantius, since they must needs
acquiesce in whatever we do?”—“Certainly they will,” replied <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p6.5"></span>Diocletian, “for we must elect their sons.”
 

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p7"></span>Now <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p7.1"></span>Maximian Herculius had a son, <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p7.2"></span>Maxentius, married to the daughter of <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p7.3"></span>Galerius, a man of bad and mischievous
dispositions, and so proud and stubborn withal, that he would never pay
the wonted obeisance either to his father or father-in-law, and on that
account he was hated by them both. <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p7.4"></span>Constantius also had a son, <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p7.5"></span>Constantine, a young man of very great
worth, and well meriting the high station of <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p7.6"></span>Cæsar. The distinguished comeliness of his
figure, his strict attention to all military duties, his virtuous
demeanour and singular affability, had endeared him to the troops, and
made him the choice of every individual. He was then at court, having
long before been created by <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p7.7"></span>Diocletian a tribune of the first order.  

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p8"></span>“What is to be done?” said <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.1"></span>Galerius, “for <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.2"></span>that Maxentius deserves not the office. He
who, while yet a private man, has treated me with contumely, how will he
act when once he obtains power?”—“But <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.3"></span>Constantine is amiable, and will so rule as
hereafter, in the opinion of mankind, to surpass the mild virtues of his
father.”—“Be it so, if my inclinations and judgment are to be
disregarded. Men ought to be appointed who are at my disposal, who will
dread me, and never do anything unless by my orders.”—“Whom then shall
we appoint?”—“<span id="iii.v.xviii-p8.4"></span>Severus.”—“How! that
dancer, that habitual drunkard, who turns night into day, and day into
night?”—“He deserves the office, for he has approved himself a faithful
paymaster and purveyor of the army; and, indeed, I have already
despatched him to receive the purple from the hands of <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.5"></span>Maximian.”—“Well, I consent; but whom else
do you suggest?”—“Him,” said <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.6"></span>Galerius, pointing out <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.7"></span>Daia, a young man, half-barbarian. Now
<span id="iii.v.xviii-p8.8"></span>Galerius had lately bestowed part of
his own name on that youth, and called him <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.9"></span>Maximin, in like manner as <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.10"></span>Diocletian formerly bestowed on <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.11"></span>Galerius the name of <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.12"></span>Maximian, for the omen’s sake, because
<span id="iii.v.xviii-p8.13"></span>Maximian Herculius had served him
with unshaken fidelity.—“Who is that you present?”—“A kinsman of
mine.”—“Alas!” said <span id="iii.v.xviii-p8.14"></span>Diocletian,
heaving a deep sigh, “you do not propose men fit for the charge of
public affairs!”—“I have tried them.”—“Then do <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.15"></span>you look to it, who are about to assume
the administration of the empire: as for <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p8.16"></span>me, while I continued emperor, long and
diligent have been my labours in providing for the security of the
commonweal; and now, should anything disastrous ensue, the blame will
not be mine.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[308:1981](0070327.htm#fr_1980) <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p4"></span> \[See p. 303, <span
id="iii.v.xviii-p4.2"></span>supra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIX](0070328)
