[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070107)  [Next](0070109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXVI.—Of the Cross, and Other Tortures of Jesus, and of the Figure of the Lamb Under the Law.

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p1"></span>I have spoken of humiliation, and
frailty, and suffering—why God thought fit to undergo them. Now an
account must be taken of the cross itself, and its meaning must be
related. What the Most High Father arranged from the beginning, and how
He ordained all things which were accomplished, not only the foretelling
by the prophets, which preceded and was proved true <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) in Christ, but also the manner of His
suffering itself teaches. For whatever sufferings He underwent were not
without meaning; <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) but they had a
figurative meaning <span id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) and great
significance, as had also those divine works which He performed, the
strength and power of which had some weight indeed for the present, but
also declared something for the future. Heavenly influence opened the
eyes of the blind, and gave light to those who did not see; and by this
deed He signified that it would come to pass that, turning to the
nations which were ignorant of God, He might enlighten the breasts of
the foolish with the light of wisdom, and open the eyes of their
understanding to the contemplation of the truth. For they are truly
blind who, not seeing heavenly things, and surrounded with the darkness
of ignorance, worship earthly and frail things. He opened the ears of
the deaf. It is plain that this divine power did not limit its exercise
to this point; <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) but He declared
that it would shortly come to pass, that they who were destitute of the
truth would both hear and understand the divine words of God. For you
may truly call those deaf who do not hear the things which are heavenly
and true, and worthy of being performed. He loosed the tongues of the
dumb, so that they spake plainly. <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) A power worthy of admiration, <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) even when it was in operation: but
there was contained in this display <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) of power another meaning, which showed
that it would shortly come to pass that those who were lately ignorant
of heavenly things, having received the instruction of wisdom, might
speak respecting God and the truth. For he who is ignorant of the divine
nature, he truly is speechless and dumb, although he is the most
eloquent of all men. For when the tongue has begun to speak truth—that
is, to set forth the excellency and majesty of the one God—then only
does it discharge the office of its nature; but as long as it speaks
false things it is not rightly employed: <span
id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) and therefore he must necessarily be
speechless who cannot utter divine things. He also renewed the feet of
the lame to the office of walking,—a strength of divine work worthy of
praise; but the figure implied this, that the errors of a worldly and
wandering life being restrained, the path of truth was opened by which
men might walk to attain the favour of God. For He is truly to be
considered lame, who, being enwrapped in the gloom and darkness of
folly, and ignorant in what direction to go, with feet liable to stumble
and fall, walks in the way of death.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p10"></span>Likewise He cleansed the stains and
blemishes of defiled bodies,—no slight exercise of immortal power; but
this strength prefigured that by the instruction of righteousness His
doctrine was about to purify those defiled by the stains of sins and the
blemishes of vices. For they ought truly to be accounted as leprous and
unclean, <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) whom either boundless
lusts compel to crimes, or insatiable pleasures to disgraceful deeds,
and affect with an everlasting stain those who are branded with the
marks of dishonourable <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-Page_128"></span>actions. He raised the bodies of the
dead as they lay prostrate; and calling them aloud by their names, He
brought them back from death. What is more suitable to God, what more
worthy of the wonder of all ages, than to have recalled <span
id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) the life which has run its course, to
have added times to the completed times of men, to have revealed the
secrets of death? But this unspeakable power was the image of a greater
energy, which showed that His teaching was about to have such might,
that the nations throughout the world, which were estranged from God and
subject to death, being animated by the knowledge of the true light,
might arrive at the rewards of immortality. For you may rightly deem
those to be dead, who, not knowing God the giver of life, and depressing
their souls from heaven to earth, run into the snares of eternal death.
The actions, therefore, which He then performed for the present, were
representations of future things; the things which He displayed in
injured and diseased bodies were figures <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) of spiritual things, that at present
He might display to us the works of an energy which was not of earth,
and for the future might show the power of His heavenly majesty. <span
id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844)  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p15"></span>Therefore, as His works had a
signification also of greater power, so also His passion did not go
before us as simple, or superfluous, or by chance. But as those things
which He did signified the great efficacy and power of His teaching, so
those things which He suffered announced that wisdom would be held in
hatred. For the vinegar which they gave Him to drink, and the gall which
they gave Him to eat, held forth hardships and severities <span
id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) in this life to the followers of
truth. And although His passion, which was harsh and severe in itself,
gave to us a sample of the future torments which virtue itself proposes
to those who linger in this world, yet drink and food of this kind,
coming into the mouth of our teacher, afforded us an example of
pressures, and labours, and miseries. All which things must be undergone
and suffered by those who follow the truth; since the truth is bitter,
and detested by all who, being destitute of virtue, give up their life
to deadly pleasures. For the placing of a crown of thorns upon His head,
declared that it would come to pass that He would gather to Himself a
holy people from those who were guilty. For people standing around in a
circle are called a <span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p16.2"></span>corona. <span
id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) But we, who before that we knew God
were unjust, were thorns—that is, evil and guilty, not knowing what was
good; and estranged from the conception and the works of righteousness,
polluted all things with wickedness and lust. Being taken, therefore,
from briars and thorns, we surround the sacred head of God; for, being
called by Himself, and spread around Him, we stand beside God, who is
our Master and Teacher, and crown Him King of the world, and Lord of all
the living.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p18"></span>But with reference to the cross, it
has great force and meaning, which I will now endeavour to show. For God
(as I have before explained), when He had determined to set man free,
sent as His ambassador to the earth a teacher of virtue, who might both
by salutary precepts train men to innocence, and by works and deeds
before their eyes <span id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) might open the
way of righteousness, by walking in which, and following his teacher,
man might attain to eternal life. He therefore assumed a body, and was
clothed in a garment of flesh, that He might hold out to man, for whose
instruction He had come, examples of virtue and incitements to its
practice. But when He had afforded an example of righteousness in all
the duties of life, in order that He might teach man also the patient
endurance of pain and contempt of death, by which virtue is rendered
perfect and complete, He came into the hands of an impious nation, when,
by the knowledge of the future which He had, He might have avoided them,
and by the same power by which He did wonderful works He might have
repelled them. Therefore He endured tortures, and stripes, and thorns.
At last He did not refuse even to undergo death, that under His guidance
man might triumph over death, subdued and bound in chains with all its
terrors. But the reason why the Most High Father chose that kind of
death in preference to others, with which He should permit Him to be
visited, is this. For some one may perchance say: Why, if He was God,
and chose to die, did He not at least suffer by some honourable kind of
death? why was it by the cross especially? why by an infamous kind of
punishment, which may appear unworthy even of a man if he is free, <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) although guilty? First of all, because
He, who had come in humility that He might bring assistance to the
humble and men of low degree, and might hold out to all the hope of
safety, was to suffer by that kind of punishment by which the humble and
low usually suffer, that there might be no one at all who might not be
able to imitate Him. In the next place, it was in order that His body
might be <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-Page_129"></span>kept unmutilated, <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) since He must rise again from the dead
on the third day.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p22"></span>Nor ought any one to be ignorant of
this, that He Himself, speaking before of His passion, also made it
known that He had the power, when He willed it, of laying down His life
and of taking it again. Therefore, because He had laid down His life
while fastened to the cross, His executioners did not think it necessary
to break His bones (as was their prevailing custom), but they only
pierced His side. Thus His unbroken body was taken down from the cross,
and carefully enclosed in a tomb. Now all these things were done lest
His body, being injured and broken, should be rendered unsuitable <span
id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) for rising again. That also was a
principal cause why God chose the cross, because it was necessary that
He should be lifted up on it, and the passion of God become known to all
nations. For since he who is suspended upon a cross is both conspicuous
to all and higher than others, the cross was especially chosen, which
might signify that He would be so conspicuous, and so raised on high,
that all nations from the whole world should meet together at once to
know and worship Him. Lastly, no nation is so uncivilized, no region so
remote, to which either His passion or the height of His majesty would
be unknown. Therefore in His suffering He stretched forth His hands and
measured out the world, that even then He might show that a great
multitude, collected together out of all languages and tribes, from the
rising of the sun even to his setting, was about to come under His
wings, and to receive on their foreheads that great and lofty
sign. <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) And the Jews even now
exhibit a figure of this transaction when they mark their thresholds
with the blood of a lamb. For when God was about to smite the Egyptians,
to secure the Hebrews from that infliction He had enjoined them to slay
a white <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) lamb without spot, and
to place on their thresholds a mark from its blood. And thus, when the
first-born of the Egyptians had perished in one night, the Hebrews alone
were saved by the sign of the blood: not that the blood of a sheep had
such efficacy in itself as to be the safety of men, but it was an image
of things to come. For Christ was the white lamb without spot; that is,
He was innocent, and just, and holy, who, being slain by the same Jews,
is the salvation of all who have written on their foreheads the sign of
blood—that is, of the cross, on which He shed His blood. For the
forehead is the top of the threshold in man, and the wood sprinkled with
blood is the emblem <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) of the
cross. Lastly, the slaying of the lamb by those very persons who perform
it is called the paschal feast, from the word “paschein,” <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) because it is a figure of the passion,
which God, foreknowing the future, delivered by <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.12"></span>Moses to be celebrated by His people.
But at that time the figure was efficacious at the present for averting
the danger, that it may appear what great efficacy the truth itself is
about to have for the protection of God’s people in the extreme
necessity of the whole world. But in what manner or in what region all
will be safe who have marked on the highest part of their body this sign
of the true and divine blood, <span id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) I
will show in the last book.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_833"></span>[127:834](0070108.htm#fr_833) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p2"></span> i.e., was shown by the event to be
true, not doubtful or deceptive.  

<span id="fn_834"></span>[127:835](0070108.htm#fr_834) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>Inania, “empty.”  

<span id="fn_835"></span>[127:836](0070108.htm#fr_835) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p4.1"></span>Figuram.  

<span id="fn_836"></span>[127:837](0070108.htm#fr_836) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p5.1"></span>Hactenus operata est.  

<span id="fn_837"></span>[127:838](0070108.htm#fr_837) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p6.1"></span>In eloquium solvit.  

<span id="fn_838"></span>[127:839](0070108.htm#fr_838) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p7"></span> See [Matt. ix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#033)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p7.1"></span>, “The dumb spake, and the multitudes
marvelled;” <span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p7.2"></span>Mark vii. 37, “They
were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done all things well: He
maketh both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak.”  

<span id="fn_839"></span>[127:840](0070108.htm#fr_839) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p8.1"></span>Inerat huic virtuti.  

<span id="fn_840"></span>[127:841](0070108.htm#fr_840) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p9.1"></span>In usu suo non est.  

<span id="fn_841"></span>[127:842](0070108.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p11.1"></span>Elephantiaci, those afflicted with
“<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p11.2"></span>elephantiasis,” a kind of
leprosy, covering the skin with incrustations resembling the hide of an
elephant.  

<span id="fn_842"></span>[128:843](0070108.htm#fr_842) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p12.1"></span>Resignasse, “to have unsealed or
opened.”  

<span id="fn_843"></span>[128:844](0070108.htm#fr_843) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p13.1"></span>Figuram gerebant.  

<span id="fn_844"></span>[128:845](0070108.htm#fr_844) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p14"></span> \[It is undoubtedly true that all
our Lord’s miracles are also <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p14.1"></span>parables. Such also is the entire
history of the Hebrews.\]  

<span id="fn_845"></span>[128:846](0070108.htm#fr_845) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p16.1"></span>Acerbitates et amaritudines.  

<span id="fn_846"></span>[128:847](0070108.htm#fr_846) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17"></span> The word “<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.1"></span>corona” denotes a “crown,” and also, as
here, a “ring” of persons standing around. The play on the word cannot
be kept up in English. \[Thus “<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.2"></span>corona tibi et judices defuerunt.”
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.3"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.4"></span>Nat. Deor., ii. 1. So <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.5"></span>Ignatius, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.6"></span>στε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.7"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.8"></span>φανον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.9"></span>του</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.10"></span>̑ </span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.11"></span>πρεσβυτερι</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.12"></span>́</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.13"></span>ου</span> = <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p17.14"></span>corona presbyterii, vol. i. p. 64,
this series."\]  

<span id="fn_847"></span>[128:848](0070108.htm#fr_847) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p19.1"></span>Præsentibus.  

<span id="fn_848"></span>[128:849](0070108.htm#fr_848) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p20"></span> The cross was the usual punishment
of slaves.  

<span id="fn_849"></span>[129:850](0070108.htm#fr_849) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p21.1"></span>Integrum.  

<span id="fn_850"></span>[129:851](0070108.htm#fr_850) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p23"></span> A weak and senseless reason. The
true cause is given by St. [John xix.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p23.1"></span>: “These things were done that the
scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of Him shall not be broken.” \[The
previous question, however, remains: Why was the Paschal lamb to be of
unbroken bones, and why the special providence that fulfilled the type?
Doubtless He who raised up His body could have restored it, had the
bones also been broken; but the <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p23.2"></span>preciousness of Christ’s body was thus
indicated as in the new tomb, the fine linen and spices, and the
ministry of “the rich in his death, because He had done no violence,”
etc.—Isa. liii. 9.\]  

<span id="fn_851"></span>[129:852](0070108.htm#fr_851) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p24"></span> The sign of the cross used in
baptism.  

<span id="fn_852"></span>[129:853](0070108.htm#fr_852) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p25"></span> The account, [Ex.
xii.](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#000)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p25.1"></span>, makes no mention of colour. “Without
spot” is equivalent to “without blemish.” \[But the whiteness implied.
“Without spot” excludes “the ring-streaked and speckled,” and a black
lamb <span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p25.2"></span>a fortiori —1 Pet. i. 19.
“Without spot” settles the case. [Isa. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p25.3"></span> proves that the <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p25.4"></span>normal wool is white.\]  

<span id="fn_853"></span>[129:854](0070108.htm#fr_853) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p25.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p26"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p26.1"></span>Significatio.  

<span id="fn_854"></span>[129:855](0070108.htm#fr_854) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.1"></span>α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.2"></span>̀</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.3"></span>πο</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.4"></span>του</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.5"></span>̑ </span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.6"></span>πα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.7"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.8"></span>σχειν</span>, “from suffering” The word
“<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.9"></span>pascha” is not derived from
Greek, as <span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.10"></span>Lactantius supposes,
but from the Hebrew “<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.11"></span>pasach,” to
pass over.  

<span id="fn_855"></span>[129:856](0070108.htm#fr_855) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p27.13"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p28"></span> \[See book vii., and the <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p28.1"></span>Epitome</span>,
cap. li., <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xxvi-p28.2"></span>infra</span>.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXVII.—Of the wonders effected by the power of the cross,
and of demons](0070109)
