[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070075)  [Next](0070077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXV.—Of Learning Philosophy, and What Great Qualifications are Necessary for Its Pursuit.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p1"></span>We must now speak a few things
concerning philosophy in general, that having strengthened our cause we
may conclude. That greatest imitator of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Plato among our writers thought that
philosophy was not for the multitude, because none but learned men could
attain to it. “Philosophy,” says <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p1.2"></span>Cicero, <span
id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) “is contented with a few judges, of
its own accord designedly avoiding the multitude.” It is not therefore
wisdom, if it avoids the concourse of men; since, if wisdom is given to
man, it is given to all without any distinction, so that there is no one
at all who cannot acquire it. But they so embrace virtue, which is given
to the human race, that they alone of all appear to wish to enjoy that
which is a public good; being as envious as if they should wish to bind
or tear out the eyes of others that they may not see the sun. For what
else is it to deny wisdom to men, than to take away from their minds the
true and divine light? But if the nature of man is capable of wisdom, it
was befitting that both workmen, and country people, and women, and all,
in short, who bear the human form, should be taught to be wise; and that
the people should be brought together from every language, and
condition, and sex, and age. Therefore it is a very strong argument that
philosophy neither tends to wisdom, nor is of itself wisdom, that its
mystery is only made known by the beard and cloak of the
philosophers. <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) The Stoics,
moreover, perceived this, who said that philosophy was to be studied
both by slaves and women; <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p3.2"></span>Epicurus
also, who invites those who are altogether unacquainted with letters to
philosophy; and <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p3.3"></span>Plato also, who
wished to compose a state of wise men.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p4"></span>They attempted, indeed, to do that
which truth required; but they were unable to proceed beyond words.
First, because instruction in many arts is necessary for an application
to philosophy. Common learning must be acquired on account of practice
in reading, because in so great a variety of subjects it is impossible
that all things should be learned by hearing, or retained in the memory.
No little attention also must be given to the grammarians, in order that
you may know the right method of speaking. That must occupy many years.
Nor must there be ignorance of rhetoric, that you may be able to utter
and express the things which you have learned. Geometry also, and music,
and astronomy, are necessary, because these arts have some connection
with philosophy; and the whole of these subjects cannot be learned by
women, who must learn within the years of their maturity the duties
which are hereafter about to be of service to them for domestic uses;
nor by servants, who must live in service during those years especially
in which they are able to learn; nor by the poor, or labourers, or
rustics, who have to gain their daily support by labour. And on this
account <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p4.1"></span>Tully says that philosophy
is averse from the multitude. But yet <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p4.2"></span>Epicurus will receive the
ignorant. <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) How, then, will they
understand those things which are said respecting the first principles
of things, the perplexities and intricacies of which are scarcely
attained to by men of cultivated minds?  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p6"></span>Therefore, in subjects which are
involved in obscurity, and confused by a variety of intellects, and set
off by the studied language of eloquent men, what place is there for the
unskilful and ignorant? Lastly, they never taught any women to study
philosophy, except <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p6.1"></span>Themiste <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) only, within the whole memory of man;
nor slaves, except <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p7.6"></span>Phædo <span
id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) only, who is said, when living in
oppressive slavery, to have been ransomed and taught by <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.7"></span>Cebes. They also enumerate <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.8"></span>Plato and <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.9"></span>Diogenes: these, however, were not
slaves, though they had fallen into servitude, for they <span
id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-Page_96"></span>had
been taken captive. A certain <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.10"></span>Aniceris is said to have ransomed <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.11"></span>Plato for eight sesterces. And on this
account <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.12"></span>Seneca severely rebuked
the ransomer himself, because he set so small value upon <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.13"></span>Plato. He was a madman, as it seems to
me, who was angry with a man because he did not throw away much money;
doubtless he ought to have weighed gold as though to ransom the corpse
of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.14"></span>Hector, or to have insisted
upon the payment of more money than the seller demanded. Moreover, they
taught none of the barbarians, with the single exception of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.15"></span>Anacharsis the Scythian, who never
would have dreamed of philosophy had he not previously learned both
language and literature.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_470"></span>[95:471](0070076.htm#fr_470) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p2.1"></span>Tusc., ii. 1.  

<span id="fn_471"></span>[95:472](0070076.htm#fr_471) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p3"></span> A long beard and cloak were the
badges of the philosophers. \[See vol. ii. p. 321, note 9.\]  

<span id="fn_472"></span>[95:473](0070076.htm#fr_472) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p5"></span> \[Platonic philosophy being
addressed to the mind, and the Epicurean to lusts and passions.\]  

<span id="fn_473"></span>[95:474](0070076.htm#fr_473) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p7.1"></span>Themiste is said to have been the wife
of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p7.2"></span>Leontius; <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p7.3"></span>Epicurus is reported to have written to
her. <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p7.4"></span>Themistoclea, the sister of
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p7.5"></span>Pythagoras, is mentioned as a
student of philosophy; besides many other women in different ages.  

<span id="fn_474"></span>[95:475](0070076.htm#fr_474) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p7.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.1"></span>Plato dedicated to <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.2"></span>Phædo his treatise on the immortality of
the soul: according to other accounts, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.3"></span>Phædo was ransomed by <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.4"></span>Crito or <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.5"></span>Alcibiades at the suggestion of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxv-p8.6"></span>Socrates.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXVI.—It is divine instruction only which bestows wisdom;
and of what efficacy the law of God is](0070077)
