[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070342)  [Next](0070344.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxxiv-p0.1"></span> Chap. XXXIV.

<span id="iii.v.xxxiv-p1"></span> “Amongst our other regulations for the
permanent advantage of the commonweal, we have hitherto studied to
reduce all things to a conformity with the ancient laws and public
discipline of the Romans.  

<span id="iii.v.xxxiv-p2"></span>“It has been our aim in an especial
manner, that the Christians also, who had abandoned the religion of
their forefathers, should return to right opinions. For such wilfulness
and folly had, we know not how, taken possession of them, that instead
of observing those ancient institutions, which possibly their own
forefathers had established, they, through caprice, made laws to
themselves, and drew together into different societies many men of
widely different persuasions.  

<span id="iii.v.xxxiv-p3"></span>“After the publication of our edict,
ordaining the Christians to betake themselves to the observance of the
ancient institutions, many of them were subdued through the fear of
danger, and moreover many of them were exposed to jeopardy;
nevertheless, because great numbers still persist in their opinions, and
because we have perceived that at present they neither pay reverence and
due adoration to the gods, nor yet worship their own God, therefore we,
from our wonted clemency in bestowing pardon on all, have judged it fit
to extend our indulgence to those men, and to permit them again to be
Christians, and to establish the places of their religious assemblies;
yet so as that they offend not against good order.  

<span id="iii.v.xxxiv-p4"></span>“By another mandate we purpose to
signify unto magistrates how they ought herein to demean themselves.  

<span id="iii.v.xxxiv-p5"></span>“Wherefore it will be the duty of the
Christians, in consequence of this our toleration, to pray to their God
for our welfare, and for that of the public, and for their own; that the
commonweal may continue safe in every quarter, and that they themselves
may live securely in their habitations.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXV](0070344.md)
