[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070259)  [Next](0070261) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXXII.—Of Christ Descending from Heaven to the General Judgment, and of the Millenarian Reign. <span id="fr_1603"></span>[1604](#fn_1603)

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p2"></span>Then the heaven shall be opened
in a tempest, <span id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604) and Christ
shall descend with great power, and there shall go before Him a fiery
brightness and a countless host of angels, and all that multitude of the
wicked shall be destroyed, and torrents of blood shall flow, and the
leader himself shall escape, and having often renewed his army, shall
for the fourth time engage in battle, in which, being taken, with all
the other tyrants, he shall be delivered up to be burnt. But the prince
also of the demons himself, the author and contriver of evils, being
bound with fiery chains, shall be imprisoned, that the world may receive
peace, and the earth, harassed through so many years, may rest.
Therefore peace being made, and every evil suppressed, that righteous
King and Conqueror will institute a great judgment on the earth
respecting the living and the dead, and will deliver all the nations
into subjection to the righteous who are alive, and will raise the <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p3.3"></span>righteous dead to eternal life, and
will Himself reign with them on the earth, and will build the holy city,
and this kingdom of the righteous shall be for a thousand years.
Throughout that time the stars shall be more brilliant, and the
brightness of the sun shall be increased, and the moon shall not be
subject to decrease. Then the rain of blessing shall descend from God at
morning and evening, and the earth shall bring forth all her fruit
without the labour of men. Honey shall drop from rocks, fountains of
milk and wine shall abound. The beasts shall lay aside their ferocity
and become mild, the wolf shall roam among the flocks without doing
harm, the calf shall feed with the lion, the dove shall be united with
the hawk, the serpent shall have no poison; no animal shall live by
bloodshed. For God shall supply to all abundant and harmless <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605) food. But when the thousand years
shall be fulfilled, and the prince of the demons loosed, the nations
will rebel against the righteous, and an innumerable multitude will come
to storm the city of the saints. Then the last judgment of God will come
to pass against the nations. For He will shake the earth from its
foundations, and the cities shall be overthrown, and He shall rain upon
the wicked fire with brimstone and hail, and they shall be on fire, and
<span id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-Page_255"></span>slay each other. But the
righteous shall for a little space be concealed under the earth, until
the destruction of the nations is accomplished, and after the third day
they shall come forth, and see the plains covered with carcases. Then
there shall be an earthquake, and the mountains shall be rent, and
valleys shall sink down to a profound depth, and into this the bodies of
the dead shall be heaped together, and its name shall be called
Polyandrion. <span id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606) After these
things God will renew the world, and transform the righteous into the
forms of angels, that, being presented with the garment of immortality,
they may serve God for ever; and this will be the kingdom of God, which
shall have no end. Then also the wicked shall rise again, not to life
but to punishment; for God shall raise these also, when the second
resurrection takes place, that, being condemned to eternal torments and
delivered to eternal fires, they may suffer the punishments which they
deserve for their crimes.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[254:1604](0070260.htm#fr_1603) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p0.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p1"></span> \[See vol. i. p. 209.\]  

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[254:1605](0070260.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p3.1"></span>In tempestate; others read “<span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p3.2"></span>intempestâ nocte.”  

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[254:1606](0070260.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p4.1"></span>Innocentem, “without injury to any.”
 

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[255:1607](0070260.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p5"></span> A name sometimes given to
cemeteries, because many men (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p5.1"></span>πολλοι</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p5.2"></span>̀ </span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.viii.lxviii-p5.3"></span>ἅνδρες</span>)
are borne thither.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXXIII.—The hope of safety is in the religion and worship
of God](0070261)
