[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070339)  [Next](0070341) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxxi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXXI.

<span id="iii.v.xxxi-p1"></span>From <span
id="iii.v.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Maximian, God, the avenger of religion and
of His people, turned his eyes to <span
id="iii.v.xxxi-p1.2"></span>Galerius, the author of the accursed
persecution, that in his punishment also He might manifest the power of
His majesty. <span id="iii.v.xxxi-p1.3"></span>Galerius, too, was
purposing to celebrate his twentieth anniversary; and as, under that
pretext, he had, by new taxes payable in gold and silver, oppressed the
provinces, so now, that he might recompense them by celebrating the
promised festival, he used the like pretext for repeating his
oppressions. Who can relate in fit terms the methods used to harass
mankind in levying the tax, and especially with regard to corn and the
other fruits of the earth? The officers, or rather the executioners,
<span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="iii.v.xxxi-Page_314"></span>of all the different magistrates, seized
on each individual, and would never let go their hold. No man knew to
whom he ought to make payment first. There was no dispensation given to
those who had nothing; and they were required, under pain of being
variously tortured, instantly to pay, notwithstanding their inability.
Many guards were set round, no breathing time was granted, or, at any
season of the year, the least respite from exactions. Different
magistrates, or the officers of different magistrates, frequently
contended for the right of levying the tax from the same persons. No
threshing-floor without a tax-gatherer, no vintage without a watch, and
nought left for the sustenance of the husbandman! That food should be
snatched from the mouths of those who had earned it by toil, was
grievous: the hope, however, of being afterwards relieved, might have
made that grievance supportable; but it was necessary for every one who
appeared at the anniversary festival to provide robes of various kinds,
and gold and silver besides. And one might have said, “How shall I
furnish myself with those things, O tyrant void of understanding, if you
carry off the whole fruits of my ground, and violently seize its
expected produce?” Thus, throughout the dominions of <span
id="iii.v.xxxi-p1.4"></span>Galerius, men were spoiled of their goods,
and all was raked together into the imperial treasury, that the emperor
might be enabled to perform his vow of celebrating a festival which he
was doomed never to celebrate.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXII](0070341)
