[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070465)  [Next](0070467.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ix.i"></span>

#### <span id="ix.ix.i-p0.1"></span>Sec. I.—On the Diversity of Spiritual Gifts.

##### <span id="ix.ix.i-p0.2"></span>On Whose Account the Powers of Miracles are Performed.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p1.1"></span>I. Jesus Christ</span>, our God and Saviour,
delivered to us the great mystery of godliness, and called both Jews and
Gentiles to the acknowledgment of the one and only <span
id="fr_3550"></span>[3551](#fn_3550.md) true God His Father, <span
id="fr_3551"></span>[3552](#fn_3551.md) as Himself somewhere says, when He
was giving thanks for the salvation of those that had believed, “I have
manifested Thy name to men, I have finished the work Thou gavest
me;” <span id="fr_3552"></span>[3553](#fn_3552.md) and said concerning us
to His Father, “Holy Father, although the world has not known Thee, yet
have I known Thee; and these have known Thee.” <span
id="fr_3553"></span>[3554](#fn_3553.md) With good reason did He say to all
of us together, when we were perfected concerning those gifts which were
given from Him by the Spirit: “Now these signs shall follow them that
have believed in my name: they shall cast out devils; they shall speak
with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any
deadly thing, it shall by no means hurt them: they shall lay their hands
on the sick, and they shall recover.” <span
id="fr_3554"></span>[3555](#fn_3554.md) These gifts were first bestowed on
us the apostles when we were about to preach the Gospel to every
creature, and afterwards were of necessity afforded to those who had by
our means believed; not for the advantage of those who perform them, but
for the conviction of the unbelievers, that those whom the word did not
persuade, the power of signs might put to shame: for signs are not for
us who believe, but for the unbelievers, both for the Jews and Gentiles.
For neither is it any profit to us to cast out demons, but to those who
are so cleansed by the power of the Lord; as the Lord <span
id="fr_3555"></span>[3556](#fn_3555.md) Himself somewhere instructs us, and
shows, saying: “Rejoice ye, not because the spirits are subject unto
you; but rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.” <span
id="fr_3556"></span>[3557](#fn_3556.md) Since the former is done by His
power, but this by our good disposition and diligence, yet (it is
manifest) by His assistance. It is not therefore necessary that every
one of the faithful should cast out demons, or raise the dead, or speak
with tongues; but such a one only who is vouchsafed this gift, for some
cause which may be advantage to the salvation of the unbelievers, who
are often put to shame, not with the demonstration of the world, but by
the power of the signs; that is, such as are worthy of salvation: for
all the ungodly are not affected by wonders; and hereof God Himself is a
witness, as when He says in the law: “With other tongues will I speak to
this people, and with other lips, and yet will they by no means
believe.” <span id="fr_3557"></span>[3558](#fn_3557.md) For neither did the
Egyptians believe in God, when <span id="ix.ix.i-p9.3"></span>Moses had
done so many signs and wonders; <span
id="fr_3558"></span>[3559](#fn_3558.md) nor did the multitude of the Jews
believe in Christ, as they believed <span
id="ix.ix.i-p10.3"></span>Moses, who yet had healed every sickness and
every disease among them. <span id="fr_3559"></span>[3560](#fn_3559.md) Nor
were the former shamed by the rod which was turned into a living
serpent, nor by the hand which was made white with leprosy, nor by the
river Nile turned into blood; nor the latter by the blind who recovered
their sight, nor by the lame who walked, nor by the dead who were
raised. <span id="fr_3560"></span>[3561](#fn_3560.md) The one was resisted
by <span id="ix.ix.i-p12.2"></span>Jannes and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p12.3"></span>Jambres, the other by <span
id="ix.ix.i-p12.4"></span>Annas and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p12.5"></span>Caiaphas. <span
id="fr_3561"></span>[3562](#fn_3561.md) Thus signs do not shame all into
belief, but only those of a good disposition; for whose sake also it is
that God is pleased, as a wise steward of a family, to appoint miracles
to be wrought, not <span id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span
id="ix.ix.i-Page_480"></span>by the power of men, but by His own will.
Now we say these things, that those who have received such gifts may not
exalt themselves against those who have not received them; such gifts,
we mean, as are for the working of miracles. For otherwise there is no
man who has believed in God through Christ, <span
id="fr_3562"></span>[3563](#fn_3562.md) that has not received some
spiritual gift: for this very thing, having been delivered from the
impiety of polytheism, and having believed in God the Father through
Christ, <span id="fr_3563"></span>[3564](#fn_3563.md) this is a gift of
God. And the having cast off the veil of Judaism, and having believed
that, by the good pleasure of God, His only begotten Son, who was before
all ages, <span id="fr_3564"></span>[3565](#fn_3564.md) was in the last
time born of a virgin, <span id="fr_3565"></span>[3566](#fn_3565.md)
without the company of a man, and that He lived as a man, yet without
sin, and fulfilled all that righteousness which is of the law; and that,
by the permission of God, He who was God the Word endured the cross, and
despised the shame; and that He died, and was buried, and rose within
three days; and that after His resurrection, having continued forty days
with His apostles, and completed His whole constitutions, He was taken
up in their sight to His God and Father, who sent Him: he who has
believed these things, not at random and irrationally, but with judgment
and full assurance, has received the gift of God. So also has He who is
delivered from every heresy. Let not, therefore, any one that works
signs and wonders judge any one of the faithful who is not vouchsafed
the same: for the gifts of God which are bestowed by Him through Christ
are various; and one man receives one gift, and another another. For
perhaps one has the word of wisdom, and another the word of
knowledge; <span id="fr_3566"></span>[3567](#fn_3566.md) another,
discerning of spirits; another, foreknowledge of things to come;
another, the word of teaching; another, long-suffering; another,
continence according to the law: for even <span
id="ix.ix.i-p18.2"></span>Moses, the man of God, when he wrought signs
in Egypt, did not exalt himself against his equals: and when he was
called a god, he did not arrogantly despise his own prophet <span
id="ix.ix.i-p18.3"></span>Aaron. <span
id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567.md) Nor did <span
id="ix.ix.i-p19.2"></span>Joshua the son of Nun, who was the leader of
the people after him, though in the war with the Jebusites he had made
the sun stand still over against Gibeon, and the moon over against the
valley of Ajalon, <span id="fr_3568"></span>[3569](#fn_3568.md) because the
day was not long enough for their victory, insult over <span
id="ix.ix.i-p20.2"></span>Phineas or <span
id="ix.ix.i-p20.3"></span>Caleb. Nor did <span
id="ix.ix.i-p20.4"></span>Samuel, who had done so many surprising
things, disregard <span id="ix.ix.i-p20.5"></span>David the beloved of
God: yet they were both prophets, and the one was high priest, and the
other was king. And when there were only seven thousand holy men in
Israel who had not bowed the knee to Baal, <span
id="fr_3569"></span>[3570](#fn_3569.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p21.3"></span>Elijah alone among them, and his disciple
<span id="ix.ix.i-p21.4"></span>Elisha, were workers of miracles. Yet
neither did <span id="ix.ix.i-p21.5"></span>Elijah despise <span
id="ix.ix.i-p21.6"></span>Obadiah the steward, who feared God, but
wrought no signs; nor did <span id="ix.ix.i-p21.7"></span>Elisha despise
his own disciple when he trembled at the enemies. <span
id="fr_3570"></span>[3571](#fn_3570.md) Moreover, neither did the wise
<span id="ix.ix.i-p22.2"></span>Daniel who was twice delivered from the
mouths of the lions, nor the three children who were delivered from the
furnace of fire, <span id="fr_3571"></span>[3572](#fn_3571.md) despise the
rest of their fellow-Israelites: for they knew that they had not escaped
these terrible miseries by their own might; but by the power of God did
they both work miracles, and were delivered from miseries. Wherefore let
none of you exalt himself against his brother, though he be a prophet,
or though he be a worker of miracles: for if it happens that there be no
longer an unbeliever, all the power of signs will thenceforwards be
superfluous. For to be pious is from any one’s good disposition; but to
work wonders is from the power of Him that works them by us: the first
of which respects ourselves; but the second respects God that works
them, for the reasons which we have already mentioned. Wherefore neither
let a king despise his officers that are under him, nor the rulers those
who are subject. For where there are none to be ruled over, rulers are
superfluous; and where there are no officers, the kingdom will not
stand. Moreover, let not a bishop be exalted against his deacons and
presbyters, nor the presbyters against the people: for the subsistence
of the congregation depends on each other. For the bishops and the
presbyters are the priests with relation to the people; and the laity
are the laity with relation to the clergy. And to be a Christian is in
our own power; but to be an apostle, or a bishop, or in any other such
office, is not in our own power, but at the disposal of God, who bestows
the gifts. And thus much concerning those who are vouchsafed gifts and
dignities.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.i-p23.2"></span>Concerning Unworthy Bishops and Presbyters.

<span id="ix.ix.i-p24"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p24.1"></span>II</span>. We add, in the next place, that
neither is every one that prophesies holy, nor every one that casts out
devils religious: for even <span id="ix.ix.i-p24.2"></span>Balaam the
son of Beor the prophet did prophesy, <span
id="fr_3572"></span>[3573](#fn_3572.md) though he was himself ungodly; as
also did <span id="ix.ix.i-p25.2"></span>Caiaphas, the falsely-named
high priest. <span id="fr_3573"></span>[3574](#fn_3573.md) Nay, the devil
foretells many things, and the demons, about Him; and yet for all that,
there is not a spark of piety in them: for they are oppressed <span
id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span id="ix.ix.i-Page_481"></span>with
ignorance, by reason of their voluntary wickedness. It is manifest,
therefore, that the ungodly, although they prophesy, do not by their
prophesying cover their own impiety; nor will those who cast out demons
be sanctified by the demons being made subject to them: for they only
mock one another, as they do who play childish tricks for mirth, and
destroy those who give heed to them. For neither is a wicked king any
longer a king, but a tyrant; nor is a bishop oppressed with ignorance or
an evil disposition a bishop, but falsely so called, being not one sent
out by God, but by men, as <span id="ix.ix.i-p26.4"></span>Ananiah and
<span id="ix.ix.i-p26.5"></span>Samœah in Jerusalem, and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p26.6"></span>Zedekiah and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p26.7"></span>Achiah the false prophets in Babylon. <span
id="fr_3574"></span>[3575](#fn_3574.md) And indeed <span
id="ix.ix.i-p27.2"></span>Balaam the prophet, when he had corrupted
Israel by Baal-peor, suffered punishment; <span
id="fr_3575"></span>[3576](#fn_3575.md) and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p28.2"></span>Caiaphas at last was his own murderer; and the
sons of <span id="ix.ix.i-p28.3"></span>Sceva, endeavouring to cast out
demons, were wounded by them, and fled away in an unseemly manner; <span
id="fr_3576"></span>[3577](#fn_3576.md) and the kings of Israel and of
Judah, when they became impious, suffered all sorts of punishments. It
is therefore evident how bishops and presbyters, also falsely so called,
will not escape the judgment of God. For it will be said to them even
now: “O ye priests that despise my name, <span
id="fr_3577"></span>[3578](#fn_3577.md) I will deliver you up to the
slaughter, as I did <span id="ix.ix.i-p30.2"></span>Zedekiah and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p30.3"></span>Achiah, whom the king of Babylon fried in a
frying-pan,” as says <span id="ix.ix.i-p30.4"></span>Jeremiah the
prophet. <span id="fr_3578"></span>[3579](#fn_3578.md) We say these things,
not in contempt of true prophecies, for we know that they are wrought in
holy men by the inspiration of God, but to put a stop to the boldness of
vainglorious men; and add this withal, that from such as these God takes
away His grace: for “God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the
humble.” <span id="fr_3579"></span>[3580](#fn_3579.md) Now <span
id="ix.ix.i-p32.2"></span>Silas and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p32.3"></span>Agabus prophesied in our times; <span
id="fr_3580"></span>[3581](#fn_3580.md) yet did they not equal themselves
to the apostles, nor did they exceed their own measures though they were
beloved of God. Now women prophesied also. Of old, <span
id="ix.ix.i-p33.4"></span>Miriam the sister of <span
id="ix.ix.i-p33.5"></span>Moses and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p33.6"></span>Aaron, <span
id="fr_3581"></span>[3582](#fn_3581.md) and after her <span
id="ix.ix.i-p34.2"></span>Deborah, <span
id="fr_3582"></span>[3583](#fn_3582.md) and after these <span
id="ix.ix.i-p35.2"></span>Huldah <span
id="fr_3583"></span>[3584](#fn_3583.md) and <span
id="ix.ix.i-p36.2"></span>Judith <span
id="fr_3584"></span>[3585](#fn_3584.md) —the former under <span
id="ix.ix.i-p37.2"></span>Josiah, the latter under <span
id="ix.ix.i-p37.3"></span>Darius. The mother of the Lord did also
prophesy, and her kinswoman <span id="ix.ix.i-p37.4"></span>Elisabeth,
and <span id="ix.ix.i-p37.5"></span>Anna; <span
id="fr_3585"></span>[3586](#fn_3585.md) and in our time the daughters of
<span id="ix.ix.i-p38.3"></span>Philip; <span
id="fr_3586"></span>[3587](#fn_3586.md) yet were not these elated against
their husbands, but preserved their own measures. <span
id="fr_3587"></span>[3588](#fn_3587.md) Wherefore if among you also there
be a man or a woman, and such a one obtains any gift, let him be humble,
that God may be pleased with him. For says He: “Upon whom will I look,
but upon him that is humble and quiet, and trembles at my words?” <span
id="fr_3588"></span>[3589](#fn_3588.md)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3550"></span>[479:3551](0070466.htm#fr_3550.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p2"></span> The words “one and only” are omitted in
the Syriac and Coptic.  

<span id="fn_3551"></span>[479:3552](0070466.htm#fr_3551.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p3"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.i-p3.1"></span>ms.</span> omits “His Father.” The Syriac amd
Coptic have “the only Father.”  

<span id="fn_3552"></span>[479:3553](0070466.htm#fr_3552.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p4"></span> [John
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p4.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3553"></span>[479:3554](0070466.htm#fr_3553.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p5"></span> [John
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#025.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3554"></span>[479:3555](0070466.htm#fr_3554.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p6"></span> [Mark
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p6.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3555"></span>[479:3556](0070466.htm#fr_3555.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p7"></span> The Coptic reads “our God.”  

<span id="fn_3556"></span>[479:3557](0070466.htm#fr_3556.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p8"></span> [Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p8.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3557"></span>[479:3558](0070466.htm#fr_3557.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p9"></span> [Isa. xxviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p9.1"></span>; [1
Cor. xiv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021.md)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p9.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3558"></span>[479:3559](0070466.htm#fr_3558.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p9.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p10"></span> [Ex.
vii.](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p10.1"></span>
and [Ex. iv.](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p10.2"></span>  

<span id="fn_3559"></span>[479:3560](0070466.htm#fr_3559.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p11"></span> [Deut. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p11.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3560"></span>[479:3561](0070466.htm#fr_3560.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p12"></span> [Matt. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p12.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3561"></span>[479:3562](0070466.htm#fr_3561.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p12.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p13"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p13.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3562"></span>[480:3563](0070466.htm#fr_3562.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p14"></span> Instead of “Christ,” the Coptic reads,
“through His Holy Son.”  

<span id="fn_3563"></span>[480:3564](0070466.htm#fr_3563.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p15"></span> The Coptic reads, “and in Christ and the
Holy Spirit.”  

<span id="fn_3564"></span>[480:3565](0070466.htm#fr_3564.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p16"></span> The Coptic reads, “and His only begotten
Son, who was with the Father and the life-giving Holy Spirit before all
the ages.”  

<span id="fn_3565"></span>[480:3566](0070466.htm#fr_3565.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p17"></span> The Coptic reads, “spotless virgin.”  

<span id="fn_3566"></span>[480:3567](0070466.htm#fr_3566.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p18"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p18.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[480:3568](0070466.htm#fr_3567.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p19"></span> [Ex. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p19.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3568"></span>[480:3569](0070466.htm#fr_3568.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p20"></span> [Josh.
x](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p20.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3569"></span>[480:3570](0070466.htm#fr_3569.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p20.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p21"></span> [1 Kings xix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p21.1"></span>;
[Rom. xi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004.md)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p21.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3570"></span>[480:3571](0070466.htm#fr_3570.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p21.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p22"></span> [2 Kings
vi](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p22.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3571"></span>[480:3572](0070466.htm#fr_3571.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p23"></span> [Dan.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p23.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3572"></span>[480:3573](0070466.htm#fr_3572.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p25"></span> [Num.
23:0](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#000.md), [Num.
24:0](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p25.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3573"></span>[480:3574](0070466.htm#fr_3573.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p26"></span> [John xi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p26.1"></span>.
\[See on the <span id="ix.ix.i-p26.2"></span>Sibyllina, <span
id="ix.ix.i-p26.3"></span>passim.\]  

<span id="fn_3574"></span>[481:3575](0070466.htm#fr_3574.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p26.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p27"></span> [Jer.
28:0](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#000.md), [Jer.
29:0](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p27.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3575"></span>[481:3576](0070466.htm#fr_3575.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p28"></span> [Num.
25:0](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#000.md), [Num.
31:0](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p28.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3576"></span>[481:3577](0070466.htm#fr_3576.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p28.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p29"></span> [Acts xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p29.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3577"></span>[481:3578](0070466.htm#fr_3577.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p30"></span> [Mal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p30.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3578"></span>[481:3579](0070466.htm#fr_3578.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p30.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p31"></span> [Jer. xxix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p31.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3579"></span>[481:3580](0070466.htm#fr_3579.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p32"></span> [1 Pet. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p32.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3580"></span>[481:3581](0070466.htm#fr_3580.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p33"></span> [Acts xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p33.1"></span>
[Acts xv. 32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032.md)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p33.2"></span>, [Acts xxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p33.3"></span>  

<span id="fn_3581"></span>[481:3582](0070466.htm#fr_3581.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p33.7"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p34"></span> [Ex. xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p34.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3582"></span>[481:3583](0070466.htm#fr_3582.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p35"></span> [Judg. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p35.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3583"></span>[481:3584](0070466.htm#fr_3583.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p36"></span> [2 Kings xxii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p36.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3584"></span>[481:3585](0070466.htm#fr_3584.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p36.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p37"></span> [Judith
viii.](../../../bib/apo/jdt008.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p37.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3585"></span>[481:3586](0070466.htm#fr_3585.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p37.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p38"></span> [Luke
i.](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p38.1"></span> and
[Luke 2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.i-p38.2"></span>  

<span id="fn_3586"></span>[481:3587](0070466.htm#fr_3586.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p38.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p39"></span> [Acts xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p39.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3587"></span>[481:3588](0070466.htm#fr_3587.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p40"></span> \[The compiler has forgotten that few of
these had husbands, at least at the time when they are reported to have
prophesied.—R.\]  

<span id="fn_3588"></span>[481:3589](0070466.htm#fr_3588.md) <span
id="ix.ix.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.i-p41"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.ix.i-p41.1"></span>.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. II.—Election and Ordination of Bishops: Form of Service on
Sundays](0070467.md)
