[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070119)  [Next](0070121.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.vii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VII.—Of the Coming of Jesus, and Its Fruit; And of the Virtues and Vices of that Age.

<span id="iii.ii.v.vii-p1"></span>But God, as a most indulgent parent,
when the last time approached, sent a messenger to bring back that old
age, and justice which had been put to flight, that the human race might
not be agitated by very great and perpetual errors. Therefore the
appearance of that golden time returned, and justice was restored to the
earth, but was assigned to a few; and this justice is nothing else than
the pious and religious worship of the one God. But perhaps some may be
inclined to ask, why, if this be justice, it is not given to all
mankind, and the whole multitude does not agree to it. This is a matter
of great disputation, why a difference was retained by God when He gave
justice to the earth; and this I have shown in another place, and
whenever a favourable opportunity shall occur it shall be explained. Now
it is sufficient very briefly to signify it: that virtue can neither be
discerned, unless it has vices opposed to it; nor be perfect, unless it
is exercised by adversity. <span id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974.md) For
God designed that there should be this distinction between good and evil
things, that we may know from that which is evil the quality of the
good, and also the quality of the evil from the good; nor can the nature
of the one be understood if the other is taken away. God therefore did
not exclude evil, that the nature of virtue might be evident. For how
could patient endurance <span id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975.md) retain
its meaning and name if there were nothing which we were compelled to
endure? <span id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976.md) How could faith devoted
to its God deserve praise, unless there were some one who wished to turn
us away from God? For on this account He permitted the unjust to be more
powerful, that they might be able to compel to evil; and on this account
to be more numerous, that virtue might be precious, because it is rare.
And this very point is admirably and briefly shown by <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p4.2"></span>Quintilian in “the muffled head.” <span
id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977.md) “For what virtue,” he says, “would
there be in innocence, had not its rarity furnished it with praises? But
because it is provided by nature that hatred, desire, and anger drive
men blindly to that object to which they have applied themselves, to be
free from fault appears to be beyond the power of man. Otherwise, if
nature had given to all men equal affections, piety would be nothing.”  

<span id="iii.ii.v.vii-p6"></span>How true this is, the necessity of the
case itself teaches. For if it is virtue to resist with fortitude evils
and vices, it is evident that, without evil and vice, there is no <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p6.1"></span>perfected virtue; and that God might
render this complete and perfect, He retained that which was contrary to
it, with which it might contend. For, being agitated by evils which
harass it, it gains stability; and in proportion to the frequency with
which <span id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-Page_143"></span>it is urged onward, is the firmness
with which it is strengthened. This is evidently the cause which effects
that, although justice is sent to men, yet it cannot be said that a
golden age exists; because God has not taken away evil, that He might
retain that diversity which alone preserves the mystery of a divine
religion.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_974"></span>[142:975](0070120.htm#fr_974.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.vii-p2"></span> \[To establish this, would be to go
far in a <span id="iii.ii.v.vii-p2.1"></span>theodicy to reconcile the
permission of evil with the divine goodness.\]  

<span id="fn_975"></span>[142:976](0070120.htm#fr_975.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.vii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p3.1"></span>Patientia.  

<span id="fn_976"></span>[142:977](0070120.htm#fr_976.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.vii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p4.1"></span>Pati.  

<span id="fn_977"></span>[142:978](0070120.htm#fr_977.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.vii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p5.1"></span>Caput obvolutum. This appears to be the
title of a lost declamation of <span
id="iii.ii.v.vii-p5.2"></span>Quintilian.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VIII.—Of justice known to all, but not embraced; of the
true temple of God, and of His worship, that all vices may be
subdued](0070121.md)
