[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070061)  [Next](0070063.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XI.—Of Religion, Wisdom, and the Chief Good.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p1"></span>It is agreed upon, therefore, by the
general consent of all mankind, that religion ought to be undertaken;
but we have to explain what errors are committed on this subject. God
willed this to be the nature of man, that he should be desirous and
eager for two things, religion and wisdom. But men are mistaken in this,
that they either undertake religion and pay no attention to wisdom, or
they devote themselves to wisdom alone, and pay no attention to
religion, though the one cannot be true without the other. The
consequence is, that they fall into a multiplicity of religions, but
false ones, because they have left wisdom, which could have taught them
that there cannot be many gods; or they devote themselves to wisdom, but
a false wisdom, because they have paid no attention to the religion of
the Supreme God, who might have instructed them to the knowledge of the
truth. Thus men who undertake either of these courses follow a devious
path, and one full of the greatest errors, inasmuch as the duty of man,
and all truth, are included in these two things which are inseparably
connected. I wonder, therefore, that there was none at all of the
philosophers who discovered the abode and dwelling-place of the chief
good. For they might have sought it in this manner. Whatever the
greatest good is, it must be an object proposed to all men. There is
pleasure, which is desired by all; but this is common also to man with
the beasts, and has not the force of the honourable, and brings a
feeling of satiety, and when it is in excess is injurious, and it is
lessened by advance of age, and does not fall to the lot of many: for
they who are without resources, who constitute the greater part of men,
must also be without pleasure. Therefore pleasure is not the chief good;
but it is not even a good. What shall we say of riches? This is much
more <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403.md) true of them. For they fall
to the lot of fewer men, and that generally by chance; and they often
fall to the indolent, and <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xi-Page_79"></span>sometimes by guilt, and they are
desired by those who already possess them. What shall we say of
sovereignty itself? That does not constitute the chief good: for all
cannot reign, but it is necessary that all should be capable of
attaining the chief good.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p3"></span>Let us therefore seek something which
is held forth to all. Is it virtue? It cannot be denied that virtue is a
good, and undoubtedly a good for all men. But if it cannot be happy
because its power and nature consist in the endurance of evil, it
assuredly is not the chief good. Let us seek something else. But nothing
can be found more beautiful than virtue, nothing more worthy of a wise
man. For if vices are to be avoided on account of their deformity,
virtue is therefore to be desired on account of its beauty. What then?
Can it be that that which is admitted to be good and honourable should
be requited with no reward, and be so unproductive as to procure no
advantage from itself? That great labour and difficulty and struggling
against evils with which this life is filled, must of necessity produce
some great good. But what shall we say that it is? Pleasure? But nothing
that is base can arise from that which is honourable. Shall we say that
it is riches? or commands? But these things are frail and
uncertain. <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404.md) Is it glory? or
honour? or a lasting name? But all these things are not contained in
virtue itself, but depend upon the opinion and judgment of others. For
virtue is often hated and visited with evil. But the good which arises
from it ought to be so closely united with it as to be incapable of
being separated or disunited from it; and it cannot appear to be the
chief good in any other way than if it belongs peculiarly to virtue, and
is such that nothing can be added to it or taken from it. Why should I
say that the duties of virtue consist in the despising of all these
things? For not to long for, or desire, or love pleasures, riches,
dominions, and honours, and all those things which are esteemed as
goods, as others do overpowered by desire, that assuredly is virtue.
Therefore it effects something else more sublime and excellent; nor does
anything struggle against these present goods but that which longs for
greater and truer things. Let us not despair of being able to find it,
if we turn our thoughts in all directions; for no slight or trifling
rewards are sought.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_403"></span>[78:404](0070062.htm#fr_403.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>Multo magis is the reading of the <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p2.2"></span>mss.; but <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p2.3"></span>multo minus—“much less”—seems preferable.
 

<span id="fn_404"></span>[79:405](0070062.htm#fr_404.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xi-p4"></span> Liable to fall, perishable.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XII.—Of the twofold conflict of body and soul; and of
desiring virtue on account of eternal life](0070063.md)
