[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070375)  [Next](0070377) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i"></span>

#### <span id="vi.ii.i-p0.1"></span>from the first chapter.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p1.1"></span>1. “<span
class="sc"><span id="vi.ii.i-p1.2"></span>The</span> Revelation of <span
id="vi.ii.i-p1.3"></span>Jesus Christ, which God gave to Him, and showed
unto His servants things which must shortly come to pass, and signified
it. Blessed are they who read and hear the words of this prophecy, and
keep the things which are written.”\] The beginning of the book promises
blessing to him that reads and hears and keeps, that he who takes pains
about the reading may thence learn <span id="vi.ii.i-p1.4"></span>to do
works, and may keep the precepts.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p2.1"></span>4. “Grace
unto you, and peace, from Him which is, and which was, and which is to
come.”\] <span id="vi.ii.i-p2.2"></span>He is, because He endures
continually; <span id="vi.ii.i-p2.3"></span>He was, because with the
Father He made all things, and has at this time taken a beginning from
the Virgin; <span id="vi.ii.i-p2.4"></span>He is to come, because
assuredly <span id="vi.ii.i-p2.5"></span>He will come to judgment.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p3"></span>“And from the seven spirits which are
before His throne.”\] We read of a sevenfold spirit in Isaiah, <span
id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241) —namely, the spirit of wisdom and
of understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, of knowledge and of
piety, and the spirit of the fear of the Lord.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p5"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p5.1"></span>5. “And from
<span id="vi.ii.i-p5.2"></span>Jesus Christ, who is the faithful
witness, the first-begotten of the dead.”\] In taking upon Him manhood,
He gave a testimony in the world, wherein also having suffered, He freed
us by His blood from sin; and having vanquished hell, He was the first
who rose from the dead, and “death shall have no more dominion over
Him,” <span id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242) but by His own reign
the kingdom of the world is destroyed.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p7.1"></span>6. “And He
made us a kingdom and priests unto God and His Father.”\] That is to
say, a Church of all believers; as also the Apostle <span
id="vi.ii.i-p7.2"></span>Peter says: “A holy nation, a royal
priesthood.” <span id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243)  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p9"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p9.1"></span>7. “Behold,
He shall come with clouds, and every eye shall see Him.”\] For He who at
first came hidden in the manhood that He had undertaken, shall after a
little while come to judgment manifest in majesty and glory. And what
saith He?  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p10"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p10.1"></span>12. “And I
turned, and saw seven golden candlesticks; and in the midst of the seven
golden candlesticks one like unto the Son of man.”\] He says that He was
like Him after His victory over death, when He had ascended into the
heavens, after the union in His body of the power which He received from
the Father with the spirit of His glory.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p11"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p11.1"></span>13. “As it
were the Son of man walking in the midst of the golden candlesticks.”\]
He says, in the midst of the churches, as it is said in <span
id="vi.ii.i-p11.2"></span>Solomon, “I will walk in the midst of the
paths of the just,” <span id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244) whose
antiquity is immortality, and the fountain of majesty.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p13"></span>“Clothed with a garment down to the
ankles.”\] In the long, that is, the priestly garment, these words very
plainly deliver the flesh which was not corrupted in death, and has the
priesthood through suffering.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p14"></span>“And He was girt about the paps with a
golden girdle.”\] His paps are the two testaments, and the golden girdle
is the choir of saints, as gold tried in the fire. Otherwise the golden
girdle bound around His breast indicates the enlightened conscience, and
the pure and spiritual apprehension that is given to the churches.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p15"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p15.1"></span>14. “And
His head and His hairs were white as it were white wool, and as it were
snow.”\] On the head the whiteness is shown; “but the head of Christ is
God.” <span id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245) In the white hairs is
the multitude of abbots <span id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246) like
to wool, in respect of simple sheep; to snow, in respect of the
innumerable crowd of candidates taught from heaven.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p18"></span>“His eyes were as a flame of fire.”\]
God’s precepts are those which minister light to believers, but to
unbelievers burning.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p19"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p19.1"></span>16. “And
in His face was brightness as the sun.”\] That which He called <span
id="vi.ii.i-p19.2"></span>brightness was <span id="page_345">p.
345</span> <span id="vi.ii.i-Page_345"></span>the appearance of that in
which He spoke to men face to face. But the glory of the <span
id="vi.ii.i-p19.3"></span>sun is less than the glory of the Lord.
Doubtless on account of its rising and setting, and rising again, that
He was born and suffered and rose again, therefore the Scripture gave
this similitude, likening His face to the glory of the sun.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p20"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p20.1"></span>15. “His
feet were like unto yellow brass, as if burned in a furnace.”\] He calls
the apostles His feet, who, being wrought by suffering, preached His
word in the whole world; for He rightly named those by whose means the
preaching went forth, feet. Whence also the prophet anticipated this,
and said: “We will worship in the place where His feet have
stood.” <span id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247) Because where they
first of all stood and confirmed the Church, that is, in Judea, all the
saints shall assemble together, and will worship their Lord.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p22"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p22.1"></span>16. “And
out of His mouth was issuing a sharp two-edged sword.”\] By the
twice-sharpened sword going forth out of His mouth is shown, that it is
He Himself who has both now declared the word of the Gospel, and
previously by <span id="vi.ii.i-p22.2"></span>Moses declared the
knowledge of the law to the whole world. But because from the same word,
as well of the New as of the Old Testament, He will assert Himself upon
the whole human race, therefore He is spoken of as two-edged. For the
sword arms the soldier, the sword slays the enemy, the sword punishes
the deserter. And that He might show to the apostles that He was
announcing judgment, He says: “I came not to send peace, but a
sword.” <span id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248) And after He had
completed His parables, He says to them: “Have ye understood all these
things? And they said, We have. And He added, Therefore is every scribe
instructed in the kingdom of God like unto a man that is a father of a
family, bringing forth from his treasure things new and old,” <span
id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249) —the new, the evangelical words of
the apostles; the old, the precepts of the law and the prophets: and He
testified that these proceeded out of His mouth. Moreover, He also says
to <span id="vi.ii.i-p24.2"></span>Peter: “Go thou to the sea, and cast
a hook, and take up the fish that shall first come up; and having opened
its mouth, thou shalt find a <span id="vi.ii.i-p24.3"></span>stater
(that is, two <span id="vi.ii.i-p24.4"></span>denarii), and thou shalt
give it for me and for thee.” <span id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250)
And similarly <span id="vi.ii.i-p25.2"></span>David says by the Spirit:
“God spake once, twice I have heard the same.” <span
id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251) Because God once decreed from the
beginning what shall be even to the end. Finally, as He Himself is the
Judge appointed by the Father, on account of His assumption of humanity,
wishing to show that men shall be judged by the word that He had
declared, He says: “Think ye that I will judge you at the last day? Nay,
but the word,” says He, “which I have spoken unto you, that shall judge
you in the last day.” <span id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252) And
<span id="vi.ii.i-p27.2"></span>Paul, speaking of Antichrist to the
Thessalonians, says: “Whom the Lord <span
id="vi.ii.i-p27.3"></span>Jesus will slay by the breath of His
mouth.” <span id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253) And <span
id="vi.ii.i-p28.2"></span>Isaiah says: “By the breath of His lips He
shall slay the wicked.” <span id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254) This,
therefore, is the two-edged sword issuing out of His mouth.  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p30"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p30.1"></span>15. “And
His voice as it were the voice of many waters.”\] The many waters are
understood to be many peoples, or the gift of baptism that He sent forth
by the apostles, saying: “Go ye, teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255)  

<span id="vi.ii.i-p32"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p32.1"></span>16. “And
He had in His right hand seven stars.”\] He said that in His right hand
He had seven stars, because the Holy Spirit of sevenfold agency was
given into His power by the Father. As <span
id="vi.ii.i-p32.2"></span>Peter exclaimed to the Jews: “Being at the
right hand of God exalted, He hath shed forth this Spirit received from
the Father, which ye both see and hear.” <span
id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256) Moreover, <span
id="vi.ii.i-p33.2"></span>John the Baptist had also anticipated this, by
saying to his disciples: “For God giveth not the Spirit by measure <span
id="vi.ii.i-p33.3"></span>unto Him. The Father,” says he, “loveth the
Son, and hath given all things into His hands.” <span
id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257) Those seven stars are the seven
churches, which he names in his addresses by name, and calls them to
whom he wrote epistles. Not that they are themselves the only, or even
the principal churches; but what he says to one, he says to all. For
they are in no respect different, that on that ground any one should
prefer them to the larger number of similar small ones. In the whole
world <span id="vi.ii.i-p34.3"></span>Paul taught that all the churches
are arranged by sevens, that they are called seven, and that the
Catholic Church is one. And first of all, indeed, that he himself also
might maintain the type of seven churches, he did not exceed that
number. But he wrote to the Romans, to the Corinthians, to the
Galatians, to the Ephesians, to the Thessalonians, to the Philippians,
to the Colossians; afterwards he wrote to individual persons, so as not
to exceed the number of seven churches. And abridging in a short space
his announcement, he thus says to <span
id="vi.ii.i-p34.4"></span>Timothy: “That thou mayest know how thou
oughtest to behave thyself in the Church of the living God.” <span
id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258) We read also that this typical
number is announced by the Holy Spirit by the month of <span
id="vi.ii.i-p35.2"></span>Isaiah: “Of seven women which took hold of one
man.” <span id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259) The one man is <span
id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span id="vi.ii.i-Page_346"></span>Christ,
not born of seed; but the seven women are seven churches, receiving His
bread, and clothed with his apparel, who ask that their reproach should
be taken away, only that His name should be called upon them. The bread
is the Holy Spirit, which nourishes to eternal life, promised to them,
that is, by faith. And His garments wherewith they desire to be clothed
are the glory of immortality, of which <span
id="vi.ii.i-p36.2"></span>Paul the apostle says: “For this corruptible
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.” <span id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260) Moreover, they
ask that their reproach may be taken away—that is, that they may be
cleansed from their sins: for the reproach is the original sin which is
taken away in baptism, and they begin to be called Christian men, which
is, “Let thy name be called upon us.” Therefore in these seven churches,
of one Catholic Church are believers, because it is one in seven by the
quality of faith and election. Whether writing to them who labour in the
world, and live <span id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) of the
frugality of their labours, and are patient, and when they see certain
men in the Church wasters, and pernicious, they hear them, lest there
should become dissension, he yet admonishes them by love, that in what
respects their faith is deficient they should repent; or to those who
dwell in cruel places among persecutors, that they should continue
faithful; or to those who, under the pretext of mercy, do unlawful sins
in the Church, and make them manifest to be done by others; or to those
that are at ease in the Church; or to those who are negligent, and
Christians only in name; or to those who are meekly instructed, that
they may bravely persevere in faith; or to those who study the
Scriptures, and labour to know the mysteries of their announcement, and
are unwilling to do God’s work that is mercy and love: to all he urges
penitence, to all he declares judgment.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[344:2242](0070376.htm#fr_2241) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p4"></span> [Isa. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="vi.ii.i-p4.1"></span>. \[P.
342, <span id="vi.ii.i-p4.3"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[344:2243](0070376.htm#fr_2242) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p6"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.i-p6.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[344:2244](0070376.htm#fr_2243) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p8"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.i-p8.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[344:2245](0070376.htm#fr_2244) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p12"></span> [Prov. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#020)<span id="vi.ii.i-p12.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[344:2246](0070376.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii.i-p16.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[344:2247](0070376.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p17"></span> \[<span id="vi.ii.i-p17.1"></span>Abba =
father. Fathers, rather.\]  

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[345:2248](0070376.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p21"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#007)<span id="vi.ii.i-p21.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[345:2249](0070376.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p22.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p23"></span> [Matt. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span id="vi.ii.i-p23.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[345:2250](0070376.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p24"></span> [Matt.
13:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#051),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)<span id="vi.ii.i-p24.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[345:2251](0070376.htm#fr_2250) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p24.5"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p25"></span> [Matt. xvii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027)<span id="vi.ii.i-p25.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[345:2252](0070376.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p25.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p26"></span> [Ps. lxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011)<span id="vi.ii.i-p26.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[345:2253](0070376.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p27"></span> [John xii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048)<span id="vi.ii.i-p27.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[345:2254](0070376.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p28"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)<span id="vi.ii.i-p28.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[345:2255](0070376.htm#fr_2254) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p28.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p29"></span> [Isa. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii.i-p29.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[345:2256](0070376.htm#fr_2255) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p31"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="vi.ii.i-p31.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[345:2257](0070376.htm#fr_2256) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p32.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p33"></span> [Acts ii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033)<span id="vi.ii.i-p33.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[345:2258](0070376.htm#fr_2257) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p33.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p34"></span> [John
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span id="vi.ii.i-p34.1"></span>.
\[Compare <span id="vi.ii.i-p34.2"></span>Wordsworth on the
Apocalypse.\]  

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[345:2259](0070376.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p34.5"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p35"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="vi.ii.i-p35.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[345:2260](0070376.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p36"></span> [Isa. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii.i-p36.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[346:2261](0070376.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p36.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p37"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="vi.ii.i-p37.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[346:2262](0070376.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="vi.ii.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p38"></span> Operantur, conjectured to be “vivunt.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From the second chapter](0070377)
