[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070430)  [Next](0070432) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>Sec. III.—Commandments to Women.

#### <span id="ix.ii.iii-p0.2"></span>Concerning the Subjection of a Wife to Her Husband, and that She Must Be Loving and Modest.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p1"></span>VIII. Let the wife be obedient to her own
proper husband, because “the husband is the head of the wife.” <span
id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568) But Christ is the head of that
husband who walks in the way of righteousness; and “the head of Christ
is God,” even His Father. Therefore, O wife, next after the Almighty,
our God and Father, the Lord of the present world and of the world to
come, the Maker of everything that breathes, and of every power; and
after His beloved Son, our Lord <span id="ix.ii.iii-p2.2"></span>Jesus
Christ, through whom <span id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569) glory be
to God, do thou fear thy husband, and reverence him, pleasing him alone,
rendering thyself acceptable to him in the several affairs of life, that
so on thy account thy husband may be called blessed, according to the
Wisdom of <span id="ix.ii.iii-p3.2"></span>Solomon, which thus speaks:
“Who can find a virtuous woman? for such a one is more precious than
costly stones. The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so
that she shall have no need of spoil: for she does good to her husband
all the days of her life. She buyeth wool and flax, and worketh
profitable things with her hands. She is like the merchants’ ships, she
bringeth her food from far. She riseth also while it is yet night, and
giveth meat to her household, and food to her maidens. She considereth a
field, and buyeth it; with the fruit of her hands she planteth a
vineyard. She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her
arms. She tasteth that it is good to labour; her lamp goeth not out all
the whole night. She stretcheth out her arms for useful work, and layeth
her hands to the spindle. She openeth her hands to the needy; yea, she
reacheth forth her hands to the poor. Her husband takes no care of the
affairs of his house; for all that are with her are clothed with double
garments. She maketh coats for her husband, clothings of silk and
purple. Her husband is eminent in the gates, when he sitteth with the
elders of the land. She maketh fine linen, and selleth it to the
Phœnicians, and girdles to the Canaanites. She is clothed with glory and
beauty, and she rejoices in the last days. She openeth her mouth with
wisdom and discretion, and puts her words in order. The ways of her
household are strict; she eateth not the bread of idleness. She will
open her mouth with wisdom and caution, and upon her tongue are the laws
of mercy. Her children arise up and praise her for her riches, and her
husband joins in her praises. Many daughters have obtained wealth and
done worthily, but thou surpassest and excellest them all. May lying
flatteries and the vain beauty of a wife be far from thee. For a
religious wife is blessed. Let her praise the fear of the Lord: <span
id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570) give her of the fruits of her lips,
and let her husband be praised in the gates.” <span
id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571) And again: “A virtuous wife is a
crown to her husband.” <span id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572) And
<span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="ix.ii.iii-Page_395"></span>again: “Many wives have built an
house.” <span id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573) You have learned what
great commendations a prudent and loving wife receives from the Lord
God. If thou desirest to be one of the faithful, and to please the Lord,
O wife, do not superadd ornaments to thy beauty, in order to please
other men; neither affect to wear fine broidering, garments, or shoes,
to entice those who are allured by such things. For although thou dost
not these wicked things with design of sinning thyself, but only for the
sake of ornament and beauty, yet wilt thou not so escape future
punishment, as having compelled another to look so hard at thee as to
lust after thee, and as not having taken care both to avoid sin thyself,
and the affording scandal to others. But if thou yield thyself up, and
commit the crime, thou art both guilty of thy own sin, and the cause of
the ruin of the other’s soul also. Besides, when thou hast committed
lewdness with one man, and beginnest to despair, thou wilt again turn
away from thy duty, and follow others, and grow past feeling; as says
the divine word: “When a wicked man comes into the depth of evil, he
becomes a scorner, and then disgrace and reproach come upon him.” <span
id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574) For such a woman afterward being
wounded, ensnares without restraint the souls of the foolish. Let us
learn, therefore, how the divine word triumphs over such women, saying:
“I hated a woman who is a snare and net to the heart of men worse than
death; her hands are fetters.” <span
id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575) And in another passage: “As a jewel
of gold in a swine’s snout, so is beauty in a wicked woman.” <span
id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576) And again: “As a worm in wood, so
does a wicked woman destroy her husband.” <span
id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) And again: “It is better to dwell
in the corner of the house-top, than with a contentious and an angry
woman.” <span id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578) You, therefore, who
are Christian women, do not imitate such as these. But thou who
designest to be faithful to thine own husband, take care to please him
alone. And when thou art in the streets, cover thy head; for by such a
covering thou wilt avoid being viewed of idle persons. Do not paint thy
face, which is God’s workmanship; for there is no part of thee which
wants ornament, inasmuch as all things which God has made are very good.
But the lascivious additional adorning of what is already good is an
affront to the bounty of the Creator. Look downward when thou walkest
abroad, veiling thyself as becomes women.  

#### <span id="ix.ii.iii-p12.2"></span>That a Woman Must Not Bathe with Men.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p13"></span>IX. Avoid also that disorderly practice
of bathing in the same place with men; for many are the nets of the evil
one. And let not a Christian woman bathe with an hermaphrodite; for if
she is to veil her face, and conceal it with modesty from strange men,
how can she bear to enter naked into the bath together with men? But if
the bath be appropriated to women, let her bathe orderly, modestly, and
moderately. But let her not bathe without occasion, nor much, nor often,
nor in the middle of the day, nor, if possible, every day; and let the
tenth hour of the day be the set time for such seasonable bathing. For
it is convenient that thou, who art a Christian woman, shouldst ever
constantly avoid a curiosity which has many eyes.  

#### <span id="ix.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>Concerning a Contentious and Brawling Woman.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p14"></span>X. But as to a spirit of contention, be
sure to curb it as to all men, but principally as to thine husband;
lest, if he be an unbeliever or an heathen, he may have an occasion of
scandal or of blaspheming God, and thou be partaker of a woe from God.
For, says He, “Woe to him by whom My name is blasphemed among the
Gentiles;” <span id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) and lest, if thy
husband be a Christian, he be forced, from his knowledge of the
Scriptures, to say that which is written in the book of Wisdom: “It is
better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious and an angry
woman.” <span id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580) You wives, therefore,
demonstrate your piety by your modesty and meekness to all without the
Church, whether they be women or men, in order to their conversion and
improvement in the faith. And since we have warned you, and instructed
you briefly, whom we do esteem our sisters, daughters, and members, as
being wise yourselves, persevere all your lives in an unblameable course
of life. Seek to know such kinds of learning whereby you may arrive at
the kingdom of our Lord, and please Him, and so rest for ever and ever.
Amen.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[394:2569](0070431.htm#fr_2568) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p2"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[394:2570](0070431.htm#fr_2569) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p3"></span> “To whom be glory,” V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>mss</span>.  

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[394:2571](0070431.htm#fr_2570) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p4"></span> \[The incorrect rendering of the LXX. is
here cited, as given in the text.—R.\]  

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[394:2572](0070431.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p5"></span> [Prov. xxxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[394:2573](0070431.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p6"></span> [Prov. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#004)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[395:2574](0070431.htm#fr_2573) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p7"></span> \[A.V., “Every wise woman buildeth her
house.”—R.\] [Prov. xiv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#001)<span
id="ix.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[395:2575](0070431.htm#fr_2574) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p8"></span> [Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[395:2576](0070431.htm#fr_2575) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p9"></span> [Eccles. vii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[395:2577](0070431.htm#fr_2576) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p10"></span> [Prov. xi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[395:2578](0070431.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p11"></span> [Prov. xii.
4](../../../bib/sep/pro012.htm#004)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p11.1"></span> in
LXX.  

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[395:2579](0070431.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p12"></span> [Prov.
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#009),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#019)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p12.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[395:2580](0070431.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p15"></span> [Isa. lii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[395:2581](0070431.htm#fr_2580) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p16"></span> [Prov. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#019)<span id="ix.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II. Of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons](0070432)
