[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070217)  [Next](0070219.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXX.—Of False Wisdom.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxvi-p1"></span>I have taught, as I imagine, that
the honours paid to gods are not only impious, but also vain, either
because they were men whose memory was consecrated after death; or
because the images themselves are insensible and deaf, inasmuch as they
are formed of earth, and that it is not right for man, who ought to look
up to heavenly things, to subject himself to earthly things; or because
the spirits who claim to themselves those acts of religious service are
unholy and impure, and on this account, being condemned by the sentence
of God, fell to the earth, and that it is not lawful to submit to the
power of those to whom you are superior, if you wish to be a follower of
the true God. It remains that, as we have spoken of false religion, we
should also discuss the subject of false wisdom, which the philosophers
profess,—men endued with the greatest learning and eloquence, but far
removed from the truth, because they neither know God nor the wisdom of
God. And although they are clever and learned, yet, because their wisdom
is human, I shall not fear to contend with them, that it may be evident
that falsehood can be easily overcome by truth, and earthly things by
heavenly.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxvi-p2"></span>They thus define the nature of
philosophy. Philosophy is the love or pursuit of wisdom. Therefore it is
not wisdom itself; for that which loves must be different from that
which is loved. If it is the pursuit of wisdom, not even thus is
philosophy <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>identical with
wisdom. For wisdom is the object itself which is sought, but the pursuit
is that which seeks it. Therefore the very definition or meaning of the
word plainly shows that philosophy is not wisdom itself. I will say that
it <span id="fr_1491"></span>[1492](#fn_1491.md) is not even the pursuit of
wisdom, in which wisdom is not comprised. For who can be said to devote
himself to the pursuit of that to which he can by no means attain? He
who gives himself to the pursuit of medicine, or grammar, or oratory,
may be said to be studious of that art which he is learning; but when he
has learned, he is now said to be a physician, a grammarian, or an
orator. Thus also those who are studious of wisdom, after they had
learned it, ought to have been called wise. But since they are called
students of wisdom as long as they live, it is manifest that that is not
the pursuit, because it is impossible to arrive at the object itself
which is sought for in the pursuit, unless by chance they who pursue
wisdom even to the end of life are about to be wise in another world.
Now every pursuit is connected with some end. That, therefore, is not a
right pursuit which has no end.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[233:1492](0070218.htm#fr_1491.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxvi-p3"></span> Philosophy.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXI.—Of knowledge and supposition](0070219.md)
