[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070027)  [Next](0070029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. xxii.—who was the author of the vanities before described in italy among the romans, and who among other nations.

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p1"></span>The author and establisher of these
vanities among the Romans was that Sabine king who especially
engaged <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) the rude and ignorant
minds of men with new superstitions: and that he might do this with some
authority, he pretended that he had meetings by night with the goddess
<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Egeria. There was a very dark
cavern in the grove of Aricia, from which flowed a stream with a never
failing spring. Hither he was accustomed to withdraw himself without any
witnesses, that he might be able to pretend that, by the admonition of
the goddess his wife, he delivered to the people those sacred rites
which were most acceptable to the gods. It is evident that he wished to
imitate the craftiness of <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.2"></span>Minos,
who concealed himself in the cave of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.3"></span>Jupiter, and, after a long delay there,
brought forward laws, as though delivered to him by <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.4"></span>Jupiter, that he might bind men to
obedience not only by the authority of his government, but also by the
sanction of religion. Nor was it difficult to persuade shepherds.
Therefore he instituted pontiffs, priests, <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.5"></span>Salii</span>, and augurs; he arranged
the gods in families; and by these means he softened the fierce spirits
of the new people and called them away from warlike affairs to the
pursuit of peace. But though he deceived others, he did not deceive
himself. For after many years, in the consulship of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.6"></span>Cornelius and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.7"></span>Bebius, in a field belonging to the
scribe <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.8"></span>Petilius, under the
Janiculum, two stone chests were found by men who were digging, in one
of which was the body of Numa, in the other seven books in Latin
respecting the law of the pontiffs, and the same number written in Greek
respecting systems of philosophy, in which he not only annulled the
religious rites which he himself had instituted, but all others also.
When this was referred to the senate, it was decreed that these books
should be destroyed. Therefore <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2.9"></span>Quintus Petilius, the prætor who had
jurisdiction in the city, burnt them in an assembly of the people. This
was a senseless proceeding; for of what advantage was it that the books
were burnt, when the cause on account of which they were burnt—that they
took away the authority due to religion—was itself handed down to
memory? Every one then in the senate was most foolish; for the books
might have been burnt, and yet the matter itself have been unknown.
Thus, while they wish to prove even to posterity with what piety they
defended religious institutions, they lessened the authority of the
institutions themselves by their testimony.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3"></span>But as <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.1"></span>Pompilius was the institutor of foolish
<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-Page_38"></span>superstitions among the Romans, so
also, before <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.2"></span>Pompilius, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.3"></span>Faunus was in Latium, who both
established impious rites to his grandfather <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.4"></span>Saturnus, and honoured his father <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.5"></span>Picus with a place among the gods, and
consecrated his sister <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.6"></span>Fatua
Fauna, who was also his wife; who, as <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.7"></span>Gabius Bassus relates, was called <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.8"></span>Fatua because she had been in the habit
of foretelling their fates to women, as <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.9"></span>Faunus did to men. And <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.10"></span>Varro writes that she was a woman of
such great modesty, that, as long as she lived, no male except her
husband saw her or heard her name. On this account women sacrifice to
her in secret, and call her the Good Goddess. And <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.11"></span>Sextus Claudius, in that book which he
wrote in Greek, relates that it was the wife of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.12"></span>Faunus who, because, contrary to the
practice and honour of kings, she had drunk a jar of wine, and had
become intoxicated, was beaten to death by her husband with myrtle rods.
But afterwards, when he was sorry for what he had done, and was unable
to endure his regret for her, he paid her divine honours. For this
reason they say that a covered jar of wine is placed at her sacred
rites. Therefore <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.13"></span>Faunus also left
to posterity no slight error, which all that are intelligent see
through. For <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.14"></span>Lucilius in these
verses derides the folly of those who imagine that images are gods: “The
terrestrial <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) Lamiæ, which <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p4.2"></span>Faunus and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p4.3"></span>Numa Pompilius</span> and others
instituted; at and these he trembles, he places everything in this. As
infant boys believe that every statue of bronze is a living man, so
these imagine that all things feigned are true: they believe that
statues of bronze contain a heart. It is a painter’s gallery; <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) there is nothing true; all things are
fictitious.” The poet, indeed, compares foolish men to infants. But I
say that they are much more senseless than infants. For they (infants)
suppose that images are men, whereas these take them for gods: the one
through their age, the others through folly, imagine that which is not
true: at any rate, the one soon ceased to be deceived; the foolishness
of the others is permanent, and always increases. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p5.1"></span>Orpheus was the first who introduced the
rites of father <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p5.2"></span>Liber into Greece;
and he first celebrated them on a mountain of Bœotia, very near to
Thebes, where <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p5.3"></span>Liber was born; and
because this mountain continually resounded with the strains of the
lyre, it was called Cithæron. <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104)
Those sacred rites are even now called Orphic, in which he himself was
lacerated and torn in pieces; and he lived about the same time with
<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p6.1"></span>Faunus. But which of them was
prior in age admits of doubt, since <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p6.2"></span>Latinus and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p6.3"></span>Priam reigned during the same years, as
did also their fathers <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p6.4"></span>Faunus and
<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p6.5"></span>Laomedon, in whose reign <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p6.6"></span>Orpheus came with the Argonauts to the
coast of the Trojans.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p7"></span>Let us therefore advance further,
and inquire who was really the first author of the worship of the gods.
<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p7.1"></span>Didymus, <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) in the books of his commentary on
<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.6"></span>Pindar, says that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.7"></span>Melisseus, king of the Cretans, was the
first who sacrificed to the gods, and introduced new rites and parades
of sacrifices. He had two daughters, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.8"></span>Amalthæa and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.9"></span>Melissa, who nourished the youthful
<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.10"></span>Jupiter with goats’ milk and
honey. Hence that poetic fable derived its origin, that bees flew to the
child, and filled his mouth with honey. Moreover, he says that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.11"></span>Melissa was appointed by her father the
first priestess of the Great Mother; from which circumstance the priests
of the same Mother are still called Melissæ. But the sacred history
testifies that <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.12"></span>Jupiter himself,
when he had gained possession of power, arrived at such insolence that
he built temples in honour of himself in many places. For when he went
about to different lands, on his arrival in each region, he united to
himself the kings or princes of the people in hospitality and
friendship; and when he was departing from each, he ordered that a
shrine should be dedicated to himself in the name of his host, as though
the remembrance of their friendship and league could thus be preserved.
Thus temples were founded in honour of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.13"></span>Jupiter Atabyrius and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.14"></span>Jupiter Labrandius; for <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.15"></span>Atabyrius and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.16"></span>Labrandius were his entertainers and
assistants in war. Temples were also built to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.17"></span>Jupiter Laprius, to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.18"></span>Jupiter Molion, to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.19"></span>Jupiter Casius, and others, after the
same manner. This was a very crafty device on his part, that he might
both acquire divine honour for himself, and a perpetual name for his
entertainers in conjunction with religious observances. Accordingly they
were glad, and cheerfully submitted to his command, and observed annual
rites and festivals for the sake of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.20"></span>handing down their own name. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.21"></span>Æneas did something like this in
Sicily, when he gave the name of his host <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.3"></span>Acestes to a city which he had built,
that <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.4"></span>Acestes might afterwards
joyfully and willingly love, increase, and adorn it. In this manner
<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.5"></span>Jupiter spread abroad through the
world the observance of his worship, and gave an example for the
imitation of others. Whether, then, the practice of worshipping the gods
proceeded from <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.6"></span>Melisseus, as <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.7"></span>Didymus related, or from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.8"></span>Jupiter also himself, as <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.9"></span>Euhemerus says, the <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-Page_39"></span>time
is still agreed upon when the gods began to be worshipped. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.10"></span>Melisseus, indeed, was much prior in
time, inasmuch as he brought up <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.11"></span>Jupiter his grandson. It is therefore
possible that either before, or while <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.12"></span>Jupiter was yet a boy, he taught the
worship of the gods, namely, the mother of his foster-child, and his
grandmother <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.13"></span>Tellus, who was the
wife of <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.14"></span>Uranus, and his father
<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.15"></span>Saturnus; and he himself, by this
example and institution, may have exalted <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.16"></span>Jupiter to such pride, that he
afterwards ventured to assume divine honours to himself.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[37:102](0070028.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p2"></span> Implicavit.  

<span id="fn_102"></span>[38:103](0070028.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p3.15"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p4"></span> Terricolas. Another reading is
<span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p4.1"></span>terriculas</span>, bugbears.  

<span id="fn_103"></span>[38:104](0070028.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p5"></span> Pergula. The word properly means a
projection attached to a house. Apelles is said to have placed his
pictures in such an adjunct, and to have concealed himself behind them,
that he might hear the comments of persons passing by.  

<span id="fn_104"></span>[38:105](0070028.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p6"></span> Cithæron, from “cithara,” a lyre.  

<span id="fn_105"></span>[38:106](0070028.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.1"></span>Didymus. A celebrated Alexandrian
grammarian, a follower of the school of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.2"></span>Aristarchus. He is distinguished from
other grammarians who bore the name of Didymus, by the surname <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.3"></span>Chalcenteros, which he is said to have
received from his unwearied diligence in study. Among his productions,
which are all lost, was one on the Homeric poems. He also wrote a
commentary on <span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.4"></span>Pindar, to which
allusion is made in the text. See Smith’s <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.5"></span>Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography.
 

<span id="fn_106"></span>[38:107](0070028.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p8.22"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9"></span> Cf. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.i.xxiii-p9.2"></span>Æneid, v. \[verse 718\].  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXIII.—Of the ages of vain superstitions, and the times at
which they commenced](0070029)
