[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070445)  [Next](0070447) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.v.i"></span>

#### <span id="ix.v.i-p0.1"></span>Sec. I.—On Helping the Poor.

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p0.2"></span>Those Who Have No Children Should Adopt Orphans, and Treat Them as Their Own Children.

<span id="ix.v.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p1.1"></span>I</span>. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p1.2"></span>When</span> any Christian becomes an orphan,
whether it be a young man or a maid, it is good that some one of the
brethren who is without a child should take the young man, and esteem
him in the place of a son; and he that has a son about the same age, and
that is marriageable, should marry the maid to him: for they which do so
perform a great work, and become fathers to the orphans, and shall
receive the reward of this charity from the Lord God. But if any one
that walks in the way of man-pleasing is rich, and therefore is ashamed
of orphans, the Father of orphans and Judge of widows will make
provision for the orphans, but himself shall have such an heir as will
spend what he has spared; and it shall happen to him according as it is
said: “What things the holy people have not eaten, those shall the
Assyrians eat.” As also Isaiah says: “Your land, strangers devour it in
your presence.” <span id="fr_2932"></span>[2933](#fn_2932)  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p2.2"></span>How the Bishop Ought to Provide for the Orphans.

<span id="ix.v.i-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p3.1"></span>II</span>. Do you therefore, O bishops, be
solicitous about their maintenance, being in nothing wanting to them;
exhibiting to the orphans the care of parents; to the widows the care of
husbands; to those of suitable age, marriage; to the artificer, work; to
the unable, commiseration; to the strangers, an house; to the hungry,
food; to the thirsty, drink; to the naked, clothing; to the sick,
visitation; to the prisoners, assistance. Besides these, have a greater
care of the orphans, that nothing may be wanting to them; and that as to
the maiden, till she arrives at the age of marriage, and ye give her in
marriage to a brother: to the young man assistance, that he may learn a
trade, and may be maintained by the advantage arising from it; that so,
when he is dextrous in the management of it, he may thereby be enabled
to buy himself the tools of his trade, that so he may no longer burden
any of the brethren, or their sincere love to him, but may support
himself: for certainly he is a happy man who is able to support himself,
and does not take up the place of the orphan, the stranger, and the
widow.  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p3.2"></span>Who Ought to Be Supported According to the Lord’s Constitution.

<span id="ix.v.i-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p4.1"></span>III</span>. Since even the Lord said: “The giver
was happier than the receiver.” <span
id="fr_2933"></span>[2934](#fn_2933) For it is again said by Him: “Woe
to those that have, and receive in hypocrisy; or who are able to support
themselves, yet will receive of others: for both of them shall give an
account to the Lord God in the day of judgment.” But an orphan who, by
reason of his youth, or he that by the feebleness of old age, or the
incidence of a disease, or the bringing up of many children, receives
alms, such a one shall not only not be blamed, but shall be commended:
for he shall be esteemed an altar to God, and be honoured by God,
because of his zealous and constant prayers for those that give to him;
not receiving idly, but to the uttermost of his power recompensing what
is given him by his prayer. Such a one therefore shall be blessed by God
in eternal life. But he that hath, and receives in hypocrisy or through
idleness, instead of working and assisting others, shall be obnoxious to
punishment before God, because he has snatched away the morsel of the
needy. <span id="fr_2934"></span>[2935](#fn_2934)  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p6.1"></span>Of the Love of Money.

<span id="ix.v.i-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p7.1"></span>IV</span>. For he that has money and does not
bestow it upon others, nor use it himself, is like the serpent, which
they say sleeps over the treasures; and of him is that scripture true
which says, “He has gathered riches of which he shall not <span
id="page_434">p. 434</span> <span
id="ix.v.i-Page_434"></span>taste;” <span
id="fr_2935"></span>[2936](#fn_2935) and they will be of no use to him
when he perishes justly. For it says, “Riches will not profit in the day
of wrath.” For such a one has not believed in God, but in his own gold;
esteeming that his God, and trusting therein. Such a one is a dissembler
of the truth, an accepter of persons, unfaithful, cheating, fearful,
unmanly, light, of no value, a complainer, ever in pain, his own enemy,
and nobody’s friend. Such a one’s money shall perish, and a man that is
a stranger shall consume it, either by theft while he is alive, or by
inheritance when he is dead. “For riches unjustly gotten shall be
vomited up.” <span id="fr_2936"></span>[2937](#fn_2936)  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p9.2"></span>With What Fear Men Ought to Partake of the Lord’s Oblations.

<span id="ix.v.i-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p10.1"></span>V</span>. We exhort, therefore, the widows and
orphans to partake of those things that are bestowed upon them with all
fear, and all pious reverence, and to return thanks to God who gives
food to the needy, and to lift up their eyes to Him. For, says He,
“Which of you shall eat, or who shall drink without Him? For He openeth
His hand, and filleth every living thing with His kindness: giving wheat
to the young men, and wine to the maidens, and oil for the joy of the
living, grass for the cattle, and green herb for the service of men,
flesh for the wild beasts, seeds for the birds, and suitable food for
all creatures.” <span id="fr_2937"></span>[2938](#fn_2937) Wherefore the
Lord says: <span id="fr_2938"></span>[2939](#fn_2938) “Consider the
fowls <span id="ix.v.i-p12.2"></span>of heaven, <span
id="fr_2939"></span>[2940](#fn_2939) that they sow not, <span
id="ix.v.i-p13.2"></span>neither do they reap nor gather into barns, and
your Father feedeth them. Are not ye much better than they? Be not
therefore solicitous, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink?
For your Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.” <span
id="fr_2940"></span>[2941](#fn_2940) Since ye therefore enjoy such a
providential care from Him, and are partakers of the good things that
are derived from Him, you ought to return praise to Him that receives
the orphan and the widow, to Almighty God, through His beloved Son <span
id="ix.v.i-p14.2"></span>Jesus Christ our Lord; through whom <span
id="fr_2941"></span>[2942](#fn_2941) glory be to God in spirit and truth
for ever. Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p15.2"></span>Whose Oblations are to Be Received, and Whose Not to Be Received.

<span id="ix.v.i-p16"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p16.1"></span>VI</span>. Now the bishop ought to know whose
oblations he ought to receive, and whose he ought not. For he is to
avoid corrupt dealers, and not receive their gifts. “For, a corrupt
dealer shall not be justified from sin.” <span
id="fr_2942"></span>[2943](#fn_2942) For of them it was that Isaiah
reproached Israel, and said, “Thy corrupt dealers mingle wine with
water.” <span id="fr_2943"></span>[2944](#fn_2943) He is also to avoid
fornicators, for “thou shall not offer the hire of an harlot to the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2944"></span>[2945](#fn_2944) He is also to avoid
extortioners, and such as covet other men’s goods, and adulterers; for
the sacrifices of such as these are abominable with God. Also those that
oppress the widow and overbear the orphan, and fill prisons with the
innocent, and abuse their own servants wickedly, I mean with stripes,
and hunger, and hard service, nay, destroy whole cities; do thou, O
bishop, avoid such as these, and their odious oblations. Thou shalt also
refuse rogues, and such pleaders that plead on the side of injustice,
and idol-makers, and thieves, and unjust publicans, and those that
deceive by false balances and deceitful measures, and a soldier who is a
false accuser and not content with his wages, but does violence to the
needy, a murderer, a cut-throat, and an unjust judge, a subverter of
causes, him that lies in wait for men, a worker of abominable
wickedness, a drunkard, a blasphemer, a sodomite, an usurer, and every
one that is wicked and opposes the will of God. For the Scripture says
that all such as these are abominable with God. For those that receive
from such persons, and thereby support the widows and orphans, shall be
obnoxious to the judgment-seat of God; as <span
id="ix.v.i-p19.3"></span>Adonias the prophet, in the book of Kings, when
he disobeyed God, and both “eat bread and drank water in the place which
the Lord had forbid him,” <span id="fr_2945"></span>[2946](#fn_2945)
because of the impiety of <span id="ix.v.i-p20.2"></span>Jeroboam, was
slain by a lion. For the bread which is distributed to the widows from
labour is better, though it be short and little, than that from
injustice and false accusation, though it be much and fine. For the
Scripture says: “Better is a little to the righteous, than much riches
of the sinners.” <span id="fr_2946"></span>[2947](#fn_2946) Now,
although a widow, who eats and is filled from the impious, pray for
them, she shall not be heard. For God, who knows the heart, with
judgment has declared concerning the impious, saying, “If <span
id="ix.v.i-p21.2"></span>Moses and <span id="ix.v.i-p21.3"></span>Samuel
stand before my face in their behalf, I will not hear them;” <span
id="fr_2947"></span>[2948](#fn_2947) and, “Pray thou not for this
people, and do not ask mercy for them, and do not intercede with me for
them, for I will not hear thee.” <span
id="fr_2948"></span>[2949](#fn_2948)  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p23.2"></span>That the Oblations of the Unworthy, While They are Such, Do Not Only Not Propitiate God, But on the Contrary Provoke Him to Indignation.

<span id="ix.v.i-p24"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p24.1"></span>VII</span>. And not these only, but those that
are in sin and have not repented, will not only not be <span
id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span id="ix.v.i-Page_435"></span>heard when
they pray, but will provoke God to anger, as putting Him in mind of
their own wickedness. Avoid therefore such ministrations, as you would
the price of a dog and the hire of an harlot; for both of them are
forbidden by the laws. For neither did <span
id="ix.v.i-p24.2"></span>Elisha receive the presents which were brought
by <span id="ix.v.i-p24.3"></span>Hazael, <span
id="fr_2949"></span>[2950](#fn_2949) nor <span
id="ix.v.i-p25.2"></span>Ahijah those from <span
id="ix.v.i-p25.3"></span>Jeroboam; <span
id="fr_2950"></span>[2951](#fn_2950) but if the prophets of God did not
admit of presents from the impious, it is reasonable, O bishops, that
neither should you. Nay, when <span id="ix.v.i-p26.2"></span>Simon the
magician offered money to me <span id="ix.v.i-p26.3"></span>Peter and
<span id="ix.v.i-p26.4"></span>John, <span
id="fr_2951"></span>[2952](#fn_2951) and tried to obtain the invaluable
grace by purchase, we did not admit it, but bound him with everlasting
maledictions, because he thought to possess the gift of God, not by a
pious mind towards God, but by the price of money. Avoid therefore such
oblations to God’s altar as are not from a good conscience. For says He:
“Abstain from all injustice, and thou shalt not fear, and trembling
shall not come nigh thee.” <span id="fr_2952"></span>[2953](#fn_2952)  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p28.2"></span>That It is Better to Afford, Though It Be Inconsiderable and Few, Contributions to the Widows from Our Own Labours, Than Those Which are Many and Large Received from the Ungodly; For It is Better to Perish by Famine Than to Receive an Oblation from the Ungodly.

<span id="ix.v.i-p29"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p29.1"></span>VIII</span>. But if ye say that those who give
alms are such as these, and if we do not receive from them, whence shall
we administer to the widows? And whence shall the poor among the people
be maintained? Ye shall hear from us, that therefore have ye received
the gift of the Levites, the oblations of your people, that ye might
have enough for yourselves, and for those that are in want; and that ye
might not be so straitened as to receive from the wicked. But if the
churches be so straitened, it is better to perish than to receive
anything from the enemies of God, to the reproach and abuse of His
friends. For of such as these the prophet speaks: “Let not the oil of a
sinner moisten my head.” <span id="fr_2953"></span>[2954](#fn_2953) Do
ye therefore examine such persons, and receive from such as walk holily,
and supply the afflicted. But receive not from those that are
excommunicated, until they are thought worthy to become the members of
the Church. But if a gift be wanting, inform the brethren, and make a
collection from them, and thence minister to the orphans and widows in
righteousness.  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p30.2"></span>That the People Ought to Be Exhorted by the Priest to Do Good to the Needy, as Says Solomon the Wise.

<span id="ix.v.i-p31"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p31.1"></span>IX</span>. Say unto the people under thee what
<span id="ix.v.i-p31.2"></span>Solomon the wise says: “Honour the Lord
out of thy just labours, and pay thy first-fruits to Him out of thy
fruits of righteousness, that thy garners may be filled with fulness of
wheat, and thy presses may burst out with wine.” <span
id="fr_2954"></span>[2955](#fn_2954) Therefore maintain and clothe those
that are in want from the righteous labour of the faithful. And such
sums of money as are collected from them in the manner aforesaid,
appoint to be laid out in the redemption of the saints, the deliverance
of slaves, and of captives, and of prisoners, and of those that have
been abused, and of those that have been condemned by tyrants to single
combat and death on account of the name of Christ. For the Scripture
says: “Deliver those that are led to death, and redeem those that are
ready to be slain, do not spare.” <span
id="fr_2955"></span>[2956](#fn_2955)  

##### <span id="ix.v.i-p33.2"></span>A Constitution, that If Any One of the Ungodly by Force Will Cast Money to the Priests, They Spend It in Wood and Coals, But Not in Food.

<span id="ix.v.i-p34"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p34.1"></span>X</span>. But if at any time you be forced
unwillingly to receive money from any ungodly person, lay it out in wood
and coals, that so neither the widow nor the orphan may receive any of
it, or be forced to buy with it either meat or drink, which it is unfit
to do. For it is reasonable that such gifts of the ungodly should be
fuel for the fire, and not food for the pious. And this method is
plainly appointed by the law, <span id="fr_2956"></span>[2957](#fn_2956)
when it calls a sacrifice kept too long a thing not fit to be eaten, and
commands it to be consumed with fire. For such oblations are not evil in
their nature, but on account of the mind of those that bring them. And
this we ordain, that we may not reject those that come to us, as knowing
that the common conversation of the pious has often been very profitable
to the ungodly, but religious communion with them is alone hurtful. And
so much, beloved, shall suffice to have spoken to you in order to your
security.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2932"></span>[433:2933](0070446.htm#fr_2932) <span
id="ix.v.i-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p2"></span> [Isa. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007)<span id="ix.v.i-p2.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2933"></span>[433:2934](0070446.htm#fr_2933) <span
id="ix.v.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p5"></span> [Acts xx.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="ix.v.i-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2934"></span>[433:2935](0070446.htm#fr_2934) <span
id="ix.v.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p6"></span> \[The early Church had a constant struggle
with professional paupers. This entire book is a valuable contribution
to social ethics. The problems of to-day confronted the Church then. Few
wiser counsels have been recorded.—R.\]  

<span id="fn_2935"></span>[434:2936](0070446.htm#fr_2935) <span
id="ix.v.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p8"></span> [Job xx.
18](../../../bib/sep/job020.htm#018)<span id="ix.v.i-p8.1"></span>,
LXX.; [Prov. xi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#004)<span
id="ix.v.i-p8.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2936"></span>[434:2937](0070446.htm#fr_2936) <span
id="ix.v.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p9"></span> [Job xx.
15](../../../bib/sep/job020.htm#015)<span id="ix.v.i-p9.1"></span>, LXX.
 

<span id="fn_2937"></span>[434:2938](0070446.htm#fr_2937) <span
id="ix.v.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p11"></span> [Eccles. ii.
25](../../../bib/sep/ecc002.htm#025)<span id="ix.v.i-p11.1"></span>,
LXX.; [Ps. cxlv. 16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016)<span
id="ix.v.i-p11.2"></span>; [Zech. ix.
17](../../../bib/sep/zac009.htm#017)<span id="ix.v.i-p11.3"></span>,
LXX.; [Ps. 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#015)<span id="ix.v.i-p11.4"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2938"></span>[434:2939](0070446.htm#fr_2938) <span
id="ix.v.i-p11.5"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p12"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p12.1"></span>ms</span>. reads, “Thus also did the Lord
exhort His disciples, saying.”  

<span id="fn_2939"></span>[434:2940](0070446.htm#fr_2939) <span
id="ix.v.i-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p13"></span> The words in italics are not in one V.
<span class="sc"><span id="ix.v.i-p13.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2940"></span>[434:2941](0070446.htm#fr_2940) <span
id="ix.v.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p14"></span> [Matt.
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032)<span id="ix.v.i-p14.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2941"></span>[434:2942](0070446.htm#fr_2941) <span
id="ix.v.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p15"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.v.i-p15.1"></span>ms</span>. reads, “with whom be glory to Him,
with the Spirit.”  

<span id="fn_2942"></span>[434:2943](0070446.htm#fr_2942) <span
id="ix.v.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p17"></span> [Ecclus. xxvi.
29](../../../bib/apo/sir026.htm#029)<span id="ix.v.i-p17.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2943"></span>[434:2944](0070446.htm#fr_2943) <span
id="ix.v.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p18"></span> [Isa. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)<span id="ix.v.i-p18.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2944"></span>[434:2945](0070446.htm#fr_2944) <span
id="ix.v.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p19"></span> [Deut.
xxiii.](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#000) <span
id="ix.v.i-p19.1"></span><span id="ix.v.i-p19.2"></span>18.  

<span id="fn_2945"></span>[434:2946](0070446.htm#fr_2945) <span
id="ix.v.i-p19.4"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p20"></span> [1 Kings
xiii](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#000)<span id="ix.v.i-p20.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2946"></span>[434:2947](0070446.htm#fr_2946) <span
id="ix.v.i-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p21"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#016)<span id="ix.v.i-p21.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2947"></span>[434:2948](0070446.htm#fr_2947) <span
id="ix.v.i-p21.4"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p22"></span> [Jer. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)<span id="ix.v.i-p22.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2948"></span>[434:2949](0070446.htm#fr_2948) <span
id="ix.v.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p23"></span> [Jer. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)<span id="ix.v.i-p23.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2949"></span>[435:2950](0070446.htm#fr_2949) <span
id="ix.v.i-p24.4"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p25"></span> [2 Kings
viii](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#000)<span id="ix.v.i-p25.1"></span>.
\[Offerings to God are privileges of saints.\]  

<span id="fn_2950"></span>[435:2951](0070446.htm#fr_2950) <span
id="ix.v.i-p25.4"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p26"></span> [1 Kings
xiv](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#000)<span id="ix.v.i-p26.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2951"></span>[435:2952](0070446.htm#fr_2951) <span
id="ix.v.i-p26.5"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p27"></span> [Acts
viii](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#000)<span id="ix.v.i-p27.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2952"></span>[435:2953](0070446.htm#fr_2952) <span
id="ix.v.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p28"></span> [Isa. liv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#014)<span id="ix.v.i-p28.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2953"></span>[435:2954](0070446.htm#fr_2953) <span
id="ix.v.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p30"></span> [Ps. cxli.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005)<span id="ix.v.i-p30.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2954"></span>[435:2955](0070446.htm#fr_2954) <span
id="ix.v.i-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p32"></span> [Prov. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009)<span id="ix.v.i-p32.1"></span>., etc
 

<span id="fn_2955"></span>[435:2956](0070446.htm#fr_2955) <span
id="ix.v.i-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p33"></span> [Prov. xxiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011)<span id="ix.v.i-p33.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2956"></span>[435:2957](0070446.htm#fr_2956) <span
id="ix.v.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v.i-p35"></span> [Lev. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#006)<span id="ix.v.i-p35.1"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. II.—On Domestic and Social Life](0070447)
