[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070146)  [Next](0070148.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p0.1"></span>Chap. IX.—Of the Law and Precept of God; Of Mercy, and the Error of the Philosophers.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p1"></span>The first head of this law is, to know
God Himself, to obey Him alone, to worship Him alone. For he cannot
maintain the character of a man who is ignorant of God, the parent of
his soul: which is the greatest impiety. For this ignorance causes him
to serve other gods, and no greater crime than this can be committed.
Hence there is now so easy a step to wickedness through ignorance of the
truth and of the chief good; since God, from the knowledge of whom he
shrinks, is Himself the fountain of goodness. Or if he shall wish to
follow the justice of God, yet, being ignorant of the divine law, he
embraces the laws of his own country as true justice, though they were
clearly devised not by justice, but by utility. For why is it that there
are different and various laws amongst all people, but that each nation
has enacted for itself that which it deemed useful for its own affairs?
But how greatly utility differs from justice the Roman people themselves
teach, who, by proclaiming war through the Fecials, and by inflicting
injuries according to legal forms, by always desiring and carrying off
the property of other, have gained for themselves the possession of the
whole world. <span id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140.md) But these
persons think themselves just if they do nothing against their own laws;
which may be even ascribed to fear, if they abstain from crimes through
dread of present punishment. But let us grant that they do that
naturally, or, as the philosopher says, of their own accord, which they
are compelled to do by the laws. Will they therefore be just, because
they obey the institutions of men, who may themselves have erred, or
have been unjust?—as it was with the framers of the twelve tables, who
certainly promoted the public advantage according to the condition of
the times. Civil law is one thing, which varies everywhere according to
customs; but justice is another thing, which God has set forth to all as
uniform and simple: and he who is ignorant of God must also be ignorant
of justice.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p3"></span>But let us suppose it possible that
any one, by natural and innate goodness, should gain true virtues, such
a man as we have heard that <span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p3.1"></span>Cimon
was at Athens, who both gave alms to the needy, and entertained the
poor, and clothed the naked; yet, when that one thing which is of the
greatest importance is wanting—the acknowledgment of God—then all those
good things are superfluous and empty, so that in pursuing them he has
laboured in vain. <span id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141.md) For all his
justice will resemble a human body which has no head, in which, although
all the limbs are in their proper position, and figure, and proportion,
yet, since that is wanting which is the chief thing of all, it is
destitute both of life and of all sensation. Therefore those limbs have
only the shape of limbs, but admit of no use, as much so as a head
without a body; and he resembles this who is not without the knowledge
of God, but yet lives unjustly. For he has that only which is of the
greatest importance; but he has it to no purpose, since he is destitute
of the virtues, as it were, of limbs.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p5"></span>Therefore, that the body may be alive,
and capable of sensation, both the knowledge of God is necessary, as it
were the head, and all the virtues, as it were the body. Thus there will
exist a perfect and living man; but, however, the whole substance is in
the head; and although this cannot exist in the absence of all, it may
exist in the absence of some. And it will be an imperfect and faulty
animal, but yet it will be alive, as he who knows God and yet sins in
some respect. For God pardons sins. And <span id="page_172">p.
172</span> <span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-Page_172"></span>thus it is possible
to live without some of the limbs, but it is by no means possible to
live without a head. This is the reason why the philosophers, though
they may be naturally good, yet have no knowledge and no intelligence.
All their learning and virtue is without a head, because they are
ignorant of God, who is the Head of virtue and knowledge; and he who is
ignorant of Him, though he may see, is blind; though he may hear, is
deaf; though he may speak, is dumb. But when he shall know the Creator
and Parent of all things, then he will both see, and hear, and speak.
For he begins to have a head, in which all the senses are placed, that
is, the eyes, and ears, and tongue. For assuredly he sees who has beheld
with the eyes of his mind the truth in which God is, or God in whom the
truth is; he hears, who imprints on his heart the divine words and
life-giving precepts; he speaks, who, in discussing heavenly things,
relates the virtue and majesty of the surpassing God. Therefore he is
undoubtedly impious who does not acknowledge God; and all his virtues,
which he thinks that he has or possesses, are found in that deadly road
which belongs altogether to darkness. Wherefore there is no reason why
any one should congratulate himself if he has gained these empty
virtues, because he is not only wretched who is destitute of present
goods, but he must also be foolish, since he undertakes the greatest
labours in his life without any purpose. For if the hope of immortality
is taken away, which God promises to those who continue in His religion,
for the sake of obtaining which virtue is to be sought, and whatever
evils happen are to be endured, it will assuredly be the greatest folly
to wish to comply with virtues which in vain bring calamities and
labours to man. For if it is virtue to endure and undergo with
fortitude, want, exile, pain, and death, which are feared by others,
what goodness, I pray, has it in itself, that philosophers should say
that it is to be sought for on its own account? Truly they are delighted
with superfluous and useless punishments, when it is permitted them to
live in tranquillity.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p6"></span>For if our souls are mortal, if virtue
is about to have no existence after the dissolution of the body, why do
we avoid the goods assigned to us, as though we were ungrateful or
unworthy of enjoying the divine gifts? For, that we may enjoy these
blessings, we must live in wickedness and impiety, because virtue, that
is, justice, is followed by poverty. Therefore he is not of sound mind,
who, without having any greater hope set before him, prefers labours,
and tortures, and miseries, to those goods which others enjoy in
life. <span id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142.md) But if virtue is to be
taken up, as is most rightly said by these, because it is evident that
man is born to it, it ought to contain some greater hope, which may
apply a great and illustrious solace for the ills and labours which it
is the part of virtue to endure. Nor can virtue, since it is difficult
in itself, be esteemed as a good in any other way than by having its
hardship compensated by the greatest good. We can in no other way
equally abstain from these present goods, than if there are other
greater goods on account of which it is worth while to leave the pursuit
of pleasures, and to endure all evils. But these are no other, as I have
shown in the third book, <span id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143.md) than
the goods of everlasting life. Now who can bestow these except God, who
has proposed to us virtue itself? Therefore the sum and substance of
everything is contained in the acknowledging and worship of God; all the
hope and safety of man centres in this; this is the first step of
wisdom, to know who is our true Father, and to worship Him alone with
the piety which is due to Him, to obey Him, to yield ourselves to His
service with the utmost devotedness: let our entire acting, and care,
and attention, be laid out in gaining His favour. <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144.md)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[171:1141](0070147.htm#fr_1140.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p2"></span> \[[Dan vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p2.1"></span>. An appeal for reformation.\]  

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[171:1142](0070147.htm#fr_1141.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p4"></span> \[[1 Cor. iii.
11-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p4.1"></span>. But are the heathen to be judged by the
New Covenant? See vol. ii. (<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p4.2"></span>Clement,
<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p4.3"></span>sparsim), this series.\]  

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[172:1143](0070147.htm#fr_1142.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p7"></span> \[[1 Cor. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p7.1"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[172:1144](0070147.htm#fr_1143.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p8"></span> \[See cap. 12, p. 79, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p8.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[172:1145](0070147.htm#fr_1144.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p9.1"></span>In eo promerendo. \[[John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.ix-p9.2"></span>.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. X.—Of religion towards God, and mercy towards men; and of
the beginning of the world](0070148.md)
