[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070063)  [Next](0070065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIII.—Of the Immortality of the Soul, and of Wisdom, Philosophy, and Eloquence.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p1"></span>The subject seems to require in
this place, that since we have taught that immortality is the chief
good, we should prove this also, that the soul is immortal. On which
subject there is great disputation among philosophers; nor have they who
held true opinions respecting the soul been able to explain or prove
anything: for, being destitute of divine knowledge, they neither brought
forward true arguments by which they might overcome, nor evidence by
which they might convince. But we shall treat of this question more
conveniently in the last book, when we shall have to discuss the subject
of a happy life. There remains that third part of philosophy, which they
call Logic, in which the whole subject of dialectics and the whole
method of speaking are contained. Divine learning does not stand in need
of this, because the seat of wisdom is not the tongue, but the heart;
and it makes no difference what kind of language you employ, for the
question is not about words, <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) but
facts. And we are not disputing about the grammarian or the orator,
whose knowledge is concerned with the proper manner of speaking, but
about the wise man, whose learning is concerned with the right manner of
living. But if that system of natural philosophy before mentioned is not
necessary, nor this of logic, because they are not able to render a man
happy, it remains that the whole force of philosophy is contained in the
ethical part alone, to which <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Socrates is said to have applied
himself, laying aside the others. And since I have shown that
philosophers erred in this part also, who did not grasp the chief good,
for the sake of gaining which we are born; it appears that philosophy is
altogether false and empty, since it does not prepare us for the duties
of justice, nor strengthen the obligations and settled course of man’s
life. Let them know, therefore, that they are in error who imagine that
philosophy is wisdom; let them not be drawn away by the authority of any
one; but rather let them incline to the truth, and approach it. There is
no room for rashness here; we must endure the punishment of our folly to
all eternity, if we shall be deceived either by an empty character or a
false opinion. But man, <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) such as
he is, if he trusts in himself, that is, if he trusts in man, is (not to
say foolish, in that he does not see his own error) undoubtedly
arrogant, in venturing to claim for himself that which the condition of
man does not admit of.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p4"></span>And how much that greatest author
of the Roman language is deceived, we may see from that sentiment of
his; for when, in his “Books on Offices,” <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) he had said that philosophy is nothing
else than the desire of wisdom, and that wisdom itself is the knowledge
of things divine and human, added: “And if any one censures the desire
of this, I do not indeed understand what there is which he imagines
praiseworthy. For if enjoyment of the mind and rest from cares is
sought, what enjoyment can be compared with the pursuits of those who
are always inquiring into something which has reference to and tends to
promote a good and happy life? Or if any account is taken of consistency
and virtue, either this is the study <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) by which we may attain them, or there
is none at all. To say that there is no system in connection with the
greatest subjects, when none of the least is without a system, is the
part of men speaking inconsiderately, and erring in the greatest
subjects. But if there is any discipline of virtue, where shall it be
sought when you have departed from that kind of learning?” For my own
part, although I endeavoured to attain in some degree to the means of
acquiring learning, on account of my desire to teach others, yet I have
never been eloquent, inasmuch as I never even engaged in <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-Page_82"></span>public speaking; but the goodness of
the cause cannot fail of itself to make me eloquent, and for its clear
and copious defence the knowledge of divinity and the truth itself are
sufficient. I could wish, therefore, that <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p6.2"></span>Cicero might for a short time rise from
the dead, that a man of such consummate eloquence might be taught by an
insignificant person who is devoid of eloquence, first, what that is
which is deemed worthy of praise by him who blames that study which is
called philosophy; and in the next place, that it is not that study by
which virtue and justice are learned, nor any other, as he thought; and
lastly, that since there is a discipline of virtue, he might be taught
where it is to be sought, when you have laid aside that kind of
learning, which he did not seek for the sake of hearing and learning.
For from whom could he hear when no one knew it? But, as his usual
practice was in pleading causes, he wished to press <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p6.3"></span>his opponent by questioning, and thus
to lead him to confession, as though he were confident that no answer
could be given to show that philosophy was not the instructress of
virtue. And in the Tusculan disputations he openly professed this,
turning his speech to philosophy, as though he was showing himself off
by a declamatory style of speaking. “O philosophy, thou guide of life,”
he says; “O thou investigator of virtue, and expeller of vices; what
could not only we, but the life of men, have effected at all without
thee? Thou hast been the inventor of laws, thou the teacher of morals
and discipline;”—as though, indeed, she could perceive anything by
herself, and he were not rather to be praised who gave her. In the same
manner he might have given thanks to food and drink, because without
these life could not exist; yet these, while they minister to sense,
confer no benefit. But as these things are the nourishment of the body,
so wisdom is of the soul.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_407"></span>[81:408](0070064.htm#fr_407) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p2"></span> There is a memorable story related
by ecclesiastical historians, about a very clever disputant, whose
sophistries could not be answered by his fellow-disputants, but who was
completely silenced by the simple answers of a Christian otherwise
unknown. When questioned about his sudden silence, the sophist replied
that others exchanged words for words, but that this simple Christian
fought with virtue.  

<span id="fn_408"></span>[81:409](0070064.htm#fr_408) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p3"></span> There seems to be a reference to a
passage of Terence, in which the poet represents it as the property of
man to err. \[Or to <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>Cicero,
rather: <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p3.2"></span>Cujusvis hominis est
errare, etc. Philipp. xii. 2<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p3.3"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_409"></span>[81:410](0070064.htm#fr_409) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p5.2"></span>De Officiis, ii. 2.  

<span id="fn_410"></span>[81:411](0070064.htm#fr_410) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiii-p6.1"></span>Ars denotes study, method, or system.
The word is applied both to theoretical knowledge and practical skill.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIV.—That Lucretius and others have erred, and Cicero
himself, in fixing the origin of wisdom](0070065)
