[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070190)  [Next](0070192.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXVII.—An Encouragement and Confirmation of the Pious.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p1"></span>Since we have completed the seven
courses <span id="fr_1437"></span>[1438](#fn_1437.md) of the work which we
undertook, and have advanced to the goal, it remains that we exhort all
to undertake wisdom together with true religion, the strength and office
of which depends on this, that, despising earthly things, and laying
aside the errors by which we were formerly held while we served frail
things, and desired frail things, we may be directed to the eternal
rewards of the heavenly treasure. And that we may obtain these, the
alluring pleasures of the present life must as soon as possible be laid
aside, which soothe the souls of men with pernicious sweetness. How
great a happiness must it be thought, to be withdrawn from these stains
of the earth, and to go to that most just Judge and indulgent Father,
who in the place of labours gives rest, in the place of death life, in
the place of darkness brightness, and in the place of short and earthly
goods, gives those which are eternal and heavenly: with which reward the
hardships and miseries which we endure in this world, in accomplishing
the works of righteousness, can in no way be compared and equalled.
Therefore, if we wish to be wise and happy, not only must those sayings
of <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>Terence be reflected upon and
proposed to us,  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p2.3"></span> “That we must ever grind at
> the mill, we must be beaten, and put in fetters;” <span
> id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p4"></span>but things much more dreadful than
these must be endured, namely, the prison, chains, and tortures: pains
must be undergone, in short, death itself must be undertaken and borne,
when it is clear to our conscience that that frail pleasure will not be
without punishment, nor virtue without a divine reward. All, therefore,
ought to endeavour either to direct themselves to the right way as soon
as possible, or, having undertaken and exercised virtues, and having
patiently performed the labours of this life, to deserve to have God as
their comforter. For our Father and Lord, who built and strengthened the
heaven, who placed in it the sun, with the other heavenly bodies, who by
His power weighed the earth and fenced it with mountains, surrounded it
with the sea, and divided it with rivers, and who made and completed out
of nothing whatever there is in this workmanship of the world; having
observed the errors of men, sent a Guide, who might open to us the way
of righteousness: let us all follow Him, let us hear Him, let us obey
Him with the greatest devotedness, since He alone, as <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>Lucretius says, <span
id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439.md)  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p5.2"></span> “Cleansed men’s breasts with
> truth-telling precepts, and fixed a limit to lust and fear, and
> explained what was the chief good which we all strive to reach, and
> pointed out the road by which, along a narrow track, we might arrive
> at it in a straightforward course.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p6"></span>And not only pointed it out, but
also went before us in it, that no one might dread the path of virtue on
account of its difficulty. Let the way of destruction and deceit, if it
is possible, be deserted, in which death is concealed, being covered by
the attractions of pleasure.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p7"></span>And the more nearly each one, as
his years incline to old age, sees to be the approach of that day in
which he must depart from this life, let him reflect how he may leave it
in purity, how he may come to the Judge in innocency; not as they do, to
whose dark minds the light is denied, <span
id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440.md) who, when the strength of their
body now fails, are admonished in this of the last pressing necessity,
that they should with greater eagerness and ardour apply themselves to
the satisfying of their lusts. From which abyss let everyone free
himself while it is permitted him, while the opportunity is present, and
let him turn himself to God with his whole mind, that he may without
anxiety await that day, in which God, the Ruler and Lord of the world,
shall judge the deeds and thoughts of each. Whatever things are here
desired, let him not only neglect, but also avoid them, and let him
judge that his soul is of greater value than those deceitful goods, the
possession of which is uncertain and transitory; for they take their
departure every day, and they go forth much more quickly than they had
entered, and if it is permitted us to enjoy them even to the last, they
must still, without doubt, be left to others. We can take nothing with
us, except a well and innocently spent life. That man will appear before
God with abundant resources, that man will appear in opulence, to whom
there shall belong self-restraint, mercy, patience, love, and faith.
This is our inheritance, which can neither be taken away from any one,
nor transferred to another. <span id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-Page_223"></span>And who is there who would wish to
provide and acquire for himself these goods?  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p9"></span>Let those who are hungry come,
that being fed with heavenly food, they may lay aside their lasting
hunger; let those who are athirst come, that they may with full mouth
draw forth the water of salvation from an ever-flowing fountain. <span
id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441.md) By this divine food and drink the
blind shall both see, and the deaf hear, and the dumb speak, and the
lame walk, and the foolish shall be wise, and the sick shall be strong,
and the dead shall come to life again. For whoever by his virtue has
trampled upon the corruptions of the earth, the supreme and truthful
arbiter will raise him to life and to perpetual light. Let no one trust
in riches, no one in badges of authority, no one even in royal power:
these things do not make a man immortal. For whosoever shall cast away
the conduct becoming a man, <span id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442.md)
and, following present things, shall prostrate himself upon the ground,
will be punished as a deserter from his Lord, his commander, and his
Father. Let us therefore apply ourselves to righteousness, which will
alone, as an inseparable companion, lead us to God; and “while a spirit
rules these limbs,” <span id="fr_1443"></span>[1444](#fn_1443.md) let us
serve God with unwearied service, let us keep our posts and watches, let
us boldly engage with the enemy whom we know, that victorious and
triumphant over our conquered adversary, we may obtain from the Lord
that reward of valour which He Himself has promised.  

<span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p13"></span>\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
 

##### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p13.1"></span>General Note.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p14.1"></span>For</span> remarks on the dubious
passages which bear upon that of p. 221, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p14.3"></span>supra, see the <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p14.4"></span>General Note suffixed to the tractate
on the <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p14.5"></span>Workmanship of God, p.
300, <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p14.7"></span>infra.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[222:1438](0070191.htm#fr_1437.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>Decursis septem spatiis,—an expression
borrowed from the chariot race: here applied to the seven books of this
treatise.  

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[222:1439](0070191.htm#fr_1438.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p2.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>Terent., <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>Phorm., ii. 1. 19.  

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[222:1440](0070191.htm#fr_1439.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>De Nat. Rer., vi. 24.  

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[222:1441](0070191.htm#fr_1440.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>Quorum cæcis mentibus lux negatur.
Others read, “<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p8.2"></span>Quidam cæcis
mentibus viri.”  

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[223:1442](0070191.htm#fr_1441.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p10"></span> \[This evident quotation from
[Rev. xxi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p10.1"></span> and xxii. 17 is noteworthy as proof
of the currency of the Apocalypse in North Africa.\]  

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[223:1443](0070191.htm#fr_1442.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>Rationem hominis.  

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[223:1444](0070191.htm#fr_1443.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxvii-p12.2"></span>Æneid, iv. 336.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epitome of the Divine Institutes](0070192.md)
