[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070149)  [Next](0070151.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XII.—Of the Kinds of Beneficence, and Works of Mercy.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p1"></span>This is that perfect justice which
protects human society, concerning which philosophers <span
id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-Page_176"></span>speak. This is the chief and truest
advantage of riches; not to use wealth for the particular pleasure of an
individual, but for the welfare of many; not for one’s own immediate
enjoyment, but for justice, which alone does not perish. We must
therefore by all means keep in mind, that the hope of receiving in
return must be altogether absent from the duty of showing mercy: for the
reward of this work and duty must be expected from God alone; for if you
should expect it from man, then that will not be kindness, but the
lending of a benefit at interest; <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169.md) nor can he seem to have deserved
well who affords that which he does, not to another, but to himself. And
yet the matter comes to this, that whatever a man has bestowed upon
another, hoping for no advantage from him, he really bestows upon
himself, for he will receive a reward from God. God has also enjoined,
that if at any time we make a feast, we should invite to the
entertainment those who cannot invite us in return, and thus make us a
recompense, so that no action of our life should be without the exercise
of mercy. Nor, however, let any one think that he is debarred from
intercourse with his friends or kindness with his neighbours. But God
has made known to us what is our true and just work: we ought thus to
live with our neighbours, provided that we know that the one manner of
living relates to man, the other to God. <span
id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p4"></span>Therefore hospitality is a principal
virtue, as the philosophers also say; but they turn it aside from true
justice, and forcibly apply <span id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171.md)
it to advantage. <span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p5.2"></span>Cicero says: <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172.md) “Hospitality was rightly praised by
<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p6.2"></span>Theophrastus. For (as it appears to
me) it is highly becoming that the houses of illustrious men should be
open to illustrious guests.” He has here committed the same error which
he then did, when he said that we must bestow our bounty on “suitable”
persons. For the house of a just and wise man ought not to be open to
the illustrious, but to the lowly and abject. For those illustrious and
powerful men cannot be in want of anything, since they are sufficiently
protected and honoured by their own opulence. But nothing is to be done
by a just man except that which is a benefit. But if the benefit is
returned, it is destroyed and brought to an end; for we cannot possess
in its completeness that for which a price has been paid to us.
Therefore the principle of justice is employed about those benefits
which have remained safe and uncorrupted; but they cannot thus remain by
any other means than if they are be stowed upon those men who can in no
way profit us. But in receiving illustrious men, he looked to nothing
else but utility; nor did the ingenious man conceal what advantage he
hoped from it. For he says that he who does that will become powerful
among foreigners by the favour of the leading men, whom he will have
bound to himself by the right of hospitality and friendship. O by how
many arguments might the inconsistency of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p6.3"></span>Cicero be proved, if this were my object!
Nor would he be convicted so much by my words as by his own. For he also
says, that the more any one refers all his actions to his own advantage,
the less he is a good man. He also says, that it is not the part of a
simple and open man to ingratiate himself in the favour of others, <span
id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173.md) to pretend and allege anything, to
appear to be doing one thing when he is doing another, to feign that he
is bestowing upon another that which he is bestowing upon himself; but
that this is rather the part of one who is designing <span
id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174.md) and crafty, deceitful and
treacherous. But how could he maintain that that ambitious hospitality
was not evil intention? <span id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175.md) “Do
you run round through all the gates, that you may invite to your house
the chief men of the nations and cities as they arrive, that by their
means you may acquire influence with their citizens; and wish yourself
to be called just, and kind, and hospitable, though you are studying to
promote your own advantage?” But did he not say this rather
incautiously? For what is less suitable for <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p9.2"></span>Cicero? But through his ignorance of true
justice he knowingly and with foresight fell into this snare. And that
he might be pardoned for this, he testified that he does not give
precepts with reference to true justice, which he does not hold, but
with reference to a sketch and outline of justice. Therefore we must
pardon this teacher who uses sketches and outlines, <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176.md) nor must we require the truth from
him who admits that he is ignorant of it.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p11"></span>The ransoming of captives is a great
and noble exercise of justice, of which the same <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p11.1"></span>Tullius also approved. <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177.md) “And this liberality,” he says, “is
serviceable even to the state, that captives should be ransomed from
slavery, and that those of slender resources should be provided for. And
I greatly prefer this practice of liberality to lavish expenditure on
shows. This is the part of great and eminent men.” Therefore it is the
appropriate work of the just to support the poor and to ransom captives,
since <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-Page_177"></span>among the unjust if any do these
things they are called great and eminent. For it is deserving of the
greatest praise for those to confer benefit from whom no one expected
such conduct. For he who does good to a relative, or neighbour, or
friend, either deserves no praise, or certainly no great praise, because
he is bound to do it, and he would be impious and detestable if he did
not do that which both nature itself and relationship require; and if he
does it, he does it not so much for the sake of obtaining glory as of
avoiding censure. But he who does it to a stranger and an unknown
person, he truly is worthy of praise, because he was led to do it by
kindness only. Justice therefore exists there, where there is no
obligation of necessity for conferring a benefit. He ought not therefore
to have preferred this duty of generosity to expenditure on shows; for
this is the part of one making a comparison, and of two goods choosing
that which is the better. For that profusion of men throwing away their
property into the sea is vain and trifling, and very far removed from
all justice. Therefore they are not even to be called gifts, <span
id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178.md) in which no one receives but he who
does not deserve to receive.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p14"></span>Nor is it less a great work of
justice to protect and defend orphans and widows who are destitute and
stand in need of assistance; and therefore that divine law prescribes
this to all, since all good judges deem that it belongs to their office
to favour them with natural kindness, and to strive to benefit them. But
these works are especially ours, since we have received the law, and the
words of God Himself giving us instructions. For they perceive that it
is naturally just to protect those who need protection, but they do not
perceive why it is so. For God, to whom everlasting mercy belongs, on
this account commands that widows and orphans should be defended and
cherished, that no one through regard and pity for his pledges <span
id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179.md) should be prevented from undergoing
death in behalf of justice and faith, but should encounter it with
promptitude and boldness, since he knows that he leaves his beloved ones
to the care of God, and that they will never want protection. Also to
undertake the care and support of the sick, who need some one to assist
them, is the part of the greatest kindness, and of great
beneficence; <span id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180.md) and he who shall
do this will both gain a living sacrifice to God, and that which he has
given to another for a time he will himself receive from God for
eternity. The last and greatest office of piety is the burying of
strangers and the poor; which subject those teachers of virtue and
justice have not touched upon at all. For they were unable to see this,
who measured all their duties by utility. For in the other things which
have been mentioned above, although they did not keep the true path,
yet, since they discovered some advantage in these things, retained as
it were by a kind of inkling <span id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181.md)
of the truth, they wandered to a less distance; but they abandoned this
because they were unable to see any advantage in it.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p18"></span>Moreover, there have not been
wanting those who esteemed burial as superfluous, and said that it was
no evil to lie unburied and neglected; but their impious wisdom is
rejected alike by the whole human race, and by the divine expressions
which command the performance of the rite. <span
id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182.md) But they do not venture to say that
it ought not to be done, but that, if it happens to be omitted, no
inconvenience is the result. Therefore in that matter they discharge the
office, not so much of those who give precepts, as of those who suggest
consolation, that if this shall by chance have occurred to a wise man,
he should not deem himself wretched on this account. But we do not speak
of that which ought to be endured by a wise man, but of that which he
himself ought to do. Therefore we do not now inquire whether the whole
system of burial is serviceable or not; but this, even though it be
useless, as they imagine, must nevertheless be practised, even on this
account only, that it appears among men to be done rightly and kindly.
For it is the feeling which is inquired into, and it is the purpose
which is weighed. Therefore we will not suffer the image and workmanship
of God to lie exposed as a prey to beasts and birds, but we will restore
it to the earth, from which it had its origin; and although it be in the
case of an unknown man, we will fulfil the office of relatives, into
whose place, since they are wanting, let kindness succeed; and wherever
there shall be need of man, there we will think that our duty is
required. <span id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183.md) But in what does
the nature of justice more consist than in our affording to strangers
through kindness, that which we render to our own relatives through
affection? And this kindness is much more sure and just when it is now
afforded, not to the man who is insensible, but to God alone, to whom a
just work is a most acceptable sacrifice. Some one will perhaps say: If
I shall do all these things, I shall have no possessions. For what if a
great number of men shall be in want, shall suffer cold, shall be taken
captive, shall die, since one who acts thus must deprive himself of his
property even in a single day, shall I throw away the estate <span
id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-Page_178"></span>acquired by my own labour or by that
of my ancestors, so that after this I myself must live by the pity of
others?  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p21"></span>Why do you so pusillanimously fear
poverty, which even your philosophers praise, and bear witness that
nothing is safer and nothing more calm than this? That which you fear is
a haven against anxieties. Do you not know to how many dangers, to how
many accidents, you are exposed with these evil resources? These will
treat you well if they shall pass without your bloodshed. But you walk
about laden with booty, and you bear spoils which may excite the minds
even of your own relatives. Why, then, do you hesitate to lay that out
well which perhaps a single robbery will snatch away from you, or a
proscription suddenly arising, or the plundering of an enemy? Why do you
fear to make a frail and perishable good everlasting, or to entrust your
treasures to God as their preserver, in which case you need not fear
thief and robber, nor rust, nor tyrant? He who is rich towards God can
never be poor. <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184.md) If you esteem
justice so highly, lay aside the burthens which press you, and follow
it; free yourself from fetters and chains, that you may run to God
without any impediment. It is the part of a great and lofty mind to
despise and trample upon mortal affairs. But if you do not comprehend
this virtue, that you may bestow your riches upon the altar <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185.md) of God, in order that you may
provide for yourself firmer possessions than these frail ones, I will
free you from fear. All these precepts are not given to you alone, but
to all the people who are united in mind, and hold together as one man.
If you are not adequate to the performance of great works alone,
cultivate justice with all your power, in such a manner, however, that
you may excel others in work as much as you excel them in riches. And do
not think that you are advised to lessen or exhaust your property; but
that which you would have expended on superfluities, turn to better
uses. Devote to the ransoming of captives that from which you purchase
beasts; maintain the poor with that from which you feed wild beasts;
bury the innocent dead with that from which you provide men for the
sword. <span id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186.md) What does it profit to
enrich men of abandoned wickedness, who fight with beasts, <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187.md) and to equip them for crimes?
Transfer things about to be miserably thrown away to the great
sacrifice, that in return for these true gifts you may have an
everlasting gift from God. Mercy has a great reward; for God promises
it, that He will remit all sins. If you shall hear, He says, the prayers
of your suppliant, I also will hear yours; if you shall pity those in
distress, I also will pity you in your distress. But if you shall not
regard nor assist them, I also will bear a mind like your own against
you, and I will judge you by your own laws. <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188.md)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[176:1170](0070150.htm#fr_1169.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>Beneficii fœneratio.  

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[176:1171](0070150.htm#fr_1170.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p3"></span> The meaning appears to be this: To
benefit our friends and relatives, relates to man, i.e., is a merely
human work; but to benefit those who cannot make a recompense is a
divine work, and its reward is to be expected from God.  

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[176:1172](0070150.htm#fr_1171.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p5.1"></span>Rapiunt.  

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[176:1173](0070150.htm#fr_1172.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p6.1"></span>De Offic., ii. 18.  

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[176:1174](0070150.htm#fr_1173.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p7.1"></span>Ambire.  

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[176:1175](0070150.htm#fr_1174.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p8.1"></span>Malitiosi et astuti.  

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[176:1176](0070150.htm#fr_1175.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p9.1"></span>Malitia, roguery. The word properly
signifies some legal trick by which the ends of justice are frustrated,
though the letter of the law is not broken.  

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[176:1177](0070150.htm#fr_1176.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p10.1"></span>Umbratico et imaginario præceptori.  

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[176:1178](0070150.htm#fr_1177.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p12.1"></span>De Officiis, ii. 18.  

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[177:1179](0070150.htm#fr_1178.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p13.1"></span>Munera. The same word is used for
“shows,” as of gladiators, or contests of wild beasts, exhibited to the
people.  

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[177:1180](0070150.htm#fr_1179.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p15"></span> i.e., children.  

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[177:1181](0070150.htm#fr_1180.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p16.1"></span>Operationis.  

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[177:1182](0070150.htm#fr_1181.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p17.1"></span>Quasi odore quodam veritatis. The word
“<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p17.2"></span>odor” is sometimes used to
express “a presentiment” or “suspicion.”  

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[177:1183](0070150.htm#fr_1182.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p19"></span> \[[Gen. xlix.
29-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p19.1"></span>; [Mark
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p19.2"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[177:1184](0070150.htm#fr_1183.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p20"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p20.1"></span>Ennius; also in <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p20.2"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p20.3"></span>De Offic., i. cap. 16\]  

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[178:1185](0070150.htm#fr_1184.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p22"></span> \[[1 Tim. vi.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p22.1"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[178:1186](0070150.htm#fr_1185.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p23.1"></span>In aram Dei. Others read “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p23.2"></span>arcam,” the chest.  

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[178:1187](0070150.htm#fr_1186.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p24"></span> i.e., “gladiators purchased from a
trainer for the gratification of the people.”  

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[178:1188](0070150.htm#fr_1187.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p25"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p25.1"></span>Bestiarios: men who fought with beasts
in the amphitheatre.  

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[178:1189](0070150.htm#fr_1188.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p26"></span> \[[Matt. xviii.
21-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xii-p26.1"></span>. Exposition of vi. 14.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIII.—Of repentance, of mercy, and the forgiveness of
sins](0070151.md)
