[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070118)  [Next](0070120.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p0.1"></span>Chap. VI.—After the Banishment of Justice, Lust, Unjust Laws, Daring, Avarice, Ambition, Pride, Impiety, and Other Vices Reigned.

<span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p1"></span>And the source of all these evils was
lust; which, indeed, burst forth from the contempt of true majesty. For
not only did they who had a superfluity fail to bestow a share upon
others, but they even seized the property of others, drawing everything
to their private gain; and the things which formerly even individuals
laboured to obtain for the common use of men, <span
id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970.md) were now conveyed to the houses of a
few. For, that they might subdue others by slavery, they began
especially to withdraw and collect together the necessaries of life, and
to keep them firmly shut up, that they might make the bounties of heaven
their own; not on account of kindness, <span
id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971.md) a feeling which had no existence in
them, but that they might sweep together all the instruments of lust and
avarice. They also, under the name of justice, passed most unequal and
unjust laws, by which they might defend their plunder and avarice
against the force of the multitude. They prevailed, therefore, as much
by authority as by strength, or resources, or malice. And since there
was in them no trace of justice, the offices of which are humanity,
equity, pity, they now began to rejoice in a proud and swollen
inequality, and made <span id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972.md) themselves
higher than other men, by a retinue of attendants, and by the sword, and
by the brilliancy of their garments. For this reason they invented for
themselves honours, and purple robes, and fasces, that, being supported
by the terror produced by axes and swords, they might, as it were by the
right of masters, rule them, stricken with fear, and alarmed. Such was
the condition in which the life of man was placed by that king who,
having defeated and put to flight a parent, did not seize his kingdom,
but set up an impious tyranny by violence and armed men, and took away
that <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-Page_142"></span>golden age of justice, and compelled
men to become wicked and impious, even from this very circumstance, that
he turned them away from God to the worship of himself; and the terror
of his excessive power had extorted this.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p5"></span>For who would not fear him who was
girded about with arms, whom the unwonted gleam of steel and swords
surrounded? Or what stranger would he spare who had not even spared his
own father? Whom, in truth, should he fear, who had conquered in war,
and destroyed by massacre the race of the Titans, which was strong and
excelling in might? What wonder if the whole multitude, pressed by
unusual fear, had given themselves up to the adulation of a single man?
Him they venerated, to him they paid the greatest honour. And since it
is judged to be a kind of obsequiousness to imitate the customs and
vices of a king, all men laid aside piety, lest, if they should live
piously, they might seem to upbraid the wickedness of the king. Thus,
being corrupted by continual imitation, they abandoned divine right, and
the practice of living wickedly by degrees became a habit. And now
nothing remained of the pious and excellent condition of the preceding
age; but justice being banished, and drawing with her the truth, left to
men error, ignorance, and blindness. The poets therefore were ignorant,
who sung that she fled to heaven, to the kingdom of <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p5.1"></span>Jupiter. For if justice was on the earth in
the age which they call “golden,” it is plain that she was driven away
by <span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p5.2"></span>Jupiter, who changed the golden
age. But the change of the age and the expulsion of justice is to be
deemed nothing else, as I have said, than the laying aside of divine
religion, which alone effects that man should esteem man dear, and
should know that he is bound to him by the tie of brotherhood, since God
is alike a Father to all, so as to share the bounties of the common God
and Father with those who do not possess them; to injure no one, to
oppress no one, not to close his door against a stranger, nor his ear
against a suppliant, but to be bountiful, beneficent, and liberal, which
<span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p5.3"></span>Tullius <span
id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973.md) thought to be praises suitable to a
king. This truly is justice, and this is the golden age, which was first
corrupted when <span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p6.4"></span>Jupiter reigned, and
shortly afterwards, when he himself and all his offspring were
consecrated as gods, and the worship of many deities undertaken, had
been altogether taken away.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_970"></span>[141:971](0070119.htm#fr_970.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p2.1"></span>Hominum. Another reading is “<span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p2.2"></span>omnium,” of all, as opposed to the few.  

<span id="fn_971"></span>[141:972](0070119.htm#fr_971.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p3.1"></span>Propter humanitatem.  

<span id="fn_972"></span>[141:973](0070119.htm#fr_972.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p4.1"></span>Altiores se…faciebant. Another reading is,
“<span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p4.2"></span>altiores cæteris…fulgebant.”  

<span id="fn_973"></span>[142:974](0070119.htm#fr_973.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.vi-p6"></span> \[Compare <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p6.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p6.2"></span>De Officiis, i. 14, with [Luke xxii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.ii.v.vi-p6.3"></span>.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VII.—Of the coming of Jesus, and its fruit; and of the
virtues and vices of that age](0070120.md)
