[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070313)  [Next](0070315) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.v-p0.1"></span>Chap. V.

<span id="iii.v.v-p1"></span>And presently <span
id="iii.v.v-p1.1"></span>Valerian also, in a mood alike frantic, lifted
up his impious hands to assault God, and, although his time was short,
shed much righteous blood. But God punished him in a new and
extraordinary manner, that it might be a lesson to future ages that the
adversaries of Heaven always receive the just recompense of their
iniquities. He, having been made prisoner by the Persians, lost not only
that power which he had exercised without moderation, but also the
liberty of which be had deprived others; and he wasted the remainder of
his days in the vilest condition of slavery: for <span
id="iii.v.v-p1.2"></span>Sapores, the king of the Persians, who had made
him prisoner, whenever he chose to get into his carriage or to mount on
horseback, commanded the Roman to stoop and present his back; then,
setting his foot on the shoulders of <span
id="iii.v.v-p1.3"></span>Valerian, he said, with a smile of reproach,
“<span id="iii.v.v-p1.4"></span>This is true, and not what the Romans
delineate on board or plaster.” <span id="iii.v.v-p1.5"></span>Valerian
lived for a considerable time under the well-merited insults of his
conqueror; so that the Roman name remained long the scoff and derision
of the barbarians: and this also was added to the severity of his
punishment, that although he had an emperor for his son, he found no one
to revenge his captivity and most abject and servile <span
id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span id="iii.v.v-Page_303"></span>state;
neither indeed was he ever demanded back. Afterward, when he had
finished this shameful life under so great dishonour, he was flayed, and
his skin, stripped from the flesh, was dyed with vermilion, and placed
in the temple of the gods of the barbarians, that the remembrance of a
triumph so signal might be perpetuated, and that this spectacle might
always be exhibited to our ambassadors, as an admonition to the Romans,
that, beholding the spoils of their captived emperor in a Persian
temple, they should not place too great confidence in their own
strength.  

<span id="iii.v.v-p2"></span>Now since God so punished the sacrilegious,
is it not strange that any one should afterward have dared to do, or
even to devise, aught against the majesty of the one God, who governs
and supports all things?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VI](0070315)
