[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070404)  [Next](0070406) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="viii.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>section 3.—contents of teaching, and relation to other works.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p1"></span>In the Babel of conflicting opinions,
it is best to notice first the obvious internal phenomena. The first
part of the <span id="viii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>Teaching (now
distinguished as chaps. i.-vi.) sets forth the duty of the Christian; in
chaps. vii.-x., xiv., we find a directory for worship; chaps. xi.-xiii.,
xv., give advice respecting church officers, extraordinary and local,
and the reception of Christians; the closing chapter (xvi.) enjoins
watchfulness in view of the coming of Christ, which is then described.  

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p2"></span>The amount of matter is not so great as
that of the Sermon on the Mount.  

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p3"></span>The peculiarities of language are
marked, but can only be indicated here in footnotes. They point to a
period of transition from New-Testament usage to that of ecclesiastical
Greek. The citations from the Scriptures resemble those of the Apostolic
Fathers. The Gospel of Matthew is most frequently used, especially
chaps. v.-vii. and xxiv.; but some of the passages fairly imply a
knowledge of the Gospel of Luke. There are some remarkable
correspondences with expressions and thoughts found in the Gospel of
John, while there is good reason for inferring the writer’s acquaintance
with all the groups of Pauline Epistles. His allusions to the other
New-Testament books are less marked. There is nothing to prove that he
did not know all of our canonical books. If an early date is accepted,
the tone of the whole opposes the tendency-theory of the Tübingen
school.  

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p4"></span>The most striking internal phenomena
are, however, the correspondences of this document with early Christian
writings, from <span class="sc"><span
id="viii.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 125 to the fourth century. With
the so-called <span id="viii.ii.iii-p4.2"></span>Epistle to <span
id="viii.ii.iii-p4.3"></span>Barnabas, chaps. xviii.-xx., the
resemblances are so marked as to demand a critical theory which can
account for them. A few passages in the <span
id="viii.ii.iii-p4.4"></span>Shepherd of Hermas show some resemblance;
but only two sentences, in Commandment Second, are verbally the same.
There is a still greater agreement with the so-called <span
id="viii.ii.iii-p4.5"></span>Apostolical Church Order, of Egyptian
origin, probably as old as the third century. It is now known in the
Coptic (Memphitic), and also in Arabic and Greek. <span
id="fr_2360"></span>[2361](#fn_2360) The first thirteen canons
correspond quite closely, both in order and words, with chaps. i.-iv. of
the <span id="viii.ii.iii-p5.3"></span>Teaching  

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p6"></span>Most noteworthy, however, is the
parallel with the <span id="viii.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>Apostolic
Constitutions, vii. 1–32, which contain more than half the <span
id="viii.ii.iii-p6.2"></span>Teaching, in precisely the same order, with
very close verbal resemblances. The parts omitted are in most cases such
as had lost their pertinence in the fourth century, while they seem
appropriate to a much earlier period. The details will be found in the
footnotes to the <span id="viii.ii.iii-p6.3"></span>Teaching in this
volume. These phenomena have called forth voluminous discussions, and
are the most important facts in determining the authenticity and age of
the <span id="viii.ii.iii-p6.4"></span>Teaching  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2360"></span>[373:2361](0070405.htm#fr_2360) <span
id="viii.ii.iii-p4.6"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p5"></span> The <span
id="viii.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>Church Order is to be distinguished from
the Ethiopic collection of Apostolic canons; see Introductory Notice to
<span id="viii.ii.iii-p5.2"></span>Apostolic Constitutions.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4.—Authenticity](0070406)
