[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070161)  [Next](0070163.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXIV.—Of Repentance, of Pardon, and the Commands of God.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p1"></span>Nor, however, let any one be
disheartened, or despair concerning himself, if, overcome by passion, or
impelled by desire, or deceived by error, or compelled by force, he has
turned aside to the way of unrighteousness. For it is possible for him
to be brought back, and to be set free, if he repents of his actions,
and, turning to better things, makes satisfaction to God. <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Cicero, indeed, thought that this was
impossible, whose words in the third book of the Academics <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254.md) are: “But if, as in the case of
those who have gone astray on a journey, it were permitted those who
have followed a devious course to correct their error by repentance, it
would be more easy to amend rashness.” It is altogether permitted them.
For if we think that our children are <span id="page_191">p. 191</span>
<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-Page_191"></span>corrected when we perceive
that they repent of their faults, and though we have disinherited and
cast them off, we again receive, cherish, and embrace them, why should
we despair that the mercy of God our Father may again be appeased by
repentance? Therefore He who is at once the Lord and most indulgent
Parent promises that He will remit the sins of the penitent, and that He
will blot out all the iniquities of him who shall begin afresh to
practice righteousness. For as the uprightness of his past life is of no
avail to him who lives badly, because the subsequent wickedness has
destroyed his works of righteousness, so former sins do not stand in the
way of him who has amended his life, because the subsequent
righteousness has effaced the stain of his former life. For he who
repents of that which he has done, understands his former error; and on
this account the Greeks better and more significantly speak of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p2.1"></span>metanoia, <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255.md) which we may speak of in Latin as a
return to a right understanding. <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256.md) For he returns to a right
understanding, and recovers his mind as it were from madness, who is
grieved for his error; and he reproves himself of madness, and confirms
his mind to a better course of life: then he especially guards against
this very thing, that he may not again be led into the same snares. In
short, even the dumb animals, when they are ensnared by fraud, if by any
means they have extricated themselves so as to escape, become more
cautious for the future, and always avoid all those things in which they
have perceived wiles and snares. Thus repentance makes a man cautious
and diligent to avoid the faults into which he has once fallen through
deceit.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p5"></span>For no one can be so prudent and so
circumspect as not at some time to slip; and therefore God, knowing our
weakness, of His compassion <span id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257.md)
has opened a harbour of refuge for man, that the medicine of repentance
might aid this necessity to which our frailty is liable. <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258.md) Therefore, if any one has erred,
let him retrace his step, and as soon as possible recover and reform
himself.  

> <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p7.4"></span> “But upward to retrace the
> way,  
> And pass into the light of day,  
> Then comes the stress of labour.” <span
> id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p9"></span>For when men have tasted sweet
pleasures to their destruction, <span
id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260.md) they can scarcely be separated from
them: they would more easily follow right things if they had not tasted
their attractions. But if they tear themselves away from this pernicious
slavery, all their error will be forgiven them, if they shall have
corrected their error by a better life. And let not any one imagine that
he is a gainer if he shall have no witness of his fault: for all things
are known to Him in whose sight we live; and if we are able to conceal
anything from all men, we cannot conceal it from God, to whom nothing
can be hidden, nothing secret. <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p10.2"></span>Seneca closed his exhortations with an
admirable sentiment: “There is,” he says, “some great deity, and greater
than can be imagined; and for him we endeavour to live. Let us approve
ourselves to him. For it is of no avail that conscience is confirmed; we
lie open to the sight of God.” What can be spoken with greater truth by
him who knew God, than has been said by a man who is ignorant of true
religion? For he both expressed the majesty of God, by saying that it is
too great for the reflecting powers of the human mind to receive; and he
touched upon the very fountain of truth, by perceiving that the life of
men is not superfluous, <span id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261.md) as
the Epicureans will have it, but that they make it their endeavour to
live to God, if indeed they live with justice and piety. He might have
been a true worshipper of God, if any one had pointed out to him
God; <span id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262.md) and he might assuredly
have despised <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p19.2"></span>Zeno, and his
teacher <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p19.3"></span>Sotion, if he had
obtained a true guide of wisdom. Let us approve ourselves to him, he
says. A speech truly heavenly, had it not been preceded by a confession
of ignorance. It is of no avail that conscience is confined; we lie open
to the sight of God. There is then no room for falsehood, none for
dissimulation; for the eyes of men are removed by walls, but the divine
power of God cannot be removed by the inward parts from looking through
and knowing the entire man. The same writer says, in the first book of
the same work: “What are you doing? what are you contriving? what are
you hiding? Your guardian follows you; one is withdrawn from you by
foreign travel, another by death, another by infirm health; this one
adheres to you, and you can never be without him. Why do you choose a
secret place, and remove the witness? Suppose that you have succeeded in
escaping the notice of all, foolish man! What does it profit you not to
have a witness, <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263.md) if you have
the witness of your own conscience?  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p21"></span>And <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p21.1"></span>Tully speaks in a manner no less
remarkable concerning conscience and God: “Let him <span
id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-Page_192"></span>remember,” he says, “that he has God
as a witness, that is, as I judge, his own mind, than which God has
given nothing more divine to man.” <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264.md) Likewise, in speaking of the just
and good man, he says: “Therefore such a man will not dare not merely to
do, but even to think, anything which he would not dare to proclaim.”
Therefore let us cleanse our conscience, which is open to the eyes of
God; and, as the same writer says, “let us always so live as to remember
that we shall have to give an account;” <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265.md) and let us reckon that we are
looked upon at every moment, not, as he said, in some theatre of the
world by men, but from above by Him who is about to be both the judge
and also the witness, to whom, when He demands an account of our life,
it will not be permitted any one to deny his actions. Therefore it is
better either to flee from conscience, or ourselves to open our mind of
our own accord, and tearing open our wounds to pour forth destruction;
which wounds no one else can heal but He alone who made the lame to
walk, restored sight to the blind, cleansed the polluted limbs, and
raised the dead. He will quench the ardour of desires, He will root out
lusts, He will remove envy, He will mitigate anger. He will give true
and lasting health. This remedy should be sought by all, inasmuch as the
soul is harassed by greater danger than the body, and a cure should be
applied as soon as possible to secret diseases. For if any one has his
eyesight clear, all his limbs perfect, and his entire body in the most
vigorous health, nevertheless I should not call him sound if he is
carried away by anger, swollen and puffed up with pride, the slave of
lust, and burning with desires; but I should rather call him sound who
does not raise his eyes to the prosperity of another, who does not
admire riches, who looks upon another’s wife with chaste eye, who covets
nothing at all, does not desire that which is another’s, envies no one,
disdains no one; who is lowly, merciful, bountiful, mild, courteous:
peace perpetually dwells in his mind.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p24"></span>That man is sound, he is just, he
is perfect. Whoever, therefore, has obeyed all these heavenly precepts,
he is a worshipper of the true God, whose sacrifices are gentleness of
spirit, and an innocent life, and good actions. And he who exhibits all
these qualities offers a sacrifice as often as he performs any good and
pious action. For God does not desire the sacrifice of a dumb animal,
nor of death and blood, but of man and life. And to this sacrifice there
is neither need of sacred boughs, nor of purifications, <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266.md) nor of sods of turf, which things
are plainly most vain, but of those things which are put forth from the
innermost breast. Therefore, upon the altar of God, which is truly very
great, <span id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267.md) and which is placed in
the heart of man, and cannot be defiled with blood, there is placed
righteousness, patience, faith, innocence, chastity, and abstinence.
This is the truest ceremony, this is that law of God, as it is called by
<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p26.3"></span>Cicero, illustrious and divine,
which always commands things which are right and honourable, and forbids
things which are wrong and disgraceful; and he who obeys this most holy
and certain law cannot fail to live justly and lawfully. And I have laid
down a few chief points of this law, since I promised that I would speak
only of those things which completed the character <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268.md) of virtue and righteousness. If any
one shall wish to comprise all the other parts, let him seek them from
the fountain itself, from which that stream flowed to us.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[190:1255](0070162.htm#fr_1254.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p2"></span> \[From a lost book.\]  

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[191:1256](0070162.htm#fr_1255.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p3.1"></span>μετάνοια</span>. The word properly
denotes a change of mind, resulting in a change of conduct.  

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[191:1257](0070162.htm#fr_1256.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p4.1"></span>Resipiscentiam. \[Note the admitted
superiority of the Greek.\]  

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[191:1258](0070162.htm#fr_1257.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p6.1"></span>Pro pietate suâ. <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p6.2"></span>Augustine (<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p6.3"></span>De Civitate Dei, x. 1) explains the use
of this expression as applied to God.  

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[191:1259](0070162.htm#fr_1258.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p7"></span> \[Concerning the “planks after
shipwreck,” see <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p7.1"></span>Tertullian, pp.
659 and 666, vol. iii., this series.\]  

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[191:1260](0070162.htm#fr_1259.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p7.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p8.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p8.2"></span>Æneid, vi. 128.  

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[191:1261](0070162.htm#fr_1260.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p10.1"></span>Male.  

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[191:1262](0070162.htm#fr_1261.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p11.1"></span>Supervacuam, i.e., useless, without an
object. \[P. 171. n. 2.\]  

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[191:1263](0070162.htm#fr_1262.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p12"></span> \[May I be pardoned for asking my
reader to refer to refer to <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p12.1"></span>The
Task of the poet <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p12.2"></span>Cowper (book
ii.): “All truth is from the sempiternal source,” etc. The concluding
lines illustrate the kindly judgment of our author:—  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p13"></span>“How oft, when <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p13.1"></span>Paul has served us with a text,  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p14"></span>Has <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p14.1"></span>Epictetus, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p14.2"></span>Plato, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p14.3"></span>Tully, preached!  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p15"></span>Men that, if now alive, would sit
content  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p16"></span>And humble learners of a Saviour’s
worth,  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p17"></span>Preach it who might. Such was their
love of truth,  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p18"></span>Their thirst of knowledge, and
their candour too.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p19"></span>But turn to our author’s last
sentence in cap. 17, p. 183, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p19.1"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[191:1264](0070162.htm#fr_1263.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p20.1"></span>Conscium.  

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[192:1265](0070162.htm#fr_1264.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p22"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p22.1"></span>De Offic., iii. 10.  

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[192:1266](0070162.htm#fr_1265.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p23.1"></span>Ibid., iii. 19.  

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[192:1267](0070162.htm#fr_1266.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p25"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p25.1"></span>Februis, a word used in the Sabine
language for purgations. Others read “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p25.2"></span>fibris,” entrails, offered in
sacrifice.  

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[192:1268](0070162.htm#fr_1267.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p26"></span> There is an allusion to the altar
of <span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p26.1"></span>Hercules, called “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p26.2"></span>ara maxima.” \[Christian philosophy is
heard at last among Latins.\]  

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[192:1269](0070162.htm#fr_1268.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p27"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xxiv-p27.1"></span>Quæ summum fastigium imponerent. The
phrase properly means to complete a building by raising the pediment or
gable. Hence its figurative use. \[See cap. 2, p. 164.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXV.—Of sacrifice, and of an offering worthy of God, and of
the form of praising God](0070163.md)
