[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070466)  [Next](0070468.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ix.ii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p0.1"></span>Sec. II.—Election and Ordination of Bishops: Form of Service on Sundays.

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p0.2"></span>That to Make Constitutions About the Offices to Be Performed in the Churches is of Great Consequence.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>III</span>. We have now finished the first
part of this discourse concerning gifts, whatever they be, which God has
bestowed upon men according to His own will; and how He rebuked the ways
of those who either attempted to speak lies, or were moved by the spirit
of the adversary; and that God often employed the wicked <span
id="fr_3589"></span>[3590](#fn_3589.md) for prophecy and the performance of
wonders. But now our discourse hastens as to the principal part, that
is, the constitution of ecclesiastical affairs, that so, when ye have
learned this constitution from us, ye who are ordained bishops by us at
the command of Christ, may perform all things according to the commands
delivered you, knowing that he that heareth us heareth Christ, and he
that heareth Christ heareth His God and Father, <span
id="fr_3590"></span>[3591](#fn_3590.md) to whom be glory for ever. Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p3.2"></span>Concerning Ordinations.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p4.1"></span>IV</span>. Wherefore we, the twelve apostles
of the Lord, who are now together, give you in charge those divine
constitutions concerning every ecclesiastical form, there being present
with us <span id="ix.ix.ii-p4.2"></span>Paul the chosen vessel, our
fellow-apostle, and <span id="ix.ix.ii-p4.3"></span>James the bishop,
and the rest of the presbyters, and the seven deacons. <span
id="fr_3591"></span>[3592](#fn_3591.md) In the first place, therefore, I
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p5.5"></span>Peter say, <span
id="fr_3592"></span>[3593](#fn_3592.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p6.2"></span>that a bishop to be ordained is to be, as we
have already, all of us, appointed, unblameable in all things, a select
person, <span id="fr_3593"></span>[3594](#fn_3593.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p7.2"></span>chosen by the whole people, who, when he is
named and approved, let the people assemble, with the presbytery and
bishops that are present, on the Lord’s day, and let them give their
consent. <span id="ix.ix.ii-p7.3"></span>And let the principal of the
bishops ask the presbytery and <span id="page_482">p. 482</span> <span
id="ix.ix.ii-Page_482"></span><span id="ix.ix.ii-p7.4"></span>people
whether this be the person whom they desire for their ruler. And if they
give their consent, let him ask further whether he has a good testimony
from all men as to his worthiness for so great and glorious an
authority; whether all things relating to his piety towards God be
right; whether justice towards men has been observed by him; whether the
affairs of his family have been well ordered by him; whether he has been
unblameable in the course of his life. And if all the assembly together
do according to truth, and not according to prejudice, witness that he
is such a one, let them the third time, as before God the Judge, and
Christ, the Holy Ghost being also present, as well as all the holy and
ministering spirits, <span id="ix.ix.ii-p7.5"></span>ask again whether
he be truly worthy of this ministry, that so “in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word may be established.” <span
id="fr_3594"></span>[3595](#fn_3594.md) <span id="ix.ix.ii-p8.2"></span>
And if they agree the third time that he is worthy, let them all be
demanded their vote; and when they all give it willingly, let them be
heard. And <span id="ix.ix.ii-p8.3"></span>silence being made, let one
of the principal bishops, together with two others, stand near to the
altar, the rest of the bishops and presbyters praying silently, and the
deacons holding the divine Gospels open upon the head of him that is to
be ordained, and say to God thus <span
id="fr_3595"></span>[3596](#fn_3595.md) :—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p9.1"></span>The Form of Prayer for the Ordination of a Bishop.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p10.1"></span>V</span>. O Thou the great Being, O Lord God
Almighty, who alone art unbegotten, and ruled over by none; who always
art, and wast before the world; who standest in need of nothing, and art
above all cause and beginning; who only art true, who only art wise; who
alone art the most high; who art by nature invisible; whose knowledge is
without beginning; who only art good, and beyond compare; who knowest
all things before they are; who art acquainted with the most secret
things; who art inaccessible, and without a superior; the God and Father
of Thy only begotten Son, of our God and Saviour; the Creator of the
whole world by Him; whose providence provides for and takes the care of
all; the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation; <span
id="fr_3596"></span>[3597](#fn_3596.md) who dwellest in the highest
heavens, <span id="fr_3597"></span>[3598](#fn_3597.md) and yet lookest down
on things below: Thou who didst appoint the rules of the Church, by the
coming of Thy Christ in the flesh; of which the Holy Ghost is the
witness, by Thy apostles, and by us the bishops, who by Thy grace are
here present; who hast fore-ordained priests from the beginning for the
government of Thy people—<span id="ix.ix.ii-p12.2"></span>Abel in the
first place, <span id="ix.ix.ii-p12.3"></span>Seth and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.4"></span>Enos, and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.5"></span>Enoch and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.6"></span>Noah, and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.7"></span>Melchisedec and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.8"></span>Job; who didst appoint Abraham, and the rest
of the patriarchs, with Thy faithful servants <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.9"></span>Moses and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.10"></span>Aaron, and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.11"></span>Eleazar and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.12"></span>Phineas; who didst choose from among them
rulers and priests in the tabernacle of Thy testimony; who didst choose
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p12.13"></span>Samuel for a priest and a prophet; who
didst not leave Thy sanctuary without ministers; who didst delight in
those whom Thou chosest to be glorified in. Do Thou, by us, pour down
the influence of Thy free Spirit, through the mediation of Thy Christ,
which is committed to Thy beloved Son <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.14"></span>Jesus Christ; which He bestowed according to
Thy will on the holy apostles of Thee the eternal God. Grant by Thy
name, O God, who searchest the hearts, that this Thy servant, whom Thou
hast chosen to be a bishop, may feed Thy holy flock, and discharge the
office of an high priest to Thee, and minister to Thee, unblameably
night and day; that he may appease Thee, and gather together the number
of those that shall be saved, and may <span id="page_483">p. 483</span>
<span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_483"></span>offer to Thee the gifts of Thy holy
Church. Grant to him, O Lord Almighty, through Thy Christ, the
fellowship of the Holy Spirit, that so he may have power to remit sins
according to Thy command; to give forth lots according to Thy command;
to loose every bond, according to the power which Thou gavest the
apostles; that he may please Thee in meekness and a pure heart, with a
stedfast, unblameable, and unreprovable mind; to offer to Thee a pure
and unbloody sacrifice, which by Thy Christ Thou hast appointed as the
mystery of the new covenant, for a sweet savour, through Thy holy child
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p12.15"></span>Jesus Christ, our God and Saviour,
through whom <span id="fr_3598"></span>[3599](#fn_3598.md) glory, honour,
and worship be to Thee in the Holy Spirit, now and always, and for all
ages. And when he has prayed for these things, let the rest of the
priests add, Amen; and together with them all the people.<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p13.2"></span> And after the prayer let one of the bishops
elevate the sacrifice upon the hands of him that is ordained, and early
in the morning<span id="ix.ix.ii-p13.3"></span> let him be placed in his
throne, in a place set apart for him among the rest of the bishops, they
all<span id="ix.ix.ii-p13.4"></span> giving him the kiss in the
Lord. <span id="fr_3599"></span>[3600](#fn_3599.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p14.1"></span> And after the reading of the Law <span
id="fr_3600"></span>[3601](#fn_3600.md) and the Prophets, and our Epistles,
and Acts, and the Gospels, <span id="ix.ix.ii-p15.1"></span>let him that
is ordained salute they Church, saying, The grace of our <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p15.2"></span>Lord Jesus Christ<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p15.3"></span>, the love of God and the Father, and the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with you all; and let them all answer,
And with Thy Spirit. And after these words let him speak to the people
the words of exhortation; and when he has ended his word of doctrine (I
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p15.4"></span>Andrew <span
id="fr_3601"></span>[3602](#fn_3601.md) the brother of <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p16.5"></span>Peter speak), all standing up, <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p16.6"></span>let the deacon ascend upon some high seat,
and proclaim, Let none of the hearers, <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p16.7"></span>let none of the unbelievers stay; and silence
being made, let him say:—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p16.9"></span>Oxford <span id="ix.ix.ii-p16.10"></span>Ms. <span id="fr_3602"></span>[3603](#fn_3602.md)

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p18"></span>V. God and Father of our Lord <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p18.1"></span>Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the
God of all consolation, who knowest all things before they take place;
Thou who didst appoint the rules of the Church through the word of Thy
grace; who didst appoint beforehand the race righteous from the
beginning that came from <span id="ix.ix.ii-p18.2"></span>Abraham to be
rulers, and didst constitute them priests, not leaving Thy sanctuary
without ministers; who from the foundation of the world didst delight in
those whom Thou chosest to be glorified in; and now pour down the
influence of Thy free Spirit, which through Thy beloved Son <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p18.3"></span>Jesus Christ Thou hast bestowed on Thy holy
apostles, who set up the Church in the place of the sanctuary, to
unending glory and praise of Thy name: O Thou, who knowest the hearts of
all, grant that this Thy servant whom Thou hast chosen to the holy
office of Thy bishop, may discharge the duty of a high priest to Thee,
and minister to Thee unblameably night and day; that he may appease Thee
unceasingly, and present to Thee the gifts of Thy holy Church, and in
the spirit of the high-priesthood have power to remit sins according to
Thy commandment, to give lots according to Thy injunction, to loose
every bond according to the power which Thou hast given to the apostles,
and be well-pleasing to Thee, in meekness and a pure heart offering a
smell of sweet savour through Thy Son <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p18.4"></span>Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to Thee be
glory, power, and honour, along with the Holy Spirit, now and for ever.
Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p18.5"></span>The Divine Liturgy, Wherein is the Bidding Prayer for the Catechumens.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p19"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p19.1"></span>VI.</span> Ye catechumens, pray, and let all
the faithful pray for them in their mind, saying: Lord, have mercy upon
them. And let the deacon bid prayers for them, saving: Let us all pray
unto God for the catechumens, that He that is good, He that is the lover
of mankind, will mercifully hear their prayers and their supplications,
and so accept their petitions as to assist them and give them those
desires of their hearts which are for their advantage, and reveal to
them the Gospel of His Christ; give them illumination and understanding,
instruct them in the knowledge of God, teach them His commands and His
ordinances, implant in them His pure and saving fear, open the ears of
their hearts, that they may exercise themselves in His law day and
night; strengthen them in piety, unite them to and number them with His
holy flock; vouchsafe them the laver of regeneration, and the garment of
incorruption, which is the true life; and deliver them from all
ungodliness, and give no place to the adversary against them; “and
cleanse them from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and dwell in them,
and walk in them, by His Christ; bless their goings out and their
comings in, and order their affairs for their good.” <span
id="fr_3603"></span>[3604](#fn_3603.md) Let us still earnestly put up our
supplications for them, that they may obtain the forgiveness of their
transgressions by their admission, and so may be thought worthy of the
holy mysteries, and of constant communion with the saints. Rise up, ye
catechumens, beg for yourselves the peace of God through His Christ, a
peaceable day, and free from sin, and the like for the whole time of
your life, and your Christian ends of it; a compassionate and merciful
God; and the forgiveness of your transgressions. Dedicate yourselves to
the only unbegotten God, through His Christ. Bow down your heads, and
receive the blessing. But at the naming of every one by the deacon, as
we said before, let the people say, Lord, have mercy upon him; and let
the children say it first. And as they have bowed down their heads, let
the bishop who is newly ordained bless them with this blessing: O God
Almighty, unbegotten and inaccessible, who only art the true God, the
God and Father of Thy Christ, Thy only begotten Son; the God <span
id="fr_3604"></span>[3605](#fn_3604.md) of the Comforter, and Lord of the
whole world; who by Christ didst appoint Thy disciples to be teachers
for the teaching of piety; do Thou now also look down upon Thy servants,
who are receiving instruction in the Gospel of Thy Christ, and “give
them a new heart, and renew a right spirit in their inward parts,” <span
id="fr_3605"></span>[3606](#fn_3605.md) that they may both know and do Thy
will with full purpose of heart, and with a willing soul. Vouchsafe them
an holy admission, and unite them to Thy holy Church, and make them
partakers of Thy divine mysteries, through Christ, who is our hope, and
who died for them; by whom glory and worship be given to Thee in the
Holy Spirit for ever. Amen. And after this, let the deacon say: Go out,
ye catechumens, in peace. And after they are gone out, let him say: Ye
energumens, afflicted with unclean spirits, pray, and let us all
earnestly pray for them, that God, the lover of mankind, will <span
id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_484"></span>by
Christ rebuke the unclean and wicked spirits, and deliver His
supplicants from the dominion of the adversary. May He that rebuked the
legion of demons, and the devil, the prince of wickedness, <span
id="fr_3606"></span>[3607](#fn_3606.md) even now rebuke these apostates
from piety, and deliver His own workmanship from his power, and cleanse
those creatures which He has made with great wisdom. Let us still pray
earnestly for them. Save them, O God, and raise them up by Thy power.
Bow down your heads, ye energumens, and receive the blessings. And let
the bishop add this prayer, and say:—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p23.3"></span>For the Energumens.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p24"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p24.1"></span>VII</span>. Thou, who hast bound the strong
man, and spoiled all that was in his house, who hast given us power over
serpents and scorpions to tread upon them, and upon all the power of the
enemy; <span id="fr_3607"></span>[3608](#fn_3607.md) who hast delivered the
serpent, that murderer of men, bound to us, as a sparrow to children,
whom all things dread, and tremble before the face of Thy power; <span
id="fr_3608"></span>[3609](#fn_3608.md) who hast cast him down as lightning
from heaven to earth, <span id="fr_3609"></span>[3610](#fn_3609.md) not
with a fall from a place, but from honour to dishonour, on account of
his voluntary evil disposition; whose look dries the abysses, and
threatening melts the mountains, and whose truth remains for ever; whom
the infants praise, and sucking babes bless; whom angels sing hymns to,
and adore; who lookest upon the earth, and makest it tremble; who
touchest the mountains, and they smoke; who threatenest the sea, and
driest it up, and makest all its rivers as desert, and the clouds are
the dust of His feet; who walkest upon the sea as upon the firm
ground; <span id="fr_3610"></span>[3611](#fn_3610.md) Thou only begotten
God, <span id="fr_3611"></span>[3612](#fn_3611.md) the Son of the great
Father, rebuke these wicked spirits, and deliver the works of Thy hands
from the power of the adverse spirit. For to Thee is due glory, honour,
and worship, and by Thee to Thy Father, in the Holy Spirit, for ever.
Amen. And let the deacon say: Go out, ye energumens. And after them, let
him cry aloud: Ye that are to be illuminated, pray. Let all us, the
faithful, earnestly pray for them, that the Lord will vouchsafe that,
being initiated into the death of Christ, they may rise with Him, and
become partakers of His kingdom, and may be admitted to the communion of
His mysteries; unite them to, number them among, those that are saved in
His holy Church. Save them, and raise them up by Thy grace. And being
sealed to God through His Christ, let them bow down their heads, and
receive this blessing from the bishop:—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p29.2"></span>For the Baptized.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p30"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p30.1"></span>VIII</span>. Thou who hast formerly said by
Thy holy prophets to those that be initiated, “Wash ye, become
clean,” <span id="fr_3612"></span>[3613](#fn_3612.md) and hast appointed
spiritual regeneration by Christ, do Thou now also look down upon these
that are baptized, and bless them, and sanctify them, and prepare them
that they may become worthy of Thy spiritual gift, and of the true
adoption of Thy spiritual mysteries, of being gathered together with
those that are saved through Christ our Saviour; by whom glory, honour,
and worship be to Thee, in the Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen. And let the
deacon say: Go out, ye that are preparing for illumination. And after
that let him proclaim: Ye penitents, pray; let us all earnestly pray for
our brethren in the state of penitence, that God, the lover of
compassion, will show them the way of repentance, and accept their
return and their confession, and bruise Satan under their feet
suddenly, <span id="fr_3613"></span>[3614](#fn_3613.md) and redeem them
from the snare of the devil, and the ill-usage of the demons, and free
them from every unlawful word, and every absurd practice and wicked
thought; forgive them all their offences, both voluntary and
involuntary, and blot out that handwriting which is against them, <span
id="fr_3614"></span>[3615](#fn_3614.md) and write them in the book of
life; <span id="fr_3615"></span>[3616](#fn_3615.md) cleanse them from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, <span
id="fr_3616"></span>[3617](#fn_3616.md) and restore and unite them to His
holy flock. For He knoweth our frame. For who can glory that he has a
clean heart? And who can boldly say, that he is pure from sin? <span
id="fr_3617"></span>[3618](#fn_3617.md) For we are all among the
blameworthy. Let us still pray for them more earnestly, for there is joy
in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, <span
id="fr_3618"></span>[3619](#fn_3618.md) that, being converted from every
evil work, they may be joined to all good practice; that God, the lover
of mankind, will suddenly accept their petitions, will restore <span
id="fr_3619"></span>[3620](#fn_3619.md) to them the joy of His salvation,
and strengthen them with His free Spirit; <span
id="fr_3620"></span>[3621](#fn_3620.md) that they may not be any more
shaken, <span id="fr_3621"></span>[3622](#fn_3621.md) but be admitted to
the communion of His most holy things, and become partakers of His
divine mysteries, that appearing worthy of His adoption, they may obtain
eternal life. Let us all still earnestly say on their account: Lord,
have mercy upon them. Save them, O God, and raise them up by Thy mercy.
Rise up, and bow your heads to God through His Christ, and receive the
blessings. Let the bishop then add this prayer:—<span id="page_485">p.
485</span> <span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_485"></span>  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p40.2"></span>Imposition of Hands; Prayer for PenItents.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p41"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p41.1"></span>IX</span>. Almighty, eternal God, Lord of the
whole world, the Creator and Governor of all things, who hast exhibited
man as the ornament of the world through Christ, and didst give him a
law both naturally implanted and written, that he might live according
to law, as a rational creature; and when he had sinned, Thou gavest him
Thy goodness as a pledge in order to his repentance: Look down upon
these persons who have bended the neck of their soul and body to Thee;
for Thou desirest not the death of a sinner, but his repentance, that he
turn from his wicked way, and live. <span
id="fr_3622"></span>[3623](#fn_3622.md) Thou who didst accept the
repentance of the Ninevites, who willest that all men be saved, and come
to the acknowledgment of the truth; <span
id="fr_3623"></span>[3624](#fn_3623.md) who didst accept of that son who
had consumed his substance in riotous living, <span
id="fr_3624"></span>[3625](#fn_3624.md) with the bowels of a father, on
account of his repentance; do Thou now accept of the repentance of Thy
supplicants: for there is no man that will not sin; for “if Thou, O
Lord, markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? For with Thee there
is propitiation.” <span id="fr_3625"></span>[3626](#fn_3625.md) And do Thou
restore them to Thy holy Church, into their former dignity and honour,
through Christ our God and Saviour, by whom glory and adoration be to
Thee, in the Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen. Then let the deacon say,
Depart, ye penitents; and let him add, Let none of those who ought not
to come draw near. All we of the faithful, let us bend our knee: let us
all entreat God through His Christ; let us earnestly beseech God through
His Christ.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p45.2"></span>The Bidding Prayer for the Faithful.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p46"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p46.1"></span>X</span>. Let us pray for the peace and happy
settlement of the world, and of the holy churches; that the God of the
whole world may afford us His everlasting peace, and such as may not be
taken away from us; that He may preserve us in a full prosecution of
such virtue as is according to godliness. Let us pray for the Holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church which is spread from one end of the earth
to the other; that God would preserve and keep it unshaken, and free
from the waves of this life, until the end of the world, as founded upon
a rock; and for the holy parish in this place, that the Lord of the
whole world may vouchsafe us without failure to follow after His
heavenly hope, and without ceasing to pay Him the debt of our prayer.
Let us pray for every episcopacy which is under the whole heaven, of
those that rightly divide the word of Thy truth. And let us pray for our
bishop <span id="ix.ix.ii-p46.2"></span>James, <span
id="fr_3626"></span>[3627](#fn_3626.md) and his parishes; let us pray for
our bishop <span id="ix.ix.ii-p47.2"></span>Clement, and his parishes;
let us pray for our bishop <span id="ix.ix.ii-p47.3"></span>Euodius, and
his parishes; let us pray for our bishop <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p47.4"></span>Annianus, and his parishes: that the
compassionate God may grant them to continue in His holy churches in
health, honour, and long life, and afford them an honourable old age in
godliness and righteousness. And let us pray for our presbyters, that
the Lord may deliver them from every unreasonable and wicked action, and
afford them a presbyterate in health and honour. Let us pray for all the
deacons and ministers in Christ, that the Lord may grant them an
unblameable ministration. Let us pray for the readers, singers, virgins,
widows, and orphans. Let us pray for those that are in marriage and in
child-bearing, that the Lord may have mercy upon them all. Let us pray
for the eunuchs who walk holily. Let us pray for those in a state of
continence and piety. Let us pray for those that bear fruit in the holy
Church, and give alms to the needy. And let us pray for those who offer
sacrifices and oblations to the Lord our God, that God, the fountain of
all goodness, may recompense them with His heavenly gifts, and “give
them in this world an hundredfold, and in the world to come life
everlasting;” <span id="fr_3627"></span>[3628](#fn_3627.md) and bestow upon
them for their temporal things, those that are eternal; for earthly
things, those that are heavenly. Let us pray for our brethren newly
enlightened, that the Lord may strengthen and confirm them. Let us pray
for our brethren exercised with sickness, that the Lord may deliver them
from every sickness and every disease, and restore them sound into His
holy Church. Let us pray for those that travel by water or by land. Let
us pray for those that are in the mines, in banishments, in prisons, and
in bonds, for the name of the Lord. Let us pray for those that are
afflicted with bitter servitude. Let us pray for our enemies, and those
that hate us. Let us pray for those that persecute us for the name of
the Lord, that the Lord may pacify their anger, and scatter their wrath
against us. Let us pray for those that are without, and are wandered out
of the way, that the Lord may convert them. Let us be mindful of the
infants of the Church, that the Lord may perfect them in His fear, and
bring them to a complete age. Let us pray one for another, that the Lord
may keep us and preserve us by His grace to the end, and deliver us from
the evil one. and from all the scandals of those that work iniquity, and
preserve us unto His heavenly kingdom. Let us pray for every Christian
soul. Save us, and raise us up, O God, by Thy mercy. Let us rise up, and
let us pray earnestly, and dedicate ourselves and one another to the
living God, through His Christ. And let the high priest add this prayer,
and say:—<span id="page_486">p. 486</span> <span
id="ix.ix.ii-Page_486"></span>  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p48.2"></span>The Form of Prayer for the Faithful.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p49"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p49.1"></span>XI</span>. O Lord Almighty, the Most High,
who dwellest on high, the Holy One, that restest among the saints,
without beginning, the Only Potentate, who hast given to us by Christ
the preaching of knowledge, to the acknowledgment of Thy glory and of
Thy name, which He has made known to us, for our comprehension, do Thou
now also look down through Him upon this Thy flock, and deliver it from
all ignorance and wicked practice, and grant that we may fear Thee in
earnest, and love Thee with affection, and have a due reverence of Thy
glory. Be gracious and merciful to them, and hearken to them when they
pray unto Thee; and keep them, that they may be unmoveable, unblameable,
and unreprovable, that they may be holy in body and spirit, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that they may be complete, and
none of them may be defective or imperfect. O our support, our powerful
God, who dost not accept persons, be Thou the assister of this Thy
people, <span id="fr_3628"></span>[3629](#fn_3628.md) which Thou hast
redeemed with the precious blood of Thy Christ; be Thou their protector,
aider, provider, and guardian, their strong wall of defence, their
bulwark and security. For “none can snatch out of Thy hand:” <span
id="fr_3629"></span>[3630](#fn_3629.md) for there is no other God like
Thee; for on Thee is our reliance. “Sanctify them by Thy truth: for Thy
word is truth.” <span id="fr_3630"></span>[3631](#fn_3630.md) Thou who dost
nothing for favour, Thou whom none can deceive, deliver them from every
sickness, and every disease, and every offence, every injury and deceit,
“from fear of the enemy, from the dart that flieth in the day, from the
mischief that walketh about in darkness;” <span
id="fr_3631"></span>[3632](#fn_3631.md) and vouchsafe them that everlasting
life which is in Christ Thy only begotten Son, our God and Saviour,
through whom glory and worship be to Thee, in the Holy Spirit, now and
always, and for ever and ever. Amen. And after this let the deacon say,
Let us attend. And let the bishop salute the church, and say, The peace
of God be with you all. And let the people answer, And with thy spirit;
and <span id="ix.ix.ii-p53.2"></span>let the deacon say to all, Salute
ye one another with the holy kiss. And let the clergy salute the bishop,
the men of the laity salute the men, the women the women. And let the
children stand at the reading-desk; and let another deacon stand by
them, that they may not be disorderly. <span
id="fr_3632"></span>[3633](#fn_3632.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p54.1"></span>And let other deacons walk about and watch
the men and women, that no tumult may be made, and that no one nod, or
whisper, or slumber; and let the deacons <span
id="fr_3633"></span>[3634](#fn_3633.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p55.1"></span>stand at the doors of the men, and the
sub-<span id="ix.ix.ii-p55.2"></span>deacons at those of the women, that
no one go out, nor a door be opened, although it be for one of the
faithful, at the time of the oblation. But let one of the sub-deacons
bring water to wash the hands of the priests, which is a symbol of the
purity of those souls that are devoted to God.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p55.3"></span>The Constitution of James the Brother of John, the Son of Zebedee.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p56"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p56.1"></span>XII</span>. And I James, <span
id="fr_3634"></span>[3635](#fn_3634.md) the brother of <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p57.5"></span>John, the son of Zebedee, say, that <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p57.6"></span>the deacon shall immediately <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p57.7"></span>say, Let none of the catechumens, let none of
the hearers, let none of the unbelievers, let none of the heterodox,
stay here. You who have prayed the foregoing prayer, depart. <span
id="fr_3635"></span>[3636](#fn_3635.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p58.1"></span>Let the mothers receive their children; let
no one have anything against any one; let no one come in hypocrisy; let
us stand upright before the Lord with fear and trembling, to offer. When
this is done, let the deacons bring the gifts to the bishop at the
altar; and let the presbyters stand on his right hand, and on his left,
as disciples stand before their Master. But let two of the deacons, on
each side of the altar, hold a fan, made up of thin membranes, or of the
feathers of the peacock, or of fine cloth, and let them silently drive
away the small animals that fly about, that they may not come near to
the cups. Let the high priest, therefore, together with the priests,
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p58.2"></span>pray <span
id="fr_3636"></span>[3637](#fn_3636.md) by himself; and let him put on his
shining garment, and stand at the altar, and make the sign of the cross
upon his forehead with his hand, <span
id="fr_3637"></span>[3638](#fn_3637.md) and say: The grace of Almighty God,
and the love of our Lord <span id="ix.ix.ii-p60.2"></span>Jesus Christ,
and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. And let all with
one voice say: And with thy spirit. The high priest: Lift up your mind.
All the people: We lift it up unto the Lord. The high priest: Let us
give thanks to the Lord. All the people: It is meet and right so to do.
Then let the high priest say: It is very meet and right before all
things to sing an hymn to Thee, who art the true God, who art before all
beings, “from whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named;” <span
id="fr_3638"></span>[3639](#fn_3638.md) who only art unbegotten, and
without beginning, and without a ruler, and without a master; who
standest in need of nothing; who art the bestower of everything that is
good; who art beyond all cause and generation; who art alway and
immutably the same; from whom all things came into being, as from their
proper original. For Thou art eternal knowledge, everlasting <span
id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_487"></span>sight,
unbegotten hearing, untaught wisdom, the first by nature, and the
measure of being, and beyond all number; who didst bring all things out
of nothing into being by Thy only begotten Son, but didst beget Him
before all ages by Thy will, Thy power, and Thy goodness, without any
instrument, the only begotten Son, God the Word, the living Wisdom, “the
First-born of every creature, the angel of Thy Great Counsel,” <span
id="fr_3639"></span>[3640](#fn_3639.md) and Thy High Priest, but the King
and Lord of every intellectual and sensible nature, who was before all
things, by whom were all things. For Thou, O eternal God, didst make all
things by Him, and through Him it is that Thou vouchsafest Thy suitable
providence over the whole world; for by the very same that Thou
bestowedst being, didst Thou also bestow well-being: the God and Father
of Thy only begotten Son, who by Him didst make before all things the
cherubim and the seraphim, the æons and hosts, the powers and
authorities, the principalities and thrones, the archangels and angels;
and after all these, didst by Him make this visible world, and all
things that are therein. For Thou art He who didst frame the heaven as
an arch, and “stretch it out like the covering of a tent,” <span
id="fr_3640"></span>[3641](#fn_3640.md) and didst found the earth upon
nothing by Thy mere will; who didst fix the firmament, and prepare the
night and the day; who didst bring the light out of Thy treasures, and
on its departure didst bring on darkness, for the rest of the living
creatures that move up and down in the world; who didst appoint the sun
in heaven to rule over the day, and the moon to rule over the night, and
didst inscribe in heaven the choir of stars to praise Thy glorious
majesty; who didst make the water for drink and for cleansing, the air
in which we live for respiration and the affording of sounds, by the
means of the tongue, which strikes the air, and the hearings which
co-operates therewith, so as to perceive speech when it is received by
it, and falls upon it; who madest fire for our consolation in darkness,
for the supply of our want, and that we might be warmed and enlightened
by it; who didst separate the great sea from the land, and didst render
the former navigable and the latter fit for walking, and didst replenish
the former with small and great living creatures, and filledst the
latter with the same, both tame and wild; didst furnish it with various
plants, and crown it with herbs, and beautify it with flowers, and
enrich it with seeds; who didst ordain the great deep, and on every side
madest a mighty cavity for it, which contains seas of salt waters heaped
together, <span id="fr_3641"></span>[3642](#fn_3641.md) yet didst Thou
every way bound them with barriers of the smallest sand; <span
id="fr_3642"></span>[3643](#fn_3642.md) who sometimes dost raise it to the
height of mountains by the winds, and sometimes dost smooth it into a
plain; sometimes dost enrage it with a tempest, and sometimes dost still
it with a calm, that it may be easy to seafaring men in their voyages;
who didst encompass this world, which was made by Thee through Christ,
with rivers, and water it with currents, and moisten it with springs
that never fail, and didst bind it round with mountains for the
immoveable and secure consistence of the earth: for Thou hast
replenished Thy world, and adorned it with sweet-smelling and with
healing herbs, with many and various living creatures, strong and weak,
for food and for labour, tame and wild; with the noises of creeping
things, the sounds of various sorts of flying creatures; with the
circuits of the years, the numbers of months and days, the order of the
seasons, the courses of the rainy clouds, for the production of the
fruits and the support of living creatures. Thou hast also appointed the
station of the winds, which blow when commanded by Thee, and the
multitude of the plants and herbs. And Thou hast not only created the
world itself, but hast also made man for a citizen of the world,
exhibiting him as the ornament of the world; for Thou didst say to Thy
Wisdom: “Let us make man according to our image, and according to our
likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over
the fowls of the heaven.” <span id="fr_3643"></span>[3644](#fn_3643.md)
Wherefore also Thou hast made him of an immortal soul and of a body
liable to dissolution—the former out of nothing, the latter out of the
four elements—and hast given him as to his soul rational knowledge, the
discerning of piety and impiety, and the observation of right and wrong;
and as to his body, Thou hast granted him five senses and progressive
motion: for Thou, O God Almighty, didst by Thy Christ plant a paradise
in Eden, <span id="fr_3644"></span>[3645](#fn_3644.md) in the east, adorned
with all plants fit for food, and didst introduce him into it, as into a
rich banquet. And when Thou madest him, Thou gavest him a law implanted
within him, that so he might have at home and within himself the seeds
of divine knowledge; and when Thou hadst brought him into the paradise
of pleasure, Thou allowedst him the privilege of enjoying all things,
only forbidding the tasting of one tree, in hopes of greater blessings;
that in case he would keep that command, he might receive the reward of
it, which was immortality. But when he neglected that command, and
tasted of the forbidden fruit, by the seduction of the serpent and the
counsel of his wife, Thou didst justly cast him out of paradise.  

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p68"></span>Yet of Thy goodness <span
id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_488"></span>Thou
didst not overlook him, nor suffer him to perish utterly, for he was Thy
creature; but Thou didst subject the whole creation to him, and didst
grant him liberty to procure himself food by his own sweat and labours,
whilst Thou didst cause all the fruits of the earth to spring up, to
grow, and to ripen. But when Thou hadst laid him asleep for a while,
Thou didst with an oath call him to a restoration again, didst loose the
bond of death, and promise him life after the resurrection. And not this
only; but when Thou hadst increased his posterity to an innumerable
multitude, those that continued with Thee Thou didst glorify, and those
who did apostatize from Thee Thou didst punish. And while Thou didst
accept of the sacrifice of <span id="ix.ix.ii-p68.1"></span>Abel <span
id="fr_3645"></span>[3646](#fn_3645.md) as of an holy person, Thou didst
reject the gift of <span id="ix.ix.ii-p69.2"></span>Cain, the murderer
of his brother, as of an abhorred wretch. And besides these, Thou didst
accept of <span id="ix.ix.ii-p69.3"></span>Seth and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p69.4"></span>Enos, <span
id="fr_3646"></span>[3647](#fn_3646.md) and didst translate <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p70.2"></span>Enoch: <span
id="fr_3647"></span>[3648](#fn_3647.md) for Thou art the Creator of men,
and the giver of life, and the supplier of want, and the giver of laws,
and the rewarder of those that observe them, and the avenger of those
that transgress them; who didst bring the great flood upon the world by
reason of the multitude of the ungodly, <span
id="fr_3648"></span>[3649](#fn_3648.md) and didst deliver righteous <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p72.3"></span>Noah from that flood by an ark, <span
id="fr_3649"></span>[3650](#fn_3649.md) with eight souls, the end of the
foregoing generations, and the beginning of those that were to come; who
didst kindle a fearful fire against the five cities of Sodom, and “didst
turn a fruitful land into a salt lake for the wickedness of them that
dwelt therein,” <span id="fr_3650"></span>[3651](#fn_3650.md) but didst
snatch holy <span id="ix.ix.ii-p74.5"></span>Lot out of the
conflagration. Thou art He who didst deliver <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p74.6"></span>Abraham from the impiety of his fore-fathers,
and didst appoint him to be the heir of the world, and didst discover to
him Thy Christ; who didst aforehand ordain <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p74.7"></span>Melchisedec an high priest for Thy
worship; <span id="fr_3651"></span>[3652](#fn_3651.md) who didst render Thy
patient servant <span id="ix.ix.ii-p75.2"></span>Job the conqueror of
that serpent who is the patron of wickedness; who madest <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p75.3"></span>Isaac the son of the promise, and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p75.4"></span>Jacob the father of twelve sons, and didst
increase his posterity to a multitude, and bring him into Egypt with
seventy-five souls. <span id="fr_3652"></span>[3653](#fn_3652.md) Thou, O
Lord, didst not overlook <span id="ix.ix.ii-p76.2"></span>Joseph, but
grantedst him, as a reward of his chastity for Thy sake, the government
over the Egyptians. Thou, O Lord, didst not overlook the Hebrews when
they were afflicted by the Egyptians, on account of the promises made
unto their fathers; but Thou didst deliver them and punish the
Egyptians. <span id="fr_3653"></span>[3654](#fn_3653.md) And when men had
corrupted the law of nature, and had sometimes esteemed the creation the
effect of chance, and sometimes honoured it more than they ought, and
equalled it to the God of the universe, Thou didst not, however, suffer
them to go astray, but didst raise up Thy holy servant <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p77.2"></span>Moses, and by him didst give the written law
for the assistance of the law of nature, <span
id="fr_3654"></span>[3655](#fn_3654.md) and didst show that the creation
was Thy work, and didst banish away the error of polytheism. Thou didst
adorn <span id="ix.ix.ii-p78.2"></span>Aaron and his posterity with the
priesthood, and didst punish the Hebrews when they sinned, and receive
them again when they returned to Thee. Thou didst punish the Egyptians
with a judgment of ten plagues, and didst divide the sea, and bring the
Israelites through it, and drown and destroy the Egyptians who pursued
after them. Thou didst sweeten the bitter water with wood; Thou didst
bring water out of the rock of stone; Thou didst rain manna from heaven,
and quails, as meat out of the air; Thou didst afford them a pillar of
fire by night to give them light, and a pillar of a cloud by day to
overshadow them from the heat; Thou didst declare <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p78.3"></span>Joshua to be the general of the army, and
didst overthrow the seven nations of Canaan by him; <span
id="fr_3655"></span>[3656](#fn_3655.md) Thou didst divide Jordan, and dry
up the rivers of Etham; <span id="fr_3656"></span>[3657](#fn_3656.md) Thou
didst overthrow walls without instruments or the hand of man. <span
id="fr_3657"></span>[3658](#fn_3657.md) For all these things, glory be to
Thee, O Lord Almighty. Thee do the innumerable hosts of angels,
archangels, thrones, dominions, principalities, authorities, and powers,
Thine everlasting armies, adore. The cherubim and the six-winged
seraphim, with twain covering their feet, with twain their heads, and
with twain flying, <span id="fr_3658"></span>[3659](#fn_3658.md) say,
together with thousand thousands of archangels, and ten thousand times
ten thousand of angels, <span id="fr_3659"></span>[3660](#fn_3659.md)
incessantly, and with constant and loud voices, and let all the people
say it with them: “Holy, holy, holy, Lord of hosts, heaven and earth are
full of His glory: be Thou blessed for ever. Amen.” <span
id="fr_3660"></span>[3661](#fn_3660.md) And afterwards let the high priest
say: For Thou art truly holy, and most holy, the highest and most highly
exalted for ever. Holy also is Thy only begotten Son our Lord and God,
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p84.3"></span>Jesus Christ, who in all things
ministered to His God and Father, both in Thy various creation and Thy
suitable providence, and has not overlooked lost mankind. But after the
law of nature, after the exhortations in the positive law, after the
prophetical reproofs and the government of the angels, when men had
perverted both the positive law and that of nature, and had cast out of
their mind the memory of the flood, the burning <span id="page_489">p.
489</span> <span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_489"></span>of Sodom, the plagues of
the Egyptians, and the slaughters of the inhabitant of Palestine, and
being just ready to perish universally after an unparalleled manner, He
was pleased by Thy good will to become man, who was man’s Creator; to be
under the laws, who was the Legislator; to be a sacrifice, who was an
High Priest; to be a sheep, who was the Shepherd. And He appeased Thee,
His God and Father, and reconciled Thee to the world, and freed all men
from the wrath to come, and was made of a virgin, and was in flesh,
being God the Word, the beloved Son, the first-born of the whole
creation, and was, according to the prophecies which were foretold
concerning Him by Himself, of the seed of <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p84.4"></span>David and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p84.5"></span>Abraham, of the tribe of Judah. And He was
made in the womb of a virgin, who formed all mankind that are born into
the world; He took flesh, who was without flesh; He who was begotten
before time, was born in time; He lived holily, and taught according to
the law; He drove away every sickness and every disease from men, and
wrought signs and wonders among the people; and He was partaker of meat,
and drink, and sleep, who nourishes all that stand in need of food, and
“fills every living creature with His goodness;” <span
id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661.md) “He manifested His name to those
that knew it not;” <span id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662.md) He drave
away ignorance; He revived piety, and fulfilled Thy will; He finished
the work which Thou gavest Him to do; and when He had set all these
things right, He was seized by the hands of the ungodly, of the high
priests and priests, falsely so called, and of the disobedient people,
by the betraying of him who was possessed of wickedness as with a
confirmed disease; He suffered many things from them, and endured all
sorts of ignominy by Thy permission; He was delivered to <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p86.2"></span>Pilate the governor, and He that was the
Judge was judged, and He that was the Saviour was condemned; He that was
impassible was nailed to the cross, and He who was by nature immortal
died, and He that is the giver of life was buried, that He might loose
those for whose sake He came from suffering and death, and might break
the bonds of the devil, and deliver mankind from his deceit. He arose
from the dead the third day; and when He had continued with His
disciples forty days, He was taken up into the heavens, and is sat down
on the right hand of Thee, who art His God and Father.  

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p87"></span>Being mindful, therefore, of those things
that He endured for our sakes, we give Thee thanks, O God Almighty, not
in such a manner as we ought, but as we are able, and fulfil His
constitution: “For in the same night that He was betrayed, He took
bread” <span id="fr_3663"></span>[3664](#fn_3663.md) in His holy and
undefiled hands, and, looking up to Thee His God and Father, “He brake
it, and gave it to His disciples, saying, This is the mystery of the new
covenant: take of it, and eat. This is my body, which is broken for
many, for the remission of sins.” <span
id="fr_3664"></span>[3665](#fn_3664.md) In like manner also “He took the
cup,” and mixed it of wine and water, and sanctified it, and delivered
it to them, saying: “Drink ye all of this; for this is my blood which is
shed for many, for the remission of sins: do this in remembrance of me.
For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show forth
my death until I come.” Being mindful, therefore, of His passion, and
death, and resurrection from the dead, and return into the heavens, and
His future second appearing, wherein He is to come with glory and power
to judge the quick and the dead, and to recompense to every one
according to his works, we offer to Thee, our King and our God,
according to His constitution, this bread and this cup, giving Thee
thanks, through Him, that Thou hast thought us worthy to stand before
Thee, and to sacrifice to Thee; and we beseech Thee that Thou wilt
mercifully look down upon these gifts which are here set before Thee, O
Thou God, who standest in need of none of our offerings. And do Thou
accept them, to the honour of Thy Christ, and send down upon this
sacrifice Thine Holy Spirit, the Witness of the Lord <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p89.4"></span>Jesus’ sufferings, that He may show this
bread to be the body of Thy Christ, and the cup to be the blood of Thy
Christ, that those who are partakers thereof may be strengthened for
piety, may obtain the remission of their sins, may be delivered from the
devil and his deceit, may be filled with the Holy Ghost, may be made
worthy of Thy Christ, and may obtain eternal life upon Thy
reconciliation to them, O Lord Almighty. We further pray unto Thee, O
Lord, for thy holy Church spread from one end of the world to another,
which Thou hast purchased with the precious blood of Thy Christ, that
Thou wilt preserve it unshaken and free from disturbance until the end
of the world; for every episcopate who rightly divides the word of
truth. We further pray to Thee for me, who am nothing, who offer to
Thee, for the whole presbytery, for the deacons and all the clergy, that
Thou wilt make them wise, and replenish them with the Holy Spirit. We
further pray to Thee, O Lord, “for the king and all in authority,” <span
id="fr_3665"></span>[3666](#fn_3665.md) for the whole army, that they may
be peaceable towards us, that so, leading the whole time of our life in
quietness and unanimity, we may glorify Thee through <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p90.2"></span>Jesus Christ, who is our hope. We further
offer to Thee also for all those holy persons who have pleased Thee from
the beginning of the world—patriarch, <span id="page_490">p. 490</span>
<span id="ix.ix.ii-Page_490"></span>prophets, righteous men, apostles,
martyrs, confessors, bishops, presbyters, deacons, sub-deacons, readers,
singers, virgins, widows, and lay persons, with all whose names Thou
knowest. We further offer to Thee for this people, that Thou wilt render
them, to the praise of Thy Christ, “a royal priesthood and an holy
nation;” <span id="fr_3666"></span>[3667](#fn_3666.md) for those that are
in virginity and purity; for the widows of the Church; for those in
honourable marriage and child-bearing; for the infants of Thy people,
that Thou wilt not permit any of us to “become castaways.” We further
beseech Thee also for this city and its inhabitants; for those that are
sick; for those in bitter servitude; for those in banishments; for those
in prison; for those that travel by water or by land; that Thou, the
helper and assister of all men, wilt be their supporter. We further also
beseech Thee for those that hate us and persecute us for Thy name’s
sake; for those that are without, and wander out of the way; that Thou
wilt convert them to goodness, and pacify their anger. We further also
beseech Thee for the catechumens of the Church, and for those that are
vexed by the adversary, and for our brethren the penitents, that Thou
wilt perfect the first in the faith, that Thou wilt deliver the second
from the energy of the evil one, and that Thou wilt accept the
repentance of the last, and forgive both them and us our offences. We
further offer to Thee also for the good temperature of the air, and the
fertility of the fruits, that so, partaking perpetually of the good
things derived from Thee, we may praise Thee without ceasing, “who
gavest food to all flesh.” <span id="fr_3667"></span>[3668](#fn_3667.md) We
further beseech Thee also for those who are absent on a just cause, that
Thou wilt keep us all in piety, and gather us together in the kingdom of
Thy Christ, the God of all sensible and intelligent nature, our King
that Thou wouldst keep us immoveable, unblameable, and unreprovable: for
to Thee belongs all glory and worship, and thanksgiving, honour and
adoration, the Father, with the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, both now and
always, and for everlasting, and endless ages for ever. And let all the
people say, Amen. And let the bishop say, “The peace of God be with you
all.” And let all the people say, “And with thy spirit.” And let the
deacon proclaim again:—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p92.2"></span>The Bidding Prayer for the Faithful After the Divine Oblation.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p93"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p93.1"></span>XIII</span>. Let us still further beseech God
through His Christ, and let us beseech Him on account of the gift which
is offered to the Lord God, that the good God will accept it, through
the mediation of His Christ, upon His heavenly altar, for a
sweet-smelling savour. Let us pray for this church and people. Let us
pray for every episcopate, every presbytery, all the deacons and
ministers in Christ, for the whole congregation, that the Lord will keep
and preserve them all. Let us pray “for kings and those in authority,”
that they may be peaceable toward us, “that so we may have and lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.” <span
id="fr_3668"></span>[3669](#fn_3668.md) Let us be mindful of the holy
martyrs, that we may be thought worthy to be partakers of their trial.
Let us pray for those that are departed in the faith. Let us pray for
the good temperature of the air, and the perfect maturity of the fruits.
Let us pray for those that are newly enlightened, that they may be
strengthened in the faith, and all may be mutually comforted by one
another. <span id="fr_3669"></span>[3670](#fn_3669.md) Raise us up, O God,
by Thy grace. Let us stand up, and dedicate ourselves to God, through
His Christ. And let the bishop say: O God, who art great, and whose name
is great, who art great in counsel and mighty in works, the God and
Father of Thy holy child <span id="ix.ix.ii-p95.2"></span>Jesus, our
Saviour; look down upon us, and upon this Thy flock, which Thou hast
chosen by Him to the glory of Thy name; and sanctify our body and soul,
and grant us the favour to be “made pure from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit,” <span id="fr_3670"></span>[3671](#fn_3670.md) and may obtain
the good things laid up for us, and do not account any of us unworthy;
but be Thou our comforter, helper, and protector, through Thy Christ,
with whom glory, honour, praise, doxology, and thanksgiving be to Thee
and to the Holy Ghost for ever. Amen. And after that all have said Amen,
let the deacon say: Let us attend. And let the bishop speak thus to the
people: Holy things for holy persons. And let the people answer: There
is One that is holy; there is one Lord, one <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p96.2"></span>Jesus Christ, blessed for ever, to the glory
of God the Father. Amen. “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, good-will among men. Hosanna to the son of <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p96.3"></span>David! Blessed be He that cometh in the name
of the Lord,” being the Lord God who appeared to us, “Hosanna in the
highest.” <span id="fr_3671"></span>[3672](#fn_3671.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p97.3"></span>And after that, let the bishop partake, then
the presbyters, and deacons, and <span
id="fr_3672"></span>[3673](#fn_3672.md) sub-deacons, and the readers, and
the singers, and the ascetics; and then of the women, the deaconesses,
and the virgins, and the widows; then the children; <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p98.1"></span>and then all the people in order, with
reverence and godly fear, without tumult. And let the bishop give the
oblation, saying, The body of Christ; and let him that receiveth say,
Amen. <span id="page_491">p. 491</span> <span
id="ix.ix.ii-Page_491"></span><span id="ix.ix.ii-p98.2"></span>And let
the deacon take <span id="ix.ix.ii-p98.3"></span>the cup; and <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p98.4"></span>when he gives it<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p98.5"></span>, say, The blood of Christ, the cup of life;
and let him that drinketh say, Amen. <span
id="fr_3673"></span>[3674](#fn_3673.md) And let the thirty-third psalm be
said, while the rest are partaking; <span id="ix.ix.ii-p99.1"></span>and
when all, <span id="fr_3674"></span>[3675](#fn_3674.md) both men and women,
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p100.1"></span>have partaken, let the deacons carry
what remains into the vestry. <span id="ix.ix.ii-p100.2"></span>And when
the singer has done, let the deacon say:—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p100.3"></span>The Bidding Prayer After the Participation.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p101"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p101.1"></span>XIV</span>. <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p101.2"></span>Now we have received the precious body and
the precious <span id="ix.ix.ii-p101.3"></span>blood of Christ, let us
give thanks to Him who has thought us worthy to partake of these His
holy <span id="fr_3675"></span>[3676](#fn_3675.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p102.1"></span> mysteries; and let us beseech Him that it
may not be to us for condemnation, but for salvation, to the advantage
of soul and body, to the preservation of piety, to the remission of
sins, and to the life of the world to come. Let us arise, and by the
grace of Christ let us dedicate ourselves to God, to the only unbegotten
God, and to His Christ. And let the bishop give thanks:—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.ii-p102.2"></span>The Form of Prayer After the Participation.

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p103"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p103.1"></span>XV</span>. O Lord God Almighty, the Father
of Thy Christ, Thy blessed Son, who hearest those who call upon Thee
with uprightness, who also knowest the supplications of those who are
silent; we thank Thee that Thou hast thought us worthy to partake of Thy
holy mysteries, which Thou hast bestowed upon us, for the entire
confirmation of those things we have rightly known, for the preservation
of piety, for the remission of our offences; for the name of thy Christ
is called upon us, and we are joined To Thee. O Thou that hast separated
us froth the communion of the ungodly, unite us with those that are
consecrated to Thee in holiness; confirm us in the truth, by the
assistance of Thy Holy Spirit; reveal to us what things we are ignorant
of, supply what things we are defective in, confirm us in what things we
already know, preserve the priests blameless in Thy worship; keep the
kings in peace, and the rulers in righteousness, the air in a good
temperature, the fruits in fertility, the world in an all-powerful
providence; pacify the warring nations, convert those that are gone
astray, sanctify Thy people, keep those that are in virginity, preserve
those in the faith that are in marriage, strengthen those that are in
purity, bring the infants to complete age, confirm the newly admitted;
instruct the catechumens, and render them worthy of admission; and
gather us all together into Thy kingdom of heaven, by <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p103.2"></span>Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom glory,
honour, and worship be to Thee, in the Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen. And
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p103.3"></span>let the deacon say: Bow down to <span
id="fr_3676"></span>[3677](#fn_3676.md) God through His Christ, <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p104.1"></span>and receive the blessing. And let the bishop
add this prayer, and say: O God Almighty, the true God, to whom nothing
can be compared, who art everywhere, and present in all things, and art
in nothing as one of the things themselves; who art not bounded by
place, nor grown old by time; who art not terminated by ages, nor
deceived by words; who art not subject to generation, and wantest no
guardian; who art above all corruption, free from all change, and
invariable by nature; “who inhabitest light inaccessible;” <span
id="fr_3677"></span>[3678](#fn_3677.md) who art by nature invisible, and
yet art known to all reasonable natures who seek Thee with a good mind,
and art comprehended by those that seek after Thee with a good mind; the
God of Israel, Thy people which truly see, and which have believed in
Christ: Be gracious to me, and hear me, for Thy name’s sake, and bless
those that bow down their necks unto Thee, and grant them the petitions
of their hearts, which are for their good, and do not reject any one of
them from Thy kingdom; but sanctify, guard, cover, and assist them;
deliver them from the adversary and every enemy; keep their houses, and
guard “their comings in and their goings out.” <span
id="fr_3678"></span>[3679](#fn_3678.md) For to Thee belongs the glory,
praise, majesty, worship, and adoration, and to Thy Son <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p106.2"></span>Jesus, Thy Christ, our Lord and God and
King, and to the Holy Ghost, now and always, for ever and ever. Amen.
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p106.3"></span>And <span
id="fr_3679"></span>[3680](#fn_3679.md) <span id="ix.ix.ii-p107.3"></span>
the deacon shall say, Depart in peace. <span
id="fr_3680"></span>[3681](#fn_3680.md) <span id="ix.ix.ii-p108.1"></span>
These constitutions concerning this mystical worship, we, the apostles,
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p108.2"></span>do ordain for you, the bishops,
presbyters, and deacons.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3589"></span>[481:3590](0070467.htm#fr_3589.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p2"></span> We have adopted the reading of one V.
<span class="sc"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p2.2"></span>ἀπεχαρήσατο</span>. It
means more than is in the text—that God used the wicked in a way in
which they would not be naturally used; lit., “abused,” or “misused.”
The other <span class="sc"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p2.3"></span>mss.</span>
and the Coptic read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p2.4"></span>ἀπεχαρίσατο</span>, “gave His gifts to the
wicked for prophecy.” <span id="ix.ix.ii-p2.5"></span>Whiston has tried
to make sense by giving a new meaning to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p2.6"></span>ἀπεχαρίσατο</span>, “taking away His grace
from the wicked.”  

<span id="fn_3590"></span>[481:3591](0070467.htm#fr_3590.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p2.7"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p3"></span> [Luke x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p3.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3591"></span>[481:3592](0070467.htm#fr_3591.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p5"></span> The Coptic and one V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p5.1"></span>ms.</span> omit from the
commencement of the chapter to “deacons.” The V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p5.2"></span>ms.</span> has: “<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p5.3"></span>Peter, the chief of the apostles, proclaimed
the Gospel to Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia, and finally
in Rome, where he was crucified by the prefect in the reign of <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p5.4"></span>Nero, and where also he is buried.”  

<span id="fn_3592"></span>[481:3593](0070467.htm#fr_3592.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p6"></span> From this to the end of ch. xxvi., only
small portions of what is now in the received text occur in the Coptic
version. The Oxford <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p6.1"></span>ms.</span> is also deficient. It has only a
portion of the fifth, nothing of ch. vi. to xvi., and only a single
sentence in ch. xxii. The portions in Coptic are printed in italics.  

<span id="fn_3593"></span>[481:3594](0070467.htm#fr_3593.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p7"></span> Omitted in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p7.1"></span>ms.</span>  

<span id="fn_3594"></span>[482:3595](0070467.htm#fr_3594.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p7.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p8"></span> [Matt. xviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p8.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3595"></span>[482:3596](0070467.htm#fr_3595.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p9"></span> The Coptic has, “let the bishop pray for
him.”  

<span id="fn_3596"></span>[482:3597](0070467.htm#fr_3596.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p11"></span> [2 Cor. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p11.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3597"></span>[482:3598](0070467.htm#fr_3597.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p12"></span> [Ps. cxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p12.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3598"></span>[483:3599](0070467.htm#fr_3598.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p12.16"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p13"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p13.1"></span>ms.</span> reads, “with whom.”  

<span id="fn_3599"></span>[483:3600](0070467.htm#fr_3599.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p14"></span> The Coptic inserts, “let the holy
Gospels be read.”  

<span id="fn_3600"></span>[483:3601](0070467.htm#fr_3600.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p15"></span> The Coptic reads “Gospel” instead of
“Law.”  

<span id="fn_3601"></span>[483:3602](0070467.htm#fr_3601.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p16"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p16.1"></span>ms.</span> has the following note: “<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p16.2"></span>Andrew the brother of <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p16.3"></span>Peter preaches the Gospel to the Scythians,
Sogdiani, and Thracians, who on account of preaching Christ is crowned
with the martyrdom of the cross by <span id="ix.ix.ii-p16.4"></span>Ægæa
the proconsul, and was buried in Patræ. Afterwards he was removed to
Constantinople by the Emperor Constantine.”  

<span id="fn_3602"></span>[483:3603](0070467.htm#fr_3602.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p16.11"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p17"></span> The Oxford <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p17.1"></span>ms</span>. has this chapter in an abbreviated
form as in the parallel columns.  

<span id="fn_3603"></span>[483:3604](0070467.htm#fr_3603.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p20"></span> [2 Cor. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p20.1"></span>,
[2Cor. vi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p20.2"></span>; [Ps. cxxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p20.3"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3604"></span>[483:3605](0070467.htm#fr_3604.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p21"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p21.1"></span>ms.</span> has <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p21.2"></span>προβολεύς</span>, “the sender forth,” or
“producer,” instead of “God.”  

<span id="fn_3605"></span>[483:3606](0070467.htm#fr_3605.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p22"></span> [Ps. li.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p22.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3606"></span>[484:3607](0070467.htm#fr_3606.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p23"></span> [Mark v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p23.1"></span>;
[Zech. iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p23.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3607"></span>[484:3608](0070467.htm#fr_3607.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p25"></span> [Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p25.1"></span>;
[Luke x. 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p25.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3608"></span>[484:3609](0070467.htm#fr_3608.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p26"></span> [Job xl.
24](../../../bib/sep/job040.htm#024.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p26.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_3609"></span>[484:3610](0070467.htm#fr_3609.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p27"></span> [Luke x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p27.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3610"></span>[484:3611](0070467.htm#fr_3610.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p28"></span> [Ps. cvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p28.1"></span>;
[Isa. li. 10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#010.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p28.2"></span>; [Ps.
97:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#005.md), [Isa.
64:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001.md), [Ps.
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p28.3"></span><span id="ix.ix.ii-p28.4"></span>2, xcvii. 4,
civ. 32; Nah. i. 4, 3; [Job ix. 8](../../../bib/sep/job009.htm#008.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p28.5"></span>, LXX.  

<span id="fn_3611"></span>[484:3612](0070467.htm#fr_3611.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p28.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p29"></span> \[Comp. note 1, p. 477, book vii. chap.
xliii.—R.\]  

<span id="fn_3612"></span>[484:3613](0070467.htm#fr_3612.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p31"></span> [Isa. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p31.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3613"></span>[484:3614](0070467.htm#fr_3613.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p32"></span> [Rom. xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p32.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3614"></span>[484:3615](0070467.htm#fr_3614.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p33"></span> [Col.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p33.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3615"></span>[484:3616](0070467.htm#fr_3615.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p34"></span> [Phil. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p34.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3616"></span>[484:3617](0070467.htm#fr_3616.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p35"></span> [2 Cor. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p35.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3617"></span>[484:3618](0070467.htm#fr_3617.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p36"></span> [Prov. xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p36.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3618"></span>[484:3619](0070467.htm#fr_3618.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p37"></span> [Luke xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p37.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3619"></span>[484:3620](0070467.htm#fr_3619.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p38"></span> The V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p38.1"></span>mss.</span> read, “restore them to their
former position, and give then the joy,” etc.  

<span id="fn_3620"></span>[484:3621](0070467.htm#fr_3620.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p39"></span> [Ps. li.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p39.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3621"></span>[484:3622](0070467.htm#fr_3621.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p40"></span> The V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p40.1"></span>mss.</span> add, “in their footsteps, but may
be deemed worthy to be admitted,” etc.  

<span id="fn_3622"></span>[485:3623](0070467.htm#fr_3622.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p42"></span> [Ezek.
xviii](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p42.1"></span>. and [Ezek.
xxxiii](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p42.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3623"></span>[485:3624](0070467.htm#fr_3623.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p43"></span> [Jonah
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p43.1"></span>;
[1 Tim. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p43.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3624"></span>[485:3625](0070467.htm#fr_3624.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p44"></span> [Luke
xv](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p44.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3625"></span>[485:3626](0070467.htm#fr_3625.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p45"></span> \[[Ps.
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p45.1"></span>.—R.\]  

<span id="fn_3626"></span>[485:3627](0070467.htm#fr_3626.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p47"></span> \[This is “James, the Lord’s brother;”
[Gal. i. 19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p47.1"></span>. An incidental proof of the Eastern and
Ante-Nicene origin of book viii. also.—R.\]  

<span id="fn_3627"></span>[485:3628](0070467.htm#fr_3627.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p47.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p48"></span> [Matt. xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p48.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3628"></span>[486:3629](0070467.htm#fr_3628.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p50"></span> The V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p50.1"></span>mss.</span> insert, “whom Thou hast selected
out of myriads.”  

<span id="fn_3629"></span>[486:3630](0070467.htm#fr_3629.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p51"></span> [John x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p51.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3630"></span>[486:3631](0070467.htm#fr_3630.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p52"></span> [John xvii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#017.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p52.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3631"></span>[486:3632](0070467.htm#fr_3631.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p53"></span> [Ps.
64:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001.md), [Ps.
91:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p53.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3632"></span>[486:3633](0070467.htm#fr_3632.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p54"></span> The meaning in Coptic seems to be
uncertain.  

<span id="fn_3633"></span>[486:3634](0070467.htm#fr_3633.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p55"></span> The Coptic reads, “sub-deacons.”  

<span id="fn_3634"></span>[486:3635](0070467.htm#fr_3634.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p57"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p57.1"></span>ms.</span> gives the following note: “<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p57.2"></span>James the son of Zebedee, brother of <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p57.3"></span>John, preached the Gospel in Judea, was slain
with the sword by <span id="ix.ix.ii-p57.4"></span>Herod the tetrarch,
and lies in Cæsarea.”  

<span id="fn_3635"></span>[486:3636](0070467.htm#fr_3635.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p57.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p58"></span> \[N.B.—No non-communicating attendance
permitted.\]  

<span id="fn_3636"></span>[486:3637](0070467.htm#fr_3636.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p58.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p59"></span> The Coptic adds, “over the oblation,
that the Holy Spirit may descend upon it, making the bread the body of
Christ, and the cup the blood of Christ; and prayers being ended.” It
then goes on with the words in italics in ch. xiii.  

<span id="fn_3637"></span>[486:3638](0070467.htm#fr_3637.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p60"></span> The common text has, “before all the
people,” omitted by one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.ii-p60.1"></span>ms.</span>  

<span id="fn_3638"></span>[486:3639](0070467.htm#fr_3638.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p60.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p61"></span> [Eph. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p61.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3639"></span>[487:3640](0070467.htm#fr_3639.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p62"></span> [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p62.1"></span>;
[Isa. ix. 6](../../../bib/sep/isa009.htm#006.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p62.2"></span>, LXX.  

<span id="fn_3640"></span>[487:3641](0070467.htm#fr_3640.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p63"></span> [Gen.
i](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p63.1"></span>.;
<span id="ix.ix.ii-p63.2"></span>4 Esd. xvi. 60; [Ps. civ.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p63.3"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3641"></span>[487:3642](0070467.htm#fr_3641.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p63.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p64"></span> [Job
xxxviii](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p64.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3642"></span>[487:3643](0070467.htm#fr_3642.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p65"></span> [Jer. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p65.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3643"></span>[487:3644](0070467.htm#fr_3643.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p66"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p66.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3644"></span>[487:3645](0070467.htm#fr_3644.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p67"></span> [Gen. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p67.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3645"></span>[488:3646](0070467.htm#fr_3645.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p69"></span> [Gen.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p69.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3646"></span>[488:3647](0070467.htm#fr_3646.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p69.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p70"></span> [Ecclus. xlix.
16](../../../bib/apo/sir049.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p70.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3647"></span>[488:3648](0070467.htm#fr_3647.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p70.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p71"></span> [Gen.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p71.1"></span>.
and [Gen. v](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p71.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3648"></span>[488:3649](0070467.htm#fr_3648.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p71.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p72"></span> [Gen.
vi](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p72.1"></span>.
and [Gen. vii](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p72.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3649"></span>[488:3650](0070467.htm#fr_3649.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p72.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p73"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p73.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3650"></span>[488:3651](0070467.htm#fr_3650.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p74"></span> [Gen.
xix.](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p74.1"></span>;
[Wisd. x. 6](../../../bib/apo/wis010.htm#006.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p74.2"></span>; [Ps.
cvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#000.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p74.3"></span><span id="ix.ix.ii-p74.4"></span>34  

<span id="fn_3651"></span>[488:3652](0070467.htm#fr_3651.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p74.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p75"></span> [Gen.
xii.](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p75.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3652"></span>[488:3653](0070467.htm#fr_3652.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p75.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p76"></span> [Gen. xlvi.
27](../../../bib/sep/gen046.htm#027.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p76.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_3653"></span>[488:3654](0070467.htm#fr_3653.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p76.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p77"></span> [Ex.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p77.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3654"></span>[488:3655](0070467.htm#fr_3654.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p77.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p78"></span> See [Isa. viii.
20](../../../bib/sep/isa008.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p78.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_3655"></span>[488:3656](0070467.htm#fr_3655.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p78.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p79"></span> [Josh. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p79.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3656"></span>[488:3657](0070467.htm#fr_3656.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p80"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#015.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p80.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3657"></span>[488:3658](0070467.htm#fr_3657.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p81"></span> [Josh.
vi](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p81.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3658"></span>[488:3659](0070467.htm#fr_3658.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p82"></span> [Isa. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p82.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3659"></span>[488:3660](0070467.htm#fr_3659.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p83"></span> [Dan. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p83.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3660"></span>[488:3661](0070467.htm#fr_3660.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p84"></span> [Isa. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p84.1"></span>;
[Rom. i. 25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p84.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[489:3662](0070467.htm#fr_3661.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p84.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p85"></span> [Ps. cv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p85.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[489:3663](0070467.htm#fr_3662.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p86"></span> [John
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p86.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3663"></span>[489:3664](0070467.htm#fr_3663.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p88"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p88.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3664"></span>[489:3665](0070467.htm#fr_3664.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p89"></span> [Matt.
xxvi.](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p89.1"></span>; [Mark
xiv](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p89.2"></span>.;
[Luke xxii](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p89.3"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3665"></span>[489:3666](0070467.htm#fr_3665.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p89.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p90"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p90.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3666"></span>[490:3667](0070467.htm#fr_3666.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p90.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p91"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p91.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3667"></span>[490:3668](0070467.htm#fr_3667.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p92"></span> [Ps. cxxxvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#025.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p92.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3668"></span>[490:3669](0070467.htm#fr_3668.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p94"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p94.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3669"></span>[490:3670](0070467.htm#fr_3669.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p95"></span> This is not a fair translation of the
Greek which, as the text stands, does not make sense. One V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.ix.ii-p95.1"></span>ms.</span> reads, “Let us
beseech in behalf of one another.”  

<span id="fn_3670"></span>[490:3671](0070467.htm#fr_3670.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p95.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p96"></span> [2 Cor. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p96.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3671"></span>[490:3672](0070467.htm#fr_3671.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p96.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p97"></span> [Luke ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p97.1"></span>;
[Matt. xxi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009.md)<span
id="ix.ix.ii-p97.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3672"></span>[490:3673](0070467.htm#fr_3672.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p97.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p98"></span> The Coptic adds, “the rest of the clergy
in their order.”  

<span id="fn_3673"></span>[491:3674](0070467.htm#fr_3673.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p98.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p99"></span> The Coptic has, “and let them sing
psalms during the distribution, until the whole congregation has
received it.”  

<span id="fn_3674"></span>[491:3675](0070467.htm#fr_3674.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p100"></span> The Coptic has, “let all the women
receive it also.”  

<span id="fn_3675"></span>[491:3676](0070467.htm#fr_3675.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p101.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p102"></span> The Coptic, “these His holy and
immortal mysteries, which are numbered in heaven.”  

<span id="fn_3676"></span>[491:3677](0070467.htm#fr_3676.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p103.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p104"></span> The Coptic has, “the Lord.”  

<span id="fn_3677"></span>[491:3678](0070467.htm#fr_3677.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p105"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p105.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3678"></span>[491:3679](0070467.htm#fr_3678.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p106"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ix.ii-p106.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3679"></span>[491:3680](0070467.htm#fr_3679.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p106.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p107"></span> The Coptic adds: “And let the
presbyters and deacons watch the few fragments that are left, that they
may perceive that there is nothing superfluous; lest they fall into the
great judgment, like the sons of <span id="ix.ix.ii-p107.1"></span>Aaron
and <span id="ix.ix.ii-p107.2"></span>Eli, whom the Holy Spirit
destroyed, because they did not refrain from despising the sacrifice of
the Lord: how much more those who despise the body and blood of the
Lord, thinking that to be merely material food which they receive, and
not spiritual!”  

<span id="fn_3680"></span>[491:3681](0070467.htm#fr_3680.md) <span
id="ix.ix.ii-p107.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.ii-p108"></span> The Coptic inserts, “when they have
been blessed.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. III.—Ordination and Duties of the Clergy](0070468.md)
