[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070002)  [Next](0070004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_3"></span>  

### <span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

###### <span id="iii.i-p1.2"></span>To

## <span id="iii.i-p1.3"></span>LACTANTIUS.

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>\[<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 260—330.\] Reaching, at last, the
epoch of <span id="iii.i-p2.2"></span>Constantine, perhaps the reader
will share my own feelings, as those of—  

> <span id="iii.i-p2.3"></span> “One who long, in thickets and in
> brakes  
> Entangled, winds now this way, and now that,  
> His devious course uncertain, seeking home,  
> But finds at last a greensward smooth and large,  
> Courageous, and refreshed for future toil.”  

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>How strange it seems, after three centuries
since <span id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>John the Baptist suffered, to gain a
moment when kings are not actually persecuting Christ in His servants!  

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>How marvelous the change must have been in
the experience of the primitive faithful; the Roman Emperor not ashamed
of <span id="iii.i-p4.1"></span>Jesus, and setting up the cross on the
standards of his legions! <span id="iii.i-p4.2"></span>Tertullian, <span
id="iii.i-p4.3"></span>De Fuga<span id="iii.i-p4.4"></span>, and the
troubles of <span id="iii.i-p4.5"></span>Cyprian about <span
id="iii.i-p4.6"></span>The Lapsed<span id="iii.i-p4.7"></span>, are
matters of the past. As in a moment, God has changed the world for His
people, and their perils become as suddenly reversed. The world’s favor
begins to be the trial of faith, as its hatred before. The mild
contemplative attitude of the Church at this period is something
surprising. It accepts with little exultation this miracle of the
Master; but so long has it been habituated to persecution, that it finds
much of its discipline, and not less of its prevailing spirit,
neutralized by its very triumph. No more the martyr’s heroic testimony
and his crown beyond this life; no such call for the celibate as had
been enforced before in tomes of the Christian literature; and what need
now of Antony’s invitation to the desert and the cell? But, on the other
hand, these ascetic forms of heroic faith were all that were now left to
minister to the martyr-spirit, and to perpetuate the habits enforced
upon the early believers. The hermitage and the monastery assumed a new
attractiveness, and became dear to sentiment, as to principle before. We
must not be surprised, then, at the tendencies of the age now rapidly
developed; but let us rejoice for a moment in the times of refreshing
from the Lord now at last vouchsafed to that “little flock” to which He
had promised the kingdom.  

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>The “conversion of <span
id="iii.i-p5.1"></span>Constantine,” as it is called, introduced the
most marvelous revolution in human empire, in practical thought, and in
the laws and manners of mankind, ever known in the history of the world.
It is amazing how little the men of the epoch itself glorified their own
introduction to “marvelous light,” and how very little the Church has
left us, to tell the story of its emotions when first it found itself at
rest from fiery persecutions, or when came forth from the Emperor the
Edict of Milan for the legal observance of “the Day of the Sun.” <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) What a day that Easter was, when, emerging
from the catacombs and other dens and caves of the earth, the Church
herself seemed as one risen from the dead!<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>
<span id="iii.i-Page_4"></span>  

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>We may be sure there were tears of joy and
warm embraces among kindred long torn asunder by their common exposures
to fire and sword. We cannot imagine, indeed, all, that was in the
hearts of those Christian families that now kept holyday together in the
face of the world, and sang fearlessly in holy places their anthem,
“Christ is risen from the dead.” But a moment’s thought we ought to
give, as we pass into a stage of history entirely fresh and new, to the
power of God thus manifested. The miracle thus wrought by the ascended
Christ needs no aid from the supposed “vision of <span
id="iii.i-p7.1"></span>Constantine” to make it a supernatural exhibition
of His glory who is “King of kings and Lord of lords.”  

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span><span id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>Arnobius wrote
to the minds of perplexed Pilates asking “What is truth” in a new
spirit, and not indisposed to wash their own hands of the blood of <span
id="iii.i-p8.2"></span>Jesus, though not prepared to believe and be
baptized. His pupil finds a better sort of Pilate in the Emperor and in
his period. <span id="iii.i-p8.3"></span>Constan<span
id="iii.i-p8.4"></span>tine is a pagan still at heart, but he is
convinced of the truth that Christ has a kingdom “not of this world;”
and he must have this credit, above the <span
id="iii.i-p8.5"></span>Antonines, that he recognized in the Chris tians
not only his best and most loyal subjects, but men of a character
altogether superior <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) to that of the
heathen, who had so long been the councillors of the empire. He was one,
also, who accepted “the logic of events,” and who came to terms with the
inevitable in time to turn it to his own advantage.  

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>I think <span
id="iii.i-p10.1"></span>Constantine had read the <span
id="iii.i-p10.2"></span>Apologies addressed to the Antonines <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) by Ju<span id="iii.i-p11.2"></span>stin
Martyr, and was at first disposed only to accept the plea for Christians
so far forth as Justin had urged it. Going so far, he was led beyond his
positive convictions to measures of policy which identified him with the
Church. That the Church was distrustful of him, and doubted how long the
Imperial favor might be relied upon, is also apparent. This doubt
accounts, in some degree, for the great moderation of the Church in
accepting benefits from him, and in withholding notes of triumph. She
instinctively foresaw Julians in the way, and expected reactionary
periods. She forbore to baptize the Emperor, and encouraged his
disposition to postpone. It was as when “the wolf of Benjamin” was
introduced to the disciples: “they were afraid of him, and believed not
that he was a disciple.”  

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span><span id="iii.i-p12.1"></span>Lactantius,
moved, perhaps, by <span id="iii.i-p12.2"></span>Hosius or <span
id="iii.i-p12.3"></span>Eusebius, undertakes the instruction of the
Emperor, while seeming only to copy the example of Justin writing to
<span id="iii.i-p12.4"></span>Antoninus Pius. The <span
id="iii.i-p12.5"></span>Institutes, it is true, had been begun at an
earlier date; but he economizes, for a new purpose, the material, in
which, perhaps, he had only purposed to follow up the work of his
teacher, in language better fitted to the polite, for refuting
heathenism. I cannot doubt that he aimed, in pure Latinity, to win the
Emperor and his court to a deeper and purer conviction of divine truth:
to more than a feeble and possibly superstitious idea that it was
useless to contend with it, and that the gods of the empire were
impotent to protect themselves against Christian progress and its
masterly exposures of their shame and nothingness.  

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>In language which has given him the title of
the Christian <span id="iii.i-p13.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.i-p13.2"></span>Lactantius employs <span
id="iii.i-p13.3"></span>Cicero himself as a defender of the truth;
correcting him, indeed, and overruling his mistakes, rebuking his
pusillanimity, and justly censuring him, (1) in philosophy, for
declaring it no rule of action, however ennobling its precepts; and (2)
in religion, for not venturing to profess conclusions to which his
reasonings necessarily tend. All this is admirably adapted to carry on
the work of Christian Fathers and Apologists under the change of times.
He and <span id="iii.i-p13.4"></span>Arnobius furnish but a supplement
to the real teachers of the Church, and are not to be always depended on
in statements of doctrine. They write like earnest converts, but not
like theologians; yet, although their loose expressions are often
inconsistent one with another, it is manifest that their design is to
support orthodoxy as it had been defined by abler expounders. I think
the large respect which <span id="iii.i-p13.5"></span>Lactantius pays to
the testimony of the <span id="iii.i-p13.6"></span>Sibyls was addressed
to the class with which he had to deal. <span
id="iii.i-p13.7"></span>Constantine was greatly influenced by such
testimonies, if we may judge from his own <span id="page_5">p. 5</span>
<span id="iii.i-Page_5"></span>liberal quotations <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) and his comments on the <span
id="iii.i-p14.4"></span>Pollio of <span id="iii.i-p14.5"></span>Virgil,
to which, as a Christian oracle, our author may have introduced him. In
short, the day had come in which it could no longer be said with strict
propriety of phrase, “Not many mighty, not many noble, are called;” and
Lactantius accepted, as his mission, the enforcement, before such a
class, of despised truths which the great had persecuted in vain for
centuries. He drew them thus to the conclusion that God had indeed
“chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the
weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and
base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that
are.” Such was the prophecy of St. <span id="iii.i-p14.6"></span>Paul,
and the <span id="iii.i-p14.7"></span>Labarum uplifted by Cæsar’s
legions proclaimed the fulfillment.  

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span>I have little doubt that <span
id="iii.i-p15.1"></span>Lactantius was of heathen parentage, and was
converted late in life. To his eternal honor he was not a “fair-weather
Christian,” but boldly confessed the faith amid the fires of the last
and most terrible of the great persecutions. Its probable date suggests
that his treatise on the persecutors may have been a far-reaching effort
to dissuade the Cæsars of a later age from trying to restore “the gods
to Latium.” I confess my own partiality to our author, and the interest
with which his writings continue to impress me, even now. In youth
(<span id="iii.i-p15.2"></span>Consule Planco) I brought to his pages an
enthusiastic appreciation of the genius which had adorned the very dawn
of Christian civilization by works of literary merit not inferior to
those of the Augustan age. The crabbed Latinity of <span
id="iii.i-p15.3"></span>Tertullian has charms, indeed, of its own sort:
it was the shaggy raiment of the ascetic and the confessor, “always
bearing about in his own body the dying of the Lord <span
id="iii.i-p15.4"></span>Jesus.” It befitted the age and the man, and
those awful realities with which Christians had then to deal. Not words,
but things, were their one concern. It is pleasant to find, however,
that Christianity is not incapable of meeting all sorts and conditions
of men; and Lactantius’ was doubtless the instrument of Providence in
bearing the testimony of <span id="iii.i-p15.5"></span>Jesus, “even
before kings,” in language which promised to Roman letters the new and
commanding development imparted to its language by Christianity, which
has made it imperishable, and more truly “eternal” than Rome itself.  

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>The following is the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p16.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span> of the reverend
translator: <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) —  

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>  

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p19.1"></span>Lactantius</span> has always held a very high
place among the Christian Fathers, not only on account of the
subject-matter of his writings, but also on account of the varied
erudition, the sweetness of expression, and the grace and elegance of
style, by which they are characterized. It appears, therefore, more
remarkable that so little is known with certainty respecting his
personal history. We are unable to fix with precision either the place
or time of his birth, and even his name has been the subject of much
discussion. It is known that he was a pupil of <span
id="iii.i-p19.2"></span>Arnobius, who gave lectures in rhetoric at Sicca
in Africa. Hence it has been supposed that Lactantius was a native of
Africa, while others have maintained that he was born in Italy, and that
his birthplace probably was Firmium, on the Adriatic. He was probably
born about the middle of the third century, since he is spoken of as far
advanced in life about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p19.3"></span>a.d.</span> 315. He is usually denominated
“<span id="iii.i-p19.4"></span>Lucius Cælius Firmianus Lactantius;” but
the name Cæcilius is sometimes substituted for Cælius, and it is
uncertain whether Firmianus is a family name or a local <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) designation. Some have even supposed that
be received the name of <span id="iii.i-p20.1"></span>Lactantius from
the milky softness of his style.  

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span>He attained to great eminence as a teacher
of rhetoric, and his fame far outstripped the reputation of his master
<span id="iii.i-p21.1"></span>Arnobius. Such, indeed, was his celebrity,
that he was invited by the Emperor <span
id="iii.i-p21.2"></span>Diocletian to settle at Nicomedia, and there
practise his art. He appears, however to have met with so little success
in that city, as to have been reduced to extreme indigence. Abandoning
his profession as a pleader, he devoted himself to literary composition.
It was <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_6"></span>probably at this period that he embraced the
Christian faith, and we may perhaps be justified in supposing some
connection between his poverty and his change of religion. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) He was afterwards called to settle in
Gaul, probably about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p22.1"></span>a.d.</span> 315, and the Emperor <span
id="iii.i-p22.2"></span>Constantine entrusted to him the education of
his son <span id="iii.i-p22.3"></span>Crispus. He is believed to have
died at Trèves about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p22.4"></span>a.d.</span> 325.  

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span>His principal work is <span
id="iii.i-p23.1"></span>The Christian Institutions<span
id="iii.i-p23.2"></span>, or an <span
id="iii.i-p23.3"></span>Introduction to True Religion<span
id="iii.i-p23.4"></span>, in seven books, designed to supersede <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) the less complete treatises of <span
id="iii.i-p24.1"></span>Minucius Felix, <span
id="iii.i-p24.2"></span>Tertullian, and <span
id="iii.i-p24.3"></span>Cyprian. In these books, each of which has a
distinct title, and constitutes a separate essay, he demonstrates the
falsehood of the pagan religion, shows the vanity of the heathen
philosophy, and undertakes the defense of the Christian religion against
its adversaries. He also sets forth the nature of righteousness, gives
instructions concerning the true worship of God, and treats of the
punishment of the wicked, and the reward of the righteous in everlasting
happiness.  

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span>To the <span
id="iii.i-p25.1"></span>Institutions is appended an epitome dedicated to
<span id="iii.i-p25.2"></span>Pentadius. The authorship of this
abridgment has been questioned in modem times; but it is expressly
assigned to <span id="iii.i-p25.3"></span>Lactantius by <span
id="iii.i-p25.4"></span>Hieronymus. The greater part of the work was
wanting in the earlier editions, and it was not until the beginning of
the eighteenth century that it was discovered nearly entire. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)  

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span>The treatise on <span
id="iii.i-p27.1"></span>The Anger of God is directed mainly against the
tenets of the Epicureans and Stoics, who maintained that the deeds of
men could produce no emotions of pleasure or anger in the Deity.
Lactantius holds that the love of the good necessarily implies the
hatred of evil; and that the tenets of these philosophers, as tending to
overthrow the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, are subversive
of the principles of true religion.  

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span>In the treatise on <span
id="iii.i-p28.1"></span>The Workmanship of God<span
id="iii.i-p28.2"></span>, or <span id="iii.i-p28.3"></span>The Formation
of Man<span id="iii.i-p28.4"></span>, the author dwells upon the
wonderful construction of the human frame, and the adaptation of means
to ends therein displayed, as proofs of the wisdom and goodness of God.
The latter part of the book contains speculations concerning the nature
and origin of the soul.  

<span id="iii.i-p29"></span>In the treatise <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) on the <span
id="iii.i-p30.2"></span>Deaths of Persecutors<span
id="iii.i-p30.3"></span>, an argument for the truth of the Christian
religion is derived from the fact, that those emperors who had been most
distinguished as persecutors of the Christians, were special objects of
divine vengeance.  

<span id="iii.i-p31"></span>To these treatises are usually appended some
poetical works which have been attributed to Lactantius, but it is very
questionable whether any of them were really written by him.  

<span id="iii.i-p32"></span>The poem on the <span
id="iii.i-p32.1"></span>Phœnix appears to be of a comparatively modern
date.  

<span id="iii.i-p33"></span>That on <span
id="iii.i-p33.1"></span>Easter <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) is
believed to have been composed by <span
id="iii.i-p34.2"></span>Venantius Honorianus Clementianus Fortunatus in
the sixth century.  

<span id="iii.i-p35"></span>The poem on the <span
id="iii.i-p35.1"></span>Passion of the Lord<span
id="iii.i-p35.2"></span>, though much admired both in its language and
style of thought, bears the impress of a later age. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)  

<span id="iii.i-p37"></span>There is also a collection of <span
id="iii.i-p37.1"></span>A Hundred Enigmas<span
id="iii.i-p37.2"></span>, <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) which has
been attributed to <span id="iii.i-p38.1"></span>Lactantius; but there
is good reason to suppose that they are not the production of his pen.
Heumann endeavored to prove that <span id="iii.i-p38.2"></span>Symposium
is the title of the work, and that no such person as Symposius <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) ever existed. But this opinion is
untenable. It is true that <span id="iii.i-p39.5"></span>Hieronymus
speaks of Lactantius as the author of a Symposium, but there are no
grounds for supposing that the work was of a light and trifling
character: it was probably a serious dialogue.  

<span id="iii.i-p40"></span>The style of <span
id="iii.i-p40.1"></span>Lactantius has been deservedly praised for the
dignity, elegance, and clearness <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_7"></span>of expression by which it is characterized, and
which have gained for him the appellation of the Christian <span
id="iii.i-p40.2"></span>Cicero. His writings everywhere give evidence of
his varied and extensive erudition, and contain much valuable
information respecting the systems of the ancient philosophers. But his
claims as a theologian are open to question; for he holds peculiar
opinions on many points, and he appears more successful as an opponent
of error than as a maintainer of the truth. Lactantius has been charged
with a leaning to Manicheism, <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) but
the charge appears to be unfounded.  

<span id="iii.i-p42"></span>The translation has been made from <span
id="iii.i-p42.1"></span>Migne’s edition, from which most of the notes
have been taken. The quotations from <span
id="iii.i-p42.2"></span>Virgil have been given in the words of <span
id="iii.i-p42.3"></span>Conington’s translation, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) and those from <span
id="iii.i-p43.2"></span>Lucretius in the words of Munro.<span
id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="iii.i-Page_8"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[3:5](0070003.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span> He borrows from <span
id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>Justin, vol. i. note 1, p. 186.  

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:6](0070003.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iii.i-p8.6"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span> e.g., Thomas, vol. vi. p. 158.  

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4:7](0070003.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iii.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span> While <span
id="iii.i-p11.1"></span>Lactantius was tutor to his son.  

<span id="fn_7"></span>[5:8](0070003.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iii.i-p13.8"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span> See his <span
id="iii.i-p14.1"></span>Address to the Assembly of the Saints<span
id="iii.i-p14.2"></span>, preserved by <span
id="iii.i-p14.3"></span>Eusebius.  

<span id="fn_8"></span>[5:9](0070003.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span> <span id="iii.i-p17.1"></span>William
Fletcher, D.D. head master of Queen Elizabeth’s School, Wimborne,
Dorset.  

<span id="fn_9"></span>[5:10](0070003.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.i-p19.5"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span> i.e. of Firmium.  

<span id="fn_10"></span>[6:11](0070003.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.i-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span> \[I see no force in this suggestion. Quite
the reverse. He could not then anticipate anything but worse
sufferings.\]  

<span id="fn_11"></span>[6:12](0070003.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.i-p23.5"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span> \[To supplement, rather.\]  

<span id="fn_12"></span>[6:13](0070003.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.i-p25.5"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span> In an ancient <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p26.1"></span>ms. </span>at Turin.  

<span id="fn_13"></span>[6:14](0070003.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p30"></span> <span id="iii.i-p30.1"></span>Lord Hailes’
translation has been adopted in the present edition.  

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:15](0070003.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p34"></span> <span id="iii.i-p34.1"></span>De Paschâ.  

<span id="fn_15"></span>[6:16](0070003.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.i-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p36"></span> It has an allusion to the adoration of the
Cross. \[Hence must be referred to a period subsequent to the
pseudo-council called Deutero-Nicene. Comp. vol. iv. note 6, p. 191; and
see Smith’s <span id="iii.i-p36.2"></span>History of the Christian
Church in the First Ten Centuries<span id="iii.i-p36.3"></span>, vol. i.
p. 451, ed. Harpers, New York.\]  

<span id="fn_16"></span>[6:17](0070003.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.i-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p38"></span> The Enigmas have not been included in the
present translation, for the reason mentioned.  

<span id="fn_17"></span>[6:18](0070003.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.i-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p39"></span> The title prefixed to them in the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.i-p39.1"></span>mss</span>. is Firmianus
Symposius (written also Symphosius) Cælius. See Dr. Smith’s <span
id="iii.i-p39.2"></span>Dictionary of Biography, under the names <span
id="iii.i-p39.3"></span>Firmianus and <span
id="iii.i-p39.4"></span>Lactantius.  

<span id="fn_18"></span>[7:19](0070003.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.i-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p41"></span> This question is fully discussed by Dr.
<span id="iii.i-p41.1"></span>Lardner in his <span
id="iii.i-p41.2"></span>Credibility of the Gospel History, Works<span
id="iii.i-p41.3"></span>, vol. iii. \[p. 516. The whole chapter (lxv.)
on <span id="iii.i-p41.4"></span>Lactantius deserves study\].  

<span id="fn_19"></span>[7:20](0070003.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.i-p42.4"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p43"></span> \[Which reduces many of <span
id="iii.i-p43.1"></span>Virgil’s finest and most Homeric passages to
mere song and ballad, and sacrifices all their epic dignity.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Divine Institutes](0070004)
