[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070021)  [Next](0070023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. xvi.— by what argument it is proved that those who are distinguished by a difference of sex cannot be gods. <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72)

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p2"></span>I might be content with those things
which I have related, but there still remain many things which are
necessary for the work which I have undertaken. For although, by
destroying the principal part of superstitions, I have taken away the
whole, yet it pleases me to follow up the remaining parts, and more
fully to refute so inveterate a persuasion, that men may at length be
ashamed and repent of their errors. This is a great undertaking, and
worthy of a man. “I proceed to release the minds of men from the ties of
superstitions,” as <span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p2.1"></span>Lucretius <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) says; and he indeed was unable to effect
this, because he brought forward nothing true. This is our duty, who
both assert the existence of the true God and refute false deities.
They, therefore, who entertain the opinion that the poets have invented
fables about the gods, and yet believe in the existence of female
deities, and worship them, are unconsciously brought back to that which
they had denied—that they have sexual intercourse, and bring forth. For
it is impossible that the two sexes can have been instituted except for
the sake of generation. But a difference of sex being admitted, they do
not perceive that conception follows as a consequence. And this cannot
<span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-Page_29"></span>be the case with a God. But let the
matter be as they imagine; for they say that there are sons of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p3.2"></span>Jupiter and of the other gods. Therefore
new gods are born, and that indeed daily, for gods are not surpassed in
fruitfulness by men. It follows that all things are full of gods without
number, since forsooth none of them dies. For since the multitude of men
is incredible, and their number not to be estimated—though, as they are
born, they must of necessity die—what must we suppose to be the case
with the gods who have been born through so many ages, and have remained
immortal? How is it, then, that so few are worshipped? Unless we think
by any means that there are two sexes of the gods, not for the sake of
generation, but for mere gratification, and that the gods practise those
things which men are ashamed to do, and to submit to. But when any are
said to be born from any, it follows that they always continue to be
born, if they are born at any time; or if they ceased at any time to be
born, it is befitting that we should know why or at what time they so
ceased. <span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p3.3"></span>Seneca, in his books of
moral philosophy, not without some pleasantry, asks, “What is the reason
why <span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p3.4"></span>Jupiter, who is represented by
the poets as most addicted to lust, ceased to beget children? Was it
that he was become a sexagenarian, and was restrained by the Papian
law? <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) Or did he obtain the
privileges conferred by having three children? Or did the sentiment at
length occur to him, ‘What you have done to another, you may expect from
another;’ and does he fear lest any one should act towards him as he
himself did to <span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p4.3"></span>Saturn?” But let
those who maintain that they are gods, see in what manner they can
answer this argument which I shall bring forward. If there are two sexes
of the gods, conjugal intercourse follows; and if this takes place, they
must have houses, for they are not without virtue and a sense of shame,
so as to do this openly and promiscuously, as we see that the brute
animals do. If they have houses, it follows that they also have cities;
and for this we have the authority of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p4.4"></span>Ovid, who says, “The multitude of gods
occupy separate places; in this front the powerful and illustrious
inhabitants of heaven have placed their dwellings.” If they have cities,
they will also have fields. Now who cannot see the consequence,—namely,
that they plough and cultivate their lands? And this is done for the
sake of food. Therefore they are mortal. And this argument is of the
same weight when reversed. For if they have no lands, they have no
cities; and if they have no cities, they are also without houses. And if
they have no houses, they have no conjugal intercourse; and if they are
without this, they have no female sex. But we see that there are females
among the gods also. Therefore there are not gods. If any one is able,
let him do away with this argument. For one thing so follows the other,
that it is impossible not to admit these last things. But no one will
refute even the former argument. Of the two sexes the one is stronger,
the other weaker. For the males are more robust, the females more
feeble. But a god is not liable to feebleness; therefore there is no
female sex. To this is added that last conclusion of the former
argument, that there are no gods, since there are females also among the
gods.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[28:73](0070022.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p0.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p1"></span> And that the office of propagating
(his race) does not fall within the nature of God.  

<span id="fn_73"></span>[28:74](0070022.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p3"></span> i. 931. \[i.e., <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p3.1"></span>De Rerum Natura, lib. i. verse 931.\]  

<span id="fn_74"></span>[29:75](0070022.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p4"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p4.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvii-p4.2"></span>De Officiis, lib. iii. 11.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVII.—Concerning the same opinion of the stoics, and
concerning the hardships and disgraceful conduct of the gods](0070023)
