[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070014)  [Next](0070016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.x"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.x-p0.1"></span>Chap. IX.—Of hercules and his life and death. <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)

<span id="iii.ii.i.x-p2"></span>Did not <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p2.1"></span>Hercules, who is most renowned for his
valour, and who is regarded as an Africanus among the gods, by his
debaucheries, lusts, and adulteries, pollute the world, which he is
related to have traversed and purified? And no wonder, since he was born
from an adulterous intercourse with <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p2.2"></span>Alcmena.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.x-p3"></span>What divinity could there have been in
him, who, enslaved to his own vices, against all laws, treated with
infamy, disgrace, and outrage, both males and females? Nor, indeed, are
those great and wonderful actions which he performed to be judged such
as to be thought worthy of being attributed to divine excellence. For
what! is it so magnificent if he overcame a lion and a boar; if he shot
down birds with arrows; if he cleansed a royal stable; if he conquered a
virago, and deprived her of her belt; if he slew savage horses together
with their master? These are the deeds of a brave and heroic man, but
still a man; for those things which he overcame were frail and mortal.
For there is no power so great, as the orator says, which cannot be
weakened and broken by iron and strength. But to conquer the mind, and
to restrain anger, is the part of the bravest man; and these things he
never did or could do: for one who does these things I do not compare
with excellent men, but I judge him to be most like to a god.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.x-p4"></span>I could wish that he had added <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p4.1"></span>something on the subject of lust, luxury,
desire, and arrogance, so as to complete the excellence of him whom he
judged to be like to a god. For he is not to be thought braver who
overcomes a lion, than he who overcomes the violent wild beast shut up
within himself, viz. anger; or he who has brought down most rapacious
birds, than he who restrains most covetous desires; or he who subdues a
warlike Amazon, than he who subdues lust, the vanquisher <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) of modesty and fame; or he who cleanses a
stable from dung, than he who cleanses his heart from vices, which are
more destructive <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-Page_19"></span>evils because they are peculiarly his
own, than those which might have been avoided and guarded against. From
this it comes to pass, that he alone ought to be judged a brave man who
is temperate, moderate, and just. But if any one considers what the
works of God are, he will at once judge all these things, which most
trifling men admire, to be ridiculous. For they measure them not by the
divine power of which they are ignorant, but by the weakness of their
own strength. For no one will deny this, that <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p5.1"></span>Hercules was not only a servant to <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p5.2"></span>Eurystheus, a king, which to a certain
extent may appear honourable, but also to an unchaste woman, <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p5.3"></span>Omphale, who used to order him to sit at her
feet, clothed with her garments, and executing an appointed task.
Detestable baseness! But such was the price at which pleasure was
valued. What! some one will say, do you think that the poets are to be
believed? Why should I not think so? For it is not <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p5.4"></span>Lucilius who relates these things, or <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p5.5"></span>Lucian, who spared not men nor gods, but
these especially who sting the praises of the gods.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.x-p6"></span>Whom, then, shall we believe, if we do
not credit those who praise them? Let him who thinks that these speak
falsely produce other authors on whom we may rely, who may teach us who
these gods are, in what manner and from what source they had their
origin, what is their strength, what their number, what their power,
what there is in them which is admirable and worthy of adoration—what
mystery, in short, more to be relied on, and more true. He will produce
no such authorities. Let us, then, give credence to those who did not
speak for the purpose of censure, but to proclaim their praise. He
sailed, then, with the Argonauts, and sacked Troy, being enraged with
<span id="iii.ii.i.x-p6.1"></span>Laomedon on account of the reward
refused to him, by Laomedon, for the preservation of his daughter, from
which circumstance it is evident at what time he lived. He also, excited
by rage and madness, slew his wife, together with his children. Is this
he whom men consider a god? But his heir <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p6.2"></span>Philoctetes did not so regard him, who
applied a torch to him when about to be burnt, who witnessed the burning
and wasting of his limbs and sinews, who buried his bones and ashes on
Mount Œta, in return for which office he received his arrows.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[18:45](0070015.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p0.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.x-p1"></span> \[Vol. ii. p. 179. It is interesting to
observe the influence of <span id="iii.ii.i.x-p1.2"></span>Justin and
<span id="iii.ii.i.x-p1.3"></span>Clement on the reasoning of the later
fathers, not excepting <span id="iii.ii.i.x-p1.4"></span>St.
Augustine.\]  

<span id="fn_45"></span>[18:46](0070015.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.ii.i.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.x-p5"></span> Debellatricem.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. X.—Of the life and actions of Æsculapius, Apollo, Neptune,
Mars, Castor and Pollux, Mercury and Bacchus](0070016)
