[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070047)  [Next](0070049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVIII.—Of the Patience and Vengeance of God, the Worship of Demons, and False Religions.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p1"></span>Some one will say, Why then does
God permit these things to be done, and not apply a remedy to such
disastrous errors? That evils may be at variance with good; that vices
may be opposed to virtues; that He may have some whom He may punish, and
others whom He <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-Page_67"></span>may honour. For He has determined at
the last times to pass judgment on the living and the dead, concerning
which judgment I shall speak in the last book. He delays, <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351.md) therefore, until the end of the times
shall come, when He may pour out His wrath with heavenly power and
might, as  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p2.3"></span> “Prophecies of pious seers  
> Ring terror in the ’wildered ears.” <span
> id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p4"></span>But now He suffers men to err, and
to be impious even towards Himself, just, and mild, and patient as He
is. For it is impossible that He in whom is perfect excellence should
not also be of perfect patience. Whence some imagine, that God is
altogether free from anger, because He is not subject to affections,
which are perturbations of the mind; for every animal which is liable to
affections and emotions is frail. But this persuasion altogether takes
away truth and religion. But let this subject of discussing the anger of
God be laid aside for the present; because the matter is very copious,
and to be more widely treated in a work devoted to the subject. Whoever
shall have worshipped and followed these most wicked spirits, will
neither enjoy heaven nor the light, which are God’s; but will fall into
those things which we have spoken of as being assigned in the
distribution of things to the prince of the evil ones himself,—namely,
into darkness, and hell, and everlasting punishment.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p5"></span>I have shown that the religious
rites of the gods are vain in a threefold manner: In the first place,
because those images which are worshipped are representations of men who
are dead; and that is a wrong and inconsistent thing, that the image of
a man should be worshipped by the image of God, for that which worships
is lower and weaker <span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>than that
which is worshipped<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p5.2"></span>: then that it
is an inexpiable crime to desert the living in order that you may serve
memorials of the dead, who can neither give life nor light to any one,
for they are themselves without it: and that there is no other God but
one, to whose judgment and power every soul is subject. In the second
place, that the sacred images themselves, to which most senseless men do
service, are destitute of all perception, since they are earth. But who
cannot understand that it is unlawful for an upright animal to bend
itself that it may adore the earth? which is placed beneath our feet for
this purpose, that it may be trodden upon, and not adored by us, who
have been raised from it, and have received an elevated position beyond
the other living creatures, that we may not turn ourselves again
downward, nor cast this heavenly countenance to the earth, but may
direct our eyes to that quarter to which the condition of their nature
has directed, and that we may adore and worship nothing except the
single deity of our only Creator and Father, who made man of an erect
figure, that we may know that we are called forth to high and heavenly
things. In the third place, because the spirits which preside over the
religious rites themselves, being condemned and cast off by God,
wallow <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353.md) over the earth, who not
only are unable to afford any advantage to their worshippers, since the
power of all things is in the hands of one alone, but even destroy them
with deadly attractions and errors; since this is their daily business,
to involve men in darkness, that the true God may not be sought by them.
Therefore they are not to be worshipped, because they lie under the
sentence of God. For it is a very great crime to devote <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354.md) one’s self to the power of those whom,
if you follow righteousness, you are able to excel in power, and to
drive out and put to flight by adjuration of the divine name. But if it
appears that these religious rites are vain in so many ways as I have
shown, it is manifest that those who either make prayers to the
dead, <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355.md) or venerate the earth, or
make over <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356.md) their souls to unclean
spirits, do not act as becomes men, and that they will suffer punishment
for their impiety and guilt, who, rebelling against God, the Father of
the human race, have undertaken inexpiable rites, and violated every
sacred law.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_351"></span>[67:352](0070048.htm#fr_351.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p2.1"></span>Jerome says “Great is the anger of God
when He does not correct sins, but punishes blindness with blindness. On
this very account God sends strong delusion, as St. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p2.2"></span>Paul writes to the Thessalonians, that
they should believe a lie, that they all may be damned who have not
believed the truth. They are unworthy of the living fountain who dig for
themselves cisterns.”  

<span id="fn_352"></span>[67:353](0070048.htm#fr_352.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p2.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p3.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p3.2"></span>Æn., iv. 464. Some read <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p3.3"></span>priorum</span>
instead of <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p3.4"></span>piorum</span>  

<span id="fn_353"></span>[67:354](0070048.htm#fr_353.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p6"></span> Roll themselves.  

<span id="fn_354"></span>[67:355](0070048.htm#fr_354.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>Addico, “to adjudge,” is the legal
term, expressing the sentence by which the <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p7.2"></span>prætor gave effect to the right which
he had declared to exist.  

<span id="fn_355"></span>[67:356](0070048.htm#fr_355.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p8"></span> \[Let this be noted.\]  

<span id="fn_356"></span>[67:357](0070048.htm#fr_356.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>Mancipo. The word implies the making
over or transferring by a formal act of sale. Debtors, who were unable
to satisfy the demands of their creditors, were made over to them, and
regarded as their slaves. They were termed <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p9.2"></span>addicti. Our Lord said ([John viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034.md)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p9.3"></span>), “Whosoever committeth sin, is the
servant of sin.” Thus also St. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p9.4"></span>Paul, [Rom.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xviii-p9.5"></span>.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIX.—Of the worship of images and earthly objects](0070049.md)
