[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070073)  [Next](0070075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXIII.—Of the Errors of Certain Philosophers, and of the Sun and Moon.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p1"></span>Since, therefore, the leading men
among the philosophers are themselves discovered to be of such
emptiness, what shall we think of those lesser <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) ones, who are accustomed never to
appear to themselves so wise, as when they boast of their contempt of
money? Brave spirit! But I wait to see their conduct, and what are the
results of that contempt. They avoid as an evil, and abandon the
property handed down to them from their parents. And lest they should
suffer shipwreck in a storm, they plunge headlong of their own accord in
a calm, being resolute not by virtue, but by perverse fear; as those
who, through fear of being slain by the enemy, slay themselves, that by
death they may avoid death. So these men, without honour and without
influence, throw away the means by which they might have acquired the
glory of liberality. <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Democritus
is praised because he abandoned his fields, and suffered them to become
public pastures. I should approve of it, if he had given them. But
nothing is done wisely which is useless and evil if it is done by all.
But this negligence is tolerable. What shall I say of him who changed
his possessions into money, which he threw into the sea? I doubt whether
he was in his senses, or deranged. Away, he says, ye evil desires, into
the deep. I will cast you away, lest I myself should be cast away by
you. If you have so great a contempt for money, employ it in acts of
kindness and humanity, bestow it upon the poor; this, which you are
about to throw away, may be a succour to many, so that they may not die
through famine, or thirst, or nakedness. Imitate at least the madness
and fury of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>Tuditanus; <span
id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) scatter abroad your property to be
seized by the people. You have it in your power both to escape the
possession of money, and yet to lay it out to advantage; for whatever
has been profitable to many is securely laid out.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p4"></span>But who approves of the equality
of faults as laid down by <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>Zeno?
But let us omit that which is always received with derision by all. This
is sufficient to prove the error of this madman, that he places pity
among vices and diseases. He deprives us of an affection, which involves
almost the whole course of human life. For since the nature of man is
more feeble than that of the other animals, which divine providence
<span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-Page_94"></span>has armed with natural means of
protection, <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) either to endure the
severity of the seasons or to ward off attacks from their bodies,
because none of these things has been given to man, he has received in
the place of all these things the affection of pity, which is truly
called humanity, by which we might mutually protect each other. For if a
man were rendered savage by the sight of another man, which we see
happen in the case of those animals which are of a solitary <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) nature, there would be no society
among men, no care or system in the building of cities; and thus life
would not even be safe, since the weakness of men would both be exposed
to the attacks of the other animals, and they would rage among
themselves after the manner of wild beasts. Nor is his madness less in
other things.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p7"></span>For what can be said respecting
him who asserted that snow was black? How naturally it followed, that he
should also assert that pitch was white! This is he who said that he was
born for this purpose, that he might behold the heaven and the sun, who
beheld nothing on the earth when the sun was shining. <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>Xenophanes most foolishly believed
mathematicians who said that the orb of the moon was eighteen times
larger than the earth; and, as was consistent with this folly, he said
that within the concave surface of the moon there was another earth, and
that there another race of men live in a similar manner to that in which
we live on this earth. Therefore these lunatics have another moon, to
hold forth to them a light by night, as this does to us. And perhaps
this globe of ours may be a moon to another earth below this. <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p8.2"></span>Seneca says that there was one among
the Stoics who used to deliberate whether he should assign to the sun
also its own inhabitants; he acted foolishly in doubting. For what
injury would he have inflicted if he had assigned them? But I believe
the heat deterred him, so as not to imperil so great a multitude; lest,
if they should perish through excessive heat, so great a calamity should
be said to have happened by his fault.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_462"></span>[93:463](0070074.htm#fr_462) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p2"></span> That is, philosophers of less
repute and fame.  

<span id="fn_463"></span>[93:464](0070074.htm#fr_463) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>Cicero speaks of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p3.2"></span>Tuditanus as scattering money from the
rostrum among the people.  

<span id="fn_464"></span>[94:465](0070074.htm#fr_464) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>Anacreon, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.2"></span>Ode 2. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.3"></span>τοι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.4"></span>̑</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.5"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.6"></span>ἀδρα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.7"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.8"></span>σιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.9"></span>φρο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.10"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.11"></span>νημα</span>.\]  

<span id="fn_465"></span>[94:466](0070074.htm#fr_465) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p5.12"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p6"></span> Animals of a solitary nature, as
opposed to those of gregarious habits.  

<span id="fn_466"></span>[94:467](0070074.htm#fr_466) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p8"></span> \[He was nearer truth than he
imagined, if the planet <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>Mars may
be called below us.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXIV.—Of the antipodes, the heaven, and the stars](0070075)
