[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070279)  [Next](0070281.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVII.—Of God, His Care and Anger.

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p1"></span>God, says <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Epicurus, regards nothing; therefore He
has no power. For he who has power must of necessity regard affairs. For
if He has power, and does not use it, what so great cause is there that,
I will not say our race, but even the universe itself, should be
contemptible in His sight? On this account he says He is pure <span
id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740.md) and happy, because He is always at
rest. <span id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741.md) To whom, then, has the
administration of so great affairs been entrusted, <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742.md) if these things which we see to be
governed by the highest judgment are neglected by God? or how can he who
lives and perceives be at rest? For rest belongs either to sleep or to
death. But sleep has not rest. For when we are asleep, the body indeed
is at rest, but the soul is restless and agitated: it forms for itself
images which it may behold, so that it exercises its natural power of
motion by a variety of visions, and calls itself away from false things,
until the limbs are satiated, and receive vigour from rest. Therefore
eternal rest belongs to death alone. Now if death does not affect God,
it follows that God is never at rest. But in what can the action of God
consist, but in the administration of the world? But if God carries on
the care of the world, it follows that He cares for the life of men, and
takes notice of the acts of individuals, and He earnestly desires that
they should be wise and good. This is the will of God, this the divine
law; and he who follows and observes this is beloved by God. It is
necessary that He should be moved with anger against the man who has
broken or despised this eternal and divine law. If, he says, God does
harm to any one, therefore He is not good. They are deceived by no
slight error who defame all censure, whether human or divine, with the
name of bitterness and malice, thinking that He ought to be called
injurious <span id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743.md) who visits the
injurious with punishment. But if this is so, it follows that we have
injurious laws, which enact punishment for offenders, and injurious
judges who inflict capital punishments on those convicted of crime. But
if the law is just which awards to the transgressor his due, and if the
judge is called upright and good when he punishes crimes,—for he guards
the safety of good men who punishes the evil,—it follows that God, when
He opposes the evil, is not injurious; but he himself is injurious who
either injures an innocent man, or spares an injurious person that he
may injure many.  

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p6"></span>I would gladly ask from those who
represent God as immoveable, <span id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744.md)
if any one had property, a house, a household <span
id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745.md) of slaves, and his slaves,
despising the forbearance of their master, should attack all things, and
themselves take the enjoyment of his goods, if his household should
honour them, while the master was despised by <span id="page_274">p.
274</span> <span id="iii.iii.xvii-Page_274"></span>all, insulted, and
deserted: could he be a wise man who should not avenge the insults, but
permit those over whom he had power to have the enjoyment of his
property? Can such forbearance be found in any one? If, indeed, it is to
be called forbearance, and not rather a kind of insensible stupor. But
it is easy to endure contempt. What if those things were done which are
spoken of by <span id="iii.iii.xvii-p8.2"></span>Cicero? <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746.md) “For I ask, if any head of a
family, <span id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747.md) when his children had
been put to death by a slave, his wife slain and his house set on fire,
should not exact most severe punishment from that slave, whether he
would appear to be kind and merciful, or inhuman and most cruel? “But if
to pardon deeds of this kind is the part of cruelty rather than of
kindness, <span id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748.md) it is not therefore
the part of goodness in God not to be moved at those things which are
done unjustly. For the world is, as it were, the house of God, and men,
as it were, His slaves; and if His name is a mockery to them, what kind
or amount of forbearance is it to give <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749.md) up His own honours, to see wicked
and unjust things done, and not to be indignant, which is peculiar and
natural to Him who is displeased with sins! To be angry, therefore, is
the part of reason: for thus faults are removed, and licentiousness is
curbed; and this is plainly in accordance with justice and wisdom.  

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p13"></span>But the Stoics did not see that there
is a distinction between right and wrong, that there is a just and also
an unjust anger; and because they did not find a remedy for the matter,
they wished altogether to remove it. But the Peripatetics said that it
was not to be cut out, but moderated; to whom we have made a sufficient
reply in the sixth book of the <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p13.1"></span>Institutions. <span
id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750.md) Now, that the philosophers were
ignorant of the nature of anger, is plain from their definitions, which
<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p14.3"></span>Seneca enumerated in the books
which he composed on the subject of anger. “Anger is,” he says, “the
desire of avenging an injury.” Others, as Posidonius says, describe it
as the desire of punishing him by whom you think that you have been
unfairly injured. Some have thus defined it: “Anger is an incitement of
the mind to injure him who either has committed an injury, or who has
wished to do so.” The definition of <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p14.4"></span>Aristotle does not differ greatly from
ours; <span id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751.md) for he says that “anger
is the desire of requiting pain.” This is the unjust anger, concerning
which we spoke before, which is contained even in the dumb animals; but
it is to be restrained in man, lest he should rush to some very great
evil through rage. This cannot exist in God, because He cannot be
injured; <span id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752.md) but it is found in
man, inasmuch as he is frail. For the inflicting <span
id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753.md) of injury inflames <span
id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754.md) anguish, and anguish produces a
desire of revenge. Where, then, is that just anger against offenders?
For this is evidently not the desire of revenge, inasmuch as no injury
precedes. I do not speak of those who sin against the laws; for although
a judge may be angry with these without incurring blame, let us,
however, suppose that he ought to be of a sedate mind when he sentences
the guilty to punishment, because he is the executor <span
id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755.md) of the laws, not of his own spirit
or power; for so they wish it who endeavour to extirpate anger. But I
speak of those in particular who are in our own power, as slaves,
children, wives, and pupils; for when we see these offend, we are
incited to restrain them.  

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p20"></span>For it cannot fail to be, that he who
is just and good is displeased with things which are bad, and that he
who is displeased with evil is moved when he sees it practised.
Therefore we arise to take vengeance, not because we have been injured,
but that discipline may be preserved, morals may be corrected, and
licentiousness be suppressed. This is just anger; and as it is necessary
in man for the correction of wickedness, so manifestly is it necessary
in God, from whom an example comes to man. For as we ought to restrain
those who are subject to our power, so also ought God to restrain the
offences of all. And in order that He may do this, He must be angry;
because it is natural for one who is good to be moved and incited at the
fault of another. Therefore they ought to have given this definition:
Anger is an emotion of the mind arousing itself for the restraining of
faults. <span id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756.md) For the definition
given by <span id="iii.iii.xvii-p21.3"></span>Cicero, “Anger is the
desire of taking vengeance,” does not differ much from those already
mentioned. <span id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757.md) But that anger
which we may call either fury or rage ought not to exist even in man,
because it is altogether vicious; but the anger which relates to the
correction of vices ought not to be taken away from man; nor can it be
taken away from God, because it is both serviceable for the affairs of
men, and necessary.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[273:1741](0070280.htm#fr_1740.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p2.1"></span>Incorruptus.  

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[273:1742](0070280.htm#fr_1741.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p3.1"></span>Quietus.  

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[273:1743](0070280.htm#fr_1742.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p4.1"></span>Cessit.  

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[273:1744](0070280.htm#fr_1743.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p5.1"></span>Nocentes.  

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[273:1745](0070280.htm#fr_1744.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p7.1"></span>Immobilem: not subject to emotions.  

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[273:1746](0070280.htm#fr_1745.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p8.1"></span>Familiam.  

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[274:1747](0070280.htm#fr_1746.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p9"></span> In <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p9.1"></span>Catal., iv. 6.  

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[274:1748](0070280.htm#fr_1747.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p10.1"></span>Paterfamilias, the master of a house.  

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[274:1749](0070280.htm#fr_1748.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p11.1"></span>Pietatis.  

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[274:1750](0070280.htm#fr_1749.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p12.1"></span>Ut cedat.  

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[274:1751](0070280.htm#fr_1750.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p14"></span> \[Cap. 15, p. 179, <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p14.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[274:1752](0070280.htm#fr_1751.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p14.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p15"></span> \[See p. 277, note 6, <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p15.2"></span>infra. But he should say <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p15.3"></span>indignation, not <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p15.4"></span>anger.\]  

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[274:1753](0070280.htm#fr_1752.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p16.1"></span>Illæsibilis est. Others read “<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p16.2"></span>stabilis est,” he is firm. The reading of
the text is confirmed by “<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p16.3"></span>læsio” in
the next clause.  

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[274:1754](0070280.htm#fr_1753.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p17.1"></span>Læsio.  

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[274:1755](0070280.htm#fr_1754.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p18.1"></span>Inurit, “burns in.”  

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[274:1756](0070280.htm#fr_1755.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p19"></span> Minister.  

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[274:1757](0070280.htm#fr_1756.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p21"></span> \[See note 6, <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p21.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[274:1758](0070280.htm#fr_1757.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p22"></span> \[P. 260, etc., <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p22.2"></span>supra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVIII.—Of the punishment of faults, that it cannot take
place without anger](0070281.md)
