[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070030)  [Next](0070032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p0.1"></span>Chap. i.—that forgetfulness of reason makes men ignorant of the true god, whom they worship in adversity and despise in prosperity.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Although</span> I have shown in the first
book that the religious ceremonies of the gods are false, because those
in whose honour the general consent of men throughout the world by a
foolish persuasion undertook various and dissimilar rites were mortals,
and when they had completed their <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p1.2"></span>term of life, yielded to a divinely
appointed necessity and died, yet, lest any doubt should be left, this
second book shall lay open the very fountain of errors, and shall
explain all the causes by which men were deceived, so that at first they
believed that they were gods, and afterwards with an inveterate
persuasion persevered in the religious observances which they had most
perversely undertaken. For I desire, O Emperor <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p1.3"></span>Constantine, now that I have proved the
emptiness of these things, and brought to light the impious vanity of
men, to assert the majesty of the one God, undertaking the more useful
and greater duty of recalling men from crooked paths, and of bringing
them back into favour with themselves, that they may not, as some
philosophers do, so greatly despise themselves, nor think that they are
weak and useless, and of no account, and altogether born in vain. For
this notion drives many to vicious pursuits. For while they imagine that
we are a care to no God, or that we are about to have no existence after
death, they altogether give themselves to the indulgence of their
passions; and while they think that it is allowed them, they eagerly
apply themselves to the enjoyment of pleasures, by which they
unconsciously run into the snares of death; for they are ignorant as to
what is reasonable conduct on the part of man: for if they wished to
understand this, in the first place they would acknowledge their Lord,
and would follow after virtue and justice; they would not subject their
souls to the influence of earth-born fictions, nor would they seek the
deadly fascinations of their lusts; in short, they would value
themselves highly, and would understand that there is more in man than
appears; and that they cannot retain their power and standing unless men
lay aside depravity, and undertake the worship of their true Parent. I
indeed, as I ought, often reflecting on the sum of affairs, am
accustomed to wonder that the majesty of the one God, which keeps
together and rules all things, has come to be so forgotten, that the
only befitting object of worship is, above all others, the one which is
especially neglected; and that men have sunk to such blindness, that
they prefer the dead to the true and living God, and those who are of
the earth, and buried in the earth, to Him who was the Creator of the
earth itself.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p2"></span>And yet this impiety of men might meet
with some indulgence if the error entirely arose from ignorance of the
divine name. But since we often see that the worshippers of other gods
themselves confess and acknowledge the Supreme God, what pardon can they
hope for their impiety, who do not acknowledge the worship of Him whom
man cannot altogether be ignorant of? For both in swearing, and in
expressing a wish, and in giving thanks, they do not name <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>Jupiter, or a number of gods, but
God; <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) so entirely does the truth
of its own accord break forth by the force of nature even from unwilling
breasts. And this, indeed, is not the case with men in their prosperity.
For then most of all does God escape the memory of men, when in the
enjoyment of His benefits they ought to honour His divine beneficence.
But if any weighty necessity shall press them, then they remember God.
If the terror of war shall have resounded, if the pestilential force of
diseases shall have overhung them, if long-continued drought shall have
denied nourishment to the <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-Page_41"></span>crops, if a violent tempest or hail
shall have assailed them, they betake themselves to God, aid is implored
from God, God is entreated to succour them. If any one is tossed about
on the sea, the wind being furious, it is this <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p3.3"></span>God whom he invokes. If any one is harassed
by any violence, he implores His aid. If any one, reduced to the last
extremity of poverty, begs for food, he appeals to God alone, and by His
divine and matchless name <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) alone
he seeks to gain the compassion of men. Thus they never remember God,
unless it be while they are in trouble. When fear has left them, and the
dangers have withdrawn, then in truth they quickly hasten to the temples
of the gods: they pour libations to them, they sacrifice to them, they
crown <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) them with garlands. But to
God, whom they called upon in their necessity itself, they do not give
thanks even in word. Thus from prosperity arises luxury; and from
luxury, together with all other vices, there arises impiety towards God.
 

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p6"></span>From what cause can we suppose this to
arise? Unless we imagine that there is some perverse power which is
always hostile to the truth, which rejoices in the errors of men, whose
one and only task it is perpetually to scatter darkness, and to blind
the minds of men, lest they should see the light,—lest, in short, they
should look to heaven, and observe the nature <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) of their own body, the origin <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) of which we shall relate at the proper
place; but now let us refute fallacies. For since other animals look
down to the ground, with bodies bending forward, because they have not
received reason and wisdom, whereas an upright position and an elevated
countenance have been given to us by the Creator God, it is evident that
these ceremonies paid to the gods are not in accordance with the reason
of man, because they bend down the heaven-sprung being to the worship of
earthly objects. For that one and only Parent of ours, when He created
man,—that is, an animal intelligent and capable of exercising
reason,—raised him from the ground, and elevated him to the
contemplation of his Creator. As an ingenious poet <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) has well represented it:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p9.7"></span> “And when other animals bend
> forward and look to the earth, He gave to man an elevated countenance,
> and commanded him to look up to the heaven, and to raise his
> countenance erect to stars.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p10"></span>From this circumstance the Greeks
plainly derived the name <span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p10.1"></span>ἄ<span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p10.2"></span>νθρωπος, <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) because he looks upward. They
therefore deny themselves, and renounce the name of man, who do not look
up, but downward: unless they think that the fact of our being upright
is assigned to man without any cause. God willed that we should look up
to heaven, and undoubtedly not without reason. For both the birds and
almost all of the dumb creation see the heaven, but it is given to us in
a peculiar manner to behold the heaven as we stand erect, that we may
seek religion there; that since we cannot see God with our eyes, we may
with our mind contemplate Him, whose throne is there: and this cannot
assuredly be done by him who worships brass and stone, which are earthly
things. But it is most incorrect that the nature of the body, which is
temporary, should be upright, but that the soul itself, which is
eternal, should be abject; whereas the figure and position have no other
signification, except that the mind of man ought to look in the same
direction as his countenance, and that his soul ought to be as upright
as his body, so that it may imitate that which it ought to rule. But
men, forgetful both of their name and nature, cast down their eyes from
the heaven, and fix them upon the ground, and fear the works of their
own hands, as though anything could be greater than its own artificer.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[40:112](0070031.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p3"></span> \[See <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 176, this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_112"></span>[41:113](0070031.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p4"></span> Nomen. Another reading is <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>numen</span>, deity.
 

<span id="fn_113"></span>[41:114](0070031.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p5"></span> It was a custom among the heathen
nations to crown the images of the gods with garlands of flowers.  

<span id="fn_114"></span>[41:115](0070031.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p7"></span> The allusion is to the upright
attitude of man, as compared with other created beings. The argument is
often used by <span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p7.1"></span>Lactantius.  

<span id="fn_115"></span>[41:116](0070031.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p8"></span> This sentence is omitted in some
editions.  

<span id="fn_116"></span>[41:117](0070031.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>Ovid, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>Metamorphosis \[book i. 85.  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p9.3"></span> <span
> id="iii.ii.ii.i-p9.5"></span>Os homini sublime dedit: cœlumque tueri  
> Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus\].  

<span id="fn_117"></span>[41:118](0070031.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11"></span> The allusion is to the supposed
derivation of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>ἄνθρωπος</span>, from <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.2"></span>ἀνα</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.3"></span>̀, </span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.4"></span>τρε</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.5"></span>́</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.6"></span>πω</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.7"></span>, </span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.8"></span>ὤψ</span><span
class="p"><span id="iii.ii.ii.i-p11.9"></span>,</span> to turn the face
upwards.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. II.—What was the first cause of making images; of the true
likeness of God, and the true worship of him](0070032)
