[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070344)  [Next](0070346.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXXVI.

<span id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Daia, on receiving this news, hasted with
relays of horses from the East, to seize the dominions of <span
id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.2"></span>Galerius, and, while <span
id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.3"></span>Licinius lingered in Europe, to arrogate to
himself all the country as far as the narrow seas of Chalcedon. On his
entry into Bithynia, he, with the view of acquiring immediate
popularity, abolished <span id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.4"></span>Galerius’ tax,
to the great joy of all. Dissension arose between the two emperors, and
almost an open war. They stood on the opposite shores with their armies.
Peace, however, and amity were established under certain conditions.
<span id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.5"></span>Licinius and <span
id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.6"></span>Daia met on the narrow sees, concluded a
treaty, and in token of friendship joined hands. Then <span
id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.7"></span>Daia, believing all things to be in
security, returned (to Nicomedia), and was in his new dominions what he
had been in Syria and Egypt. First of all, he took away the toleration
and general protection granted by <span
id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.8"></span>Galerius to the Christians, and, for this
end, he secretly procured addresses from different cities, requesting
that no Christian church might be built within their walls; and thus he
meant to make that which was his own choice appear as if extorted from
him by importunity. In compliance with those addresses, he introduced a
new mode of government in things respecting religion, and for each city
he created a high priest, chosen from among the persons of most
distinction. The office of those men was to make daily sacrifices to all
their gods, and, with the aid of the former priests, to prevent the
Christians from erecting churches, or from worshipping God either
publicly or in private; and he authorized them to compel the Christians
to sacrifice to idols, and, <span id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span
id="iii.v.xxxvi-Page_316"></span>on their refusal, to bring them before
the civil magistrate; and, as if this had not been enough, in every
province he established a superintendent priest, one of chief eminence
in the state; and he commanded that all those priests newly instituted
should appear in white habits, that being the most honourable
distinction of dress. <span id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990.md) And as
to the Christians, he purposed to follow the course that he had followed
in the East, and, affecting the show of clemency, he forbade the slaying
of God’s servants, but he gave command that they should be mutilated. So
the confessors for the faith had their ears and nostrils slit, their
hands and feet lopped off, and their eyes dug out of the sockets.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[316:1991](0070345.htm#fr_1990.md) <span
id="iii.v.xxxvi-p1.9"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xxxvi-p2"></span> \[Singular that he does not assert
that in this he imitated the Christian discipline.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXVII](0070346.md)
