[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070067)  [Next](0070069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVII.—He Passes from Philosophy to the Philosophers, Beginning with Epicurus; And How He Regarded Leucippus and Democritus as Authors of Error.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p1"></span>I have spoken on the subject of
philosophy itself as briefly as I could; now let us come to the
philosophers, not that we may contend with these, who cannot maintain
their ground, but that we may pursue those who are in flight and driven
from our battle-field. The system of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Epicurus was much more generally
followed than those of the others; not because it brings forward any
truth, but because the attractive name of pleasure invites many. <span
id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430) For every one is naturally inclined to
vices. Moreover, for the purpose of drawing the multitude to himself, he
speaks that which is specially adapted to each character separately. He
forbids the idle to apply himself to learning; he releases the covetous
man from giving largesses to the people; he prohibits the inactive man
from undertaking the business of the state, the sluggish from bodily
exercise, the timid from military service. The irreligious is told that
the gods pay no attention to the conduct of men; the man who is
unfeeling and selfish is ordered to give nothing to any one, for that
the wise man does everything on his own account. To a man who avoids the
crowd, solitude is praised. One who is too sparing, learns that life can
be sustained on water and meal. If a man hates his wife, the blessings
of celibacy are enumerated to him; to one who has bad children, the
happiness of those who are without children is proclaimed; against
unnatural <span id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431) parents it is said
that there is no bond of nature. To the man who is delicate and
incapable of endurance, it is said that pain is the greatest of all
evils; to the man of fortitude, it is said that the wise man is happy
even under tortures. The man who devotes himself to the pursuit of
influence and distinction is enjoined to pay court to kings; he who
cannot endure annoyance is enjoined to shun the abode of kings. Thus the
crafty man collects an assembly from various and differing characters;
and while he lays himself out to please all, he is more at variance with
himself than they all are with one another. But we must explain from
what source the whole of this system is derived, and what origin it has.
 

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p4"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p4.1"></span>Epicurus saw that the good are always
subject to adversities, poverty, labours, exile, loss of dear friends.
On the contrary, he saw that the wicked were happy; that they were
exalted with influence, and loaded with honours; he saw that innocence
was unprotected, that crimes were committed with impunity: he saw that
death raged without any regard to character, without any arrangement or
discrimination of age; but that some arrived at old age, while others
were carried off in their infancy; that some died when they were now
robust and vigorous, that others were cut off by an untimely death in
the first flower of youth; that in wars the better men were especially
overcome and slain. But that which especially moved him, was the fact
that religious men were especially visited with weightier evils, whereas
he saw that less evils or none at all fell upon those who altogether
neglected the gods, or worshipped them in an impious manner; and that
even the very temples themselves were often set on fire by lightning.
And of this <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p4.2"></span>Lucretius
complains, <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432) when he says
respecting the god:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p5.3"></span> “Then he may hurl lightnings,
> and often throw down his temples, and withdrawing into the deserts,
> there spend his rage in practising his bolt, which often passes the
> guilty by, and strikes dead the innocent and unoffending.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p6"></span>But if he had been able to collect
even a small particle of truth, he would never say that the god throws
down his own temples, when he throws them down on this account, because
they are not his. The Capitol, which is the chief seat of the Roman city
and religion, was struck with lightning and set on fire not once only,
but frequently. But what was the opinion of clever men respecting this
is evident from the saying of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p6.1"></span>Cicero, who says that the flame came
from heaven, not to destroy that earthly dwelling-place of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p6.2"></span>Jupiter, but to demand a loftier and
more magnificent abode. Concerning which transaction, in the books
respecting his consulship, he speaks to the same purport as <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p6.3"></span>Lucretius:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p6.4"></span> “For the father thundering on
> high, throned in the lofty Olympus, himself assailed his own citadels
> and famed temples, and cast fires upon his abode in the Capitol.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p7"></span>In the obstinacy of their folly,
therefore, they not only did not understand the power and majesty of the
true God, but they even increased the impiety of their error, in
endeavouring against all divine law to restore a temple so often
condemned by the judgment of Heaven.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p8"></span>Therefore, when <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p8.1"></span>Epicurus reflected on these things,
induced as it were by the injustice of these matters (for thus it
appeared to him in his ignorance of the cause and subject), he thought
that there was no providence. <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433)
And having persuaded himself of this, he undertook also to defend it,
and thus he entangled himself in inextricable errors. For if there is no
providence, <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-Page_87"></span>how is it that the world was made
with such order and arrangement? He says: There is no arrangement, for
many things are made in a different manner from that in which they ought
to have been made. And the divine man found subjects of censure. Now, if
I had leisure to refute these things separately, I could easily show
that this man was neither wise nor of sound mind. Also, if there is no
providence, how is it that the bodies of animals are arranged with such
foresight, that the various members, being disposed in a wonderful
manner, discharge their own offices individually? The system of
providence, he says, contrived nothing in the production of animals; for
neither were the eyes made for seeing, nor the ears for hearing, nor the
tongue for speaking, nor the feet for walking; inasmuch as these were
produced before it was possible to speak, to hear, to see, and to walk.
Therefore these were not produced for use; but use was produced from
them. If there is no providence, why do rains fall, fruits spring up,
and trees put forth leaves? These things, he says, are not always done
for the sake of living creatures, inasmuch as they are of no benefit to
providence; but all things must be produced of their own accord. From
what source, therefore, do they arise, <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434) or how are all things which are
carried on brought about? There is no need, he says, of supposing a
providence; for there are seeds floating through the empty void, and
from these, collected together without order, all things are produced
and take their form. Why, then, do we not perceive or distinguish them?
Because, he says, they have neither any colour, nor warmth, nor smell;
they are also without flavour and moisture; and they are so minute, that
they cannot be cut and divided.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p11"></span>Thus, because he had taken up a
false principle at the commencement, the necessity of the subjects which
followed led him to absurdities. For where or from whence are these
atoms? Why did no one dream of them besides <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p11.1"></span>Leucippus only? from whom <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p11.2"></span>Democritus, <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435) having received instructions, left to
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p12.2"></span>Epicurus the inheritance of his
folly. And if these are minute bodies, and indeed solid, as they say,
they certainly are able to fall under the notice of the eyes. If the
nature of all things is the same, how is it that they compose various
objects? They meet together, he says, in varied order and position as
the letters which, though few in number, by variety of arrangement make
up innumerable words. But it is urged the letters have a variety of
forms. And so, he says, have these first principles; for they are rough,
they are furnished with hooks, they are smooth. Therefore they can be
cut and divided, if there is in them any part which projects. But if
they are smooth and without hooks, they cannot cohere. They ought
therefore to he hooked, that they may be linked together one with
another. But since they are said to be so minute that they cannot be cut
asunder by the edge of any weapon, how is it that they have hooks or
angles? For it must be possible for these to be torn asunder, since they
project. In the next place, by what mutual compact, by what discernment,
do they meet together, so that anything may be constructed out of them?
If they are without intelligence, they cannot come together in such
order and arrangement; for nothing but reason can bring to
accomplishment anything in accordance with reason. With how many
arguments can this trifling be refuted! But I must proceed with my
subject. This is he  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p12.3"></span> “Who surpassed in intellect
> the race of man, and quenched the light of all, as the ethereal sun
> arisen quenches the stars.” <span id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436)  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p14"></span>Which verses I am never able to
read without laughter. For this was not said respecting <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p14.1"></span>Socrates or <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p14.2"></span>Plato, who are esteemed as kings of
philosophers, but concerning a man who, though of sound mind and
vigorous health, raved more senselessly than any one diseased. And thus
the most vain poet, I do not say adorned, but overwhelmed and crushed,
the mouse with the praises of the lion. But the same man also releases
us from the fear of death, respecting which these are his own exact
words:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p14.3"></span> “When we are in existence,
> death does not exist; when death exists, we have no existence:
> therefore death is nothing to us.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p15"></span>How cleverly he has deceived us!
As though it were death now completed which is an object of fear, by
which sensation has been already taken away, and not the very act of
dying, by which sensation is being taken from us. For there is a time in
which we ourselves even yet <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437)
exist, and death does not yet exist; and that very time appears to be
miserable, because death is beginning to exist, and we are ceasing to
exist.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p17"></span>Nor is it said without reason that
death is not miserable. The approach of death is miserable; that is, to
waste away by disease, to endure the thrust, to receive the weapon in
the body, to be burnt with fire, to be torn by the teeth of beasts.
These are the things which are feared, not because they bring death, but
because they bring great pain. But rather make out that pain is not an
evil. He says it is the greatest of all evils. <span id="page_88">p.
88</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-Page_88"></span>How therefore can I
fail to fear, if that which precedes or brings about death is an evil?
Why should I say that the argument is false, inasmuch as souls do not
perish? But, he says, souls do perish; for that which is born with the
body must perish with the body. I have already stated that I prefer to
put off the discussion of this subject, and to reserve it for the last
part of my work, that I may refute this persuasion of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p17.1"></span>Epicurus, whether it was that of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p17.2"></span>Democritus or <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p17.3"></span>Dicæarchus, both by arguments and
divine testimonies. But perhaps he promised himself impunity in the
indulgence of his vices; for he was an advocate of most disgraceful
pleasure, and said that man was born for its enjoyment. <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) Who, when he hears this affirmed,
would abstain from the practice of vice and wickedness? For; if the soul
is doomed to perish, let us eagerly pursue riches, that we may be able
to enjoy all kinds of indulgence; and if these are wanting to us, let us
take them away from those who have them by stealth, by stratagem, or by
force, especially if there is no God who regards the actions of men: as
long as the hope of impunity shall favour us, let us plunder and put to
death. <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) For it is the part of the
wise man to do evil, if it is advantageous to him, and safe; since, if
there is a God in heaven, He is not angry with any one. It is also
equally the part of the foolish man to do good; because, as he is not
excited with anger, so he is not influenced by favour. Therefore let us
live in the indulgence of pleasures in every possible way; for in a
short time we shall not exist at all. Therefore let us suffer no day, in
short, no moment of time, to pass away from us without pleasure; lest,
since we ourselves are doomed to perish, the life which we have already
spent should itself also perish.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p20"></span>Although he does not say this in
word, yet he teaches it in fact. For when he maintains that the wise man
does everything for his own sake, he refers all things which he does to
his own advantage. And thus he who hears these disgraceful things, will
neither think that any good thing ought to be done, since the conferring
of benefits has reference to the advantage of another; nor that he ought
to abstain from guilt, because the doing of evil is attended with gain.
If any chieftain of pirates or leader of robbers were exhorting his men
to acts of violence, what other language could he employ than to say the
same things which <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p20.1"></span>Epicurus says:
that the gods take no notice; that they are not affected with anger nor
kind feeling; that the punishment of a future state is not to be
dreaded, because souls die after death, and that there is no future
state of punishment at all; that pleasure is the greatest good; that
there is no society among men; that every one consults for his own
interest; that there is no one who loves another, unless it be for his
own sake; that death is not to be feared by a brave man, nor any pain;
for that he, even if he should be tortured or burnt, should say that he
does not regard it. There is evidently sufficient cause why any one
should regard this as the expression of a wise man, since it can most
fittingly be applied to robbers!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_430"></span>[86:431](0070068.htm#fr_430) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p2"></span> \[See <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p2.1"></span>Plato’s remark upon what he calls <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p2.2"></span>this disease, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p2.3"></span>De Leg., x., finely expounded in <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p2.4"></span>Plato cont. Atheos (note ix. p. 114) by
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p2.5"></span>Tayler Lewis.\]  

<span id="fn_431"></span>[86:432](0070068.htm#fr_431) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p2.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p3"></span> There is another reading, “<span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p3.1"></span>adversus parentes impio,” “to the son
whose conduct to his parents is unnatural.”  

<span id="fn_432"></span>[86:433](0070068.htm#fr_432) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p5.1"></span>Lucretius, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p5.2"></span>De Rerum Natura, ii. 1101, Munro.  

<span id="fn_433"></span>[86:434](0070068.htm#fr_433) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p9"></span> \[This age is favoured with a
reproduction of these absurdities; and what has happened in consequence
before, will be repeated now.\]  

<span id="fn_434"></span>[87:435](0070068.htm#fr_434) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p10"></span> See <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p10.1"></span>Lucretius, book ii.  

<span id="fn_435"></span>[87:436](0070068.htm#fr_435) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p12"></span> \[See vol. ii. p. 465, the whole
of 14th chapter.\]  

<span id="fn_436"></span>[87:437](0070068.htm#fr_436) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p13.1"></span>Lucretius, iii. 1056.  

<span id="fn_437"></span>[87:438](0070068.htm#fr_437) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p16"></span> The reading of the text, which
appears to be the true one, is “<span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p16.1"></span>quo nos etiamnum sumus.” There is
another reading, “<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p16.2"></span>quo et nos jam
non sumus.” This latter reading would be in accordance with the
sentiment of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p16.3"></span>Epicurus, which is
totally opposed to the view taken by <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p16.4"></span>Lactantius.  

<span id="fn_438"></span>[88:439](0070068.htm#fr_438) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p18"></span> \[For his pious talk, however,
see <span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p18.1"></span>T. Lewis, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p18.2"></span>Plato, etc., p. 258.\]  

<span id="fn_439"></span>[88:440](0070068.htm#fr_439) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p19"></span> \[These operations of the
unbelieving mind have appeared in our day in the <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xvii-p19.1"></span>Communisme of Paris. They already
threaten the American Republic, the mass of the population being
undisciplined in moral principle, and our lawgivers as well.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVIII.—The Pythagoreans and Stoics, while they hold the
immortality of the soul, foolishly persuade a voluntary death](0070069)
