[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070438)  [Next](0070440) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Sec. VII.—On Assembling in the Church.

#### <span id="ix.iii.vii-p0.2"></span>An Exact Description of a Church and the Clergy, and What Things in Particular Every One is to Do in the Solemn Assemblies of the Clergy and Laity For Religious Worship.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>LVII</span>. But be thou, O bishop, holy,
unblameable, no striker, not soon angry, not cruel; but a builder up, a
converter, apt to teach, forbearing of evil, of a gentle mind, meek,
long-suffering, ready to exhort, ready to comfort, as a man of God.  

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p2"></span>When thou callest an assembly of the
Church as one that is the commander of a great ship, appoint the
assemblies to be made with all possible skill, charging the deacons as
mariners to prepare places for the brethren as for passengers, with all
due care and decency. And first, let the building be long, with its head
to the east, with its vestries on both sides at the east end, and so it
will be like a ship. In the middle let the bishop’s throne be placed,
and on each side of him let the presbytery sit down; and let the deacons
stand near at hand, in close and small girt garments, for they are like
the mariners and managers of the ship: with regard to these, let the
laity sit on the other side, with all quietness and good order. And let
the women sit by themselves, they also keeping silence. In the middle,
let the reader stand upon some high place: let him read the books of
Moses, of Joshua the son of Nun, of the Judges, and of the Kings and of
the Chronicles, and those written after the return from the captivity;
and besides these, the books of Job and of Solomon, and of the sixteen
prophets. But when there have been two lessons severally read, let some
other person sing the hymns of David, and let the people join at the
conclusions of the verses. Afterwards let our Acts be read, and the
Epistles of Paul our fellow-worker, which he sent to the churches under
the conduct of the Holy Spirit; and afterwards let a deacon or a
presbyter read the Gospels, both those which I Matthew and John have
delivered to you, and those which the fellow-workers of Paul received
and left to you, Luke and Mark. And while the Gospel is read, let all
the presbyters and deacons, and all the people, stand up in great
silence; for it is written: “Be silent, and hear, O Israel.” <span
id="fr_2830"></span>[2831](#fn_2830) And again: “But do thou stand
there, and hear.” <span id="fr_2831"></span>[2832](#fn_2831) In the next
place, let the presbyters one by one, not all together, exhort the
people, and the bishop in the last place, as being the commander. Let
the porters stand at the entries of the men, and observe them. Let the
deaconesses also stand at those of the women, like shipmen. For the same
description and pattern was both in the tabernacle of the testimony and
in the temple of God. <span id="fr_2832"></span>[2833](#fn_2832) But if
any one be found sitting out of his place, let him be rebuked by the
deacon, as a manager of the foreship, and be removed into the place
proper for him; for the Church is not only like a ship, but also like a
sheepfold. For as the shepherds place all the brute creatures
distinctly, I mean goats and sheep, according to their kind and age, and
still every one runs together, like to his like; so is it to be in the
Church. Let the young persons sit by themselves, if there be a place for
them; if not, let them stand upright. But let those that are already
stricken in years sit in order. For the children which stand, let their
fathers and mothers take them to them. Let the younger women also sit by
themselves, if there be a place for them; but if there be not, let them
stand behind the women. Let those women which are married, and have
children, be placed by themselves; but let the virgins, and the widows,
and the elder women, stand or sit before all the rest; and let the
deacon be the disposer of the places, that every one of those that comes
in may go to his proper place, and may not sit at the entrance. In like
manner, let the deacon oversee the people, that nobody may whisper, nor
slumber, nor laugh, nor nod; for all ought in the church to stand
wisely, and soberly, and attentively, having their attention fixed upon
the word of the Lord. After this, let all rise up with one consent, and
looking towards the east, after the catechumens and penitents are gone
out, pray to God eastward, who ascended up to the heaven of heavens to
the east; remembering also the ancient situation of paradise in the
east, from whence the first man, when he had yielded to the persuasion
of the serpent, and disobeyed the command of God, was expelled. As to
the deacons, after the prayer is over, let some of them attend upon the
oblation of the Eucharist, ministering to the Lord’s body with fear. Let
others of them watch the multitude, and keep them silent. But let <span
id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span id="ix.iii.vii-Page_422"></span>that
deacon who is at the high priest’s hand say to the people, Let no one
have any quarrel against another; let no one come in hypocrisy. Then let
the men give the men, and the women give the women, the Lord’s kiss. But
let no one do it with deceit, as Judas betrayed the Lord with a kiss.
After this let the deacon pray for the whole Church, for the whole
world, and the several parts of it, and the fruits of it; for the
priests and the rulers, for the high priest and the king, and the peace
of the universe. After this let the high priest pray for peace upon the
people, and bless them, as <span id="ix.iii.vii-p5.3"></span>Moses
commanded the priests to bless the people, in these words: “The Lord
bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make His face to shine upon
thee, <span id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833) and give thee
peace.” <span id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834) Let the bishop pray
for the people, and say: “Save Thy people, O Lord, and bless Thine
inheritance, which Thou hast obtained with the precious blood of Thy
Christ, and hast called a royal priesthood, and an holy nation.” <span
id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835) After this let the sacrifice
follow, the people standing, and praying silently; and when the oblation
has been made, let every rank by itself partake of the Lord’s body and
precious blood in order, and approach with reverence and holy fear, as
to the body of their king. Let the women approach with their heads
covered, as is becoming the order of women; but let the door be watched,
lest any unbeliever, or one not yet initiated, come in. <span
id="fr_2836"></span>[2837](#fn_2836)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.vii-p9.1"></span>Of Commendatory Letters in Favour of Strangers, Lay Persons, Clergymen, and Bishops; And that Those Who Come into the Church Assemblies are to Be Received Without Regard to Their Quality.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>LVIII</span>. If any brother, man or woman,
come in from another parish, bringing recommendatory letters, let the
deacon be the judge of that affair, inquiring whether they be of the
faithful, and of the Church? whether they be not defiled by heresy? and
besides, whether the party be a married woman or a widow? And when he is
satisfied in these questions, that they are really of the faithful, and
of the same sentiments in the things of the Lord, let him conduct every
one to the place proper for him. And if a presbyter comes from another
parish, let him be received to communion by the presbyters; if a deacon,
by the deacons; if a bishop, let him sit with the bishop, and be allowed
the same honour with himself; and thou, O bishop, shalt desire him to
speak to the people words of instruction: for the exhortation and
admonition of strangers is very acceptable, and exceeding profitable.
For, as the Scripture says, “no prophet is accepted in his own
country.” <span id="fr_2837"></span>[2838](#fn_2837) Thou shalt also
permit him to offer the Eucharist; but if, out of reverence to thee, and
as a wise man, to preserve the honour belonging to thee, he will not
offer, at least thou shalt compel him to give the blessing to the
people. But if, after the congregation is sat down, any other person
comes upon you of good fashion and character in the world, whether he be
a stranger, or one of your own country, neither do thou, O bishop, if
thou art speaking the word of God, or hearing him that sings or reads,
accept persons so far as to leave the ministry of the word, that thou
mayest appoint an upper place for him; but continue quiet, not
interrupting thy discourse, nor thy attention. But let the brethren
receive him by the deacons; and if there be not a place, let the deacon
by speaking, but not in anger, raise the junior, and place the stranger
there. And it is but reasonable that one that loves the brethren should
do so of his own accord; but if he refuse, let him raise him up by
force, and set him behind all, that the rest may be taught to give place
to those that are more honourable. Nay, if a poor man, or one of a mean
family, or a stranger, comes upon you, whether he be old or young, and
there be no place, the deacon shall find a place for even these, and
that with all his heart; that, instead of accepting persons before men,
his ministration towards God may be well-pleasing. The very same thing
let the deaconess do to those women, whether poor or rich, that come
unto them.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.vii-p11.3"></span>That Every Christian Ought to Frequent the Church Diligently Both Morning and Evening.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>LIX</span>. When thou instructest the
people, O bishop, command and exhort them to come constantly to church
morning and evening every day, and by no means to forsake it on any
account, but to assemble together continually; neither to diminish the
Church by withdrawing themselves, and causing the body of Christ to be
without its member. For it is not only spoken concerning the priests,
but let every one of the laity hearken to it as concerning himself,
considering that it is said by the Lord: “He that is not with me is
against me, and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.” <span
id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838) Do not you therefore scatter
yourselves abroad, who are the members of Christ, by not assembling
together, since you have Christ your head, according to His promise,
present, and communicating to you. <span
id="fr_2839"></span>[2840](#fn_2839) Be not careless of yourselves,
<span id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span
id="ix.iii.vii-Page_423"></span>neither deprive your Saviour of His own
members, neither divide His body nor disperse His members, neither
prefer the occasions of this life to the word of God; but assemble
yourselves together every day, morning and evening, singing psalms and
praying in the Lord’s house: in the morning saying the sixty-second
Psalm, and in the evening the hundred and fortieth, but principally on
the Sabbath-day. And on the day of our Lord’s resurrection, which is the
Lord’s day, meet more diligently, sending praise to God that made the
universe by <span id="ix.iii.vii-p14.3"></span>Jesus, and sent Him to
us, and condescended to let Him suffer, and raised Him from the dead.
Otherwise what apology will he make to God who does not assemble on that
day to hear the saving word concerning the resurrection, on which we
pray thrice standing in memory of Him who arose in three days, in which
is performed the reading of the prophets, the preaching of the Gospel,
the oblation of the sacrifice, the gift of the holy food?  

#### <span id="ix.iii.vii-p14.4"></span>The Vain Zeal Which the Heathens and Jews Show in Frequenting Their Temples and Synagogues is a Proper Example and Motive to Excite Christians to Frequent the Church.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p15"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>LX</span>. And how can he be other than an
adversary to God, who takes pains about temporary things night and day,
but takes no care of things eternal? who takes care of washings and
temporary food every day, but does not take care of those that endure
for ever? How can such a one even now avoid hearing that word of the
Lord, “The Gentiles are justified more than you?” <span
id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840) as He says, by way of reproach, to
Jerusalem, “Sodom is justified rather than thou.” For if the Gentiles
every day, when they arise from sleep, run to their idols to worship
them, and before all their work and all their labours do first of all
pray to them, and in their feasts and in their solemnities do not keep
away, but attend upon them; and not only those upon the place, but those
living far distant do the same; and in their public shows all come
together, as into a synagogue: in the same manner those which are vainly
called Jews, when they have worked six days, on the seventh day rest,
and come together into their synagogue, never leaving nor neglecting
either rest from labour or assembling together, while yet they are
deprived of the efficacy of the word in their unbelief, nay, and of the
force of that name <span id="ix.iii.vii-p16.2"></span>Judah, by which
they call themselves,—for Judah is interpreted <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p16.3"></span>Confession,—but these do not confess to God
(having unjustly occasioned the suffering on the cross), so as to be
saved on their repentance;—if, therefore, those who are not saved
frequently assemble together for such purposes as do not profit them,
what apology wilt thou make to the Lord God who forsakest His Church,
not imitating so much as the heathen, but by such thy absence growest
slothful, or turnest apostate, or actest wickedness? To whom the Lord
says by Jeremiah: “Ye have not kept my ordinances; nay, ye have not
walked according to the ordinances of the heathen, and you have in a
manner exceeded them.” <span id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841) And
again: “Israel has justified his soul more than treacherous
Judah.” <span id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842) And afterwards: “Will
the Gentiles change their gods which are not gods? <span
id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843) Wherefore pass over to the isles of
Chittim, and behold, and send to Kedar, and observe diligently whether
such things have been done. For those nations have not changed their
ordinances; but,” says He, “my people has changed its glory for that
which will not profit.” <span id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844) How,
therefore, will any one make his apology who has despised or absented
himself from the church of God?  

#### <span id="ix.iii.vii-p20.2"></span>That We Must Not Prefer the Affairs of This Life to Those Which Concern the Worship of God.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p21"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p21.1"></span>LXI</span>. But if any one allege the
pretence of his own work, and so is a despiser, “offering pretences for
his sins,” let such a one know that the trades of the faithful are works
by the by, but the worship of God is their great work. Follow therefore
your trades as by the by, for your maintenance, but make the worship of
God your main business; as also our Lord said: “Labour not for the meat
which perishes, but for that which endureth unto everlasting
life.” <span id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845) And again: “This is
the work of God, that ye believe on Him whom He hath sent.” <span
id="fr_2846"></span>[2847](#fn_2846) Endeavour therefore never to leave
the Church of God; but if any one overlooks it, and goes either into a
polluted temple of the heathens, or into a synagogue of the Jews or
heretics, what apology will such a one make to God in the day of
judgment, who has forsaken the oracles of the living God, and the living
and quickening oracles, such as are able to deliver from eternal
punishment, and has gone into an house of demons, or into a synagogue of
the murderers of Christ, or the congregation of the wicked?—not
hearkening unto him that says: “I have hated the congregation of the
wicked, and I will not enter with the ungodly. I have not sat with the
assembly of vanity, neither will I sit with the ungodly.” <span
id="fr_2847"></span>[2848](#fn_2847) And again: “Blessed is the <span
id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span id="ix.iii.vii-Page_424"></span>man
that hath not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the way
of sinners, and hath not sat in the seat of the scornful; but his
delight is in the law of the Lord, and in His law will he meditate day
and night.” <span id="fr_2848"></span>[2849](#fn_2848) But thou,
forsaking the gathering together of the faithful, the Church of God, and
His laws, hast respect to those “dens of thieves,” calling those things
holy which He has called profane, and making such things unclean which
He has sanctified. And not only so, but thou already runnest after the
pomps of the Gentiles, and hastenest to their theatres, being desirous
to be reckoned one of those that enter into them, and to partake of
unseemly, not to say abominable words; not hearkening to Jeremiah, who
says, “O Lord, I have not sat in their assemblies, for they are
scorners; but I was afraid because of Thy hand;” <span
id="fr_2849"></span>[2850](#fn_2849) nor to Job, who speaks in like
manner, “If I have gone at any time with the scornful; for I shall be
weighed in a just balance.” <span id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850)
But why wilt thou be a partaker of the heathen oracles, which are
nothing but dead men declaring by the inspiration of the devil deadly
things, and such as tend to subvert the faith, and to draw those that
attend to them to polytheism? Do you therefore, who attend to the laws.
of God, esteem those laws more honourable than the necessities of this
life, and pay a greater respect to them, and run together to the Church
of the Lord, “which He has purchased with the blood of Christ, the
beloved, the first-born of every creature.” <span
id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851) For this Church is the daughter of
the Highest, which has been in travail of you by the word of grace, and
has “formed Christ in you,” of whom you are made partakers, and thereby
become His holy and chosen members, “not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing; but as being holy and unspotted in the faith, ye are
complete in Him, after the image of God that created you.” <span
id="fr_2852"></span>[2853](#fn_2852)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.vii-p29.2"></span>That Christians Must Abstain from All the Impious Practices of the Heathens.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p30"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p30.1"></span>LXII</span>. Take heed, therefore, not to
join yourselves in your worship with those that perish, which is the
assembly of the Gentiles, to your deceit and destruction. For there is
no fellowship between God and the devil; for he that assembles himself
with those that favour the things of the devil, will be esteemed one of
them, and will inherit a woe. Avoid also indecent spectacles: I mean the
theatres and the pomps of the heathens; their enchantments, observations
of omens, soothsayings, purgations, divinations, observations of birds;
their necromancies and invocations. For it is written: “There is no
divination in Jacob, nor soothsaying in Israel.” <span
id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853) And again: “Divination is
iniquity.” <span id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854) And elsewhere: “Ye
shall not be soothsayers, and follow observers of omens, nor diviners,
nor dealers with familiar spirits. Ye shall not preserve alive
wizards.” <span id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855) Wherefore Jeremiah
exhorts, saying: “Walk ye not according to the ways of the heathen, and
be not afraid of the signs of heaven.” <span
id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856) So that it is the duty of a
believer to avoid the assemblies of the ungodly, of the heathen, and of
the Jews, and of the rest of the heretics, lest by uniting ourselves to
them we bring snares upon our own souls; that we may not by joining in
their feasts, which are celebrated in honour of demons, be partakers
with them in their impiety. You are also to avoid their public meetings,
and those sports which are celebrated in them. For a believer ought not
to go to any of those public meetings, unless to purchase a slave, and
save a soul, <span id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857) and at the same
time to buy such other things as suit their necessities. Abstain,
therefore, from all idolatrous pomp and state, all their public
meetings, banquets, duels, and all shows belonging to demons.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2830"></span>[421:2831](0070439.htm#fr_2830) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p3"></span> [Deut. xxvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#009)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2831"></span>[421:2832](0070439.htm#fr_2831) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p4"></span> [Deut. v.
31](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#031)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2832"></span>[421:2833](0070439.htm#fr_2832) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p5"></span> [Deut. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>.
“And in the temple of God” is omitted in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p5.2"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[422:2834](0070439.htm#fr_2833) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p6"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p6.1"></span>ms</span>. inserts, “and pity thee: the Lord
lift His countenance upon thee.”  

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[422:2835](0070439.htm#fr_2834) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p7"></span> [Num. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[422:2836](0070439.htm#fr_2835) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p8"></span> [Ps. xxviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>;
[Acts xx. 28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span
id="ix.iii.vii-p8.2"></span>; [1 Pet. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p8.3"></span>,
ii. 9.  

<span id="fn_2836"></span>[422:2837](0070439.htm#fr_2836) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p9"></span> \[Note all this as bearing upon the
ceremonial of the Latin Mass, which reverses these primitive precepts in
divers points.\]  

<span id="fn_2837"></span>[422:2838](0070439.htm#fr_2837) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p11"></span> [Luke iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#024)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p11.1"></span>;
[John iv. 44](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#044)<span
id="ix.iii.vii-p11.2"></span> .  

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[422:2839](0070439.htm#fr_2838) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p13"></span> [Matt. xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#030)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p13.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2839"></span>[422:2840](0070439.htm#fr_2839) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p14"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p14.1"></span>.
\[Compare vol. i. pp. 185, 186, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[423:2841](0070439.htm#fr_2840) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p16"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[423:2842](0070439.htm#fr_2841) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p17"></span> [Ezek. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p17.1"></span>,
xvi. 47.  

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[423:2843](0070439.htm#fr_2842) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p18"></span> [Jer. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#011)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p18.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[423:2844](0070439.htm#fr_2843) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p19"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.vii-p19.1"></span>ms</span>. inserts here, “and elsewhere
through another.”  

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[423:2845](0070439.htm#fr_2844) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p20"></span> [Jer.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)<span
id="ix.iii.vii-p20.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[423:2846](0070439.htm#fr_2845) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p22"></span> [John vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p22.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2846"></span>[423:2847](0070439.htm#fr_2846) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p23"></span> [John vi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p23.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2847"></span>[423:2848](0070439.htm#fr_2847) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p24"></span> [Ps.
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p24.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2848"></span>[424:2849](0070439.htm#fr_2848) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p25"></span> [Ps.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p25.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2849"></span>[424:2850](0070439.htm#fr_2849) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p26"></span> [Jer. xv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#017)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p26.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[424:2851](0070439.htm#fr_2850) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p27"></span> [Job
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#006)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p27.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[424:2852](0070439.htm#fr_2851) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p28"></span> <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p28.1"></span>Vid. [Acts xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p28.2"></span>;
[Col. i. 15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="ix.iii.vii-p28.3"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2852"></span>[424:2853](0070439.htm#fr_2852) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p28.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p29"></span> [Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[424:2854](0070439.htm#fr_2853) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p31"></span> [Num. xxiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#023)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p31.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[424:2855](0070439.htm#fr_2854) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p32"></span> [1 Sam. xv.
23](../../../bib/sep/sa1015.htm#023)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p32.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[424:2856](0070439.htm#fr_2855) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p33"></span> [Lev. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p33.1"></span>;
[Deut. xviii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010)<span
id="ix.iii.vii-p33.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[424:2857](0070439.htm#fr_2856) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p34"></span> [Jer. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p34.1"></span>.
\[Slaves were bought to be baptized. Elucid., p. 425.\]  

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[424:2858](0070439.htm#fr_2857) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p35"></span> [Jer. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p35.1"></span>.
\[Slaves were bought to be baptized. Elucid., p. 425.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. VIII.—On the Duty of Working for a Livelihood](0070440)
