[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070181)  [Next](0070183.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVIII.—Of the Fortunes of the World at the Last Time, and of the Things Foretold by the Soothsayers.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p1"></span>That these things will thus take
place, all the prophets have announced from the inspiration of God, and
also the soothsayers at the instigation of the demons. For <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Hystaspes, whom I have named above,
having described the iniquity of this last time, says that the pious and
faithful, being separated from the wicked, will stretch forth their
hands to heaven with weeping and mourning, and will implore the
protection of <span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p1.2"></span>Jupiter: that
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p1.3"></span>Jupiter will look to the earth,
and hear the voices of men, and will destroy the wicked. All which
things are true except one, that he attributed to <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p1.4"></span>Jupiter those things which God will
do. But that also was withdrawn from the account, not without fraud on
the part of the demons, viz., that the Son of God would then be sent,
who, having destroyed all the wicked, would set at liberty the pious.
Which, however, <span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p1.5"></span>Hermes did not
conceal. For in that book which is entitled the <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p1.6"></span>Complete Treatise, after an
enumeration of the evils concerning which we have spoken, he added these
things: “But when these things thus come to pass, then He who is Lord,
and Father, and God, and the Creator of the first and one God, looking
upon what is done, and opposing to the disorder His own will, that is,
goodness, and recalling the wandering and cleansing wickedness, partly
inundating it with much water, and partly burning it with most rapid
fire, and sometimes pressing it with wars and pestilences, He brought
His world to its ancient state and restored it.” The Sibyls also show
that it would not be otherwise than that the Son of God should be sent
by His supreme Father, to set free the righteous from the hands of the
wicked, and to destroy the unrighteous, together with their cruel
tyrants. One of whom thus wrote:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p1.7"></span> “He shall come also, wishing
> to destroy the city of the blest; and a king sent against him from the
> gods shall slay all the great kings and chief men: then judgment shall
> thus come from the Immortal to men.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p2"></span>Also another <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p2.1"></span>Sibyl:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p2.2"></span> “And then God shall send a
> king from the sun, who shall cause all the earth to cease from
> disastrous war.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p3"></span>And again another:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xviii-p3.1"></span> “He will take away the
> intolerable yoke of slavery which is placed on our neck, and he will
> do away with impious laws and violent chains.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIX.—Of the advent of Christ to judgment, and of the
overcoming of the false prophet](0070183.md)
