[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070071)  [Next](0070073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXI.—Of the System of Plato, Which Would Lead to the Overthrow of States.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi-p1"></span>Let us, however, see what it was
that he learned from <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Socrates,
who, having entirely rejected natural philosophy, betook himself to
inquiries about virtue and duty. And thus I do not doubt that he
instructed his hearers in the precepts of justice. Therefore, under the
teaching of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi-p1.2"></span>Socrates, it did not
escape the notice of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi-p1.3"></span>Plato, that
the force of justice consists in equality, since all are born in an
equal condition. Therefore (he says) they must have nothing private or
their own; but that they may be equal, as the method of justice
requires, they must possess all things in common. This is capable of
being endured, as long as it appears to be spoken of money. But how
impossible and how unjust this is, I could show by many things. Let us,
however, admit its possibility. For grant that all are wise, and despise
money. To what, then, did that community lead him? Marriages also, be
says, ought to be in common; so that many men may flock together like
dogs to the same woman, and he who shall be superior in strength may
succeed in obtaining her; or if they are patient as philosophers, they
may await their turns, as in a brothel. Oh the wonderful equality of
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi-p1.4"></span>Plato! Where, then, is the virtue
of chastity? where conjugal fidelity? And if you take away these, all
justice is taken away. But he also says that states would be prosperous,
if either philosophers were their kings, or their kings were
philosophers. But if you were to give the sovereignty to this man of
such justice and equity, who had deprived some of their own property,
and given to some the property of others, he would prostitute the
modesty of women; a thing which was never done, I do not say by a king,
but not even by a tyrant.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi-p2"></span>But what motive did he advance for
this most degrading advice? The state will be in harmony, and bound
together with the bonds of mutual love, if all shall be the husbands,
and fathers, and wives, and children of all. What a confusion of the
human race is this? How is it possible for affection to be preserved
where there is nothing certain to be loved? What man will love a woman,
or what woman a man, unless they shall always have lived
together,—unless devotedness of mind, and faith mutually preserved,
shall have made their love indivisible? But this virtue has no place in
that promiscuous pleasure. Moreover, if all are the children of all, who
will be able to love children as his own, when he is either ignorant or
in doubt whether they are his own? Who will bestow honour upon any one
as a father, when he does not know from whom he was born? From which it
comes to pass, that he not only esteems a stranger as a father, but also
a father as a stranger. Why should I say that it is possible for a wife
to be common, but impossible for a son, who cannot be conceived except
from one? The community, therefore, is lost to him alone, nature herself
crying out against it. It remains that it is only for the sake of
concord that he would have a community of wives. But there is no more
vehement cause of discords, than the desire of one woman by many men.
And in this <span id="iii.ii.iii.xxi-p2.1"></span>Plato might have been
admonished, if not by reason, yet certainly by example, both of the dumb
animals, which fight most vehemently on this account, and of men, who
have always carried on most severe wars with one another on account of
this matter.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXII.—Of the precepts of Plato, and censures of the
same](0070073.md)
