[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070148)  [Next](0070150.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XI.—Of the Persons Upon Whom a Benefit is to Be Conferred.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p1"></span>Therefore humanity is to be preserved,
if we wish rightly to be called men. But what else is this preservation
of humanity than the loving a man because he is a man, and the same as
ourselves? Therefore discord and dissension are not in accordance with
the nature of man; and that expression of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>Cicero is true, which says <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158.md) that man, while he is obedient to
nature, cannot injure man. Therefore, if it is contrary to nature to
injure a man, it must be in accordance with nature to benefit a man; and
he who does not do this deprives himself of the title of a man, because
it is the duty of humanity to succour the necessity and peril of a man.
I ask, therefore, of those who do not think it the part of a wise man to
be prevailed upon and to pity, If a man were seized by some beast, and
were to implore the aid of an armed man, whether they think that he
ought to be succoured or not? They are not so shameless as to deny that
that ought to be done which humanity demands and requires. Also, if any
one were surrounded by fire, crushed by the downfall of a building,
plunged in the sea, or carried away by a river, would they think it the
duty of a man not to assist him? They themselves are not men if they
think so; for no one can fail to be liable to dangers of this kind. Yes,
truly, they will say that it is the part of a human being, and of a
brave man too, to preserve one who was on the point of perishing. If,
therefore, in casualties of this nature which imperil the life of man,
they allow that it is the part of humanity to give succour, what reason
is there why they should think that succour is to be withheld if a man
should suffer from hunger, thirst, or cold? But though these things are
naturally on an equality with those accidental circumstances, and need
one and the same humanity, yet they make a distinction between these
things, because they measure all things not by the truth itself, but by
present utility. For they hope that those whom they rescue from peril
will make a return of the favour to them. But because they do not hope
for this in the case of the needy, they think that whatever they bestow
on men of this kind is thrown away. Hence that sentiment of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p2.2"></span>Plautus is detestable: <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159.md) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p3.2"></span> “He deserves ill who gives food
> to a beggar;  
> For that which he gives is thrown away, and  
> It lengthens out the life of the other to his misery.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p4"></span>But perhaps the poet spoke for the
actor. <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160.md)  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p6"></span>What does <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p6.1"></span>Marcus Tullius say in his books respecting
Offices? Does he not also advise that bounty should not be employed at
all? For thus he speaks: <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161.md)
“Bounty, which proceeds from our estate, drains the very source of our
liberality; and thus liberality is destroyed by liberality: for the more
numerous they are towards whom you practice it, the less you will be
able to practice it towards many.” And he also says shortly afterwards:
“But what is more foolish than so to act that you may not be able to
continue to do that which you do willingly?” This professor of wisdom
plainly keeps men back from acts of kindness, and advises them carefully
to guard their property, and to preserve their money-chest in safety,
rather than to follow justice. And when he perceived that this was
inhuman and wicked, soon afterwards, in another chapter, as though moved
by repentance, he thus spoke: “Sometimes, however, we must exercise
bounty in giving: nor is this kind of liberality altogether to be
rejected; and we must give from our property to suitable <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162.md) persons when they are in need of
assistance.” What is the meaning of “suitable?” <span id="page_175">p.
175</span> <span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-Page_175"></span>Assuredly those who
are able to restore and give back the favour. <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163.md) If <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p9.2"></span>Cicero were now alive, I should certainly
exclaim: Here, here, <span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p9.3"></span>Marcus Tullius,
you have erred from true justice; and you have taken it away by one
word, since you measured the offices of piety and humanity by utility.
For we must not bestow our bounty on suitable objects, but as much as
possible on unsuitable objects. For that will be done with justice,
piety, and humanity, which you shall do without the hope of any return!
 

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p10"></span>This is that true and genuine
justice, of which you say that you have no real and life-like
figure. <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164.md) You yourself exclaim
in many places that virtue is not mercenary; and you confess in the
books of your Laws <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165.md) that
liberality is gratuitous, in these words: “Nor is it doubtful that he
who is called liberal and generous is influenced by a sense of duty, and
not by advantage.” Why therefore do you bestow your bounty on suitable
persons, unless it be that you may afterwards receive a reward? With
you, therefore, as the author and teacher of justice, whosoever shall
not be a suitable person will be worn out with nakedness, thirst, and
hunger; nor will men who are rich and abundantly supplied, even to
luxuriousness, assist his last extremity. If virtue does not exact a
reward; if, as you say, it is to be sought on its own account, then
estimate justice, which is the mother and chief of the virtues, at its
own price, and not according to your advantage: give especially to him
from whom you hope for nothing in return. Why do you select persons? Why
do you look at bodily forms? He is to be esteemed by you as a man,
whoever it is that implores you, because he considers you a man. Cast
away those outlines and sketches of justice, and hold fast justice
itself, true and fashioned to the life. Be bountiful to the blind, the
feeble, the lame, the destitute, who must die unless you bestow your
bounty upon them. They are useless to men, but they are serviceable to
God, who retains them in life, who endues them with breath, who
vouchsafes to them the light. Cherish as far as in you lies, and support
with kindness, the lives of men, that they may not be extinguished. He
who is able to succour one on the point of perishing, if he fails to do
so, kills him. But they, because they neither retain their nature, nor
know what reward there is in this, while they fear to lose, do lose, and
fall into that which they chiefly guard against; so that whatever they
bestow is either lost altogether, or profits only for the briefest time.
For they who refuse a small gift to the wretched, who wish to preserve
humanity without any loss to themselves, squander their property, so
that they either acquire for themselves frail and perishable things, or
they certainly gain nothing by their own great loss.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p13"></span>For what must be said of those who,
induced by the vanity of popular favour, <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166.md) expend on the exhibition of shows
wealth that would be sufficient even for great cities? Must we not say
that they are senseless and mad who bestow upon the people that which is
both lost to themselves, and which none of those on whom it is bestowed
receives? Therefore, as all pleasure is short and perishable, and
especially that of the eyes and ears, men either forget and are
ungrateful for the expenses incurred by another, or they are even
offended if the caprice of the people is not satisfied: so that most
foolish men have even acquired evil for themselves by evil; or if they
have thus succeeded in pleasing, they gain nothing more than empty
favour and the talk <span id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167.md) of a few
days. Thus every day the estates of most trifling men are expended on
superfluous matters. Do they then act more wisely who exhibit to their
fellow-citizens more useful and lasting gifts? They, for instance, who
by the building of public works seek a lasting memory for their name?
Not even do they act rightly in burying their property in the earth;
because the remembrance of them neither bestows anything upon the dead,
nor are their works eternal, inasmuch as they are either thrown down and
destroyed by a single earthquake, or are consumed by an accidental fire,
or they are over through by some attack of an enemy, or at any rate they
decay and fall to pieces by mere length of time. For there is nothing,
as the orator says, <span id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168.md) made by
the work of man’s hand which length of time does not weaken and destroy.
But this justice of which we speak, and mercy, flourish more every day.
They therefore act better who bestow their bounty on their tribesmen and
clients, for they bestow something on men, and profit them; but that is
not true and just bounty, for there is no conferring of a benefit where
there is no necessity. Therefore, whatever is given to those who are not
in need, for the sake of popularity, is thrown away; or it is repaid
with interest, and thus it will not be the conferring of a benefit. And
although it is pleasing to those to whom it is given, still it is not
just, because if it is not done, no evil follows. Therefore the only
sure and true office of liberality is to support the needy and
unserviceable.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[174:1159](0070149.htm#fr_1158.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>De Offic., iii. 5.  

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[174:1160](0070149.htm#fr_1159.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p3.1"></span>Trinumm., ii. 2. 58.  

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[174:1161](0070149.htm#fr_1160.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>Pro personâ.  

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[174:1162](0070149.htm#fr_1161.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p7.1"></span>De Offic., ii. 15.  

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[174:1163](0070149.htm#fr_1162.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p8.1"></span>Idoneis. <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p8.2"></span>Lactantius uses this word as though its
meaning were “the rich;” and though it seems to have passed into this
sense in later times, it is plain from the very words of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p8.3"></span>Cicero himself that he uses it of
deserving persons who need assistance.  

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[175:1164](0070149.htm#fr_1163.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p9"></span> \[[Luke vi.
32-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#032.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p9.1"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[175:1165](0070149.htm#fr_1164.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p11.1"></span>De Offic., iii. 17. <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p11.2"></span>Solidam et expressam.  

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[175:1166](0070149.htm#fr_1165.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p12"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p12.1"></span>De Leg., iii., and <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p12.2"></span>De Offic., i. cap. 16.\]  

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[175:1167](0070149.htm#fr_1166.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p14.1"></span>Populari levitate ducti: an expression
somewhat similar to “<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p14.2"></span>popularis
aura.”  

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[175:1168](0070149.htm#fr_1167.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p15"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p15.1"></span>Fabulam.  

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[175:1169](0070149.htm#fr_1168.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p16.1"></span>Cic., <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p16.2"></span>Pro Marcello \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xi-p16.3"></span>Nihil opere et manu factum.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XII.—Of the kinds of beneficence, and works of
mercy](0070150.md)
