[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070065)  [Next](0070067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XV.—The Error of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p0.2"></span>Seneca in Philosophy, and How the Speech of Philosophers is at Variance with Their Life.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p1"></span>Under the influence of the same error
(for who could keep the right course when <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Cicero is in error?), <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p1.2"></span>Seneca said: “Philosophy is nothing else
than the right method of living, or the science of living honourably, or
the art of passing a good life. We shall not err in saying that
philosophy is the law of living well and honourably. And he who spoke of
it as a rule of life, gave to it that which was its due.” He evidently
did not refer to the common name of philosophy; for, since this is
diffused into many sects and systems, and has nothing certain—nothing,
in short, respecting which all agree with one mind and one voice,—what
can be so false as that philosophy should be called the rule of life,
since the diversity of its precepts hinders the right way and causes
confusion? or the law of living well, when its subjects are widely
discordant? or the science of passing life, in which nothing else is
effected by its repeated contradictions than general <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) uncertainty? For I ask whether he
thinks that the Academy is philosophy or not? I do not think that he
will deny it. And if this is so, none of these things, therefore, is in
agreement with philosophy; which renders all things uncertain, abrogates
law, esteems art as nothing, subverts method, distorts rule, entirely
takes away knowledge. Therefore all those things are false, because they
are inconsistent with a system which is always uncertain, and up to this
time explaining nothing. Therefore no system, or science, or law of
living well, has been established, except in this the only true and
heavenly wisdom, which had been unknown to philosophers. For that
earthly wisdom, since it is false, becomes varied and manifold, and
altogether opposed to itself. And as there is but one founder and ruler
of the world, God, and as truth is one; so wisdom must be one and
simple, because, if anything is true and good, it cannot be perfect
unless it is the only one of its kind. But if philosophy were able to
form the life, no others but philosophers would be good, and all those
who had not learned it would be always bad. But since there are, and
always have been, innumerable persons who are or have been good without
any learning, but of philosophers there has seldom been one who has done
anything praiseworthy in his life; who is there, I pray, who does not
see that those men are not teachers <span id="page_84">p. 84</span>
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-Page_84"></span>of virtue, of which they
themselves are destitute? For if any one should diligently inquire into
their character, he will find that they are passionate, covetous,
lustful, arrogant, wanton, and, concealing their vices under a show of
wisdom, doing those things at home which they had censured in the
schools. <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421)  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p4"></span>Perhaps I speak falsely for the sake
of bringing an accusation. Does not <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p4.1"></span>Tullius both acknowledge and complain of
the same thing? “How few,” he says, “of philosophers are found of such a
character, so constituted in soul and life, as reason demands! how few
who think true instruction not a display of knowledge, but a law of
life! how few who are obedient to themselves, and submit to their own
decrees! We may see some of such levity and ostentation, that it would
be better for them not to have learned at all; others eagerly desirous
of money, others of glory; many the slaves of lusts, so that their
speech wonderfully disagrees with their life.” <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p4.2"></span>Cornelius Nepos also writes to the same
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p4.3"></span>Cicero: “So far am I from thinking
that philosophy is the teacher of life and the completer of happiness,
that I consider that none have greater need of teachers of living than
many who are engaged in the discussion of this subject. For I see that a
great part of those who give most elaborate precepts in their school
respect-modesty and self-restraint, live at the same time in the
unrestrained desires of all lusts.” <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p4.4"></span>Seneca also, in his <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p4.5"></span>Exhortations, says: “Many of the
philosophers are of this description, eloquent to their own
condemnation: for if you should hear them arguing against avarice,
against lust and ambition, you would think that they were making a
public disclosure <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) of their own
character, so entirely do the censures which they utter in public flow
back upon themselves; so that it is right to regard them in no other
light than as physicians, whose advertisements <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) contain medicines, but their medicine
chests poison. Some are not ashamed of their vices; but they invent
defences for their baseness, so that they may appear even to sin with
honour.” <span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p6.2"></span>Seneca also says: “The
wise man will even do things which he will not approve of, that he may
find means of passing to the accomplishment of greater things; nor will
he abandon good morals, but will adapt them to the occasion; and those
things which others employ for glory or pleasure, he will employ for the
sake of action.” Then he says shortly afterwards: “All things which the
luxurious and the ignorant do, the wise man also will do, but not in the
same manner, and with the same purpose. But it makes no difference with
what intention you act, when the action itself is vicious; because acts
are seen, the intention is not seen.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p7"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p7.1"></span>Aristippus, the master of the Cyrenaics,
had a criminal intimacy with <span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p7.2"></span>Lais,
the celebrated courtesan; and that grave teacher of philosophy defended
this fault by saying, that there was a great difference between him and
the other lovers of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p7.3"></span>Lais, because
he himself possessed <span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p7.4"></span>Lais, whereas
others were possessed by <span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p7.5"></span>Lais. O
illustrious wisdom, to be imitated by good men! Would you, in truth,
entrust your children to this man for education, that they might learn
to possess a harlot? He said that there was some difference between
himself and the dissolute, that they wasted their property, whereas he
lived in indulgence without any cost. And in this the harlot was plainly
the wiser, who had the philosopher as her creature, that all the youth,
corrupted by the example and authority of the teacher, might flock
together to her without any shame. What difference therefore did it
make, with what intention the philosopher betook himself to that most
notorious harlot, when the people and his rivals saw him more depraved
than all the abandoned? Nor was it enough to live in this manner, but he
began also to teach lusts; and he transferred his habits from the
brothel to the school, contending that bodily pleasure was the chief
good. Which pernicious and shameful doctrine has its origin not in the
heart of the philosopher, but in the bosom of the harlot.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p8"></span>For why should I speak of the Cynics,
who practised licentiousness in public? What wonder if they derived
their name and title from dogs, <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424)
since they also imitated their life? Therefore there is no instruction
of virtue in this sect, since even those who enjoin more honourable
things either themselves do not practice what they advise; or if they do
(which rarely happens), it is not the system which leads them to that
which is right, but nature which often impels even the unlearned to
praise.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_420"></span>[83:421](0070066.htm#fr_420) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p2"></span> Than—that no one knows anything.  

<span id="fn_421"></span>[84:422](0070066.htm#fr_421) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p3"></span> Sallust as a writer abounds in
denunciations of vice. But see book ii. cap. 13, note 4, p. 62, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p3.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_422"></span>[84:423](0070066.htm#fr_422) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p4.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>Indicium sui professos putes; others read
<span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p5.2"></span>judicium</span>, “you would think that
they were passing sentence on themselves.”  

<span id="fn_423"></span>[84:424](0070066.htm#fr_423) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>Tituli, “titles.”  

<span id="fn_424"></span>[84:425](0070066.htm#fr_424) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>Augustine in many places expresses his
opinion that the Cynics were so called from their immodesty. Others
suppose that the name was given to them on account of their snarling
propensity.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVI.—That the philosophers who give good instructions live
badly, by the testimony of Cicero; therefore we should not so much
devote ourselves to the study of philosophy as to wisdom](0070067)
