[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070319)  [Next](0070321) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XI.

<span id="iii.v.xi-p1"></span>The mother of <span
id="iii.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Galerius, a woman exceedingly superstitious,
was a votary of the gods of the mountains. Being of such a character,
she made sacrifices almost every day, and she feasted her servants on
the meat offered to idols: but the Christians of her family would not
partake of those entertainments; and while she feasted with the
Gentiles, they continued in fasting and prayer. On this account she
conceived ill-will against the Christians, and by woman-like complaints
instigated her son, no less superstitious than herself, to destroy them.
So, during the whole winter, <span id="iii.v.xi-p1.2"></span>Diocletian
and <span id="iii.v.xi-p1.3"></span>Galerius held councils together, at
which no one else assisted; and it was the universal opinion that their
conferences respected the most momentous affairs of the empire. The old
man long opposed the fury of <span id="iii.v.xi-p1.4"></span>Galerius,
and showed how pernicious it would be to raise disturbances throughout
the world and to shed so much blood; that the Christians were wont with
eagerness to meet death; and that it would be enough for him to exclude
persons of that religion from the court <span
id="fr_1970"></span>[1971](#fn_1970) and the army. Yet he could not
restrain the madness of that obstinate man. He resolved, therefore, to
take the opinion of his friends. Now this was a circumstance in the bad
disposition of <span id="iii.v.xi-p2.4"></span>Diocletian, that whenever
he determined to do good, he did it without advice, that the praise
might be all his own; but whenever he determined to do ill, which he was
sensible would be blamed, he called in many advisers, that his own fault
might be imputed to other men: and therefore a few civil magistrates,
and a few military commanders, were admitted to give their counsel; and
the question was put to them according to priority of rank. Some,
through personal ill-will towards the Christians, were of opinion that
they ought to be cut off, as enemies of the gods and adversaries of the
established religious ceremonies. Others thought differently, but,
having understood the will of <span id="iii.v.xi-p2.5"></span>Galerius,
they, either from dread of displeasing or from a desire of gratifying
him, concurred in the opinion given against the Christians. Yet not even
then could the emperor be prevailed upon to yield his assent. He
determined above all to consult his gods; and to that end he despatched
a soothsayer to inquire of <span id="iii.v.xi-p2.6"></span>Apollo at
Miletus, whose answer was such as might be expected from an enemy of the
divine religion. So <span id="iii.v.xi-p2.7"></span>Diocletian was drawn
over from his purpose. But although he could struggle no longer against
his friends, and against Cæsar and <span
id="iii.v.xi-p2.8"></span>Apollo, yet still he attempted to observe such
moderation as to command the business to be carried through without
bloodshed; whereas <span id="iii.v.xi-p2.9"></span>Galerius would have
had all persons burnt alive who refused to sacrifice.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1970"></span>[305:1971](0070320.htm#fr_1970) <span
id="iii.v.xi-p1.5"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xi-p2"></span> \[A just statement of <span
id="iii.v.xi-p2.1"></span>Diocletian’s earlier disposition. See. vol.
vi. p. 158, the beautiful letter of <span
id="iii.v.xi-p2.3"></span>Theonas.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XII](0070321)
