[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070245)  [Next](0070247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.liv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.liv-p0.1"></span>Chap. LVIII.—Of the True Worship of God, and Sacrifice.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.liv-p1"></span>I have spoken of justice, what was
its nature. It follows that I show what is true sacrifice to God, what
is the most just manner of worshipping Him, lest any one should think
that victims, or odours, or precious gifts, are desired by God, who, if
He is not subject to hunger, and thirst, and cold, and desire of all
earthly things, does not therefore make use of all these things which
are presented in temples and to gods of earth; but as corporeal
offerings are necessary for corporeal beings, so manifestly an
incorporeal sacrifice is necessary for an incorporeal being. But God has
no need of those things which He has given to man for his use, since all
the earth is under His power: He needs not a temple, since the world is
His dwelling; He needs not an image, since He is incomprehensible both
to the eyes and to the mind; He needs not earthly lights, for He was
able to kindle the light of the sun, with the other stars, for the use
of man. What then does God require from man but worship of the mind,
which is pure and holy? For those things which are made by the hands, or
are outside of man, are senseless, frail, and displeasing. This is true
sacrifice, which is brought forth not from the chest but from the heart;
not that which is offered by the hand, but by the mind. This is the
acceptable victim, which the mind sacrifices of itself. For what do
victims bestow? What does incense? What do garments? What does silver?
What gold? What precious stones,—if there is not a pure mind on the part
of the worshipper? Therefore it is justice only which God requires. In
this is sacrifice; in this the worship of God, respecting which I must
now speak, and show in what works justice must necessarily be contained.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LIX.—Of the ways of life, and the first times of the
world](0070247)
