[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070157)  [Next](0070159.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p0.1"></span>Chap. XX.—Of the Senses, and Their Pleasures in the Brutes and in Man; And of Pleasures of the Eyes, and Spectacles.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p1"></span>It remains that I should speak against
the pleasures of the five senses, and this briefly, for the measure of
the book itself now demands moderation; all of which, since they are
vicious and deadly, ought to be overcome and subdued by virtue, or, as I
said a little before respecting the affections, be recalled to their
proper office. The other animals have no pleasure, except the one only
which relates to generation. Therefore they use their senses for the
necessity of their nature: they see, in order that they may seek those
things which are necessary for the preservation of life; they hear one
another, and distinguish one another, that they may be able to assemble
together; they either discover from the smell, or perceive from the
taste, the things which are useful for food; they refuse and reject the
things which are useless, they measure the business of eating and
drinking by the fulness of their stomach. But the foresight of the most
skilful Creator gave to man pleasure without limit, and liable to fall
into vice, because He set before him virtue, which might always be at
variance with pleasure, as with a domestic enemy. <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p1.1"></span>Cicero says, in the <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p1.2"></span>Cato Major: <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229.md) “In truth, debaucheries, and
adulteries, and disgraceful actions are excited by no other enticements
than those of pleasure. And since nature or some God has given to man
nothing more excellent than the mind, nothing is so hostile to this
divine benefit and gift as pleasure. For when lust bears sway there is
no place for temperance, nor can virtue have any existence when pleasure
reigns supreme.” But, on the other hand, God gave virtue on this
account, that it might subdue and conquer pleasure, and that, when it
passed the boundaries assigned to it, it might restrain it within the
prescribed limits, lest it should soothe and captivate man with
enjoyments, render him subject to its control, and punish him with
everlasting death.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p3"></span>The pleasure arising from the eyes is
various and manifold, which is derived from the sight of objects which
are pleasant in intercourse with men, or in nature or workmanship. The
philosophers rightly took this away. For they say that it is much more
excellent and worthy of man to look upon the heaven <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230.md) rather than carved works, and to
admire this most beautiful work adorned with the lights of the stars
shining through, <span id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231.md) as with
flowers, than to admire things painted and moulded, and varied with
jewels. But when they have eloquently exhorted us to despise earthly
things, and have urged us to look up to the heaven, nevertheless they do
not despise these public spectacles. Therefore they are both delighted
with these, and are gladly present at them; though, since they are the
greatest incitement to vices, and have a most powerful tendency to
corrupt our minds, they ought to be taken away from us; for they not
only contribute in no respect to a happy life, but even inflict the
greatest injury. For he who reckons it a pleasure, that a man, though
justly condemned, should be slain in his sight, pollutes his conscience
as much as if he should become a spectator and a sharer of a homicide
which is secretly committed. <span id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232.md)
And yet they call these sports in which human blood is shed. So far has
the feeling of humanity departed from the men, that when they destroy
the lives of men, they think that they are amusing themselves with
sport, being more guilty than all those whose blood-shedding they esteem
a pleasure. I ask now whether they can be just and pious men, who, when
they see men placed under the stroke of death, and entreating mercy, not
only suffer them to be put to death, but also demand it, and give cruel
and inhuman votes for their death, not being satiated with wounds nor
contented with bloodshed. Moreover, they order them, even though wounded
and prostrate, to be attacked again, and their caresses to he
wasted <span id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233.md) with blows, that no
one may delude them by a pretended death. They are even angry with the
combatants, unless one of the two is quickly slain; and as though they
thirsted for human blood, they hate delays. They demand that other and
fresh combatants should be given to them, that they may satisfy their
eyes <span id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-Page_187"></span>as soon as possible. Being imbued with
this practice, they have lost their humanity. Therefore they do not
spare even the innocent, but practice upon all that which they have
learned in the slaughter of the wicked. It is not therefore befitting
that those who strive to keep to the path of justice should be
companions and sharers in this public homicide. For when God forbids us
to kill, He not only prohibits us from open violence, <span
id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234.md) which is not even allowed by the
public laws, but He warns us against the commission of those things
which are esteemed lawful among men. Thus it will be neither lawful for
a just man to engage in warfare, since his warfare is justice itself,
nor to accuse any one of a capital charge, because it makes no
difference whether you put a man to death by word, or rather by the
sword, since it is the act of putting to death itself <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235.md) which is prohibited. Therefore,
with regard to this precept of God, there ought to be no exception at
all; but that it is always unlawful to put to death a man, whom God
willed to be a sacred animal. <span id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236.md)
 

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p11"></span>Therefore let no one imagine that
even this is allowed, to strangle <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237.md) newly-born children, which is the
greatest impiety; for God breathes into their souls for life, and not
for death. But men, that there may be no crime with which they may not
pollute their hands, deprive souls as yet innocent and simple of the
light which they themselves have not given. Can any one, indeed, expect
that they would abstain from the blood of others who do not abstain even
from their own? But these are without any controversy wicked and unjust.
What are they whom a false piety <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238.md) compels to expose their children?
Can they be considered innocent who expose their own offspring <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239.md) as a prey to dogs, and as far as it
depends upon themselves, kill them in a more cruel manner than if they
had strangled them? Who can doubt that he is impious who gives
occasion <span id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240.md) for the pity of
others? For, although that which he has wished should befall the
child—namely, that it should be brought up—he has certainly consigned
his own offspring either to servitude or to the brothel? But who does
not understand, who is ignorant what things may happen, or are
accustomed to happen, in the case of each sex, even through error? For
this is shown by the example of Œdipus alone, confused with twofold
guilt. It is therefore as wicked to expose as it is to kill. But truly
parricides complain of the scantiness of their means, and allege that
they have not enough for bringing up more children; as though, in truth,
their means were in the power of those who possess them, or God did not
daily make the rich poor, and the poor rich. Wherefore, if any one on
account of poverty shall be unable to bring up children, it is better to
abstain from marriage <span id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241.md) than
with wicked hands to mar the work of God.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p17"></span>If, then, it is in no way permitted
to commit homicide, it is not allowed us to be present at all, <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242.md) lest any bloodshed should
overspread the conscience, since that blood is offered for the
gratification of the people. And I am inclined to think that the
corrupting influence of the stage is still more contaminating. <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243.md) For the subject of comedies are the
dishonouring of virgins, or the loves of harlots; and the more eloquent
they are who have composed the accounts of these disgraceful actions,
the more do they persuade by the elegance of their sentiments; and
harmonious and polished verses more readily remain fixed in the memory
of the hearers. In like manner, the stories of the tragedians place
before the eyes the parricides and incests of wicked kings, and
represent tragic <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244.md) crimes. And
what other effect do the immodest gestures of the players produce, but
both teach and excite lusts? whose enervated bodies, rendered effeminate
after the gait and dress of women, imitate <span
id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245.md) unchaste women by their disgraceful
gestures. Why should I speak of the actors of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p21.2"></span>mimes, <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246.md) who hold forth instruction in
corrupting influences, who teach adulteries while they feign them, and
by pretended actions train to those which are true? What can young men
or virgins do, when they see that these things are practised without
shame, and willingly beheld by all? They are plainly admonished of what
they can do, and are inflamed with lust, which is especially excited by
seeing; and every one according to his sex forms <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247.md) himself in these representations.
And they approve of these things, while they laugh at them, and with
vices clinging to them, they return more corrupted to their apartments;
and not boys only, who ought not to be inured to vices prematurely, but
also old men, whom it does not become at their age to sin. <span
id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-Page_188"></span>  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p24"></span>What else does the practice of the
Circensian games contain but levity, vanity, and madness? For their
souls are hurried away to mad excitement with as great impetuosity as
that with which the chariot races are there carried on; so that they who
come for the sake of beholding the spectacle now themselves exhibit more
of a spectacle, when they begin to utter exclamations, to be thrown into
transports, and to leap from their seats. Therefore all spectacles ought
to be avoided, not only that no vice may settle in our breasts, which
ought to be tranquil and peaceful; but that the habitual indulgence of
any pleasure may not soothe and captivate us, and turn us aside from God
and from good works. <span id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248.md) For the
celebrations of the games are festivals in honour of the gods, inasmuch
as they were instituted on account of their birthdays, or the dedication
of new temples. And at first the huntings, which are called shows, were
in honour of <span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p25.3"></span>Saturnus, and the
scenic games in honour of <span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p25.4"></span>Liber,
but the Circensian in honour of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p25.5"></span>Neptune. By degrees, however, the same
honour began to be paid also to the other gods, and separate games were
dedicated to their names, as <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p25.6"></span>Sisinnius Capito teaches in his book on
the games. Therefore, if any one is present at the spectacles to which
men assemble for the sake of religion, he has departed from the worship
of God, and has betaken himself to those deities whose birthdays and
festivals he has celebrated. <span id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249.md)
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[186:1230](0070158.htm#fr_1229.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p2"></span> C. 12.  

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[186:1231](0070158.htm#fr_1230.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p4.1"></span>Cœlum potius quàm cœlata. There appears to
be an allusion to the supposed derivation of “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p4.2"></span>cœlum” from “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p4.3"></span>cœlando.”  

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[186:1232](0070158.htm#fr_1231.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p5"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p5.1"></span>Intermicantibus astrorum luminibus. It
does not seem to me that the learned translator does full justice here
to our author’s idea. “Adorned with the twinkling lights of the stars”
would be an admissible rendering.\]  

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[186:1233](0070158.htm#fr_1232.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p6"></span> \[It is unbecoming for a Christian,
unless as an officer of the law or a minister of mercy, to be a
spectator of any execution of criminals. Blessed growth of Christian
morals.\]  

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[186:1234](0070158.htm#fr_1233.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p7.1"></span>Dissipari. \[A very graphic description of
the brutal shows of the arena, which were abolished by the first
Christian emperor, perhaps influenced by these very pages.\]  

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[187:1235](0070158.htm#fr_1234.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p8.1"></span>Lactrocinari.  

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[187:1236](0070158.htm#fr_1235.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p9"></span> i.e., without reference to the manner
in which death is inflicted. \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p9.1"></span>Lactantius goes further here than the
Scriptures seem to warrant, if more than <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p9.2"></span>private warfare be in his mind. The
influence of <span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p9.3"></span>Tertullian is visible
here. See Elucidation II. p. 76, and cap. xi. p. 99, vol. iii., this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[187:1237](0070158.htm#fr_1236.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p9.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p10"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p10.1"></span>Sanctum animal. See p. 56, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p10.3"></span>supra. But the primal law on this very
subject contains a sanction which our author seems to forget. Because he
is an animal of such sacred dignity, therefore “whoso sheddeth man’s
blood,” etc. ([Gen. ix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p10.4"></span>). The impunity of Cain had led to
bloodshed ([Gen. vi. 11](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p10.5"></span>), to which as a necessary remedy this
sanction was prescribed.\]  

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[187:1238](0070158.htm#fr_1237.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p12.1"></span>Oblidere.  

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[187:1239](0070158.htm#fr_1238.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p13"></span> They thought it less criminal to
expose children than to strangle them.  

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[187:1240](0070158.htm#fr_1239.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p14.1"></span>Sanguinem suum.  

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[187:1241](0070158.htm#fr_1240.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p15"></span> i.e., by exposing them, that others
may through compassion bring then up.  

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[187:1242](0070158.htm#fr_1241.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p16.1"></span>Ab uxoris congressione.  

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[187:1243](0070158.htm#fr_1242.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p18"></span> i.e., at the shows of gladiators.  

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[187:1244](0070158.htm#fr_1243.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p19"></span> \[How seriously this warning should
be considered in our days, when American theatricals have become so
generally licentious beyond all bounds, I beg permission to suggest. See
Elucidation I. p. 595, vol. v.; also <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p19.2"></span>Ibid., pp. 277, 575, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[187:1245](0070158.htm#fr_1244.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p19.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p20.1"></span>Cothurnata scelera.  

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[187:1246](0070158.htm#fr_1245.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p21.1"></span>Mentiuntur.  

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[187:1247](0070158.htm#fr_1246.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p22"></span> The <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p22.1"></span>mimus was a species of dramatic
representation, containing scenes from common life, which were expressed
by gesture and mimicry more than by dialogue.  

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[187:1248](0070158.htm#fr_1247.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p23.1"></span>Præfigurat, not a word of classical
usage.  

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[188:1249](0070158.htm#fr_1248.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p25"></span> \[see <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p25.1"></span>Tertullian, vol. iii cap. 25, p. 89, this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[188:1250](0070158.htm#fr_1249.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p25.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p26"></span> See p. 27, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xx-p26.2"></span>supra; also vol. vi. pp. 487, 488.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXI.—Of the pleasures of the ears, and of sacred
literature](0070159.md)
