[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070035)  [Next](0070037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chap. vI.—that neither the whole universe nor the elements are god, nor are they possessed of life.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p1"></span>In like manner, if the land on which
we tread, and which we subdue and cultivate for food, is not a god, then
the plains and mountains will not be gods; and if these are not so, it
follows that the whole of the earth cannot appear to be God. In like
manner, if the water, which is <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-Page_49"></span>adapted to the wants <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) of living creatures for the purpose of
drinking and bathing, is not a god, neither are the fountains <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>gods from which the water flows. And if
the fountains are not gods, neither are the rivers, which are collected
from the fountains. And if the rivers also are not gods, it follows that
the sea, which is made up of rivers, cannot be considered as God. But if
neither the heaven, nor the earth, nor the sea, which are the parts of
the world, can be gods, it follows that the world altogether is not God;
whereas the same Stoics contend that it is both living and wise, and
therefore God. But in this they are so inconsistent, that nothing is
said by them which they do not also overthrow. For they argue thus: It
is impossible that that which produces from itself sensible objects
should itself be insensible. But the world produces man, who is endowed
with sensibility; therefore it must also itself be sensible. Also they
argue: that cannot be without sensibility, a part of which is sensible;
therefore, because man is sensible, the world, of which man is a part,
also possesses sensibility. The propositions <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) themselves are true, that that which
produces a being endowed with sense is itself sensible; and that that
possesses sense, a part of which is endowed with sense. But the
assumptions by which they draw their conclusions are false; for the
world does not produce man, nor is man a part of the world. For the same
God who created the world, also created man from the beginning: and man
is not a part of the world, in the same manner in which a limb is a part
of the body; for it is possible for the world to be without man, as it
is for a city or house. Now, as a house is the dwelling-place of one
man, and a city of one people, so also the world is the abode <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) of the whole human race; and that
which is inhabited is one thing, that which inhabits another. But these
persons, in their eagerness to prove that which they had falsely
assumed, that the world is possessed of sensibility, and is God, did not
perceive the consequences of their own arguments. For if man is a part
of the world, and if the world is endowed with sensibility because man
is sensible, therefore it follows that, because man is mortal, the world
must also of necessity be mortal, and not only mortal, but also liable
to all kinds of disease and suffering. And, on the contrary, if the
world is God, its parts also are plainly immortal: therefore man also is
God, because he is, as you say, a part of the world. And if man, then
also both beasts of burden and cattle, and the other kinds of beasts and
of birds, and fishes, since these also in the same manner are possessed
of sensibility, and are parts of the world. But this is endurable; for
the Egyptians worship even these. But the matter comes to this: that
even frogs, and gnats, and ants appear to be gods, because these also
have sensibility, and are parts of the world. Thus arguments drawn from
a false <span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p4.3"></span>source always lead to
foolish and absurd conclusions. Why should I mention that the same <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p4.4"></span>philosophers assert that the world was
constructed <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) for the sake of gods
and men as a common dwelling? Therefore the world is neither god, nor
living, if it has been made: for a living creature is not made, but
born; and if it has been built, it has been built as a house or ship
<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p5.3"></span>is built. Therefore there is a
builder of the world, <span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p5.4"></span>even God; and
the world which has been made is distinct from Him who made it. Now, how
inconsistent and absurd is it, that when they affirm that the heavenly
fires <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) and the other elements of
the world are gods, they also say that the world itself is God! How is
it possible that out of a great heap of gods one God can be made up? If
the stars are gods, it follows that the world is not God, but the
dwelling-place of gods. But if the world is God, it follows that all the
things which are in it are not gods, but members <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) of God, which clearly cannot by
themselves <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) take the name of God.
For no one can rightly say that the members of one man are many men;
but, however, there is no similar comparison between a living being and
the world. For because a living being is endowed with sensibility, its
members also have sensibility; nor do they become senseless <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) unless they are separated from the
body. But what resemblance does the world present to this? Truly they
themselves tell us, since they do not deny that it was made, that it
might be, as it were, a common abode for gods and men. If, therefore, it
has been constructed as an abode, it is neither itself God, nor are the
elements which are its parts; because a house cannot bear rule over
itself, nor can the parts of which a house consists. Therefore they are
refuted not only by the truth, but even by their own words. For as a
house, made for the purpose of being inhabited, has no sensibility by
itself, and is subject to the master who built or inhabits it; so the
world, having no sensibility of itself, is subject to God its Maker, who
made it for His own use.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[49:168](0070036.htm#fr_167) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p2"></span> Is subservient to.  

<span id="fn_168"></span>[49:169](0070036.htm#fr_168) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>Lactantius speaks after the manner of
<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p3.2"></span>Cicero, and uses the word
proposition to express that which logicians call the <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p3.3"></span>major proposition, as containing the major
term: the word <span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p3.4"></span>assumption expresses
that which is called the <span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p3.5"></span>minor
proposition, as containing the minor term.  

<span id="fn_169"></span>[49:170](0070036.htm#fr_169) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p3.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p4"></span> Thus <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p4.2"></span>De Finibus, iii., says: “But they think
that the universe is governed by the power of the gods, and that it is,
as it were, a city and state common to men and gods, and that every one
of us is a part of that universe.”  

<span id="fn_170"></span>[49:171](0070036.htm#fr_170) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p5"></span> If the world was created out of
nothing, as Christians are taught to believe, it was not born; for birth
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>γένεσις</span>)
takes place when matter assumes another substantial form.—<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p5.2"></span>Betuleius</span>.  

<span id="fn_171"></span>[49:172](0070036.htm#fr_171) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p5.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p6"></span> The stars.  

<span id="fn_172"></span>[49:173](0070036.htm#fr_172) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p7"></span> Membra, “limbs,” “parts.”  

<span id="fn_173"></span>[49:174](0070036.htm#fr_173) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p8"></span> Sola, “alone.” Another reading is
solius, “of the only God.”  

<span id="fn_174"></span>[49:175](0070036.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.vi-p9"></span> Brutescunt.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VII.—Of God, and the religious rites of the foolish; of
avarice, and the authority of ancestors](0070037)
