[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070020)  [Next](0070022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chap. xv.—how they who were men obtained the name of gods.

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p1"></span>Now, since it is evident from these
things that they were men, it is not difficult to see in what manner
they began to be called gods. <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) For
if there were no kings before <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p2.2"></span>Saturn
or <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p2.3"></span>Uranus, on account of the small
number of men who lived a rustic life without any ruler, there is no
doubt but in those times men began to exalt the king himself, and his
whole family, with the highest praises and with new honours, so that
they even called them gods; whether on account of their wonderful
excellence, men as yet rude and simple really entertained this opinion,
or, as is commonly the case, in flattery of present power, or on account
of the benefits by which they were set in order and reduced to a
civilized state. Afterwards the kings themselves, since they were
beloved by those whose life they had civilized, after their death left
regret of themselves. Therefore men formed images of them, that they
might derive some consolation from the contemplation of their
likenesses; and proceeding further through love of their worth, <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) they began to reverence the memory of the
deceased, that <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-Page_27"></span>they might appear to be grateful for
their services, and might attract their successors to a desire of ruling
well. And this <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p3.1"></span>Cicero teaches in his
treatise on the Nature of the Gods, saying “But the life of men and
common intercourse led to the exalting to heaven by fame and goodwill
men who were distinguished by their benefits. On this account <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p3.2"></span>Hercules, on this <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p3.3"></span>Castor and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p3.4"></span>Pollux, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p3.5"></span>Æsculapius and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p3.6"></span>Liber” were ranked with the gods. And in
another passage: “And in most states it may be understood, that for the
sake of exciting valour, or that the men most distinguished for bravery
might more readily encounter danger on account of the state, their
memory was consecrated with the honour paid to the immortal gods.” It
was doubtless on this account that the Romans consecrated their Cæsars,
and the Moors their kings. Thus by degrees religious honours began to be
paid to them; while those who had known them, first instructed their own
children and grandchildren, and afterwards all their posterity, in the
practice of this rite. And yet these great kings, on account of the
celebrity of their name, were honoured in all provinces.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4"></span>But separate people privately honoured
the founders of their nation or city with the highest veneration,
whether they were men distinguished for bravery, or women admirable for
chastity; as the Egyptians honoured <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.1"></span>Isis, the Moors <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.2"></span>Juba, the Macedonians <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.3"></span>Cabirus, the Carthaginians <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.4"></span>Uranus, the Latins <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.5"></span>Faunus, the Sabines <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.6"></span>Sancus, the Romans <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.7"></span>Quirinus. In the same manner truly Athens
worshipped <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.8"></span>Minerva, Samos <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.9"></span>Juno, Paphos <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.10"></span>Venus, Lemnos <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.11"></span>Vulcan, Naxos <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.12"></span>Liber, and Delos <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.13"></span>Apollo. And thus various sacred rites
have been undertaken among different peoples and countries, inasmuch as
men desire to show gratitude to their princes, and cannot find out other
honours which they may confer upon the dead. Moreover, the piety of
their successors contributed in a great degree to the error; for, in
order that they might appear to be born from a divine origin, they paid
divine honours to their parents, and ordered that they should be paid by
others. Can any one doubt in what way the honours paid to the gods were
instituted, when he reads in Virgil the words of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.14"></span>Æneas giving commands to his
friends: <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p5.2"></span> “Now with full cups libation
> pour  
> To mighty <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p5.5"></span>Jove, whom all adore,  
> Invoke <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p5.7"></span>Anchises’ blessed soul.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p6"></span>And he attributes to him not only
immortality, but also power over the winds: <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p7.2"></span> “Invoke the winds to speed our
> flight,  
> And pray that he we hold so dear  
> May take our offerings year by year,  
> Soon as our promised town we raise,  
> In temples sacred to his praise.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p8"></span>In truth, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p8.1"></span>Liber and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p8.2"></span>Pan, and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p8.3"></span>Mercury and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p8.4"></span>Apollo, acted in the same way respecting
<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p8.5"></span>Jupiter, and afterwards their
successors did the same respecting them. The poets also added their
influence, and by means of poems composed to give pleasure, raised them
to the heaven; as is the case with those who flatter kings, even though
wicked, with false panegyrics. And this evil originated with the Greeks,
whose levity being furnished <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) with
the ability and copiousness of speech, excited in an incredible degree
mists of falsehoods. And thus from admiration of them they first
undertook their sacred rites, and handed them down to all nations. On
account of this vanity the <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p9.2"></span>Sibyl
thus rebukes them:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p9.3"></span> “Why trustest thou, O Greece, to
> princely men?  
> Why to the dead dost offer empty gifts?  
> Thou offerest to idols; this error who suggested,  
> That thou shouldst leave the presence of the mighty God,  
> And make these offerings?”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10"></span><span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10.1"></span>Marcus Tullius, who was not only an
accomplished orator, but also a philosopher, since he alone was an
imitator of <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10.2"></span>Plato, in that treatise
in which he consoled himself concerning the death of his daughter, did
not hesitate to say that those gods who were publicly worshipped were
men. And this testimony of his ought to be esteemed the more weighty,
because he held the priesthood of the augurs, and testifies that he
worships and venerates the same gods. And thus within the compass of a
few verses he has presented us with two facts. For while he declared his
intention of consecrating the image of his daughter in the same manner
in which they were consecrated by the ancients, he both taught that they
were dead, and showed the origin of a vain superstition. “Since, in
truth,” he says, “we see many men and women among the number of the
gods, and venerate their shrines, held in the greatest honour in cities
and in the country, let us assent to the wisdom of those to whose
talents and inventions we owe it that life is altogether adorned with
laws and institutions, and established on a firm basis. And if any
living being was worthy of being consecrated, assuredly it was this. If
the offspring of <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10.3"></span>Cadmus, or <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10.4"></span>Amphitryon, or <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10.5"></span>Tyndarus, was worthy of being extolled by
fame to the heaven, the same honour ought undoubtedly to be appropriated
to her. And this indeed I will do; and with the approbation of the gods,
I will place you the best and most learned of all women in their
assembly, and will consecrate you to the estimation of all men.” Some
one may perhaps say that <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10.6"></span>Cicero
raved through excessive grief. But, in truth, the whole of that speech,
which was perfect both in learning and in its examples, and in the very
style of expression, gave no indications of a <span id="page_28">p.
28</span> <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-Page_28"></span>distempered mind, but
of constancy and judgment; and this very sentence exhibits no sign of
grief. For I do not think that he could have written with such variety,
and copiousness, and ornament, had not his grief been mitigated by
reason itself, and the consolation of his friends and length of time.
Why should I mention what he says in his books concerning the Republic,
and also concerning glory? For in his treatise on the Laws, in which
work, following the example of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10.7"></span>Plato, he wished to set forth those laws
which he thought that a just and wise state would employ, he thus
decreed concerning religion: <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) “Let
them reverence the gods, both those who have always been regarded as
gods of heaven, and those whose services <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.2"></span>to men have placed them in heaven: <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.3"></span>Hercules, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.4"></span>Liber, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.5"></span>Æsculapius, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.6"></span>Castor, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.7"></span>Pollux, and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.8"></span>Quirinus.” Also in his Tusculan
Disputations, <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) when he said that
heaven was almost entirely filled with the human race, he said: “If,
indeed, I should attempt to investigate ancient accounts, and to extract
from them those things which the writers of Greece have handed down,
even those who are held in the highest rank as gods will be found to
have gone from us into heaven. Inquire whose sepulchres are pointed out
in Greece: remember, since you are initiated, what things are handed
down in the mysteries; and then at length you will understand how widely
this <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.2"></span>persuasion is spread.” He
appealed, as it is plain, to the conscience of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.3"></span>Atticus, that it might be understood from
the very mysteries that all those who are worshipped were men; and when
he acknowledged this without hesitation in the case of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.4"></span>Hercules, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.5"></span>Liber, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.6"></span>Æsculapius, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.7"></span>Castor and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.8"></span>Pollux, he was afraid openly to make the
same admission respecting <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.9"></span>Apollo
and <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.10"></span>Jupiter their fathers, and
likewise respecting <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.11"></span>Neptune, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.12"></span>Vulcan, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.13"></span>Mars, and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.14"></span>Mercury, whom he termed the greater
gods; and therefore he says that this opinion is widely spread, that we
may understand the same concerning <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.15"></span>Jupiter and the other more ancient gods:
for if the ancients consecrated their memory in the same manner in which
he says that he will consecrate the image and the name of his daughter,
those who mourn may be pardoned, but those who believe it cannot be
pardoned. For who is so infatuated as to believe that heaven is opened
to the dead at the consent and pleasure of a senseless multitude? Or
that any one is able to give to another that which he himself does not
possess? Among the Romans, <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.16"></span>Julius
was made a god, because it pleased a guilty man, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.17"></span>Antony; <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.18"></span>Quirinus was made a god, because it
seemed good to the shepherds, though one of them was the murderer of his
twin brother, the other the destroyer of his country. But if <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.19"></span>Antony had not been consul, in return
for his services towards the state <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.20"></span>Caius Cæsar would have been without the
honour even of a dead man, and that, too, by the advice of his
father-in-law <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.21"></span>Piso, and of his
relative <span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.22"></span>Lucius Cæsar, who opposed
the celebration of the funeral, and by the advice of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.23"></span>Dolabella the consul, who overthrew the
column in the forum, that is, his monuments, and purified the forum. For
<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.24"></span>Ennius declares that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.25"></span>Romulus was regretted by his people,
since he represents the people as thus speaking, through grief for their
lost king: “O Romulus, Romulus, say what a guardian of your country the
gods produced you? You brought us forth within the regions of light. O
father, O sire, O race, descended from the gods.” On account of this
regret they more readily believed <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.26"></span>Julius Proculus uttering falsehoods, who
was suborned by the fathers to announce to the populace that he had seen
the king in a form more majestic than that of a man; and that he had
given command to the people that a temple should be built to his honour,
that he was a god, and was called by the name of Quirinus. By which deed
he at once persuaded the people that Romulus had gone to the gods, and
freed the senate from the suspicion of having slain the king.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[26:66](0070021.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p2"></span> \[Vol. ii. cap. 28, p. 143, this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_66"></span>[26:67](0070021.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p3"></span> Per amorem meriti. Some editions omit
“meriti.”  

<span id="fn_67"></span>[27:68](0070021.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p4.15"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p5.1"></span>Æneid, vii. 133.  

<span id="fn_68"></span>[27:69](0070021.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p7"></span> <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p7.1"></span>Ibid</span>., v. 59.  

<span id="fn_69"></span>[27:70](0070021.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p8.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p9"></span> Instructa. \[Vol. ii. cap. 18, p.
137, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_70"></span>[28:71](0070021.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p10.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.1"></span>De Legibus, ii. cap. 8.\]  

<span id="fn_71"></span>[28:72](0070021.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p11.9"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.i.xvi-p12.1"></span>Liber i. capp. 12, 13.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVI.—By what argument it is proved that those who are
distinguished by a difference of sex cannot be gods](0070022.md)
