[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070429)  [Next](0070431) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Sec. II.—Commandments to Men.

#### <span id="ix.ii.ii-p0.2"></span>Concerning the Adornment of Ourselves, and the Sin Which Arises from Thence.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p1"></span>Let the husband not be insolent nor
arrogant towards his wife; but compassionate, bountiful, willing to
please his own wife <span id="ix.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>alone, <span
id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552) and treat her honourably and
obligingly, endeavouring to be agreeable to her; (III.) not adorning
thyself in such a manner as may entice another woman to thee. For if
thou art overcome by her, and sinnest with her, eternal death will
overtake thee from God; and thou wilt be punished with sensible and
bitter torments. Or if thou dost not perpetrate such a wicked act, but
shakest her off, and refusest her, in this case thou art not wholly
innocent, even though thou art not guilty of the crime itself, but only
in so far as through thy adorning thou didst entice the woman to desire
thee. For thou art the cause that the woman was so affected, and by her
lusting after thee was guilty of adultery with thee: yet art thou not so
guilty, because thou didst not send to her, who was ensnared by thee;
nor didst thou desire her. Since, therefore, thou didst not deliver up
thyself to her, thou shalt find mercy with the Lord thy God, who hath
said, “Thou shalt not commit adultery,” and, “Thou shalt not
covet.” <span id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553) For if such a woman,
upon sight of thee, or unseasonable meeting with thee, was smitten in
her mind, and sent to thee, but thou as a religious person didst refuse
her, <span id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554) if she was wounded in
her heart by thy beauty, and youth, and adorning, and fell in love with
thee, thou wilt be found guilty of her transgressions, as having been
the occasion of scandal to her, <span
id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555) <span id="ix.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>and
shalt inherit a woe. <span id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556)
Wherefore pray thou to the Lord God that no mischief may befall thee
upon this account: for thou art not to please men, so as to commit sin;
but God, so as to attain holiness of life, and be partaker of
everlasting rest. That beauty which God and nature has bestowed on thee,
do not further beautify; but modestly diminish it before men. Thus, do
not thou permit the hair of thy head to grow too long, but rather cut it
short; lest by a nice combing thy hair, and wearing it long, and
anointing thyself, thou draw upon thyself such ensnared or ensnaring
women. Neither do thou wear over-fine garments to seduce any; neither do
thou, with an evil subtilty, affect over-fine stockings or shoes for thy
feet, but only such as suit the measures of decency and usefulness.
Neither do thou put a gold ring upon thy fingers; for all these
ornaments are the signs of lasciviousness, which if thou be solicitous
about in an indecent manner, thou wilt not act as becomes a good man:
for it is not lawful for thee, a believer and a man of God, to permit
the hair of thy head to grow long, and to brush it up together, nor to
suffer it to spread abroad, nor to puff it up, nor by nice combing and
platting to make it curl and shine; since that is contrary to the law,
which says thus, in its additional precepts: “You shall not make to
yourselves curls and round rasures.” <span
id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557) Nor may men destroy the hair of
their beards, and unnaturally change the form of a man. For the law
says: “Ye shall not mar your beards.” <span
id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558) For God the Creator has made this
decent for women, but has determined that it is unsuitable for men. But
if thou do these things to please men, in contradiction to the law, thou
wilt be abominable with God, who created thee after His own image. <span
id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span id="ix.ii.ii-Page_393"></span>If,
therefore, thou wilt be acceptable to God, abstain from all those things
which He hates, and do none of those things that are unpleasing to Him.
 

#### <span id="ix.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>That We Ought Not to Be Over-Curious About Those Who Live Wickedly, But to Be Intent Upon Our Own Proper Employment.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p9"></span>IV. Thou shalt not be as a wanderer and
gadder abroad, rambling about the streets, without just cause, to spy
out such as live wickedly. But by minding thy own trade and employment,
endeavour to do what is acceptable to God. And keeping in mind the
oracles of Christ, meditate in the same continually. For so the
Scripture says to thee: “Thou shalt meditate in His law day and night;
when thou walkest in the field, and when thou sittest in thine house,
and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up, that thou mayest have
understanding in all things.” <span id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559)
Nay, although thou beest rich, and so dost not want a trade for thy
maintenance, be not one that gads about, and walks abroad at random; but
either go to some that are believers, and of the same religion, and
confer and discourse with them about the lively oracles of God:—  

#### <span id="ix.ii.ii-p10.3"></span>What Books of Scripture We Ought to Read.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p11"></span>V. Or if thou stayest at home, read the
books of the Law, of the Kings, with the Prophets; sing the hymns of
<span id="ix.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>David; and peruse diligently the
Gospel, which is the completion of the other.  

#### <span id="ix.ii.ii-p11.2"></span>That We Ought to Abstain from All the Books of Those that are Out of the Church.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p12"></span>VI. Abstain from all the heathen books.
For what hast thou to do with such foreign discourses, or laws, or false
prophets, which subvert the faith of the unstable? For what defect dost
thou find in the law of God, that thou shouldest have recourse to those
heathenish fables? For if thou hast a mind to read history, thou hast
the books of the Kings; if books of wisdom or poetry, thou hast those of
the Prophets, of Job, and the Proverbs, in which thou wilt find greater
depth of sagacity than in all the heathen poets and sophisters, because
these are the words of the Lord, the only wise God. If thou desirest
something to sing, thou hast the Psalms; if the origin of things, thou
hast Genesis; if laws and statutes, thou hast the glorious law of the
Lord God. Do thou therefore utterly abstain from all strange and
diabolical books. Nay, when thou readest the law, think not thyself
bound to observe the additional precepts; though not all of them, yet
some of them. Read those barely for the sake of history, in order to the
knowledge of them, and to glorify God that He has delivered thee from
such great and so many bonds. Propose to thyself to distinguish what
rules were from the law of nature, and what were added afterwards, or
were such additional rules as were introduced and given in the
wilderness to the Israelites after the making of the calf; for the law
contains those precepts which were spoken by the Lord God before the
people fell into idolatry, and made a calf like the Egyptian Apis—that
is, the ten commandments. But as to those bonds which were further laid
upon them after they had sinned, do not thou draw them upon thyself: for
our Saviour came for no other reason but that <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>He might deliver those that were obnoxious
thereto from the wrath which was reserved far them, that <span
id="fr_2560"></span>[2561](#fn_2560) He might fulfil the Law and the
Prophets, and that He might abrogate or change those secondary bonds
which were superadded to the rest of the law. For therefore did He call
to us and say, “Come un<span id="ix.ii.ii-p13.2"></span>to me, <span
id="fr_2561"></span>[2562](#fn_2561) all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.” <span
id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562) When, therefore, thou hast read the
Law, which is agreeable to the Gospel and to the Prophets, read also the
books of the Kings, that thou mayest thereby learn which of the kings
were righteous, and how they were prospered by God, and how the promise
of eternal life continued with them from Him; but those kings which went
a-whoring from God did soon perish in their apostasy by the righteous
judgment of God, and were deprived of His life, inheriting, instead of
rest, eternal punishment. Wherefore by reading these books thou wilt be
mightily strengthened in the faith, and edified in Christ, whose body
and member thou art. Moreover, when thou walkest abroad in public, and
hast a mind to bathe, make use of that bath which is appropriated to
men, lest, by discovering thy body in an unseemly manner to women, or by
seeing a sight not seemly for men, either thou beest ensnared, or thou
ensnarest and enticest to thyself <span id="ix.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>those
women who easily yield to such temptations. <span
id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563) Take care, therefore, and avoid
such things, lest thou admit a snare upon thy own soul.  

#### <span id="ix.ii.ii-p16.2"></span>Concerning a Bad Woman.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p17"></span>VII. For let us learn what the sacred
word says in the book of Wisdom: “My son, keep my words, and hide my
commandments with thee. Say unto Wisdom, Thou art my sister; and make
understanding familiar with thee: that she may keep thee from the
strange and wicked woman, in case such a one accost thee with sweet
words. <span id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii-Page_394"></span>For from the window of her house she looks
into the street, to see if she can espy some young man among the foolish
children, without understanding, walking in the market-place, in the
meeting of the street near her house, and talking in the dusk of the
evening, or in the silence and darkness of the night. A woman meets him
in the appearance of an harlot, who steals away the hearts of young
persons. She rambles about, and is dissolute; her feet abide not in her
house: sometimes she is without, sometimes in the streets, and lieth in
wait at every corner. Then she catches him, and kisses him, and with an
impudent face says unto him, I have peace-offerings with me; this day do
I pay my vows: therefore came I forth to meet thee; earnestly I have
desired thy face, and I have found thee. I have decked my bed with
coverings; with tapestry from Egypt have I adorned it. I have perfumed
my bed with saffron, and my house with cinnamon. Come, let us take our
fill of love until the morning; come, let us solace ourselves with
love,” etc. To which he adds: “With much discourse she seduced him, with
snares from her lips she forced him. He goes after her like a silly
bird.” <span id="fr_2564"></span>[2565](#fn_2564) And again: “Do not
hearken to a wicked woman; for though the lips of an harlot are like
drops from an honey-comb, which for a while is smooth in thy throat, yet
afterwards thou wilt find her more bitter than gall, and sharper than
any two-edged sword.” <span id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565) And
again: “But get away quickly, and tarry not; fix not thine eyes upon
her: for she hath thrown down many wounded; yea, innumerable multitudes
have been slain by her.” <span id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566) “If
not,” says he, “yet thou wilt repent at the last, when thy flesh and thy
body are consumed, and wilt say, How have I hated instruction, and my
heart has avoided the reproofs of the righteous! I have not hearkened to
the voice of my instructor, nor inclined mine ear to my teacher. I have
almost been in all evil.” <span id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567) But
we will make no more quotations; and if we have omitted any, be so
prudent as to select the most valuable out of the Holy Scriptures, and
confirm yourselves with them, rejecting all things that are evil, that
so you may be found holy with God in eternal life.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[392:2553](0070430.htm#fr_2552) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p2"></span> Omitted in V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>mss</span>.  

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[392:2554](0070430.htm#fr_2553) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p3"></span> [Exod.
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[392:2555](0070430.htm#fr_2554) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p4"></span> The V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. add: “didst abstain from her, and
didst not sin against her.”  

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[392:2556](0070430.htm#fr_2555) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p5"></span> [Matt. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[392:2557](0070430.htm#fr_2556) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p6"></span> Not in V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>mss</span>.  

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[392:2558](0070430.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p7"></span> [Lev.
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027), [Lev.
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[392:2559](0070430.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p8"></span> [Lev.
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027), [Lev.
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[393:2560](0070430.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p10"></span> [Josh. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>;
[Deut. vi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007)<span
id="ix.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2560"></span>[393:2561](0070430.htm#fr_2560) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p13"></span> Omitted in V <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>mss</span>.  

<span id="fn_2561"></span>[393:2562](0070430.htm#fr_2561) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p14"></span> Omitted in V <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>mss</span>.  

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[393:2563](0070430.htm#fr_2562) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p15"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[393:2564](0070430.htm#fr_2563) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p16"></span> Omitted in V <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>mss</span>.  

<span id="fn_2564"></span>[394:2565](0070430.htm#fr_2564) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p18"></span> [Prov. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#001)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[394:2566](0070430.htm#fr_2565) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p19"></span> [Prov.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#004)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[394:2567](0070430.htm#fr_2566) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p20"></span> [Prov.
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#026)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[394:2568](0070430.htm#fr_2567) <span
id="ix.ii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p21"></span> [Prov. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#011)<span id="ix.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>,
etc.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. III.—Commandments to Women.](0070431)
