[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070386)  [Next](0070388.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="vi.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>from the twelfth chapter.

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>1. “And
there was seen a great sign in heaven. A woman clothed with the sun, and
the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars. And
being with child, she cried out travailing, and bearing torments that
she might bring forth.”\] The woman clothed with the sun, and having the
moon under her feet, and wearing a crown of twelve stars upon her head,
and travailing in her pains, is the ancient Church of fathers, and
prophets, and saints, and apostles, <span
id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297.md) which had the groans and torments
of its longing until it saw that Christ, the fruit of its people
according to the flesh long promised to it, had taken flesh out of the
selfsame people. Moreover, being clothed with the sun intimates the hope
of resurrection and the glory of the promise. And the moon intimates the
fall of the bodies of the saints under the obligation of death, which
never can fail. For even as life is diminished, so also it is increased.
Nor is the hope of those that sleep extinguished absolutely, as some
think, but they have in their darkness a light such as the moon. And the
crown of twelve stars signifies the choir of fathers, according to the
fleshly birth, of whom Christ was to take flesh.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p3"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p3.1"></span>3. “And
there appeared another sign in heaven; and behold a red dragon, having
seven heads.”\] Now, that he says that this dragon was of a red
colour—that is, of a purple colour—the result of his work gave him such
a colour. For from the beginning (as the Lord says) he was a murderer;
and he has oppressed the whole of the human race, not so much by the
obligation of death, as, moreover, by the various forms of destruction
and fatal mischiefs. His seven heads were the seven kings of the Romans,
of whom also is Antichrist, as we have said above.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p4"></span>“And ten horns.”\] He says that the ten
kings in the latest times are the same as these, as we shall more fully
set forth there.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p5"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>4. “And
his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them upon
the earth.”\] Now, that he says that the dragon’s tail drew the third
part of the stars of heaven, this may be taken in two ways. For many
think that he may be able to seduce the third part of the men who
believe. <span id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298.md) But it should more
truly be understood, that of the angels that were subject to him, since
he was still a prince when he descended from his estate, he seduced the
third part; therefore what we said above, the Apocalypse says.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p7"></span>“And the dragon stood before the woman
who was beginning to bring forth, that, when she had brought forth, he
might devour her child.”\] The red dragon standing and desiring to
devour her child when she had brought him forth, is the devil,—to wit,
the traitor angel, who thought that the perishing of all men would be
alike by death; but He, who was not born of seed, owed nothing to death:
wherefore he could not devour Him—that is, detain Him in death—for on
the third day He rose again. Finally, also, and before He suffered, he
approached to tempt Him as man; but when he found that He was not what
he thought Him to be, he departed from Him, even till the time. Whence
it is here said:—  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p8"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p8.1"></span>5. “And
she brought forth a son, who begins to rule all nations with a rod of
iron.”\] The rod of iron is the sword of persecution.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p9"></span>“I saw that all men withdrew from his
abodes.”\] That is, the good will be removed, flying from
persecution. <span id="fr_2299"></span>[2300](#fn_2299.md)  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p11"></span>“And her son was caught up to God, and
to His throne.”\] We read also in the Acts of the Apostles that He was
caught up to God’s throne, just as speaking with the disciples He was
caught up to heaven.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p12"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p12.1"></span>6.
“But the woman fled into the wilderness, and there were given to her two
great eagle’s <span id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="vi.ii.xii-Page_356"></span>wings.”\] The aid of the great eagle’s
wings—to wit, the gift of prophets—was given to that Catholic Church,
whence in the last times a hundred and forty-four thousands of men
should believe on the preaching of <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p12.2"></span>Elias; but, moreover, he here says that the
rest of the people should be found alive on the coming of the Lord. And
the Lord says in the Gospel: “Then let them which are in Judea flee to
the mountains;” <span id="fr_2300"></span>[2301](#fn_2300.md) that is, as
many as should be gathered together in Judea, let them go to that place
which they have ready, and let them be supported there for three years
and six months from the presence of the devil.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p14"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p14.1"></span>14.
“Two great wings”\] are the two prophets—Elias, and the prophet who
shall be with him.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p15"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p15.1"></span>15.
“And the serpent cast out of his mouth after the woman water as a flood,
that he might carry her away with the flood.”\] He signifies by the
water which the serpent cast out of his mouth, the people who at his
command would persecute her.  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p16"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p16.1"></span>16.
“And the earth helped the woman, and opened her mouth, and swallowed up
the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth.”\] That the earth
opened her month and swallowed up the waters, sets forth the vengeance
for the present troubles. Although, therefore, it may signify this woman
bringing forth, it shows her afterwards flying when her offspring is
brought forth, because both things did not happen at one time; for we
know that Christ was born, but that the time should arrive that she
should flee from the face of the serpent: (we do not know) that this has
happened as yet. Then he says:—  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p17"></span><span id="vi.ii.xii-p17.1"></span>7–9.
“There was a battle in heaven: <span id="vi.ii.xii-p17.2"></span>Michael
and his angels fought with the dragon; and the dragon warred, and his
angels, and they prevailed not; nor was their place found any more in
heaven. And that great dragon was cast forth, that old serpent: he was
cast forth into the earth.”\] This is the beginning of Antichrist; yet
previously <span id="vi.ii.xii-p17.3"></span>Elias must prophesy, and
there must be times of peace. And afterwards, when the three years and
six months are completed in the preaching of <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p17.4"></span>Elias, he also must be cast down from
heaven, where up till that time he had had the power of ascending; and
all the apostate angels, as well as Antichrist, must be roused up from
hell. <span id="vi.ii.xii-p17.5"></span>Paul the apostle says: “Except
there come a falling away first, and the man of sin shall appear, the
son of perdition; and the adversary who exalted himself above all which
is called God, or which is worshipped.” <span
id="fr_2301"></span>[2302](#fn_2301.md)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[355:2298](0070387.htm#fr_2297.md) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p2"></span> \[No hint here that this was a
manifestation of the Blessed Virgin, the modern fiction of Rome. See
vol. vi, p. 355, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[355:2299](0070387.htm#fr_2298.md) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p6"></span> \[A noteworthy testimony to primitive
interpretation.\]  

<span id="fn_2299"></span>[355:2300](0070387.htm#fr_2299.md) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p10"></span> \[Compare <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p10.1"></span>Tertullian, <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p10.2"></span>De Fuga, vol. iv. p. 117, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_2300"></span>[356:2301](0070387.htm#fr_2300.md) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p13"></span> [Luke xxi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#021.md)<span id="vi.ii.xii-p13.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2301"></span>[356:2302](0070387.htm#fr_2301.md) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p17.6"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p18"></span> [2 Thess.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.ii.xii-p18.1"></span>.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From the thirteenth chapter](0070388.md)
