[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070168)  [Next](0070170.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p0.1"></span>Chap. V.—Of the Creation of Man, and of the Arrangement of the World, and of the Chief Good.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p1"></span>Let us now assign the reason why He
made man himself. For if the philosophers had known this, they would
either have maintained those things which they had found to be true, or
would not have fallen into the greatest errors. For this is the chief
thing; this is the point on which everything turns. And if any one does
not possess this, the truth altogether glides away from him. It is this,
in short, which causes them to be inconsistent with reason; <span
id="fr_1312"></span>[1313](#fn_1312.md) for if this had shone upon them, if
they had known all the mystery <span
id="fr_1313"></span>[1314](#fn_1313.md) of man, the Academy would never
have been in entire opposition <span
id="fr_1314"></span>[1315](#fn_1314.md) to their disputations, and to all
philosophy. As, therefore, God did not make the world for His own sake,
because He does not stand in need of its advantages, but for the sake of
man, who has the use of it, so also He made man himself for His own
sake. What advantage is there to God in man, says <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p4.2"></span>Epicurus, that He should make him for His
own sake? Truly, that there might be one who might understand His works;
who might be able both to admire with his understanding, and to express
with his voice, the foresight displayed in their arrangement, the order
of their creation, the power exerted in their completion. And the sum of
all these things is, that he should worship God. <span
id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315.md) For he who understands these things
worships Him; he follows Him with due veneration as the Maker of all
things, He as his true Father, who measures the excellence of His
majesty according to the invention, the commencement, and completion of
His works. <span id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-Page_200"></span>What more evident argument can be
brought forward that God both made the world for the sake of man, and
man for His own sake, than that he alone of all living creatures has
been so formed that his eyes are directed towards heaven, his face
looking towards God, his countenance is in fellowship with his Parent,
so that God appears, as it were, with outstretched hand to have raised
man from the ground, and to have elevated him to the contemplation of
Himself. “What, then,” he says, “does the worship paid by man confer on
God, who is blessed, and in want of nothing? Or if He gave such honour
to man as to create the world for his sake, to furnish him with wisdom,
to make him lord of all things living, and to love him as a son, why did
He make him subject to death and decay? why did He expose the object of
His love to all evils? when it was befitting that man should be happy,
as though closely connected with God, and everlasting as He is, to the
worship and contemplation of whom he was formed.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p6"></span>Although we have taught these things
for the most part in a scattered manner in the former books,
nevertheless, since the subject now specially requires it, because we
have undertaken to discuss the subject of a happy life, these things are
to be explained by us more carefully and fully, that the arrangement
made by God, and His work and will, may be known. Though He was always
able by His own immortal Spirit to produce innumerable souls, as He
produced the angels, to whom there exists immortality without any danger
and fear of evils, yet He devised an unspeakable work, in what manner He
might create an infinite multitude of souls, which being at first united
with frail and feeble bodies, He might place in the midst between good
and evil, that He might set virtue before them composed as they were of
both natures; that they might not attain to immortality by a delicate
and easy course of life, but might arrive at that unspeakable reward of
eternal life with the utmost difficulty and great labours. Therefore,
that He might clothe them with limbs which were heavy and liable to
injury, <span id="fr_1316"></span>[1317](#fn_1316.md) since they were
unable to exist in the middle void, the weight and gravity of the body
sinking downwards, He determined that an abode and dwelling-place should
first be built for them. And thus with unspeakable energy and power He
contrived the surpassing works of the world; and having suspended the
light elements on high, and depressed the heavy ones to the depths
below, He strengthened the heavenly things, and established the earthly.
It is not necessary at present to follow out each point separately,
since we discussed them all together in the second book.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p8"></span>Therefore He placed in the heaven
lights, whose regularity, and brightness, and motion, were most suitably
proportioned to the advantage of living beings. Moreover, He gave to the
earth, which He designed as their dwelling-place, fruitfulness for
bringing forth and producing various <span
id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317.md) things, that by the abundance of
fruits and green herbs it might supply nourishment according to the
nature and requirements of each kind. Then, when He had completed all
things which belonged to the condition of the world, He formed man from
the earth itself, which He prepared for him from the beginning as a
habitation; that is, He clothed and covered his spirit with an earthly
body, that, being compacted of different and opposing materials, he
might be susceptible of good and evil; and as the earth itself is
fruitful for the bringing forth of grain, so the body of man, which was
taken from the earth, received the power of producing offspring, that,
inasmuch as he was formed of a fragile substance, and could not exist
for ever, when the space of his temporal life was past, he might depart,
and by a perpetual succession renew that which he bore, which was frail
and feeble. Why, then, did He make him frail and mortal, when He had
built the world for his sake? First of all, that an infinite number of
living beings might be produced, and that He might fill all the earth
with a multitude; in the next place, that He might set before man
virtue, that is, endurance of evils and labours, by which he might be
able to gain the reward of immortality. For since man consists of two
parts, body and soul, of which the one is earthly, the other heavenly,
two lives have been assigned to man: the one temporal, which is
appointed for the body; the other everlasting, which belongs to the
soul. We received the former at our birth we attain to the latter by
striving, that immortality might not exist to man without any
difficulty. That earthly one is as the body, and therefore has an end;
but this heavenly one is as the soul, and therefore has no limit. We
received the first when we were ignorant of it, this second knowingly;
for it is given to virtue, not to nature, because God wished that we
should procure life for ourselves in life.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p10"></span>For this reason He has given us this
present life, that we may either lose that true and eternal life by our
vices, or win it <span id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318.md) by virtue.
The chief good is not contained in this bodily life, since, as it was
given to us by divine necessity, so it will again be destroyed by divine
necessity. Thus that which has an end does not contain the chief good.
But the chief good is contained in that spiritual life which we acquire
by ourselves, because it cannot contain evil, or have <span
id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span id="iii.ii.vii.v-Page_201"></span>an
end; to which subject nature and the system of the body afford an
argument. For other animals incline towards the ground, because they are
earthly, and are incapable of immortality, which is from heaven; but man
is upright and looks towards heaven, <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319.md) because immortality is proposed to
him; which, however, does not come, unless it is given to man by God.
For <span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p23.1"></span>otherwise there would be no
difference between the just and the unjust, since every man who is born
would become immortal. Immortality, then, is not the consequence <span
id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320.md) of nature, but the reward and
recompense of virtue. Lastly, man does not immediately upon his birth
walk upright, but at first on all fours, <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[1322](#fn_1321.md) because the nature of his body and
of this present life is common to us with the dumb animals; afterwards,
when his strength is confirmed, he raises himself, and his tongue is
loosened so that he speaks plainly, and he ceases to be a dumb animal.
And this argument teaches that man is born mortal; but that he
afterwards becomes immortal, when he begins to live in conformity with
the will <span id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322.md) of God, that is, to
follow righteousness, <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323.md) which
is comprised in the worship of God, since God raised man to a view of
the heaven and of Himself. And this takes place when man, purified in
the heavenly laver, lays aside <span
id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324.md) his infancy together with all the
pollution of his past life, and having received an increase of divine
vigour, becomes a perfect and complete man.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p29"></span>Therefore, because God has set forth
virtue before man, although the soul and the body are connected
together, yet they are contrary, and oppose one another. The things
which are good for the soul are evil to the body, that is, the avoiding
of riches, the prohibiting of pleasures, the contempt of pain and death.
In like manner, the things which are good for the body are evil to the
soul, that is, desire and lust, by which riches are desired, and the
enjoyments of various pleasures, by which the soul is weakened and
destroyed. <span id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325.md) Therefore it is
necessary, that the just and wise man should be engaged in all evils,
since fortitude is victorious over evils; but the unjust in riches, in
honours, in power. For these goods relate to the body, and are earthly;
and these men also lead an earthly life, nor are they able to attain to
immortality, because they have given themselves up to pleasures which
are the enemies of virtue. Therefore this temporal life ought to be
subject to that eternal life, as the body is to the soul. Whoever, then,
prefers the life of the soul must despise the life of the body; nor will
he in any other way be able to strive after that which is highest,
unless he shall have despised the things which are lowest. But he who
shall have embraced the life of the body, and shall have turned his
desires downwards <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326.md) to the
earth, is unable to attain to that higher life. But he who prefers to
live well for eternity, will live badly <span
id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327.md) for a time, and will be subjected
to all troubles and labours as long as he shall be on earth, that he may
have divine and heavenly consolation. And he who shall prefer to live
well <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328.md) for a time, will live
ill to eternity; for he will be condemned by the sentence of God to
eternal punishment, because he has preferred earthly to heavenly goods.
On this account, therefore, God seeks to be worshipped, and to be
honoured by man as a Father, that he may have virtue and wisdom, which
alone produce immortality. For because no other but Himself is able to
confer that immortality, since He alone possesses it, He will
grant <span id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329.md) to the piety of the
man, with which he has honoured God, this reward, to be blessed to all
eternity, and to be for ever in the presence of God and in the society
of God.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p35"></span><span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p35.1"></span>N.B.—The following paragraphs to the end
of the chapter are wanting many <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p35.2"></span>mss.<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p35.3"></span>, and it is very doubtful whether they
were written by Lactantius.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p36"></span>Nor can any one shelter himself under
the pretext that the fault belongs to Him who made both good and evil.
For why did He will that evil should exist if He hated it? Why did He
not make good only, that no one might sin, no one commit evil? Although
I have explained this in almost all the former books, and have touched
upon it, though slightly, above, yet it must be mentioned repeatedly,
because the whole matter turns on this point. For there could be no
virtue unless He had made contrary things; nor can the power of good be
at all manifest, except from a comparison with evil. Thus evil is
nothing else but the explanation of good. Therefore if evil is taken
away, good must also be taken away. If you shall cut off <span
id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span id="iii.ii.vii.v-Page_202"></span>your
left hand or foot, your body will not be entire, nor will life itself
remain the same. Thus, for the due adjustment of the framework of the
body, the left members are most suitably joined with the right. In like
manner, if you make chessmen <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330.md)
all alike, no one will play. If you shall give one colour <span
id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331.md) only to the circus, no one will
think it worth while to be a spectator, all the pleasure of the
Circensian games being taken away. For he who first instituted the games
was a favourer of one colour; but he introduced another as a rival, that
there might be a contest, and some partisanship <span
id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332.md) in the spectacle. Thus God, when He
was fixing that which was good, and giving virtue, appointed also their
contraries, with which they might contend. If an enemy and a fight be
wanting, there is no victory. Take away a contest, and even virtue is
nothing. How many are the mutual contests of men, and with what various
arts are they carried on! No one, however, would be regarded as
surpassing in bravery, swiftness, or excellence, if he bad no adversary
with whom he might contend. And where victory is wanting, there also
glory and the reward of victory must be absent together with it.
Therefore, that he might strengthen virtue itself by continual exercise,
and might make it perfect from its conflict with evils, He gave both
together, because each of the two without the other is unable to retain
its force. Therefore there is diversity, on which the whole system of
truth depends.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p40"></span>It does not escape my notice what may
here be urged in opposition by more skilful persons. If good cannot
exist without evil, how do you say that, before he had offended God, the
first man lived in the exercise of good only, or that he will hereafter
live in the exercise of good only? This question is to be examined by
us, for in the former books I omitted it, that I might here fill up the
subject. We have said above that the nature of man is made up of
opposing elements; for the body, because it is earth, is capable of
being grasped, of temporary duration, senseless, and dark. But the soul,
because it is from heaven, is unsubstantial, <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333.md) everlasting, endued with
sensibility, and full of lustre; <span
id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334.md) and because these qualities are
opposed to one another, it follows of necessity that man is subject to
good and evil. Good is ascribed to the soul, because it is incapable of
dissolution; evil to the body, because it is frail. Since, therefore,
the body and the soul are connected and united together, the good and
the evil must necessarily hold together; nor can they be separated from
one another, unless when they (the body and soul) are separated.
Finally, the knowledge of good and of evil was given at the same time to
the first man; and when he understood this, he was immediately driven
from the holy place in which there is no evil; for when he was
conversant with that which was good only, he was ignorant that this
itself was good. But after that he had received the knowledge of good
and evil, it was now unlawful for him to remain in that place of
happiness, and he was banished to this common world, that he might at
once experience both of those things with the nature of which he had at
once become acquainted. It is plain, therefore, that wisdom has been
given to man that he may distinguish good from evil—that he may
discriminate between things advantageous and things disadvantageous,
between things useful and things useless—that he may have judgment and
consideration as to what he ought to guard against, what to desire, what
to avoid, and what to follow. Wisdom therefore cannot exist without
evil; and that first author <span id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335.md)
of the human race, as long as he was conversant with good only, lived as
an infant, ignorant of good and evil. But, indeed, hereafter man must be
both wise and happy without any evil; but this cannot take place as long
as the soul is clothed with the abode of the body.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p44"></span>But when a separation shall have been
made between the body and the soul, then evil will be disunited from
good; and as the body perishes and the soul remains, so evil will perish
and good be permanent. Then man, having received the garment of
immortality, will be wise and free from evil, as God is. He, therefore,
who wishes that we should be conversant with good only, especially
desires this, that we should live without the body, in which evil is.
But if evil is taken away, either wisdom, as I have said, or the body,
will be taken from man; wisdom, that he may be ignorant of evil; the
body, that he may not be sensible of it. But now, since man is furnished
with wisdom to know, and a body to perceive, God willed that both should
exist alike in this life, that virtue and wisdom may be in agreement.
Therefore He placed man in the midst, between both, that he might have
liberty to follow either good or evil. But He mingled with evil some
things which appear good, that is, various and delightful enjoyments,
that by the <span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-Page_203"></span>enticements of these He might lead men
to the concealed evil. And He likewise mingled with good some things
which appear evil—that is, hardships, and miseries, and labours—by the
harshness and unpleasantness of which the soul, being offended, might
shrink back from the concealed good. But here the office of wisdom is
needed, that we may see more with the mind than with the body, which
very few are able to do; because while virtue is difficult and rarely to
be found, pleasure is common and public. Thus it necessarily happens
that the wise man is accounted as a fool, who, while he seeks good
things which are not seen, permits those which are seen to slip from his
hands; and while he avoids evils which are not seen, runs into evils
which are before the eyes; which happens to us when we refuse neither
torture nor death in behalf of the faith, since we are driven to the
greatest wickedness, so as to betray the faith and deny the true God,
and to sacrifice to dead and death-bearing gods. This is the cause why
God made man mortal, and made him subject to evils, although he had
framed the world for his sake, namely, that he might be capable of
virtue, and that his virtue might reward him with immortality. Now
virtue, as we have shown, is the worship of the true God.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[199:1313](0070169.htm#fr_1312.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p2.1"></span>Illis non quadrare rationem.  

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[199:1314](0070169.htm#fr_1313.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p3.1"></span>Sacramentum.  

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[199:1315](0070169.htm#fr_1314.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p4.1"></span>De transverso jugulasset. The Academics,
affirming that nothing was certain, opposed the tenets of the other
philosophers, who maintained their own opinions respectively.  

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[199:1316](0070169.htm#fr_1315.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p5"></span> \[The law of his being is stated in
<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p5.1"></span>Bacon’s words: “Homo naturæ <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p5.2"></span>minister et interpres,” <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p5.3"></span>Nov. Org., i. 1. It is his duty to
comprehend what he expounds, and to lend his voice to nature in the
worship of God. See the <span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p5.4"></span>Benedicite,
or “Song of the Three Children,” in the apocryphal Bible.\]  

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[200:1317](0070169.htm#fr_1316.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p7.1"></span>Vexabilibus.  

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[200:1318](0070169.htm#fr_1317.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p9.1"></span>Varia. Others read, “<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p9.2"></span>fæcunditatem variam generandi.”  

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[200:1319](0070169.htm#fr_1318.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p11.1"></span>Mereamur.  

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[201:1320](0070169.htm#fr_1319.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p12"></span> \[Our author never wearies of this
reference to <span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p12.1"></span>Ovid’s beautiful
verses. Compare <span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p12.2"></span>Cowper (<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p12.3"></span>Task, book v.) as follows:—  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p13"></span>“Brutes graze the mountain-top with
faces prone  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p14"></span>And eyes intent upon the scanty herb
 

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p15"></span>It yields them; or, recumbent on its
brow,  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p16"></span>Ruminate heedless of the scene
outspread  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p17"></span>Beneath, beyond, and stretching far
away  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p18"></span>From inland regions to the distant
main.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p19"></span>Not so the mind that has been touched
from heaven.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p20"></span>. . . She often holds,  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p21"></span>With those fair ministers of light to
man  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p22"></span>That nightly fill the skies with
silent pomp,  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p23"></span>Sweet conference,” etc.\]  

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[201:1321](0070169.htm#fr_1320.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p24"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p24.1"></span>Sequela.  

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[201:1322](0070169.htm#fr_1321.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p25"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p25.1"></span>Quadrupes.  

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[201:1323](0070169.htm#fr_1322.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p26"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p26.1"></span>Ex Deo.  

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[201:1324](0070169.htm#fr_1323.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27.1"></span>Justitiam sequi. I have substituted <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27.2"></span>righteousness for the translator’s <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27.3"></span>justice here (see c. 25, p. 126, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27.4"></span>supra). Coleridge remarks on the weakness
of the latter word. It may be, our author is quoting St. Paul ([1 Tim.
vi. 11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27.5"></span> and [2 Tim.
ii.](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27.6"></span>), <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27.7"></span>sectare justitiam, “follow after
righteousness.”\]  

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[201:1325](0070169.htm#fr_1324.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p27.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p28"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p28.1"></span>Exponit.  

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[201:1326](0070169.htm#fr_1325.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p30"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p30.1"></span>Enervatus exstinguitur.  

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[201:1327](0070169.htm#fr_1326.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p31"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p31.1"></span>In terram dejecerit.  

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[201:1328](0070169.htm#fr_1327.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p32"></span> i.e., “in discomfort,” liable to the
evils of this life.  

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[201:1329](0070169.htm#fr_1328.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p33"></span> i.e., in comfort and luxury. On the
whole passage see [John xii. 25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p33.1"></span>: “He that loveth his life shall lose it;
and he that hateth his life in this world, shall keep it unto life
eternal.”  

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[201:1330](0070169.htm#fr_1329.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p34"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p34.1"></span>Afficiet. Others read “<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p34.2"></span>afficit.”  

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[202:1331](0070169.htm#fr_1330.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p37"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p37.1"></span>Calculi, called also “<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p37.2"></span>latrunculi.” There were two sets, the one
white, the other red or black.  

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[202:1332](0070169.htm#fr_1331.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p38"></span> The chariot-drivers in the contests
of the circus were distinguished by different colours. Originally there
were but two factions or parties, the white and the red; afterwards they
were increased to four, the green and the azure being added. <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p38.1"></span>Domitian increased the number to six, but
this was not in accordance with the usual practise.  

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[202:1333](0070169.htm#fr_1332.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.1"></span>Gratia. Thus <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.2"></span>Pliny, “<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.3"></span>Tanta<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.4"></span> gratia, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.5"></span>tanta<span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.6"></span> auctoritas in unâ vilissimâ tunicâ.” Cf.
<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.7"></span>Juv., <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.8"></span>Sat., xi. 195. <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p39.9"></span>Gibbon thus describes the scene: “The
spectators remained in eager attention, their eyes fixed on the
charioteers, their minds agitated with hope and fear for the success of
the colour which they favoured.”  

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[202:1334](0070169.htm#fr_1333.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p41"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p41.1"></span>Tenuis.  

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[202:1335](0070169.htm#fr_1334.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p42"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p42.1"></span>Illustris.  

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[202:1336](0070169.htm#fr_1335.md) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.v-p43"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.v-p43.1"></span>Princeps.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VI.—Why the world and man were created. How unprofitable is
the worship of false gods](0070170.md)
