[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070230)  [Next](0070232) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p0.1"></span>Chap. XLIII.—Of the Name of Jesus Christ, and His Twofold Nativity.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p1"></span>But lest by any chance there
should be any doubt in your mind why we call Him <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Jesus Christ, who was born of God
before the world, and who was born of man three hundred years ago, I
will briefly explain to you the reason. The same person is the son of
God and of man. For He was twice born: first of God, in the spirit,
before the origin of the world; afterwards in the flesh of man, in the
reign of <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p1.2"></span>Augustus; and in
connection with this fact is an illustrious and great mystery, in which
is contained both the salvation of men and the religion of the Supreme
God, and all truth. For when first the accursed and impious worship of
gods crept in through the treachery of the demons, then the religion of
God remained with the Hebrews alone, who, not by any law, but after the
manner of their fathers, observed the worship handed down to them by
successive generations, <span id="fr_1517"></span>[1518](#fn_1517) even
until the time when they went forth out of Egypt under the leadership of
<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p2.2"></span>Moses, the first of all the
prophets, through whom the law was given to them from God; and they were
afterwards called Jews. Therefore they served God, being bound by the
chains of the law. But they also, by degrees going astray to profane
rites, undertook the worship of strange gods, and, leaving the worship
of their father, sacrificed to senseless images. Therefore God sent to
them prophets filled with the Divine Spirit, to upbraid them with their
sins and proclaim repentance, to threaten them with the vengeance which
would follow, and announce that it would come to pass, if they persisted
in the same faults, that He would send another as the bearer of a new
law; and having removed the ungrateful people from their inheritance, He
would assemble to Himself a more faithful people from foreign nations.
But they not only persisted in their course, but even slew the
messengers themselves. Therefore He condemned them on account of these
deeds: nor did He any longer send messengers to a stubborn people; but
He sent His own Son, to call all nations to the favour of God. Nor,
however, did He shut them out, impious and ungrateful as they were, from
the hope of salvation: but He sent Him to them before all others, <span
id="fr_1518"></span>[1519](#fn_1518) that if they should by chance obey,
they might not lose that which they had received; but if they should
refuse to receive their God, then, the heirs being removed, <span
id="fr_1519"></span>[1520](#fn_1519) the Gentiles would come into
possession. Therefore the supreme Father ordered Him to descend to the
earth, and to put on a human body, that, being subject to the sufferings
of the flesh, He might teach virtue and patience not only by words, but
also by deeds. Therefore He was born a second time as man, of a virgin,
without a father, that, as in His first spiritual birth, being born of
God alone, He was made a sacred spirit, so in His second and fleshly
birth, being born of a mother only, He might become holy flesh, that
through Him the flesh, which had become subject to sin, might be freed
from destruction.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[239:1518](0070231.htm#fr_1517) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>Per successiones.  

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[239:1519](0070231.htm#fr_1518) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>Potissimum.  

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[239:1520](0070231.htm#fr_1519) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>Hæredibus abdicatis.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XLIV.—The twofold nativity of Christ is proved from the
prophets](0070232)
