[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070016)  [Next](0070018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p0.1"></span>Chap. xi.—of the origin, life, reign, name and death of jupiter, and of saturn and uranus. <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md)

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2"></span>Who, then, is so senseless as to
imagine that he reigns in heaven who ought not even to have reigned on
earth? It was not without humour that a certain poet wrote of the
triumph of <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.1"></span>Cupid: in which book he
not only represented <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.2"></span>Cupid as the
most powerful of the gods, but also as their conqueror. For having
enumerated the loves of each, by which they had come into the power and
dominion of <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.3"></span>Cupid, he sets in array
a procession, in which <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.4"></span>Jupiter, with
the other gods, is led in chains before the chariot of him, celebrating
a triumph. This is elegantly pictured by the poet, but it is not far
removed from the truth. For he who is without virtue, who is overpowered
by desire and wicked lusts, is not, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.5"></span>as the poet feigned, in subjection to
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.6"></span>Cupid, but to everlasting death. But
let us cease to speak concerning morals; let us examine the matter, in
order that men may understand in what errors they are miserably engaged.
The common people imagine that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.7"></span>Jupiter reigns in heaven; both learned and
unlearned are alike persuaded of this. For both religion itself, and
prayers, and hymns, and shrines, and images demonstrate this. And yet
they admit that he was also descended from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.8"></span>Saturn and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.9"></span>Rhea. How can he appear a god, or be
believed, as the poet says, to be the author of men and all things, when
innumerable thousands of men existed before his birth—those, for
instance, who lived during the reign of Saturn, and enjoyed the light
sooner than <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.10"></span>Jupiter? I see that one
god was king in the earliest times, and another in the times that
followed. It is therefore possible that there may be another hereafter.
For if the former kingdom was changed, why should we not expect that the
latter may possibly be changed, unless by chance it was possible for
Saturn to produce one more powerful than himself, but impossible for
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p2.11"></span>Jupiter so to do? And yet the
divine government is always unchangeable; or if it is changeable, which
is an impossibility, it is undoubtedly changeable at all times.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3"></span>Is it possible, then, for <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3.1"></span>Jupiter to lose his kingdom as his father
lost it? It is so undoubtedly. For when that deity had spared neither
virgins nor married women, he abstained from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3.2"></span>Thetis only in consequence of an oracle
which foretold that whatever son should be born from her would be
greater than his father. And first of all there was in him a want of
foreknowledge not befitting a god; for had not <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3.3"></span>Themis related to him future events, he
would not have known them of his own accord. But if he is not divine, he
is not indeed a god; for the name of divinity is derived from god, as
humanity is from man. Then there was a consciousness of weakness; but he
who has feared, must plainly have feared one greater than himself. But
he who does this assuredly knows that he is not the greatest, since
something greater can exist. He also swears most solemnly by the Stygian
marsh: “Which is set forth the sole object of religious dread to the
gods above.” What is this object of religious dread? Or by whom is it
set forth? <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-Page_21"></span>Is there, then, some mighty power which
may punish the gods who commit perjury? What is this great dread of the
infernal marsh, if they are immortal? Why should they fear that which
none are about to see, except those who are bound by the necessity of
death? Why, then, do men raise their eyes to the heaven? Why do they
swear by the gods above, when the gods above themselves have recourse to
the infernal gods, and find among them an object of veneration and
worship? But what is the meaning of that saying, that there are fates
whom all the gods and <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3.4"></span>Jupiter
himself obey? If the power of the Parcæ is so great, that they are of
more avail than all the heavenly gods, and their ruler and lord himself,
why should not they be rather said to reign, since necessity compels all
the gods to obey their laws and ordinances? Now, who can entertain a
doubt that he who is subservient to anything cannot be greatest? For if
he were so, he would not receive fates, but would appoint them. Now I
return to another subject which I had omitted. In the case of one
goddess only he exercised self-restraint, though he was deeply enamoured
of her; but this was not from any virtue, but through fear of a
successor. But this fear plainly denotes one who is both mortal and
feeble, and of no weight: for at the very hour of his birth he might
have been put to death, as his elder brother had been put to death; and
if it had been possible for him to have lived, he would never have given
up the supreme power to a younger brother. But <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3.5"></span>Jupiter himself having been preserved by
stealth, and stealthily nourished, was called <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3.6"></span>Zeus, or <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3.7"></span>Zen, <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md)
not, as they imagine, from the fervor of heavenly fire, or because he is
the giver of life, or because he breathes life into living creatures,
which power belongs to God alone; for how can he impart the breath of
life who has himself received it from another source? But he was so
called because he was the first who lived of the male children of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.8"></span>Saturn. Men, therefore, might have had
another god as their ruler, if Saturn had not been deceived by his wife.
But it will be said the poets feigned these things. Whoever entertains
this opinion is in error. For they spoke respecting men; but in order
that they might embellish those whose memory they used to celebrate with
praises, they said that they were gods. Those things, therefore, which
they spoke concerning them as gods were feigned, and not those which
they spoke concerning them as men; and this will be manifest from an
instance which we will bring forward. When about to offer violence to
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.9"></span>Danae, he poured into her lap a
great quantity of golden coins. This was the price which he paid for her
dishonour. But the poets who spoke about him as a god, that they might
not weaken the authority of his supposed majesty, feigned that he
himself descended in a shower of gold, making use of the same figure
with which they speak of showers of iron when they describe a multitude
of darts and arrows. He is said to have carried away <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.10"></span>Ganymede by an eagle; it is a picture of
the poets. But he either carried him off by a legion, which has an eagle
for its standard; or the ship on board of which he was placed had its
tutelary deity in the shape of an eagle, just as it had the effigy of a
bull when he seized <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.11"></span>Europa and
conveyed her across the sea. In the same manner, it is related that he
changed <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.12"></span>Io, the daughter of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.13"></span>Inachus, into a heifer. And in order that
she might escape the anger of <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.14"></span>Juno,
just as she was, now covered with bristly hair, and in the shape of a
heifer, she is said to have swam over the sea, and to have come into
Egypt; and there, having recovered her former appearance, she became the
goddess who is now called <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.15"></span>Isis. By
what argument, then, can it be proved that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.16"></span>Europa did not sit on the bull, and that
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.17"></span>Io was not changed into a heifer?
Because there is a fixed day in the annals on which the voyage of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.18"></span>Isis is celebrated; from which fact we
learn that she did not swim across the sea, but sailed over. Therefore
they who appear to themselves to be wise because they understand that
there cannot be a living and earthly body in heaven, reject the whole
story of <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.19"></span>Ganymede as false, and
perceive that the occurrence took place on earth, inasmuch as the matter
and the lust itself is earthly. The poets did not therefore invent these
transactions, for if they were to do so they would be most worthless;
but they added a certain colour to the transactions. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) For it was not for the purpose of
detraction that they said these things, but from a desire to embellish
them. Hence men are deceived; especially because, while they think that
all these things are feigned by the poets, they worship that of which
they are ignorant. For they do not know what is the limit of poetic
licence, how far it is allowable to proceed in fiction, since it is the
business of the poet with some gracefulness to change and transfer
actual occurrences into other representations by oblique
transformations. But to feign the whole of that which you relate, that
is to be foolish and deceitful rather than to be a poet.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6"></span>But grant that they feigned those
things which are believed to be fabulous, did they also feign those
things which are related about the female deities and the marriages of
the gods? Why, then, are they so represented, and so worshipped? unless
by chance not the poets only, but painters also, and statuaries, speak
falsehoods. For if <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-Page_22"></span>this is the <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.1"></span>Jupiter who is called by you a god, if it
is not he who was born from <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.2"></span>Saturn
and <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.3"></span>Ops, no other image but his
alone ought to have been placed in all the temples. What meaning have
the effigies of women? What the doubtful sex? in which, if this <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.4"></span>Jupiter is represented, the very stones
will confess that he is a man. They say that the poets have spoken
falsely, and yet they believe them: yes, truly they prove by the fact
itself that the poets did not speak falsely; for they so frame the
images of the gods, that, from the very diversity of sex, it appears
that these things which the poets say are true. For what other
conclusion does the image of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.5"></span>Ganymede and the effigy of the eagle admit
of, when they are placed before the feet of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.6"></span>Jupiter in the temples, and are worshipped
equally with himself, except that the memory of impious guilt and
debauchery remains for ever? Nothing, therefore, is wholly invented by
the poets: something perhaps is transferred and obscured by oblique
fashioning, under which the truth was enwrapped and concealed; as that
which was related about the dividing of the kingdoms by lot. For they
say that the heaven fell to the share of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.7"></span>Jupiter, the sea to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.8"></span>Neptune, and the infernal regions to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.9"></span>Pluto. Why was not the earth rather taken
as the third portion, except that the transaction took place on the
earth? Therefore it is true that they so divided and portioned out the
government of the world, that the empire of the east fell to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.10"></span>Jupiter, a part of the west was allotted
to <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.11"></span>Pluto, who had the surname of
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.12"></span>Agesilaus; because the region of
the east, from which light is given to mortals, seems to be higher, but
the region of the west lower. Thus they so veiled the truth under a
fiction, that the truth itself detracted nothing from the public
persuasion. It is manifest concerning the share of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.13"></span>Neptune; for we say that his kingdom
resembled that unlimited authority possessed by <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.14"></span>Mark Antony, to whom the senate had
decreed the power of the maritime coast, that he might punish the
pirates, and tranquillize the whole sea. Thus all the maritime coasts,
together with the islands, fell to the lot of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.15"></span>Neptune. How can this be proved?
Undoubtedly ancient stories attest it. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.16"></span>Euhemerus, an ancient author, who was of
the city of Messene, collected the actions of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.17"></span>Jupiter and of the others, who are
esteemed gods, and composed a history from the titles and sacred
inscriptions which were in the most ancient temples, and especially in
the sanctuary of the <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.18"></span>Triphylian
Jupiter, where an inscription indicated that a golden column had been
placed by <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.19"></span>Jupiter himself, on which
column he wrote an account of his exploits, that posterity might have a
memorial of his actions. This history was translated and followed by
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.20"></span>Ennius, whose words are these:
“Where <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.21"></span>Jupiter gives to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p6.22"></span>Neptune the government of the sea, that
he might reign in all the islands and places bordering on the sea.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7"></span>The accounts of the poets, therefore,
are true, but veiled with an outward covering and show. It is possible
that Mount Olympus may have supplied the poets with the hint for saying
that <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.1"></span>Jupiter obtained the kingdom of
heaven, because Olympus is the common name both of the mountain and of
heaven. But the same history informs us that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.2"></span>Jupiter dwelt on Mount Olympus, when it
says: “At that time <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.3"></span>Jupiter spent
the greatest part of his life on Mount Olympus; and they used to resort
to him thither for <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.4"></span>the
administration of justice, if any matters were disputed. Moreover, if
any one had found out any new invention which might be useful for human
life, he used to come thither and display it to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.5"></span>Jupiter.” The poets transfer many things
after this manner, not for the sake of speaking falsely against the
objects of their worship, but that they may by variously coloured
figures add beauty and grace to their poems. But they who do not
understand the manner, or the cause, or the nature of that which is
represented by figure, attack the poets as false and sacrilegious. Even
the philosophers were deceived by this error; for because these things
which are related about <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.6"></span>Jupiter
appeared unsuited to the character of a god, they introduced two
Jupiters, one natural, the other fabulous. They saw, on the one hand,
that which was true, that he, forsooth, concerning whom the poets speak,
was man; but in the case of that natural <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.7"></span>Jupiter, led by the common practise of
superstition, they committed an error, inasmuch as they transferred the
name of a man to God, who, as we have already said, because He is one
only, has no need of a name. But it is undeniable that he is <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.8"></span>Jupiter who was born from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.9"></span>Ops and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.10"></span>Saturn. It is therefore an empty
persuasion on the part of those who give the name of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.11"></span>Jupiter to the Supreme God. For some are
in the habit of defending their errors by this excuse; for, when
convinced of the unity of God, since they cannot deny this, they affirm
that they worship Him, but that it is their pleasure that He should be
called <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.12"></span>Jupiter. But what can be
more absurd than this? For <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.13"></span>Jupiter
is not accustomed to be worshipped without the accompanying worship of
his wife and daughter. From which his real nature is evident; nor is it
lawful for that name to be transferred thither, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) where there is neither any <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p8.1"></span>Minerva nor <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p8.2"></span>Juno. Why should I say that the peculiar
meaning of this name does not express a divine, but human power? For
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p8.3"></span>Cicero explains the names <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p8.4"></span>Jupiter and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p8.5"></span>Juno as being derived from giving
help; <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p9.2"></span>Jupiter is so called as if he were a
helping father,—a name which is ill adapted to God: <span
id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-Page_23"></span>for to
help is the part of a man conferring some aid upon one who is a
stranger, and in a case where the benefit is small. No one implores God
to help him, but to preserve him, to give him life and safety, which is
a much greater and more important matter than to help.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p10"></span>And since we are speaking of a
father, no father is said to help his sons when he begets or brings them
up. For that expression is too insignificant to denote the magnitude of
the benefit derived from a father. How much more unsuitable is it to
God, who is our true Father, by whom we exist, and whose we are
altogether, by whom we are formed, endued with life, and enlightened,
who bestows upon us life, gives us safety, and supplies us with various
kinds of food! He has no apprehension of the divine benefits who thinks
that he is only aided by God. Therefore he is not only ignorant, but
impious, who disparages the excellency of the supreme power under the
name of <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p10.1"></span>Jupiter. Wherefore, if both
from his actions and character we have proved that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p10.2"></span>Jupiter was a man, and reigned on earth,
it only remains that we should also investigate his death. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p10.3"></span>Ennius, in his sacred history, having
described all the actions which he performed in his life, at the close
thus speaks: Then <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p10.4"></span>Jupiter, when he
had five times made a circuit of the earth, and bestowed governments
upon all his friends and relatives, and left laws to men, provided them
with a settled mode of life and corn, and given them many other
benefits, and having been honoured with immortal glory and remembrance,
left lasting memorials to his friends, and when his age <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) was almost spent, he changed <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) his life in Crete, and departed to the
gods. And the Curetes, his sons, took charge of him, and honoured him;
and his tomb is in Crete, in the town of Cnossus, and Vesta is said to
have founded this city; and on his tomb is an inscription in ancient
Greek characters, “Zan Kronou,” which is in Latin, “<span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p12.1"></span>Jupiter the son of Saturn.” This
undoubtedly is not handed down by poets, but by writers of ancient
events; and these things are so true, that they are confirmed by some
verses of the <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p12.2"></span>Sibyls, to this
effect:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p12.3"></span> “Inanimate demons, images of the
> dead,  
> Whose tombs the ill-fated Crete possesses as a boast.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p13"></span><span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p13.1"></span>Cicero, in his treatise concerning the
Nature of the Gods, having said that three Jupiters were enumerated by
theologians, adds that the third was of Crete, the son of Saturn, and
that his tomb is shown in that island. How, therefore, can a god be
alive in one place, and dead in another; in one place have a temple, and
in another a tomb? Let the Romans then know that their Capitol, that is
the chief head of their objects of public veneration, is nothing but an
empty monument.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p14"></span>Let us now come to his father who
reigned before him, and who perhaps had more power in himself, because
he is said to be born from the meeting of such great elements. Let us
see what there was in him worthy of a god, especially that he is related
to have had the golden age, because in his reign there was justice in
the earth. I find something in him which was not in his son. For what is
so befitting the character of a god, as a just government and an age of
piety? But when, on the same principle, I reflect that he is a son, I
cannot consider him as the Supreme God; for I see that there is
something more ancient than himself,—namely, the heaven and the earth.
But I am in search of a God beyond whom nothing has any existence, who
is the source and origin of all things. He must of necessity exist who
framed the heaven itself, and laid the foundations of the earth. But if
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p14.1"></span>Saturn was born from these, as it
is supposed, how can he be the chief God, since he owes his origin to
another? Or who presided over the universe before the birth of Saturn?
But this, as I recently said, is a fiction of the poets. For it was
impossible that the senseless elements, which are separated by so long
an interval, should meet together and give birth to a son, or that he
who was born should not at all resemble his parents, but should have a
form which his parents did not possess.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p15"></span>Let us therefore inquire what degree
of truth lies hid under this figure. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p15.1"></span>Minucius Felix, in his treatise which has
the title of <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p15.2"></span>Octavius, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) alleged these proofs: “That <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.2"></span>Saturn, when he had been banished by his
son, and had come into Italy, was called the son of Cœlus (heaven),
because we are accustomed to say that those whose virtue we admire, or
those who have unexpectedly arrived, have fallen from heaven; and that
he was called the son of earth, because we name those who are born from
unknown parents sons of earth.” These things, indeed, have some
resemblance to the truth, but are not true, because it is evident that
even during his reign he was so esteemed. He might have argued thus:
That Saturn, being a very powerful king, in order that the memory of his
parents might be preserved, gave their names to the heaven and earth,
whereas these were before called by other names, for which reason we
know that names were applied both to mountains and rivers. For when the
poets speak of the offspring of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.3"></span>Atlas, or of the river Inachus, they do
not absolutely say that men could possibly be born from inanimate
objects; but they undoubtedly indicate those who were born from those
men, who either during their lives or after their death gave their <span
id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-Page_24"></span>names
to mountains or rivers. For that was a common practise among the
ancients, and especially among the Greeks. Thus we have heard that seas
received the names of those who had fallen into them, as the Ægean, the
Icarian, and the Hellespont. In Latium, also, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.4"></span>Aventinus gave his name to the mountain
on which he was buried; and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.5"></span>Tiberinus, or Tiber, gave his name to the
river in which he was drowned. No wonder, then, if the names of those
who had given birth to most powerful kings were attributed to the heaven
and earth. Therefore it appears that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.6"></span>Saturn was not born from heaven, which is
impossible, but from that man who bore the name of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.7"></span>Uranus. And <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.8"></span>Trismegistus attests the truth of this;
for when he said that very few had existed in whom there was perfect
learning, he mentioned by name among these his relatives, Uranus,
Saturn, and <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.9"></span>Mercury. And because he
was ignorant of these things, he gave another account of the matter; how
he might have argued, I have shown. Now I will say in what manner, at
what time, and by whom this was done; for it was not Saturn who did
this, but <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.10"></span>Jupiter. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.11"></span>Ennius thus relates in his sacred
history: “Then <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.12"></span>Pan leads him to
the mountain, which is called the pillar of heaven. Having ascended
thither, he surveyed the lands far and wide, and there on that mountain
he builds an altar to <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.13"></span>Cœlus; and
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.14"></span>Jupiter was the first who offered
sacrifice on that altar. In that place he looked up to heaven, by which
name we now call it, and that which was above the world which was called
the firmament, <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) and he gave to the
heaven its name from the name of his grandfather; and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p17.3"></span>Jupiter in prayer first gave the name of
heaven to that which was called firmament, <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) and he burnt entire the victim which he
there offered in sacrifice.” Nor is it here only that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18.3"></span>Jupiter is found to have offered
sacrifice. Cæsar also, in Aratus, relates that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18.4"></span>Aglaosthenes says that when he was
setting out from the island of Naxos against the Titans, and was
offering sacrifice on the shore, an eagle flew to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18.5"></span>Jupiter as an omen, and that the victor
received it as a good token, and placed it under his own protection. But
the sacred history testifies that even beforehand an eagle had sat upon
his head, and portended to him the kingdom. To whom, then, could <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18.6"></span>Jupiter have offered sacrifice, except to
his grandfather Cœlus, who, according to the saying of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18.7"></span>Euhemerus, <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) died in Oceania, and was buried in the
town of Aulatia?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[20:49](0070017.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p0.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p1"></span> \[Compare the remorseless satire of
<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p1.1"></span>Arnobius, vol. vi. p. 498.\]  

<span id="fn_49"></span>[21:50](0070017.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p3.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.1"></span>Ζευ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.2"></span>̀</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.3"></span>ς</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.4"></span>Ζη</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.5"></span>̑</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.6"></span>ν</span>. \[Quad sit auctor vitæ. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.7"></span>Delphin note.\]  

<span id="fn_50"></span>[21:51](0070017.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p4.20"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p5"></span> \[On the Poets, vol. i. cap. 2, p.
273.\]  

<span id="fn_51"></span>[22:52](0070017.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p7.14"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p8"></span> Eo, i.e., to those.  

<span id="fn_52"></span>[22:53](0070017.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p8.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p9"></span> Juvando. \[<span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p9.1"></span>Nat. Deor., iii. 25, 26.\]  

<span id="fn_53"></span>[23:54](0070017.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p11"></span> Ætate pessum acta. \[See plural
Joves, <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p11.1"></span>Nat. Deor., iii. 16.\]  

<span id="fn_54"></span>[23:55](0070017.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p12"></span> Commutavit; others read consummavit,
“he completed.”  

<span id="fn_55"></span>[23:56](0070017.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16"></span> \[Condensed from cap. xxii. See vol.
iv. p. 186, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_56"></span>[24:57](0070017.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p16.15"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p17"></span> Æther. \[Tayler Lewis, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p17.1"></span>Plato<span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p17.2"></span> cont. Ath., pp. 126–129.\]  

<span id="fn_57"></span>[24:58](0070017.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18"></span> Æther. \[Tayler Lewis, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18.1"></span>Plato<span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18.2"></span> cont. Ath., pp. 126–129.\]  

<span id="fn_58"></span>[24:59](0070017.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p18.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p19.1"></span>Euhemerus was a Sicilian author of the
age of <span id="iii.ii.i.xii-p19.2"></span>Alexander the Great. He
wrote a sacred history containing an account of the several gods who
were worshipped in Greece, whom he represents as having originally been
men who had distinguished themselves by their exploits, or benefits
conferred upon men, and who were therefore, after their death,
worshipped as gods. The Christian writers frequently refer to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p19.3"></span>Euhemerus as helping them to prove that
the pagan mythology consisted only of fables invented by men. See <span
id="iii.ii.i.xii-p19.4"></span>Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XII.—That the stoics transfer the figments of the poets to
a philosophical system](0070018.md)
