[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070154)  [Next](0070156) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVII.—Of the Affections and Their Use; Of Patience, and the Chief Good of Christians.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p1"></span>But I have been carried too far in
my desire of refuting them; since it is my purpose to show that those
things which the philosophers thought to be vices, are so far from being
vices, that they are even great virtues. Of others, I will take, for the
sake of instruction, those which I think to be most closely related to
the subject. They regard dread or fear as a very great vice, and think
that it is a very great weakness of mind; the opposite to which is
bravery: and if this exists in a man, they say that there is no place
for fear. Does any one then believe that it can possibly happen that
this same fear is the highest fortitude? By no means. For nature does
not appear to admit that anything should fall back to its contrary. But
yet I, not by any skilful conclusion, as <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>Socrates does in the writings of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p1.2"></span>Plato, who compels those against whom he
disputes to admit those things which they had denied, but in a simple
manner, will show that the greatest fear is the greatest virtue. No one
doubts but that it is the part of a timid and feeble mind either to fear
pain, or want, or exile, or imprisonment, or death; and if any one does
not dread all these, he is judged a man of the greatest fortitude. But
he who fears God is free from the fear of all these things. In proof of
which, there is no need of arguments: for the punishments inflicted on
the worshippers of God have been witnessed at all times, and are still
witnessed through the world, in the tormenting of whom new and unusual
tortures have been devised. For the mind shrinks from the recollection
of various kinds of death, when the butchery of savage monsters has
raged even beyond death itself. But a happy and unconquered patience
endured these execrable lacerations of their bodies without a groan.
This virtue afforded the greatest astonishment to all people and
provinces, and to the torturers themselves, when <span id="page_182">p.
182</span> <span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-Page_182"></span>cruelty was
overcome by patience. But this virtue was caused by nothing else than
the fear of God. Therefore (as I said) fear is not to be uprooted, as
the Stoics maintain, nor to be restrained, as the Peripatetics wish, but
to be directed into the right way; and apprehensions are to be taken
away, but so that this one only may be left: for since this is the only
lawful and true one, it alone effects that all other things may not be
feared. Desire also is reckoned among vices; but if it desires those
things which are of the earth, it is a vice; on the other hand, if it
desires heavenly things, it is a virtue. For he who desires to obtain
justice, God, perpetual life, everlasting light, and all those things
which God promises to man, will despise these riches, and honours, and
commands, and kingdoms themselves.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p2"></span>The Stoic will perhaps say that
inclination is necessary for the attainment of these things, and not
desire; but, in truth, the inclination is not sufficient. For many have
the inclination; but when pain has approached the vitals, inclination
gives way, but desire perseveres: and if it effects that all things
which are sought by others are objects of contempt to him, it is the
greatest virtue, since it is the mother of self-restraint. And therefore
we ought rather to effect this, that we may rightly direct the
affections, a corrupt use of which is vice. For these excitements of the
mind resemble a harnessed chariot, in the right management of which the
chief duty of the driver is to know the way; and if he shall keep to
this, with whatever swiftness he may go, he will not strike against an
obstacle. But if he shall wander from the course, although he may go
calmly and gently, he will either be shaken over rough places, or will
glide over precipices, or at any rate will be carried where he does not
need to go. So that chariot of life which is led by the affections as
though by swift horses, if it keeps the right way, will discharge its
duty. Dread, therefore, and desire, if they are cast down to the earth,
will become vices, but they will be virtues if they are referred to
divine things. On the other hand, they esteem parsimony as a virtue;
which, if it is eagerness for possessing, cannot be a virtue, because it
is altogether employed in the increase or preservation of earthly goods.
But we do not refer the chief good to the body, but we measure every
duty by the preservation of the soul only. But if, as I have before
taught, we must by no means spare our property that we may preserve
kindness and justice, it is not a virtue to be frugal; which name
beguiles and deceives under the appearance of virtue. For frugality is,
it is true, the abstaining from pleasures; but in this respect it is a
vice, because it arises from the love of possessing, whereas we ought
both to abstain from pleasures, and by no means to withhold money. For
to use money sparingly, that is, moderately, is a kind of weakness of
mind, either of one fearing lest he should be in want, or of one
despairing of being able to recover it, or of one incapable of the
contempt of earthly things. But, on the other hand, they call him who is
not sparing of his property prodigal. For thus they distinguish between
the liberal man and the prodigal: that he is liberal who bestows on
deserving objects, and on proper occasions, and in sufficient
quantities; but that he is prodigal who lavishes on undeserving objects,
and when there is no need, and without any regard to his property.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p3"></span>What then? shall we call him
prodigal who through pity gives food to the needy? But it makes a great
difference, whether on account of lust you bestow your money on harlots,
or on account of benevolence on the wretched; whether profligates,
gamesters, and pimps squander your money, or you bestow it on piety and
God; whether you expend it upon your own appetite, <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) or lay it up in the treasury of
justice. As, therefore, it is a vice to lay it out badly, so it is a
virtue to lay it out well. If it is a virtue not to be sparing of
riches, which can be replaced, that you may support the life of man,
which cannot be replaced; then parsimony is a vice. Therefore I can call
them by no other name than mad, who deprive man, a mild and sociable
animal, of his name; who, having uprooted the affections, in which
humanity altogether consists, wish to bring him to an immoveable
insensibility of mind, while they desire to free the soul from
perturbations, and, as they themselves say, to render it calm and
tranquil; which is not only impossible, because its force and nature
consist in motion, but it ought not even to be so. For as water which is
always still and motionless is unwholesome and more muddy, so the soul
which is unmoved and torpid is useless even to itself: nor will it be
able to maintain life itself; for it will neither do nor think anything,
since thought itself is nothing less than agitation of the mind. In
fine, they who assert this immoveableness of the soul wish to deprive
the soul of life; for life is full of activity, but death is quiet. They
also rightly esteem some things as virtues, but they do not maintain
their due proportion. <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203)  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p6"></span>Constancy is a virtue; not that we
resist those who injure us, for we must yield to these; and why this
ought to be done I will show presently: but that when men command us to
act in opposition to the law of God, and in opposition to justice, we
should be deterred by no threats or punishments from preferring the
command of God to the command of man. <span id="page_183">p. 183</span>
<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-Page_183"></span>Likewise it is a virtue to
despise death; not that we seek it, and of our own accord inflict it
upon ourselves, as many and distinguished philosophers have often done,
which is a wicked and impious thing; but that when compelled to desert
God, and to betray our faith, we should prefer to undergo death, and
should defend our liberty against the foolish and senseless violence of
those who cannot govern themselves, and with fortitude of spirit we
should challenge all the threats and terrors of the world. Thus with
lofty and invincible mind we trample upon those things which others
fear—pain and death. This is virtue; this is true constancy—to be
maintained and preserved in this one thing alone, that no terror and no
violence may be able to turn us away from God. Therefore that is a true
sentiment of <span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p6.1"></span>Cicero: <span
id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204) “No one,” he says, “can be just who
fears death, or pain, or exile, or want.” Also of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p7.2"></span>Seneca, who says, in his books of moral
philosophy: “This is that virtuous man, not distinguished by a diadem or
purple, or the attendance of lictors, but in no respect inferior, who,
when he sees death at hand, is not so disturbed as though he saw a fresh
object; who, whether torments are to be suffered by his whole body, or a
flame is to be seized by his mouth, or his hands are to be stretched out
on the cross, <span id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205) does not
inquire what he suffers, but how well.” But he who worships God suffers
these things without fear. Therefore he is just. By these things it is
effected, that he cannot know or maintain at all either the virtues or
the exact limits of the virtues, whoever is estranged from the religion
of the one God.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[182:1203](0070155.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p4.1"></span>Ventri ac gulæ ingeras.  

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[182:1204](0070155.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p5.1"></span>Sed earum modum non tenent. \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p5.2"></span>Augustine’s anthropology better.\]  

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[183:1205](0070155.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p7.1"></span>De Offic., ii. 11.  

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[183:1206](0070155.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvii-p8.1"></span>Per patibulum.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVIII.—Of some commands of God, and of patience](0070156)
