[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070296)  [Next](0070298) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.x"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv.x-p0.1"></span>Chap. X.—Of the Outer Limbs of Man, and Their Use.

<span id="iii.iv.x-p1"></span>But let us return to the works of God.
That the eyes, therefore, might be better protected from injury, He
concealed them with the coverings of the eyelashes, <span
id="fr_1864"></span>[1865](#fn_1864) from which <span
id="iii.iv.x-p2.3"></span>Varro thinks that the eyes <span
id="fr_1865"></span>[1866](#fn_1865) derived their name. For even the
eyelids themselves, in which there is the power of rapid motion, and to
which throbbing <span id="fr_1866"></span>[1867](#fn_1866) gives their
name, being protected by hairs standing in order, afford a most becoming
fence to the eyes; the continual motion of which, meeting with
incomprehensible rapidity, does not impede the course of the sight, and
relieves the eyes. <span id="fr_1867"></span>[1868](#fn_1867) For the
pupil—that is, the transparent membrane—which ought not to be drained
and to become dry, unless it is cleansed by continual moisture so that
it shines clearly, loses its power. <span
id="fr_1868"></span>[1869](#fn_1868) Why should I speak of the summits
of the eyebrows themselves, furnished with short hair? Do they not, as
it were by mounds, both afford protection to the eyes, so that nothing
may fall into them from above, <span
id="fr_1869"></span>[1870](#fn_1869) and at the same time ornament? And
the nose, arising from the confines of these, and stretched out, as it
were, with an equal ridge, at once serves to separate and to protect the
two eyes. Below also, a not unbecoming swelling of the cheeks, gently
rising after the similitude of hills, makes the eyes safer on every
side; and it has been provided by the great Artificer, that if there
shall happen to be a more violent blow, it may be repelled by the
projecting parts. But the upper part of the nose as far as the middle
has been made solid; but the lower part has been made with a softened
cartilage annexed to it, that it may be pliant <span
id="fr_1870"></span>[1871](#fn_1870) to the use of the fingers.
Moreover, in this, though a single member, three offices are placed:
one, that of drawing the breath; the second, that of smelling; the
third, that the secretions of the brain may escape through its caverns.
And in how wonderful, how divine a manner did God <span id="page_291">p.
291</span> <span id="iii.iv.x-Page_291"></span>contrive these also, so
that the very cavity of the nose should not deform the beauty of the
face: which would certainly have been the case if one single aperture
only were open. But He enclosed and divided that, as though by a wall
drawn through the middle, and made it most beautiful by the very
circumstance of its being double. <span
id="fr_1871"></span>[1872](#fn_1871) From which we understand of how
much weight the twofold number, made firm by one simple connection, is
to the perfection of things.  

<span id="iii.iv.x-p10"></span>For though the body is one, yet the whole
could not be made up of single members, unless it were that there should
be parts on the right hand or on the left. Therefore, as the two feet
and also hands not only avail to some utility and practice either of
walking or of doing something, but also bestow an admirable character
and comeliness; so in the head, which is, as it were, the crown of the
divine work, the hearing has been divided by the great Artificer into
two ears, and the sight into two eyes, and the smelling into two
nostrils, because the brain, in which is contained the system of the
sensation, although it is one, yet is divided into two parts by the
intervening membrane. But the heart also, which appears to be the abode
of wisdom, although it is one, yet has two recesses within, in which are
contained the living fountains of blood, divided by an intervening
barrier: that as in the world itself the chief control, being twofold
from simple matter, or simple from a twofold matter, governs and keeps
together the whole; so in the body, all the parts, being constructed of
two, might present an inseparable unity. Also how useful and how
becoming is the appearance and the opening of the mouth transversely
cannot be expressed; the use of which consists in two offices, that of
taking food and speaking.  

<span id="iii.iv.x-p11"></span>The tongue enclosed within, which by its
motions divides the voice into words, and is the interpreter of the
mind, cannot, however, by itself alone fulfil the office of speaking,
unless it strikes its edge against the palate, unless aided by striking
against the teeth or by the compression of the lips. The teeth, however,
contribute more to speaking: for infants do not begin to speak before
they have teeth; and old men, when they have lost their teeth, so lisp
that they appear to have returned afresh to infancy. But these things
relate to man alone, or to birds, in which the tongue, being pointed and
vibrating with fixed motions, expresses innumerable inflexions of songs
and various kinds of sounds. It has, moreover, another office also,
which it exercises in all, and this alone in the dumb animals, that it
collects the food when bruised and ground by the teeth, and by its force
presses it down when collected into balls, and transmits it to the
belly. Accordingly, <span id="iii.iv.x-p11.1"></span>Varro thinks that
the name of tongue was given to it from binding <span
id="fr_1872"></span>[1873](#fn_1872) the food. It also assists the
beasts in drinking: for with the tongue stretched out and hollowed they
draw water; and when they have taken it in the hollow <span
id="fr_1873"></span>[1874](#fn_1873) of the tongue, lest by slowness and
delay it should flow away, they dash <span
id="fr_1874"></span>[1875](#fn_1874) it against the palate with swift
rapidity. This, therefore, is covered by the concave part of the palate
as by a shell, <span id="fr_1875"></span>[1876](#fn_1875) and God has
surrounded it with the enclosure of the teeth as with a wall.  

<span id="iii.iv.x-p16"></span>But He has adorned the teeth themselves,
which are arranged in order in a wonderful manner, lest, being bare and
exposed, <span id="fr_1876"></span>[1877](#fn_1876) they should be a
terror rather than an ornament, with soft gums, which are so named from
producing teeth, and then with the coverings of the lips; and the
hardness of the teeth, as in a millstone, is greater and rougher than in
the other bones, that they might be sufficient for bruising the food and
pasture. But how befittingly has He divided <span
id="fr_1877"></span>[1878](#fn_1877) the lips themselves, which as it
were before were united! the upper of which, under the very middle of
the nostrils, He has marked with a kind of slight cavity, as with a
valley: He has gracefully spread out <span
id="fr_1878"></span>[1879](#fn_1878) the lower for the sake of beauty.
For, as far as relates to the receiving of flavour, he is deceived,
whoever he is, who thinks that this sense resides in the palate; for it
is the tongue by which flavours are perceived, and not the whole of it:
for the parts of it which are more tender on either side, draw in the
flavour with the most delicate perceptions. And though nothing is
diminished from that which is eaten or drunk, yet the flavour in an
indescribable manner penetrates to the sense, in the same way in which
the taking of the smell detracts nothing from any material.  

<span id="iii.iv.x-p20"></span>And how beautiful the other parts are can
scarcely be expressed. The chin, gently drawn down from the cheeks, and
the lower part of it so closed that the lightly imprinted division
appears to mark its extreme point: the neck stiff and well rounded: the
shoulders let down as though by gentle ridges from the neck: the
fore-arms <span id="fr_1879"></span>[1880](#fn_1879) powerful, and
braced <span id="fr_1880"></span>[1881](#fn_1880) by sinews for
firmness: the great strength of the upper-arms <span
id="fr_1881"></span>[1882](#fn_1881) standing out with remarkable
muscles: the useful and becoming bending of the elbows. What shall I say
of the hands, the ministers of reason and wisdom? Which the most skilful
Creator made with a flat and moderately concave bend, that if <span
id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span id="iii.iv.x-Page_292"></span>anything
was to be held, it might conveniently rest upon them, and terminated
them in the fingers; in which it is difficult to explain whether the
appearance or the usefulness is greater. For the perfection and
completeness of their number, and the comeliness of their order and
gradation, and the flexible bending of the equal joints, and the round
form of the nails, comprising and strengthening the tips of the fingers
with concave coverings, lest the softness of the flesh should yield in
holding any object, afford great adornment. But this is convenient for
use, in wonderful ways, that one separated from the rest rises together
with the hand itself, and is enlarged <span
id="fr_1882"></span>[1883](#fn_1882) in a different direction, which,
offering itself as though to meet the others, possesses all the power of
holding and doing either alone, or in a special manner, as the guide and
director of them all; from which also it received the name of
thumb, <span id="fr_1883"></span>[1884](#fn_1883) because it prevails
among the others by force and power. It has two joints standing out, not
as the others, three; but one is annexed by flesh to the hand for the
sake of beauty: for if it had been with three joints, and itself
separate, the foul and unbecoming appearance would have deprived the
hand of all grace.  

<span id="iii.iv.x-p26"></span>Again, the breadth of the breast, being
elevated, and exposed to the eyes, displays a wonderful dignity of its
condition; of which this is the cause, that God appears to have made man
only, as it were, reclining with his face upward: for scarcely any other
animal is able to lie upon its back. But He appears to have formed the
dumb animals as though lying on one side, and to have pressed them to
the earth. For this reason He gave them a narrow breast, and removed
from sight, and prostrate <span id="fr_1884"></span>[1885](#fn_1884)
towards the earth. But He made that of man open and erect, because,
being full of reason given from heaven, it was not befitting that it
should be humble or unbecoming. The nipples also gently rising, and
crowned with darker and small orbs, add something of beauty; being given
to females for the nourishment of their young, to males for grace only,
that the breast might not appear misshapen, and, as it were, mutilated.
Below this is placed the fiat surface of the belly, about the middle of
which the navel distinguishes by a not unbecoming mark, being made for
this purpose, that through it the young, while it is in the womb, may be
nourished.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[290:1865](0070297.htm#fr_1864) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p2"></span> <span id="iii.iv.x-p2.1"></span>Ciliorum.
The word properly denotes the edge of the eyelid, in which the eyelash
is fixed; said to be derived from “<span
id="iii.iv.x-p2.2"></span>cilleo,” to move.  

<span id="fn_1865"></span>[290:1866](0070297.htm#fr_1865) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p3"></span> <span id="iii.iv.x-p3.1"></span>Oculi, as
though derived from “<span id="iii.iv.x-p3.2"></span>occulere,” to
conceal.  

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[290:1867](0070297.htm#fr_1866) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p4.1"></span>Palpitatio. Hence “<span
id="iii.iv.x-p4.2"></span>palpebræ,” the eyelids.  

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[290:1868](0070297.htm#fr_1867) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p5"></span> <span id="iii.iv.x-p5.1"></span>Reficit
obtutum.  

<span id="fn_1868"></span>[290:1869](0070297.htm#fr_1868) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p6.1"></span>Obsolescit.  

<span id="fn_1869"></span>[290:1870](0070297.htm#fr_1869) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p7"></span> <span id="iii.iv.x-p7.1"></span>Xenophon,
<span id="iii.iv.x-p7.2"></span>Memorabilia, i. 4.\]  

<span id="fn_1870"></span>[290:1871](0070297.htm#fr_1870) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p8.1"></span>Tractabilis.  

<span id="fn_1871"></span>[291:1872](0070297.htm#fr_1871) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p9"></span> <span id="iii.iv.x-p9.1"></span>Ipsa
duplicitate.  

<span id="fn_1872"></span>[291:1873](0070297.htm#fr_1872) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p12"></span> <span id="iii.iv.x-p12.1"></span>Lingua,
as though from “<span id="iii.iv.x-p12.2"></span>ligando.”  

<span id="fn_1873"></span>[291:1874](0070297.htm#fr_1873) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p13"></span> <span id="iii.iv.x-p13.1"></span>Linguæ
sinu.  

<span id="fn_1874"></span>[291:1875](0070297.htm#fr_1874) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p14.1"></span>Complodunt.  

<span id="fn_1875"></span>[291:1876](0070297.htm#fr_1875) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p15"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p15.1"></span>Testudine.  

<span id="fn_1876"></span>[291:1877](0070297.htm#fr_1876) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p17.1"></span>Restricti.  

<span id="fn_1877"></span>[291:1878](0070297.htm#fr_1877) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p18.1"></span>Intercidit.  

<span id="fn_1878"></span>[291:1879](0070297.htm#fr_1878) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p19"></span> <span id="iii.iv.x-p19.1"></span>Foras
molliter explicavit.  

<span id="fn_1879"></span>[291:1880](0070297.htm#fr_1879) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p21.1"></span>Brachia. The fore-arms, from the hand to the
elbow.  

<span id="fn_1880"></span>[291:1881](0070297.htm#fr_1880) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p22"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p22.1"></span>Substricta.  

<span id="fn_1881"></span>[291:1882](0070297.htm#fr_1881) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p23.1"></span>Lacerti, The arm from the elbow to the
shoulder.  

<span id="fn_1882"></span>[292:1883](0070297.htm#fr_1882) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p24"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p24.1"></span>Maturius funditur.  

<span id="fn_1883"></span>[292:1884](0070297.htm#fr_1883) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p25"></span> i.e., <span
id="iii.iv.x-p25.1"></span>pollex, as though from “<span
id="iii.iv.x-p25.2"></span>polleo,” to prevail.  

<span id="fn_1884"></span>[292:1885](0070297.htm#fr_1884) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p27"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.x-p27.1"></span>Abjectum.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XI.—Of the intestines in man, and their use](0070298)
