[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070121)  [Next](0070123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p0.1"></span>Chap. IX.—Of the Crimes of the Wicked, and the Torture Inflicted on the Christians.

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p1"></span>At times, however, they perceive that
they are wicked, and praise the condition of the former <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="iii.ii.v.ix-Page_144"></span>ages,
and conjecture that justice is absent because of their characters and
deserts; for, though she presents herself to their eyes, they not only
fail to receive or recognise her, but they even violently hate, and
persecute, and endeavour to banish her. Let us suppose, in the meantime,
that she whom we follow is not justice: how will they receive her whom
they imagine to be the true justice, if she shall have come, when they
torture and kill those whom they themselves confess to be imitators of
the just, because they perform good and just actions; whereas, if they
should put to death the wicked only, they would deserve to be unvisited
by justice, who had no other reason for leaving the earth than the
shedding of human blood? How much more so when they slay the righteous,
and account the followers of justice themselves as enemies, yea, as more
than enemies; who, though they eagerly seek their lives, and property,
and children by sword and fire, yet are spared when conquered; and there
is a place for clemency even amidst arms; or if they have determined to
carry their cruelty to the utmost, nothing more is done towards them,
except that they are put to death or led away to slavery! But this is
unutterable which is done towards those who are ignorant of crime, and
none are regarded as more guilty than those who are of all men innocent.
Therefore most wicked men venture to make mention of justice, men who
surpass wild beasts in ferocity, who lay waste the most gentle flock of
God,—  

> <span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p1.1"></span> “Like gaunt wolves rushing from
> their den,  
> Whom lawless hunger’s sullen growl  
> Drives forth into the night to prowl.” <span
> id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982)  

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p3"></span>But these have been maddened not by the
fury of hunger, but of the heart; nor do they prowl in a black mist, but
by open plundering; nor does the consciousness of their crimes ever
recall them from profaning the sacred and holy name of justice with that
mouth which, like the jaws of beasts, is wet with the blood of the
innocent. What must we say is especially the cause of this excessive and
persevering hatred?  

> <span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p3.1"></span> “Does truth produce hatred,” <span
> id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983)  

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p5"></span>as the poet says, as though inspired by
the Divine Spirit, or are they ashamed to be bad in the presence of the
just and good? Or is it rather from both causes? For the truth is always
hateful on this account, because he who sins wishes to have free scope
for sinning, and thinks that he cannot in any other way more securely
enjoy the pleasure of his evil doings, than if there is no one whom his
faults may displease. Therefore they endeavour entirely to exterminate
and take them away as witnesses of their crimes and wickedness, and
think them burthensome to themselves, as though their life were
reproved. For why should any be unseasonably good, who, when the public
morals are corrupted, should censure them by living well? Why should not
all be equally wicked, rapacious, unchaste, adulterers, perjured,
covetous, and fraudulent? Why should they not rather be taken out of the
way, in whose presence they are ashamed to lead an evil life, who,
though not by words, for they are silent, but by their very course of
life, so unlike their own, assail and strike the forehead of sinners?
For whoever disagrees with them appears to reprove them.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p6"></span>Nor is it greatly to be wondered at if
these things are done towards men, since for the same cause the people
who were placed in hope, <span id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) and not
ignorant of God, rose up against God Himself; and the same necessity
follows the righteous which attacked the Author of righteousness
Himself. Therefore they harass and torment them with studied kinds of
punishments, and think it little to kill those whom they hate, unless
cruelty also mocks their bodies. But if any through fear of pain or
death, or by their own perfidy, have deserted the heavenly oath, <span
id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985) and have consented to deadly
sacrifices, these they praise and load <span
id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) with honours, that by their example
they may allure others. But upon those who have highly esteemed their
faith, and have not denied that they are worshippers of God, they fall
with all the strength of their butchery, as though they thirsted for
blood; and they call them desperate, <span
id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987) because they by no means spare their
body; as though anything could be more desperate, than to torture and
tear in pieces him whom you know to be innocent. Thus no sense of shame
remains among those from whom all kind feeling is absent, and they
retort upon just men reproaches which are befitting to themselves. For
they call them impious, being themselves forsooth pious, and shrinking
from the shedding of human blood; whereas, if they would consider their
own acts, and the acts of those whom they condemn as impious, they would
now understand how false they are, and more deserving of all those
things which they either say or do against the good. For they are not of
our number, but of theirs who besiege the roads in arms, practice piracy
by sea; or if it has not been in their power openly to assail, secretly
mix poisons; who kill their wives that they may gain their dowries, or
their husbands that they may marry adulterers; who either strangle the
sons born from themselves, or if <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-Page_145"></span>they are too pious, expose them; who
restrain their incestuous passions neither from a daughter, nor sister,
nor mother, nor priestess; who conspire against their own citizens and
country; who do not fear the sack; <span
id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988) who, in fine, commit sacrilege, and
despoil the temples of the gods whom they worship; and, to speak of
things which are light and usually practised by them, who hunt for
inheritances, forge wills, either remove or exclude the just heirs; who
prostitute their own persons to lust; who, in short, unmindful of what
they were born, contend with women in passivity; <span
id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) who, in violation of all
propriety, <span id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990) pollute and dishonour
the most sacred part of their body; who mutilate themselves, and that
which is more impious, in order that they may be priests of religion;
who do not even spare their own life, but sell their lives to be taken
away in public; who, if they sit as judges, corrupted by a bribe, either
destroy the innocent or set free the guilty without punishment; who
grasp at the heaven itself by sorceries, as though the earth would not
contain their wickedness. These crimes, I say, and more than these, are
plainly committed by those who are worshippers of the gods.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p14"></span>Amidst these crimes of such number and
magnitude, what place is there for justice? And I have collected a few
only out of many, not for the purpose of censure, but to show their
nature. Let those who shall wish to know all take in hand the books of
<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p14.1"></span>Seneca, who was at the same time a
most true describer and a most vehement accuser of the public morals and
vices. But <span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p14.2"></span>Lucilius also briefly and
concisely described that dark life in these verses: “But now from morn
to night, on festival and ordinary day alike, the whole people and the
fathers with one accord display themselves in <span
id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) the forum, and never depart from it.
They have all given themselves to one and the same pursuit and art, that
they may be able cautiously to deceive, to fight treacherously, to
contend in flattery, each to pretend that he is a good man, to lie in
wait, as if all were enemies to all.” But which of these things can be
laid to the charge of our people, <span
id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) with whom the whole of religion
consists in living without guilt and without spot? Since, therefore,
they see that both they and their people do those things which we have
said, but that ours practice nothing else but that which is just and
good, they might, if they had any understanding, have perceived from
this, both that they who do what is good are pious, and that they
themselves who commit wicked actions are impious. For it is impossible
that they who do not err in all the actions of their life, should err in
the main point, that is, in religion, which is the chief of all things.
For impiety, if taken up in that which is the most important, would
follow through all the rest. And therefore <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) it is impossible that they who err in
the whole of their life should not be deceived also in religion;
inasmuch as piety, if it kept its rule in the chief point, would
maintain its course in others. Thus it happens, that on either side the
character of the main subject may be known from the state of the actions
which are carried on.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_982"></span>[144:983](0070122.htm#fr_982) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p1.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p2.2"></span>Æn., ii. 355.  

<span id="fn_983"></span>[144:984](0070122.htm#fr_983) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p4.1"></span>Ter., <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p4.2"></span>Andr., i. 1, 41.  

<span id="fn_984"></span>[144:985](0070122.htm#fr_984) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p7"></span> The Jewish people. Thus St. <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p7.1"></span>Paul speaks, [Acts xxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#006)<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p7.2"></span>:
“I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our
fathers.”  

<span id="fn_985"></span>[144:986](0070122.htm#fr_985) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p8"></span> i.e., the Christian religion.  

<span id="fn_986"></span>[144:987](0070122.htm#fr_986) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p9.1"></span>Mactant.  

<span id="fn_987"></span>[144:988](0070122.htm#fr_987) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p10.1"></span>Desperati, equivalent to <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p10.2"></span>παράβολοι</span>, a
word borrowed from combats with wild beasts, and applied to Christians
as being ready to devote their lives to the cause of God.  

<span id="fn_988"></span>[145:989](0070122.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p11"></span> There is an allusion to the
punishment of <span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p11.1"></span>parricides, who were
enclosed in a bag with a dog, a serpent, an ape, and a cock, and thrown
into the sea.  

<span id="fn_989"></span>[145:990](0070122.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p12.1"></span>Patientia, in a bad sense. \[The text of
the translator gives “endurance,” for which I venture to substitute as
above.\]  

<span id="fn_990"></span>[145:991](0070122.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p13.1"></span>Contra fas omne.  

<span id="fn_991"></span>[145:992](0070122.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p15"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p15.1"></span>Induforo. “<span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p15.2"></span>Indu” and “<span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p15.3"></span>endo” are archaisms, used by <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p15.4"></span>Lucretius and other writers in the same
sense as “in.”  

<span id="fn_992"></span>[145:993](0070122.htm#fr_992) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p16"></span> i.e., Christians. \[See vol. i. pp.
26, 27.\]  

<span id="fn_993"></span>[145:994](0070122.htm#fr_993) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ix-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p17.1"></span>Eoque fieri non potest. Others read “<span
id="iii.ii.v.ix-p17.2"></span>æque fieri,” etc.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. X.—Of false piety, and of false and true religion](0070123)
