[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cvmc08)  [Next](cvmc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Common-Sense View of the Mind Cure*, by Laura M. Westall, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

### VII

### THE NATURE OF PAIN

THERE is a great deal going on around us of which we are wholly
unconscious, for the reason that nature has set limits to our perceptive
powers. There are sounds which we never hear, sights which we never see,
things which we can not touch, etc.

The explanation usually given is that all the forces of nature, such as
light, heat, sound, and electricity, have a vibratory motion, but our
brains are able to react only upon a limited number of such
vibrations--those within a certain range. When they exceed that
limit--that is, greatly increase or diminish the vibratory rate--we
either do not perceive them at all or else they occasion us physical

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

discomfort. Thus, a low sound has a slow rate of vibration; we do not
hear it distinctly; a shrill sound has a high rate of vibration, and if
near at hand is unpleasant or hard to endure.

A block of marble is cold, but one can hold his hand upon it
comfortably; a block of ice is very cold and if one attempts to hold his
hand upon it, he experiences an unpleasant sensation. The sound of a
violin is agreeable, but the sound of a steamboat whistle gives a
sensation of pain.

So then those vibrations which are within a certain range we find
pleasant, but those that exceed that range we find painful.

Pain, then, must be an *unpleasant sensation*, and sensations are always
mental. Hence *pain must be mental*.

Now, in chapter first it was noted that a stimulus or sense-impression
made on the brain first resolved itself into sensation--we feel before
we think. Thus, I touch a hot iron. The impression made upon

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the nerves in my finger-tips must travel up the arm to the brain, where
another impression is made. That impression gives rise to a feeling or
sensation in consciousness, and then the mind says: "That iron is hot. I
have burned my finger. Oh, how it hurts!"

A strong impression was made on the delicate nerve-tissue of the brain,
too strong to be agreeable, and the mind calls it pain. But not until
consciousness *perceived* the stimulus did I feel the pain or know that
I had burned my hand.

So, you see, not only is pain a sensation, but it must be mentally
perceived before we know that it is pain. In other words, pain is
mentally perceived sensation. It matters not whether the sensations
originate externally or internally, the fact remains.

An illustration or two will make this clear.

Suppose you are suffering with neuralgia,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

but having tickets to the theater and being eager to hear some noted
actor, you resolve to go. Now, when you take your seat you will perhaps
think that you will not be able to sit through the performance. But the
curtain rises. The beauty of the stage-setting and the movement of the
drama absorb your attention, and not until the curtain falls do you feel
any pain. Why? Because your mind has been so absorbed by what was
passing on the stage that you did not think about your pain and hence
did not perceive it.

Again: You are prostrated by a headache. Somebody below stairs or in the
next house cries "Fire!" and instantly you are on your feet, your whole
mind absorbed in locating the fire and aiding to extinguish it. And not
once, till the excitement subsides, do you remember your pain. Where was
it when you were not thinking of it?

Obviously we have to *think* pain before we know that it is pain, and so
we are

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

obliged to conclude that pain is not in the nerves or organs or tissues
of the body, but in the *perceiving mind*--that is, it is mental--a
recognized or perceived sensation.

You may say, "Don't you suppose I know when I have a pain in my foot?"
Yet the pain is not in the foot; it is a perceived sensation which
*imagination refers to the foot*.

How can that be? Thus: The nerves in your foot for some reason or other
are irritated; they protest and that starts a vital current up the
nerves of the leg to the brain and there a corresponding irritation is
set up. The mind perceives the irritation and then imagination steps in
and refers it to the *source* of the irritation. The cells in the brain
which correspond with the foot are in telegraphic communication with one
another, and thus it is very natural to infer that the pain is where the
primary irritation is; whereas we *perceive* the irritation and call it
pain.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

If one has not thought about this matter, it may seem improbable, but
there are not wanting facts to substantiate it.

For instance, if you should sever the nerve-trunk in the leg and thus
interrupt communication with the brain, your foot might be pinched or
pricked or burned and you would feel no pain. Or if you should cut the
nerve between the little finger and the brain, the surgeon might
amputate your little finger and yet you would feel no pain.

Or your arm might be rendered cataleptic by "suggestion," and you would
not then feel a pin which was passed through the skin.

On the other hand, if the cells in the brain which correspond with the
foot were irritated in some way, you would think you had a pain in the
foot. Even if the foot were amputated, you would think you had a pain in
the imaginary foot or where it used to be. Again, you may have a

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

pain in one knee, or think you have, and develop a sympathetic pain in
the other knee. But if the pain is in the knee, why the sympathetic
pain? Simply because the brain area which corresponds with and governs
both knees is irritated, and imagination does the rest.

So there is really no escape; pain is mental, or a perceived sensation.

Well, if pain is mental, the more one thinks about it the more he
suffers, which every one knows is true. To fix the attention upon it, as
we have seen, is to give it a stronger hold upon the mind. Therefore, if
one diverts his mind from himself, he diminishes his sufferings.

Some say, ignore pain. This is excellent advice if one can follow it.
"There's the rub." The difficulty is that the immediate effect of severe
pain is temporarily to unbalance first the brain, then the mind. It acts
very much like a strong emotion. The brain-cells seem to be

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

paralyzed, the reasoning powers, self-control, and will are temporarily
submerged, and thus the door is open for emotion. And it comes,
cavorting to the front like a war-horse. See how quickly fear and
imagination begin to work! Note how unreasonable and irritable and
weak-willed the average person is under the influence of pain.
Therefore, one must have a well-disciplined mind and strong will to be
able to ignore severe pain.

Yet it is moral cowardice to be always whimpering when one is hurt. And
the more one yields to pain, the more it enslaves him; the more
difficult it is for him to "rise above it." How, then, shall we crack
this nut?

Undoubtedly, it is necessary to cultivate moral heroism. If we teach
ourselves to make light of trivial discomforts, we may, by degrees, so
discipline our minds as to be able to master great ones. If one
persistently fights back at it, he will by

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

degrees lessen the receptivity of the upper brain (cortex) and thus
throw the stimulus back upon the lower part of the brain, of whose
operations we are unconscious. By persistently refusing to admit it, one
may prevent it from gaining so great a power over his mind; it
*rebounds* from the seat of consciousness as a ball rebounds from an
unyielding wall. Thus, in time, a measurable degree of control will be
acquired over the seat of consciousness; it does not respond so quickly
to that particular stimulus.

Needless to say it can not be done in a day, but it is a moral victory,
a phase of self-mastery well worth working for, and above the price of
rubies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. The Environment](cvmc10)
