[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fu00)  [Next](fu02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417919205/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE.

IT is now more than a century since the learned French sinologist
Deguignes set forth, in a very ably-written paper in the "Mémoires de
l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres" (vol. xxviii., 1761), the
fact that he had found in the works of early Chinese historians a
statement that, in the fifth century of our era, certain travellers of
their race had discovered a country which they called Fusang, and which,
from the direction and distance as described by them, appeared to be
Western America, and in all probability Mexico. When Deguignes wrote,
his resources, both as regards the knowledge of the region supposed to
have been discovered and the character of the travellers, were extremely
limited, so that the skill with which he conducted his investigation,
and the shrewdness of his conjectures, render his memoir, even to the
present day, a subject of commendation among scholars. Few men have ever
done so much or as well with such scanty and doubtful material.

The original document on which the Chinese historians

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

based their account of Fusang was the report of a Buddhist monk or
missionary named Hoei-shin (Schin or Shên), <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) who, in the year 499 A.D., returned from a
long journey to the East. This report was regularly entered on the
Year-Books or Annals of the Chinese Empire, whence it passed, not only
to the pages of historians, but also to those of poets and writers of
romances, by whom it was so confused with absurd inventions and
marvellous tales, that even at the present clay discredit is thrown by a
certain class of critics on the entire narrative. In 1841 Carl Friedrich
Neumann, Professor of Oriental Languages and History at the University
of Munich, published the original narrative of Hoei-shin from the
Annals, adding to it comments of his own elucidating its statements, and
advancing somewhat beyond Deguignes. This little work I translated into
English, under the supervision of Professor Neumann, and with his aid. I
believe that, as he revised and corrected the English version here
given, it may claim to be an accurate translation from the Chinese text
of the Year-Book, and that of Hoei-shin. I have placed it first in this
volume because it gives in a much more perfect form than is to be found
in the memoir of Deguignes the original report on which the entire
investigation is based. It of course includes Professor Neumann's
comments on the monk's brief narrative; and as these embrace many
remarks on the

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

possibility of passing by sea from the Chinese to the American coast, I
have thought it appropriate to place next in the series a letter from
Colonel Barclay Kennon, who, as a prominent officer in the United States
Coast Survey, passed several years in the North Pacific, during which
time he surveyed and mapped, in company with two colleagues, the entire
coast, both on the Asiatic and American sides. Colonel Kennon is of
opinion that the voyage supposed to have been taken by the Buddhist
monks is easily practicable, and might be effected even in an open
boat--the vessel in which he himself passed both summer and winter, and
in which he sailed more than 40,000 miles, having been simply a small
pilot-boat. To tins I have added, in further reference to certain
remarks by Professor Neumann, a comment on the affinities between
American and Asiatic languages, and other subjects mentioned in his
text, *i.e.*, the Mound-Builders and the Images of Buddha. These are
followed by extracts from, and remarks on, a series of articles by M.
Gustave d’Eichthal, contributed to the *Revue Archæologique* in 1862-63,
in which he defends Deguignes from an attack which the well-known
Orientalist Julius Heinrich von Klaproth made upon the original memoir
by the former. I believe that it will be admitted by all unprejudiced
scholars, that in these ably-written and very temperate articles M.
D’Eichthal has fully vindicated Deguignes, and has also contributed much
very valuable material to the subject. I am far from claiming that it

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

has been absolutely proved that Hoei-shin was in Mexico, or that he was
preceded thither by "five beggar-monks from the Kingdom of Kipin." But
it cannot be denied that, as further researches have been made, much
which at first seemed obscure or improbable in his narrative has been
cleared up. All that Hoei-shin declares he saw is not only probable, but
is confirmed, almost to the minutest details, by what is now known of
Old and New Mexico.

All that seems fabulous in his story, he, like Herodotus, relates from
hearsay; but it is remarkable that these wonders, which Professor
Neumann was unwilling to cite, all appear at the present day to be
simply exaggerations of facts which recent research has brought to
light. Among the objects seen and described by the monk was the maguey
plant, or great cactus, which he called the Fusang, after a Chinese
plant slightly resembling it, and this name (Fusang) he applied to the
country. His description of this plant, and of its many uses, is very
striking. Other things peculiar to Mexico, but not known to China, were
remarked, as, for instance, the absence of iron, and the fact that
copper, gold, and silver were not prized, and were not used for money.
The manner in which marriage was contracted in Fusang, according to his
description, is not at all Chinese--I doubt if it be Asiatic--but it
exists in more than one North American tribe, and something very like it
was observed by a recent traveller in New Mexico.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

I have in [Chapter IX](fu12.htm#ch09). called attention to a fact which
seems to have escaped both Neumann and Klaproth, though both were
familiar with the literature on which it is based. It is simply this,
that the voyage of Hoei-shin forms a portion of the somewhat extensive
literature of travel of Buddhist monks, the authenticity of which has
been vindicated by Stanislas Julien. Many of these have been translated,
and one of them, "The Mission of Sung-yun," was recently published in
English. Sung-yun travelled only nineteen years after Hoei-shin, and was
in all probability a contemporary who had met him at the Chinese court,
where such travellers enjoyed the highest consideration. Sung-yun had
been sent to India, or the West, by the Empress Dowager Tai-Hau, of the
Wei dynasty, and it is not improbable that Hoei-shin had travelled to
the East, in like manner, by imperial order. It is evident that he lived
at a time when men of his stamp were in request to go to the ends of the
earth to spread the doctrines of Buddha.

In 1869, some one who had read or heard of Neumann's work on the
Buddhist discovery of America, placed in the "Notes and Queries on China
and Japan," published at Hong Kong, a request that those who possessed
information on the subject would send it to that journal. The results
were, however, trifling, the principal communication thus elicited being
an article from Dr E. Bretschneider, in which the writer, while
expressing his opinion that Hoei-shin was a

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "lying Buddhist
priest," and a "consummate humbug," brought forth nothing of consequence
to prove such very positive assertions. But as the paper forms a portion
of the literature of the Fusang question, I have included it in this
volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vi:1](fu01.htm#fr_0) Neumann gives the name as
Hoei-schin; Dr Bretschneider, as Hui-shên. When not translating Dr
Neumann, I have written it *Hoei-shin*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Memoir of Professor Carl Friedrich Neumann](fu02)
