[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fu01)  [Next](fu03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417919205/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

#### MEMOIR

###### OF

##### PROFESSOR CARL FRIEDRICH NEUMANN.

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

### MEMOIR.

CARL FRIEDRICH NEUMANN, the author of the subjoined memoir on the
presumed early discovery of America by Buddhist monks, was of Jewish
family, and born December 22, 1798, near Bamberg, Bavaria. He was
intended for commerce, but having studied history at the Universities of
Heidelberg and Munich, determined to devote his life to letters. Having
become a Protestant, he was appointed professor in 1822 at the Gymnasium
of Speier, whence he was dismissed in 1825 for Liberal opinions in
politics. He subsequently lived for several years in Venice, Paris, and
London, occupied with the study of Oriental languages. Having
distinguished himself as a sinologist, he went. in 1829 to China, where
he remained nearly two years, occupied in collecting Chinese books. In
Canton he obtained a valuable library of 10,000 volumes, which, after
his return, were ceded to the Bavarian Government. In 1838 he received
an appointment as professor of the Chinese and Armenian languages at the
University of Munich, where he also read lectures on mathematics

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

and modern history, which were very popular with the students. Having
known him well, both in public and private, and pursued studies under
his special guidance, I venture to speak with confidence and respect of
his enormous learning, as well as his sound judgment in matters of
scholarship.

Professor Neumann was the author of a number of works in Latin, French,
and English, as well as German, two of which received prizes from the
Academies of Copenhagen and Paris. His principal books are the
following:

Rerum Cretaricum Specimen. Göttingen, 1820.

Ueber die Staatsverfassung der Florentiner, von Leonardus Aretinus.
Frankfurt, 1822.

Historische Versuche. Heidelberg, 1825.

Mémoires sur la Vie et les Ouvrages de David, philosophe Armenien du
cinquième siècle de notre ére, et principalement sur ses traductions de
quelques écrits à Aristote. Paris, 1829.

The History of Vartan, and of the Battle of the Armenians, containing an
account of the religious wars between the Persians and Armenians. By
Elisæus; translated by C. F. Neumann. London, 1831.

The Catechism of the Shamans, or the Laws and Regulations of the
Priesthood of Buddha in China. Translated from the Chinese, with notes
and illustrations. London, 1831.

History of the Pirates who infested the Chinese Seas from 1807 to 1810.
Translated from the Chinese original, with notes and illustrations.
London, 1831.

Geschichte der Armenischen Literatur. Leipzig, 1833-36.

Geschichte der Uebersiedlung von 40,000 Armeniern. Leipzig, 1834.

Russland und die Tcherkessen. Stuttgart, 1840.

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

Geschichte des Englisch-Chinesischen Kriegs. Leipzig, 1846. In this
comprehensive work, one division is entitled, "Nord Amerika und
Frankreich in China," in which the present and future relations of
Western America and Eastern Asia are developed with great sagacity. A
few years before his death, Iskander (Alexander Herzen) wrote to
me--"The Pacific will yet be the Mediterranean of the future." Those who
look forward to such developments of civilisation and commerce will find
this book of Professor Neumann's very interesting.

Die Völker des Südlichen Russland in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung.
Leipzig, 1847. To this work was awarded the prize of the Royal Institute
of Paris.

Die Reisen des Venetianers Marco Polo, Deutsch von August Bürk. Nebst
Zusätzen und Verbesserungen von C. F. Neumann. Leipzig, 1845.

Beiträge zur Armenischen Literatur. Leipzig, 1849.

Geschichte des Englischen Reichs in Asien. Leipzig, 1857.

Professor Neumann was one of the directors of the German Oriental
Association, and published in the first number of their magazine a
biography of Dr Morrison, the celebrated Protestant missionary to China.

I sincerely trust that the additions which I have made to this work, in
elucidation or in illustration of the idea advanced, will be found to
the purpose. They are the result of much research,--I may honestly say,
of far more than appears in this volume, as the subject, from its
obscurity, yielded only the proverbial grain of wheat to the wearisome
bushel of chaff. I also hope that it is free from either reckless
hypothesis or easy credulity, and that nothing will be understood to be
advanced as being more than probable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](fu03)
