[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fu04)  [Next](fu06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417919205/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### IDENTITY OF THE TARTARS AND NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS; OR, THE ROAD TO AMERICA, AND THE PEOPLE IN IT.

THE Tunguse, Mongolians, and a great part of the Turkish race, formed
originally, according to all external organic tokens, as well as the
elements of their languages, but one people, closely allied with the
Esquimaux, the *Skräling*, or dwarf of the Norsemen, and the races of
the New World. This is the irrefutable result to which all the more
recent inquiries in anatomy and physiology, as well as comparative
philology and history, have conduced. All the aboriginal Americans have
those distinctive tokens which forcibly recall their neighbours dwelling
on the other side of Behring's Straits. They have the four-cornered
head, high cheek-bones, heavy jaws, large angular eye-cavities, and 'a
retreating forehead. The skulls of the oldest Peruvian graves exhibit
the same tokens as the heads of the nomadic tribes of Oregon and
California. The different American languages, as has been already proved
by Albert Gallatin in his minute researches, have such an identity, that
we can, however varied the vocabulary, at once reduce them to

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

one original source. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) In fact, all
researches as to the manner in which America was first populated lead to
one inevitable conclusion. Since the earth has been inhabited, these
rude tribes dwelt in their separate divisions of Asia and America. This
rough mass has, however, during the course of centuries, been separated
by different corporeal and mental formative influences into different
nations, each with peculiar bodily distinctions, the natural consequence
of higher mental influences; and various languages have been developed;
yet all of these distinctions, whether of body or of language, of manner
or custom, present internal evidence of an original unity. This unity
manifests itself in their genealogies, the oldest historical system of
all nations by which the identity of the Turks, Mongolians, and Tunguse
is clearly proved. Among these Tartaric hordes we find absolutely the
same relation as that which existed among the German nations. The
Ostrogoths and Visigoths, the Westphalians, the northern and southern
nations, belonged originally, notwithstanding their different destinies
and culture, to the internal being of one and the same German race.

### TUNGUSE EASTERN BARBARIANS.

All the numerous Tartaric hordes dwelling about the north-east of the
Central Empire were termed by

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

the civilised natives of the South "Tonghu," "Eastern Red Men," or
savages, from which appellation we derive our word Tunguse, <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) which has been subsequently applied to an
extremely limited portion of the entire race. Among these Mongolian
nations, many centuries before Zenghis Khan (Tschinggs Chakan), the
Mongolians proper were distinguished by the differently-written name of
*Wog* or *Mog*, and divided into seven hordes, dwelling in different
places, extending from the Corean Peninsula to the distant north, over
the river Amo to the eastern sea; that is to say, to the Gulf of Anadir
or Behring's Straits. The nomadic tribes dwelling more directly to the
north they termed Peti, or Northern Savages, and many tribes were
reckoned by them as belonging either to the Tunguse or Peti. During the
course of many centuries the Chinese acquired a surprisingly accurate
knowledge of the north-east coast of Asia, extending, as their records
in astronomy and natural history prove, to the sixty-fifth degree of
latitude, and even to the Arctic Ocean. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) Among other accounts, they tell us of a land
very far from the Central Kingdom, whose inhabitants, termed Kolihan or
Chorran, sent during the latter part of the seventh century ambassadors
to the Court at Singan. This land lay on the North Sea; and still
further to the north, on the other side of that sea, the days were so

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

long, and the nights in proportion so short, that the sun set and rose
again "before one could roast a leg of mutton." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

The Chinese were well acquainted with the customs of these tribes, and
describe them to us as resembling the Tsohuktschi or Koljuschens <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5) of the present day, and other tribes of
North-eastern Asia and North-western America. They had neither oxen,
sheep, nor other domestic animals, but there were tribes among them
which employed deer, which were there very numerous. These deer of which
they speak were undoubtedly reindeer. They knew nothing of agriculture,
but lived by hunting and fishing, as well as on the root of a certain
plant which grew there in abundance. Their dwellings were constructed of
twigs and wood, their clothes were made of furs and feathers. They laid
their dead in coffins, which they placed in trees in the
mountains. <span id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6) They were ignorant of any
subdivisions of the year. The Chinese were also as well acquainted with
those dwelling more directly to the east, as with these inhabitants of
the north.

The limits of the Chinese Empire extended, under the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

dynasty of Tschen, in the time of David and Solomon, to the Eastern
Ocean. They knew and frequented the numerous groups of islands in the
Pacific Ocean, for the sake of trade. The natives inhabiting these
islands sent, on their part, messengers to the coast with presents,
which are registered in the Chinese annals. It also frequently happened
that China sent a portion of its discontented or superfluous population
to these thinly-inhabited islands, as well as to Japan, Lieu-kuei, and
Formosa, of which we have accurate historical proofs. The tribe of the
Ainos, or Jebis, extending from Japan to Kamtschatka, over the Kurilean
and Aleutian, or Fox Islands, to the distant north, where it touched
upon the nearly-allied Esquimaux, must naturally have astonished the
occasional colonists and merchants who found their way thither, by a
singular distinctive bodily phenomenon, namely, an exceeding growth of
hair on their bodies. Such was the case, and they were termed
*Mau-schin* (or, according to the Japanese mode of pronouncing Chinese
writing, *Mosin*)--*i.e.*, Hairy People, and also, from the great number
of sea-crabs found in their region, *Hi-ai* (in Japanese, *Jeso*), or
Crab-Barbarians. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) And as these
barbarians, like the inhabitants of the southern islands, were in the
habit of tattooing figures upon their skin, they were also termed by the
Chinese *Wen-schin*, or Painted People. In the course of time other
names were also added, but any one acquainted with the nature

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

of that part of the world and its inhabitants, readily recognises,
despite the varied appellations, the same race of men in the Ainos. We
are indebted to the numerous embassies which in earlier times passed
between China and Japan for the greater part of the information
contained in their Year-Books, relating to the north and south-easterly
islands and nations. These embassies brought back with them many
traditionary accounts, which were strongly tinged with fable, and yet
not entirely devoid of truth. For instance, when they speak of the land
of *Tschutschu*, or dwarfs, very far to the south of Japan, whose
inhabitants, black and ugly and naked, kill and devour all strangers, we
readily recognise the natives of Papua or New Guinea.

The Ainos were first described, under the name of Hairy People, in "The
Book of Mountains and Seas," a Chinese work, written in the second or
third century, and richly adorned with wonderful legends. They dwelt,
according to this book, in the Eastern Sea, and were completely
overgrown with hair. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) Some of these
people came, A.D. 659, in company with a Japanese embassy, to China;
they are termed in the Year-Book of Tang, "Crab-Barbarians," <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9) after which this note fellows:--"They had
long beards, and dwelt in the

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

north-east of Japan; they laid bows, arrows, and deer-skins as presents
before the throne. These were the inhabitants of Jeso, which island had,
not long before, been subdued and rendered tributary by the Japanese."
The report of the Japanese embassy, in their own domestic returns, is,
however, much more copious and satisfactory. The queries of the Heaven's
Son of Tang, and the replies of the Japanese ambassador, are there
narrated as follows:--

*The Ruler of Tang*.--"Does the heavenly Autocrat find himself in
constant tranquillity?"

*The Ambassador*.--"Heaven and earth unite their gifts, and constant
tranquillity ensues."

*The Ruler of Tang*.--"Are the Government officers well appointed?"

*The Ambassador*.--"They have the grace of the Heavenly Ruler, and are
well."

*The Ruler of Tang*.--"Is there internal peace?"

*The Ambassador*.--"The Government harmonises with heaven and earth--the
people have no care."

*The Ruler of Tang*.--"Where lies the land--this Jeso?"

*The Ambassador*.--"To the north-east."

*The Ruler of Tang*.--"How many divisions has it?"

*The Ambassador*.--"Three; the most distant we call Tsgaru, the next
Ara, and the nearest Niki. To the last belong these men here before us.
They appear yearly with their tribute at the court of our king."

*The Ruler of Tang*.--"Does this land produce corn?"

*The Ambassador*.--"No; its inhabitants live on flesh."

*The Ruler of Tang*.--"Have they houses?"

*The Ambassador*.--"No; they live in the mountains, under trunks of
trees."

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

This extract is from the Nipponki, or Japanese Annals, from 661 until
696, which were collected in the year 720. They embrace thirty volumes
octavo. The portions translated by Hoffman are to be found in vol. xxvi.
p. 9; of Siebold's "Japanese Archives," viii. 130.

Since this time, in the seventh century, many wars have been undertaken
against these northern border barbarians by their more civilised
neighbours, and generally with success. But the inhabitants of Jeso
always rose again after a short time, drove forth the Japanese invaders
from the land, and gave themselves up again to their wild, original
freedom, like their ancestors on the neighbouring island. Even at the
present day the Japanese govern only a very small portion of Jeso,
*i.e.*, the gold district of this remarkably rich island. Jeso readily
leads to an acquaintance with Kamtschatka, which country was also
described about the same period, in the following manner: <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)--

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### KAMTSCHATKA IN THE TIME OF TANG.

Lieu-kuei (Loo-choo), or Hing-goci, as the Kamtschadales of the present
day term their fellow-countrymen dwelling on the Penschinisch Bay, is
situated, according to the Chinese Year-Books, fifteen thousand Chinese
miles distant from the capital, which, according to the measurement of
the celebrated astronomer Ihan, in the time of Tang, gives about three
hundred and thirty-eight to one of our grades--the Chinese grades being
rather smaller than our geographical. Now, Sigan, the capital of China
during the dynasty of Tang, lies in the district Schensi, 34° 15´ 34″
north latitude, and 106° 34´ east longitude from Paris. Peter and Paul's
Haven, on the contrary, according to Preuss, lies 53° 0´ 59″ north
latitude, and 153° 19´ 56″ east longitude from Paris. These are
differences which the accounts of the Chinese Year-Books establish in an
astonishing manner, and leave no doubt whatever as to the identity of
Kamtschatka with Lieu-kuei; for it is certainly satisfactory if
estimates of such great distances, drawn in all probability from the
accounts of half-savage sailors or quite savage natives, should agree
within two or three grades with accurate astronomic results.

"This land lies exactly north-east from the Black River, or Black Dragon
River, and the Moko, and the voyage thither requires fifteen days, which
is the time in which the Moko generally effect it."

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

The Moko here alluded to are, beyond doubt, the Mongolians, who governed
in earlier ages, and even in the time of Tang as far south as Corea, and
in the north as far as the other side of the Amur. The western limits of
this people are unknown. In the east they dwelt, as our chronicle
expressly remarks, as far as the ocean, or the Pacific, from whence they
could very easily pass to the islands and to the American Continent.
That this was in reality effected, is evident from their external
appearance, as well as the affinity between the Mongolian language and
that of the American Indians. The distance from Ocho-tock to the
opposite peninsula is about 150 German miles, and, in fact, the natives
generally require from ten to fifteen days to make the voyage.

"Lieu-kuei lies to the north of the North Sea, <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) by which it is on three sides surrounded.
To the north this peninsula touches upon the land of Jetschay, or
Tschuktschi, but the exact limits are not easy to determine; it requires
an entire month to make the journey from Kamtschatka to Jetschay. Beyond
this the land is unexplored, and no mission has as yet come from thence
to the Central Kingdom. Here are neither fortified

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

places nor towns; the people dwell in scattered groups on the
sea-islands and along the shore, or on the banks of rivers, where they
live by catching and salting fish.

Steller also assures us that the dwellings of the Itölmen, or native
Kamtschadales, are always situated on rivers, bays, or the mouths of the
lesser streams, and especially in places which are surrounded by woods.
Fish in incredible quantities, and in great variety, are found there,
serving during the long winters as pro-vender for both men and cattle.
These they prepare in many ways, but principally by salting. Those
living still more to the north subsist almost entirely on the same food,
from which they receive the name Eskimantik or Eskimo, *i.e.*,
"raw-fish-eating."

"They dwell in caves, generally dug tolerably deep in the earth, around
which they lay thick, unhewn planks."

This is applicable only to their winter dwellings; their summer
habitations are built high in the air, on posts like our dovecots. The
Itölmen dig out the earth to the depth of three or four feet in the form
of a brick, and to such an extent as the number of their family may
require. The excavated earth they pile to the height of two or three
feet around the pit thus formed, and then roof it with pieces of bark or
willow sticks, five or six feet long, which they drive deep within the
pit into the earth, so that the tops are all equally high. Between these
sticks and the earth they

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

generally lay dry straw, so that none of the earth may fall through, nor
any of the articles in the dwelling become rusty or mouldy by direct
contact with it; then they leave a shelf of earth around, about a foot
broad, and lay great beams thereon in squares, which they support on the
outside with planks and sticks stuck into the ground, so that they may
not give way externally. Then they place over them four posts cut in the
form of forks, as high as they wish to have the lodging in the middle.

Over this they lay again crosswise four beams, and fasten them with
thongs to the posts, upon which they lay on every side the rafters.
Between these rafters they put thin sticks, and across these small
pieces of wood, quite close together; this entire wooden roof they cover
to the depth of six inches with straw, shake over it the remnant of the
excavated earth, and tread it down firm. In the middle of the house they
make the hearth between four thin posts; of these posts, two form the
entrance, which is at the same time the chimney. Opposite the fireplace
they dig out an air-passage from eight to twelve feet long, according to
the size of the house, which passes beyond the limits of the dwelling
itself. This is kept closed, except when they are making a fire. To
facilitate the admission of air they build the roof of the air-passage
in such a manner that the wind continually strikes against it, and is
drawn in. If any one would enter, he must naturally descend the
door-chimney, which is done either by

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

means of a ladder, or the notched trunk of a tree. The smoky atmosphere
is very oppressive to a European, though the natives support it without
inconvenience. The little children generally creep through the draft,
which also serves as a repository for cooking utensils. In the interior,
cubes of wood are placed, to indicate the divisions of the separate
sleeping-places.

"The climate, owing to fogs and heavy snows, is very severe. The natives
are all clothed in furs, which they obtain by hunting. They also prepare
a sort of cloth from dog's-hair and different species of grass. In
winter they wear the skins of swine and reindeer; in summer, those of
fish. They have great numbers of dogs."

We know that the climate of Kamtschatka presents remarkable differences.
Districts situated at no great distance from each other have at the same
season a different temperature. The southern part of the peninsula is
damper, darker, and more exposed to terrible storm-winds, on account of
its vicinity to the sea; but the farther north we ascend on the
Pensiuischen Bay, so much the milder are the winds in winter, and so
much the less rain falls in summer. In no land are the fogs so frequent
and so thick as in Kamtschatka, nor is any country known where deeper
snows fall than between 51° and 54° of the peninsula. The natives,
therefore, naturally require the heavy sea-dog (seal) and reindeer
fur-clothing spoken of in the Chinese chronicle. The women prepare from
dried nettles and other grasses a sort of linen which serves for all
domestic purposes.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Reindeer, black
bears, wolves, foxes, and other animals are found here in abundance, and
are caught by a variety of ingenious methods, which the Chinese have
also described. Dogs, which they use instead of horses to draw their
sledges, are their only tame animals. It is an error of the Chinese
writer when he speaks of swine; they would indeed succeed in this
country, but in the time of Steller they were as yet unknown. Even at
the present day several of the north-easterly Mantchou tribes clothe
themselves in fish-skins, for which reason they are termed by the
Chinese *Jupi*, or Fish-skins.. These, like the Chadschen, belong to the
Aleutes.

"The people have no regular constitution; they know nothing of officers
and laws. If there is a robber in the land, all of the inhabitants
assemble together to judge him. They know nothing of the divisions and
courses of the four seasons. Their bows are about four feet long, and
their arrows are like those of the Middle Kingdom. They prepare from
bones and stones a sort of musical instrument; they love singing and
dancing. They place their dead in the hollow trunks of trees, and mourn
for them three years, without wearing any mourning-clothes. In the year
640, during the reign of the second Heaven's Son of Tang, came the first
and last tribute-bringing embassy from the land of Lieu-kuei to the
Middle Kingdom."

Before the conquest of their land by the Russians, the Kamtschadales
lived in a sort of community, such

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

as is generally found among all primitive tribes, as, for example, the
early Germans. Every one revenged his own wrongs with the readiest
weapons--such as bows, arrows, and bone-spears. In war they chose a
leader whose authority ceased with it. In case of theft, where the
offender was unknown, the elders called the people together, and advised
them to give him up. When this proved unsuccessful, death and
destruction were generally invoked upon his head by means of their
Shamanic sorcery. They divide the entire solar year into summer and
winter, but are ignorant of any division of time into days and weeks,
and few are able to count above forty. They pass their time principally
in dancing, singing, and relating tales and legends. Their songs and
melodies, several of which are given in Steller, are remarkably soft and
agreeable. "When I compare," says this excellent writer, "the songs of
the great Orlando Lasso, with which the King of France was so much
delighted after the Parisian Bloody Marriage, with these airs of the
Itölmen, I am compelled, so far as. agreeableness is concerned, to give
the latter the preference." The Chinese account of the three years of
mourning is groundless; at least, when the Russians first discovered
Kamtschatka, nothing of the kind existed. The sick were thrown, when
beyond all hope of recovery, to the dogs, even while yet alive, and
anything like mourning or lamenting from their surviving relatives was
seldom even thought of. It is, however, possible, if not probable, that
since the seventh century,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the manners of the Kamtschadales have much changed, or deteriorated.

The situation of the Wen-schin, or Painted People, if we are to credit
the account regarding their distance from Japan, must be sought for to
the east of Kamtschatka, and within the Aleutian group of islands. "The
land of Wen-schin," says the Year-Book of the Southern Dynasty, "is
situated about 7000 Chinese miles (or twenty of our geographical
degrees) to the north-east of Japan," <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) a direction and distance which places us
in the midst of the Aleutian or Fox group of islands. It is not readily
intelligible how Deguignes could seek and find these Painted People on
the Island of Jeso. <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13)

"Their bodies are usually covered with a variety of figures of animals
and the like. On the forehead they have three lines: the long and
straight indicate the nobles, the small and crooked the common
people." <span id="fr_14"></span>[3](#fn_14)

The Aleutian or Fox Islanders, before their conversion to Christianity,
not only cut, as is well known, a variety

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

of figures upon the body, but also bored the cartilage of the nose, and
through it stuck a pin, upon which they placed, on festive occasions,
glass beads. The women, for a similar purpose, bored the ear. Moreover,
they made cuts in the under lip, in which they wore needles of stone or
bone, about two inches long.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[8:1](fu05.htm#fr_1) *Vide* Memoires de la
Société des Antiquaires de l’Amerique du Nord, Partie linguistique
rapport fait a l’Institut Historique, par M. Antonio Renzi, Paris, 1842,
8vo.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[9:1](fu05.htm#fr_2) In the "Shajrat ul Atrak,"
or Genealogical Tree of the Turks and Tartars, translated by Colonel
Miles, London, 1838, *Tung* or *Tungus* is rendered "son of a Tartar."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[9:2](fu05.htm#fr_3) Gaubil: Observations
Mathematiques, Paris, 1732, ii. 110.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[10:1](fu05.htm#fr_4) Mantuanlin, bk. 348, p. 6.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[10:2](fu05.htm#fr_5) *Koljustchi*, or *Koljuki*,
signifies the peg or pin which those savages wear in the under lip, and
from which the name is derived. They were subsequently termed by the
Russians, who possess the land, Galloches, from the French word, merely
in jest. In the course of time this name supplanted the earlier term
Koljuken, so that all are now known as *Kaloschen*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[10:3](fu05.htm#fr_6) This is similar to the
custom of many North American Indians of the West.--C. G. L.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[11:1](fu05.htm#fr_7) Description of the Kurilean
and Aleutian Islands (translated from the Russian), Ulm, 1792, p. 16.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[12:1](fu05.htm#fr_8) Shan-hai-king, quoted in
the "Histoire des Trois Royaumes, traduite par Titsingh." Klaproth has,
according to his custom, passed off the translation, as his own. Paris,
1832, p. 218.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[12:2](fu05.htm#fr_9) Tang-schu, or, "Year-Books
of Tang," bk. 220, p. 18, v. Mantuanlin, bk. 326, p. 23, *v*., where the
report as usual is given. Titsingh: Annales des Empereurs do Japon,
Paris, 1834, p. 52. This is a remarkable coincidence in the Chinese and
Japanese Year-Books.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[14:1](fu05.htm#fr_10) *Vide* Steller's
Description of Kamtschatka, Leipzig, 1734, p. 3. All that occurs here in
quotation marks has been literally translated from the Year-Books of
Tang (Tang-schu, bk. 220, p. 19, v.) The part not thus marked is drawn
principally from Steller, and is added for explanation. The article of
Mantuanlin (bk. 347, p. 6), may be compared with the Year-Books of Tang.
The article is indeed evidently borrowed from the Tang-schu, but is much
better arranged, and contains many original incidents, on which account
I have freely availed myself of it. The compiler of the "Encyclopædia of
Kang hi" (*Juen-kien-hui-han*) satisfied himself (bk. 241, p. 19), as he
frequently did, with merely transcribing from Mantuanlin.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[16:1](fu05.htm#fr_11) In Tang-schu an error of
transcription occurs. Instead of Pe-hai, North Sea, we have Schao-hai,
"little sea." The correct reading is to be found in the two
encyclopædias already quoted. *Jetschaykno*, a kingdom, here "an
excellent country;" the Jetschay is only to be found in the
encyclopædias. The arrogant Chinese love to write the names of
foreigners with names which indicate scorn and contempt. Lieu-kuei, for
example, signifies "the devil who runs through," and Jetschay, "the
devil's companion."

<span id="fn_12"></span>[22:1](fu05.htm#fr_12) *Nausse*, *i.e.*, History
of the Southern Dynasties, bk. 79, p. 5. The same article is to be found
in *Leang-schu*, *i.e.*, in the Year-Book of Leang, bk. 54, p. 19, and
by Mantuanlin, bk. 327, p. 2.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[22:2](fu05.htm#fr_13) [Mémoires de
l’Académie](errata.htm#0) des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, xxxviii.
506. This is not the only error which this writer, so excellent in other
respects, has made in this treatise.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[22:3](fu05.htm#fr_14) While engaged on this
re-edition of Professor Neumann's work (London, March 1874), I have
frequently seen two very curious Chinese figures, carved from wood,
representing Aleutian Islanders. The faces are smooth, but the garment,
or external figure, ingeniously adapted from some wood covered with a
long fibre, gives them a very wild, hairy appearance.--C. G. L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Tahan or Aliaska, and its Discovery](fu06)
