[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fu13)  [Next](fu15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417919205/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

### THE MOUND-BUILDERS AND MEXICANS.

THERE is as yet great confusion in our knowledge if the different races
of ancient America. For, admitting that the Sioux language, or any North
American Indian language, presents traces of Asiatic derivation, this
would simply prove that the Sioux came from Asia. But it would not
explain the origin of the Aztec race, nor would it cast the least light
on the nature of the Mound-Builders, or tell us who or what the people
were whom Hoei-shin found, possibly in Mexico. With regard to these
early races, some observations by an American writer may not be deemed
out of place: <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65)--

"Centuries before the Red Indian appeared on the Northern Continent, a
race (perhaps of a kindred stock) of higher civilisation dwelt on the
western prairies. The 'Mound-Builders,' as they are appropriately
called, left their remarkable lines of earth-works from the Lower
Mississippi to the Ohio. These structures, on which successive forests
of various growths have flourished and died, still survive, and surprise
the stranger by their intricacy, skill, and the evidences of vast labour
which they display.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Some are temples,
some burial-places, some are fortifications, some are gardens, some are
representations on a gigantic scale of the forms of animals and birds,
for what purpose it is difficult to explain. Among these structures are
mounds in the form of truncated pyramids, which seem to be the first
suggestions of the pyramidal and terraced structures in Central America
and Mexico, which, perhaps; formed the highest material works of this
mysterious race. They must have conducted an inland commerce over a vast
territory, and obtained or purchased mica from the North Carolina
mountains, copper from Lake Superior, obsidian from Mexico, specular
iron from Missouri, and salt from Michigan--articles which the Red
Indians never possessed, except by accident. They understood a rude
agriculture, and the arts of weaving and of moulding pottery and figures
of animals. They even at times melted copper, and used it in
instruments, though they never seem to have done this with iron. The
forms of their skulls, and the evidences from their arts, show a milder
and more cultivated race than any the whites have ever known north of
Central America. Who they were, whence they came, of what blood or
stock, is hidden in the mists of a far antiquity. They spread their busy
life, and left their traces over the whole Central West, perhaps
existing there as long as the Anglo-Saxon race has existed, and then
they perished--their only history being written on the ground, a record
obliterated by the growth of forests for uncounted centuries, but now
partly deciphered by a people of whom they never dreamt. Before even the
Mound-Builders, lived a lower and more primeval race, the companions, in
all probability, of the fossil animals, a race whose skulls are just
being discovered near Chicago, and whose contemporaries have left their
stone implements beneath the volcanic deposits of the Sierras. This
prehistoric and primeval man belonged to tribes as low and degraded as
the present Australians; indeed, of a type more nearly approaching the
simian than any hitherto discovered (with the single exception of that
of the 'Neanderthal' skull.)"

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

The extinction of such a vast and widely-spread race as was that of the
Mound-Builders, in all probability by the fierce and powerful Red
Indian, indicates an immense extent of time. For as by no possibility
could any mere migrations from Asia have sufficed to sweep them away, it
follows that their exterminators must have long been growing in numbers
before they could effectually put an end to them. The writer from whom I
have quoted remarks, probably with truth, that the Mound-Builders were a
milder and gentler race than their successors, and far more
intellectual, as is shown by their skulls. The thoroughness with which
this numerous and widely-spread people were exterminated, and the fact
that no tradition of them has ever been found among the Red Indians,
indicate a very remote age as the period of their disappearance. And yet
it is quite certain that if, as Hoei-shin asserts, the mild and
highly-refined religion of Buddha ever took root among early Americans,
it must have been with such people as the Mound-Builders who practised
some vast and dreamy Nature-worship, which would render them peculiarly
susceptible to the teachings of the monks. For that they did practise
some such religion would appear from this, that since works like theirs
were in every other part of the world invariably erected under the
influence of belief, it is very unlikely that they formed structures
many miles in length, employing probably the labour of millions, for
mere amusement. It must have been either among such a race, or by

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

highly-civilised Aztecs, that the monks were welcomed. But it is most
unlikely that Buddhism ever made any mark upon the Aztec monarchy
itself, or upon the fierce Tolteks. Had it done so, we should find its
traces to this day. There is a wonderful leaven in Buddhism; it
penetrates deeply wherever it goes; it changes strong and energetic
faiths; it even blended intimately with the vigorous Greek element in
Northern India.

Meanwhile antiquarians are constantly collecting new facts, which
indicate a mysterious knowledge by the Mexicans of many phenomena of the
so-called Old World. Even while writing, I learn that Senor José Ostiz
de Tapia has now in New York a museum of Mexican antiquities, which is
said to be by far the most important ever yet made. This gentleman, who
has been for many years investigating the archæology of Central America,
has collected many thousand objects. One of these is a remarkable stone
image, said, according to Indian tradition, to be that of Cucumaz, the
God of the Air. "It is cut from a block of chocolate-coloured porphyry,
is about two feet high, and about eighteen inches in diameter. The shape
is that of a feathered serpent in a solid coil, from whose
widely-distended mouth the head of a woman emerges, her arms and legs
appearing between the coils. This is supposed to represent the creation
of woman. The type of her face bears no likeness to that of any race
which ever lived in Mexico, but much resembles

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the sculptured faces found in Egyptian ruins. Another singular
curiosity, that also appears to connect the New with the Old World in
prehistoric times, is an image cut from a black stone in the likeness of
a negro. Not only are the features of the true Ethiopian type, but the
shape of the head and the conformation of the figure. Both these small
statues are admirably carved and finished, although their worshippers
were certainly ignorant of the use of iron."

So were the ancient Egyptians; but, like the Mexicans, they had copper,
which the latter, as it has been proved, brought from Lake Superior; and
the Egyptians made bronze as hard as iron, an art but recently
rediscovered. Yet all such testimony requires thoroughly scientific
treatment. The day has gone by when loose hearsay evidence and wild
conjecture passed current for very fair archeology or ethnology. The man
who cannot absolutely prove a fact beyond all suspicion of forgery,
exaggeration, and chance coincidence, must be satisfied to offer his
conjectures very modestly, and merely with the hope that they will
attract the attention of others who may deem the hint thus given of
sufficient importance to develop by further investigation. Discoveries
like those of the Spanish archaeologist may be multiplied *ad
infinitum*. But they prove nothing beyond an antecedent probability. And
as I have kept this strictly in mind through every sentence of this
work, having specially selected the illustration by Mr Roehrig on the
affinities

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

of the languages in preference to others, ou account of its *cautious*
spirit, I trust that I may not be accused of positively believing that
the "discovery" of America by Buddhist monks is an established fact.

It is, however, more than merely probable that we shall yet make very
important discoveries as to the Mound-Builders of America. An immense
stock of their remains are still buried, and, in the present rudimentary
state of the archaeology of prehistoric man, little has been done--very
little--with the material which has been gathered. The following brief
notice from the *Saturday Review* of a recent work ou the subject, sums
up in reality nearly all that is known of the mysterious race which once
covered such an immense extent of American soil with works strikingly
like those of the Old World:

"No one," says the reviewer, "will long remain in uncertainty whether
the Mound-Builders were or were not the ancestors of the tribes who
succeeded them in their possession. The author of 'Prehistoric
Races' <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) is in no such perplexity; nor
do we think that any one who compares the two will long remain in
uncertainty. The vast size of the mound-works, their enormous number,
and their elaborate formation, imply conditions wholly unlike those
described in the volume already noticed. They imply not a thin
population of free hunters and warriors, obtaining a fairly comfortable
but uncertain sustenance by the chase and fishing and a scanty
agriculture, but a vast nation,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

well fed by the labour of a portion only of its available numbers, and
therefore able to spend immense toil on such constructions; governed,
probably, by powerful princes able to dispose of the exertions of their
people at their pleasure; and, if Dr Foster is right, an extensive
empire under a single rule, able to rely on the frontier defences for
the security of the interior. We have lately noticed other works on this
subject, and it will therefore suffice to state in this place that Dr
Foster's book is one of the best and clearest accounts we have seen of
those grand monuments of a forgotten race, and to note its peculiar
merits. The most important of these is the distinct judgment expressed
on the purpose of these works. They may be divided into three classes:
the animal mounds, or imitations of animal forms, in rude but gigantic
earthworks, chiefly to be found in Wisconsin, to which it is difficult
to assign any object, except one of religion or commemoration; those
which, square or round in shape, appear to have been intended as the
foundations of temple observatories for the worship of the heavenly
bodies, or of dwellings (often crowded together in such numbers that we
can hardly assign any but the latter purpose), and yet not entrenched;
and those works which are distinctly entrenchments, often containing
mounds of the second class. It is possible, we suppose, that the mounds
of the second class may have been separately stockaded, and in that case
they would have been easily defensible; but where several are found near
together with no entrenchments connecting them, it is difficult to think
that defence was their primary purpose. On the other hand, the
earthworks which enclose great spaces of land generally appear, by their
form and location, to have been fortifications; and Dr Foster observes
that they rarely appear in the centre of the region occupied by these
monuments, but rather on its northern border, where the empire would be
chiefly exposed to the incursions of warlike enemies. To the question,
what has become of the builders, the author replies by citing traditions
of the earlier and more civilised possessors of Mexico, which indicate
that they once occupied

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

a much more northerly settlement, and were driven thence by conquering
enemies. The absence of any relics of stone buildings on the mounds,
compared with the grand stone ruins of Mexico, forms an obstacle to the
identification of the earlier Mexicans with the Mound-Builders; but it
is barely possible that a people who built entirely with wood in an
alluvial country might learn to erect vast buildings of stone in one of
a different character. And a long period may have elapsed between the
ejection of the Mound-Builders and the Aztec conquest of Mexico--a
period sufficient to account for great changes in the habits of the
emigrant race. For we know, at least, that two successive forest growths
have covered many of the mounds since they were abandoned, each of which
must have occupied centuries, and may have occupied almost any length of
time. The Indians appear to have had no tradition of the Mound-Builders,
no story of their conquest, no legend even to account for the existence
of the mounds. 'Our fathers found them here when they came' is surely
not the sole reminiscence of a great war, and of the conquest of a
civilised people and a fortified empire, that would linger among the
children of the conquerors. Such an answer seems to imply either the
interposition of a second race and a second extermination, or an
enormous lapse of time, sufficient to extinguish the very memory of such
a history as always lingers longest in the minds of a warlike race--a
history, too, of which the monuments were always under their eyes."

Assuming these deductions as representing the state of our knowledge of
the Mound-Builders, it would seem more probable that they preceded the
present inhabitants in Western America by hundreds, or even thousands,
of years, than that they were known to the Buddhist priests whom we
suppose may have visited their land. It is possible--though it is as yet
anything but capable of demonstration--that the civilised races of

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

old New Mexico, as we still see them represented in the Pueblos, were
descended from the Mound-Builders, and that their ancestors were
exterminated or driven to the south by a rude, fierce, semi-Mongol race,
which, derived from Asia, gradually changed its characteristics with
climate and intermixture, until it became the present Red Indian. For it
is very certain that thousands of American Indians, particularly those
of short stature, or of the dwarfish tribes, bear a most extraordinary
likeness to Mongols. A closer study of the Indians remaining in New
Mexico would throw light on this question. Meanwhile, it may be
temporarily assumed that, as nearly every point in Hoei-shin's narrative
seems to agree more or less with something known of the Mexican,
Peruvian, or New Mexican history or legends, it was not with the old
Mound-Builders that the monks came in contact.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[110:1](fu14.htm#fr_65) *New York Times*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[115:1](fu14.htm#fr_66) Prehistoric Races of the
United States of America, by Y. W. Foster, LL.D., author of the
"Physical Geography of the Mississippi Valley," &c. Chicago: Griggs &
Co.; London: Trübuer & Cu., 1873.--*Saturday Review*, Aug. 30, 1874.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Images of Buddha](fu15)
