[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1104)  [Next](sbe1106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

# TEVIGGA-SUTTANTA.

### INTRODUCTION

###### TO

## THE TEVI*GG*A SUTTA.

THIS is the twelfth and last Sutta in the first division of the Dîgha
Nikâya, which is called the Sîlakkhandha Vaggo, because the whole of its
twelve Dialogues deal, from one point of view or another, with Sîla, or
Right Conduct.

There is another Sutta sometimes called by the same name, No. 21 in the
Middle Fifty of the Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya: but it has nothing, except the
name, in common with the present. It is called Tevi*gg*a Sutta merely
because Gotama is there described by the complimentary title of
Tevi*gg*a, 'Wise in the Vedas;' and its full name is the
Tevi*gg*a-va*kkh*agotta-sutta\[1\].

I have made the present translation from a text constituted from three
MSS.,--my own MS. of the Dîgha Nikâya, referred to as D; the Turnour MS.
of the same in the Indian Office, referred to as T; both in Sinhalese
characters: and the Phayre MS. in the same place, in Burmese characters,
referred to as P.

------------------------

In this book we have Right Conduct used as a sort of argumentum ad
hominem for the conversion of two earnest young Brâhmans.

They ask which is the true path to a state of union (in the next birth)
with God. After arguing, in a kind of Socratic dialogue, that on their
own showing, on the

\[1. It may be noted, in passing, that the substance of it recurs as the
Va*khh*agotta Sa*m*yutta in the Sa*m*yutta Nikâya.\]

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

basis of facts they themselves admitted, the Brâhmans could have no real
knowledge of their God, Gotama maintains that union with a God whom they
admitted to be pure and holy must be unattainable by men impure and
sinful and self-righteous, however great their knowledge of the Vedas.
And he then lays down, not without occasional beauty of language, that
system of Right Conduct, which must be the only direct way to a real
union with God.

One would think perhaps that such a Sutta might be adapted, without very
great difficulty, for use as a missionary tract, so closely does it
remind us of the argument of many a sermon on the text, 'Except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter the kingdom of heaven!' And it is
true that the Tevi*gg*â--the men of special knowledge in the three
Vedas--correspond exactly in most essential particulars with the Scribes
and Pharisees of the New Testament. They were the official preservers by
repeating, as the Scribes were by copying, the sacred books; and they
were the recognised interpreters, and the sole custodians of the
traditional interpretation--which too often explained away the real
meaning--of those books. It follows that as the law in both cases was
included in the sacred books, it was they who, in both cases, were the
real lawgivers, and practically the only lawyers. And as almost all
learning was confined to, or in close connection with the sacred books,
the Tevi*gg*â were the chief Pa*nd*its, as the Scribes were the 'Doctors
of the Law.' Like the Pharisees, too, the Brâhmans laid claim to
peculiar sanctity; and many of them in the pride of their education,
their birth, and their wealth, looked down with self-righteous scorn on
the masses of the people. And while, on the other hand, the Brâhmans
further resembled the Scribes and Pharisees in that many of them were
justly deserving of the respect in which they were held; it is only the
undeserving who, in both cases, are intended to be condemned.

But whatever interpretation of the 'kingdom of heaven'

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

the reader may adopt, it must be very different from anything the Sutta
can mean by 'a state of union with Brahmâ.' It is not easy to say what
opinion is really imputed to the young Brâhmans before their conversion.
It is probably meant that they were seeking a way by which their Self
should become identified, after death, with Brâhman; a way by which they
could escape from the immortality of transmigration, from existence
altogether as separate individuals\[1\]. And in holding out a hope of
union with Brahmâ as a result of the practice of universal love\[2\],
the Buddha is most probably intended to mean 'a union with Brahmâ' in
the Buddhist sense--that is to say, a temporary companionship as a
separate being with the Buddhist Brahmâ, to be enjoyed by a new
individual not consciously identical with its predecessor. It is just
possible that the argumentum ad hominem should be extended to this part
of the Sutta; and that the statement in III, 1 should be taken to mean,
'This (universal love) is the only way to that kind of union with your
own Brahmâ which you desire.' But such a yielding to heretical opinion
at the close of his own exposition of the truth would scarcely be
imputed to a Buddha.

Just as during the time of the early Christians, in the way which
Archbishop Trench has so instructively pointed out, it was not men only
who received a new birth and a new baptism, but old words and terms of
common use were also infused with a new spirit; so the Indian reformer,
while clothing his new system in the current phraseology, infused a
different and in many cases a higher meaning into the old expressions.

Thus, for instance, Tevi*gg*a (Sanskrit Traividya) meant either
knowledge of the Three Vedas, or as an adjective, a Brâhman possessed of
that knowledge; and then, as a noun of multitude, such an assembly of
those Brâhmans

\[1. Compare Professor Max Müller's Preface to the Sacred Books of the
East, vol. i. p. xxx.

2\. See Chapter III, §§ 1, 2.\]

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

as is described in the first sections of our Sutta. As there were many
Brâhmans who had not that knowledge, the word naturally came to imply a
person worthy of the respect due to special learning, and was used as a
complimentary title, not very different from our Doctor. It is preserved
as an epithet of Arahats in the Buddhist writings, but as meaning one
possessed of the knowledge of a fundamental threefold doctrine of
Buddhism, the doctrine of the impermanency, the inherent pain, and the
absence of any abiding principle (any Self) in the confections or
component things\[1\]. That is to say, the knowledge of the Vedas was
replaced by a knowledge of the real character of the deceptive and
evanescent phenomena by which we are encircled, and of which we form a
part.

So also with regard to Brahmâ. The name was retained, but the idea was
entirely changed. The course of religious belief had passed among the
Indian section of the Aryan tribes through the usual stages of animism
and polytheism to a kind of pantheism peculiar to India, in which
Brahman was held to be a first cause, the highest self, emotionless,
infinite, absolute. As the Buddhist system was constructed without any
use of the previous idea of a separate soul, or self, or ghost, or
spirit, supposed to exist inside the human body, this woven chain of
previous speculation had as little importance for it as theological
discussions have for positivism. But Buddhism fell into what to the
positivist would be the unpardonable sin--perhaps inevitable at the time
and place of its youth--of continuing to express a belief in the
external spirits, big and little, of the then Hindu pantheon.

They were preserved very much in the previous order of precedence, and
were all--except Mâra, the Evil One, and his personal following, and a
few others--supposed to be passably good Buddhists. They were not feared
any more; they were patronized as a kind of fairies, usually beneficent,

\[1. See *K*ulla Vagga VI, 6, 2, = *G*âtaka, vol. i. p. 217;
Mahâva*m*sa, p. 79; Dîpava*m*sa XV, 80 (where the Arahats are women);
and on 'confections' below, in the Introduction to the 'Book of the
Great King of Glory.'\]

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

though always more or less foolish and ignorant. They were of course not
worshipped any more, for they were much less worthy of reverence than
any wise and good man. And they were not eternal,--all of them, even the
very best or highest, being liable, like all things and all other
creatures, to dissolution. If they had behaved well they were then
reborn under happy outward conditions, and might even look forward to
being some day born as men, so that they could attain to the supreme
goal of the Buddhist faith, to that bliss which passeth not away,--the
Nirvâ*n*a of a perfect life in Arahatship.

The duty of a Buddhist who had entered the Noble Path towards these
light and airy shapes--for to such vain things had the great gods
fallen--was the same as his duty towards every fellow creature; pity for
his ignorance, sympathy with his weakness, equanimity (the absence of
fear or malice, or the sense of any differing or opposing interest), and
the constant feeling of a deep and lasting love, all pervading, grown
great, and beyond measure.

No exception was made in the case of Brahmâ. He, like every other
creature that had life, was evanescent, was bound by the chain of
existence, the result of ignorance, and could only find salvation by
walking along the Noble Eightfold Path. It must be remembered that the
Brahmâ of modern times, the God of the ardent theism of some of the best
of the later Hindus, had not then come into existence: that conception
was one effect of the influence of Mohammadan and Christian thought upon
Hindu minds. And it would be useless to conjecture how the Buddhist
theory might have been modified by contact with that ideal.

While regarded however as essentially of the same class as all other
external spirits, Brahmâ was still regarded as a superior spirit, as a
very devout Buddhist, and as a kind of king among the angels. The Brahmâ
of this world system, who was living in Gotama's time, and who is living
now, acquired his present exalted position from his virtue in a previous
birth as a Bhikkhu named Sahaka

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

in the time when Kassapa Buddha's religion flourished upon earth\[1\].
According to the author of the *G*âtaka commentary, he assisted at the
future Buddha's birth\[2\]; and twice afterwards he rendered service to
the Bodisat just before the great conflict with Mâra\[3\]. And when
after the victory the Blessed One hesitated whether it would be of any
use to tell to others the truth he had found, it was Brahmâ who appeared
and besought him to proclaim the truth\[4\] . Brahmâ Sahampati was the
first to give utterance to the universal sorrow which followed on the
death of the Buddha\[5\]; and at a critical period in the later history
of the Buddhist church he is represented to have descended from heaven,
and to have appeared to the Thera Sâ*lh*a, to confirm his wavering
faith\[6\].

These instances will show the high character ascribed to the Brahmâ of
the world system in which we live; and in each of the infinite world
systems which are scattered through space there is supposed to be a like
finite, temporary, virtuous Brahmâ sitting as king over the most exalted
of the angel hosts.

It must be evident that it follows, without the possibility of question,
that the early Buddhists cannot with any accuracy be described as
'monotheists,' and it is much to be regretted that even cultured and
scholarly writers still speak of them as such, and can suggest that the
independent monotheism of the later Jews can be paralleled by a supposed
monotheism among the Buddhists\[7\].

And even if the idea of Brahmâ were at all the same as the idea of God,
a union with this Brahmâ would mean a merely temporary life as an angel
in the Brahmâ heaven--such a life as is represented below to have been
the result

\[1. Teste a comment quoted by Childers, Dict. p. 227.

2\. 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. 66.

3\. Ibid. pp. 92, 97.

4\. Ibid. p. 111. Related already in the Mahâ Vagga I, 2; 6, 7.

5\. Book of the Great Decease, Chapter VI, § 4.

6\. 'Mahâva*m*sa, p. 17.

7 'Their (the Jews') monotheism was perhaps independently evolved; but
the Buddhists at least showed a contemporary monotheism.' Mr. Huth, in
'Life &c. of Buckle,' p. 238.\]

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

of the noble life and noble thoughts of the Great King of Glory. But
this was not the supreme goal of the Buddhist faith; and the angel,
though the same person as the king, from the Buddhist point of view (as
resulting from, and carrying on, the same Karma), would be a different
person from the king, according to the Christian point of view; for
there is no mention of the passage of a soul from the earth to heaven,
no conscious identity, no continuing memory.

------------------------

We may draw, from the above, two conclusions. Firstly, that the use of a
word in Sanskrit authors is but very little guide to the meaning of the
corresponding word in the Pâli Buddhist scriptures whenever the word has
reference to an idea of a religious character.

And, secondly, that very little reliance can be placed, without careful
investigation, on a resemblance--however close at first sight-between a
passage in the Pâli Pi*t*akas and a passage in the New Testament.

It is true that many passages in these two literatures can be easily
shown to have a similar tendency. But when some writers on the basis of
such similarities proceed to argue that there must have been some
historical connection between the two, and that the New Testament, as
the later, must be the borrower, I venture to think that they are wrong.
There does not seem to me to be the slightest evidence of any historical
connection between them; and whenever the resemblance is a real one--and
it often turns out to be really least when it first seems to be
greatest, and really greatest when it first seems least--it is due, not
to any borrowing on the one side or on the other, but solely to the
similarity of the conditions under which the two movements grew.

This does not of course apply to the later literature of the two
religions; and it ought not to detract from the very great value and
interest of the parallels which may be adduced from the earlier books.
If we wish to understand what it was that gave such life and force to
the stupendous movement which is called Buddhism, we

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

cannot refrain from comparing it--not only in the points in which it
agrees with it, but also in the points in which it differs from it--with
our own faith. I trust I have not been wrong in making use occasionally
of this method, though the absence of any historical connection between
the New Testament and the Pâli Pi*t*akas has always seemed to me so
clear, that it would be unnecessary to mention it. But when a reviewer
who has been kind enough to appreciate, I am afraid too highly, what he
calls my 'service in giving, for the first time, a thoroughly human,
acceptable, and coherent' account of the 'life of Buddha,' and of the
'simple groundwork of his religion' has gone on to conclude that the
parallels I had thus adduced are 'an unanswerable indication of the
obligations of the New Testament to Buddhism,' I must ask to be allowed
to enter a protest against an inference which seems to me to be against
the rules of sound historical criticism.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

### ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.

## TEVI*GG*A-SUTTA.

#### CHAPTER I.

1\. This have I heard. At one time when the Blessed One was journeying
through Kosala with a great company of the brethren, with about five
hundred brethren, he came to the Brâhman village in Kosala which is
called Manasâka*t*a. And there at Manasâka*t*a the Blessed One stayed in
the mango grove, on the bank of the river A*k*iravatî, to the south of
Manasâka*t*a \[1\].

2\. Now at that time many very distinguished and wealthy Brâhmans were
staying at Manasâka*t*a--to wit, *K*a<u>n</u>kî the Brâhman, Târukkha
the Brâhman, Pokkharasâti the Brâhman, Gâ*n*usso*n*i the Brâhman,
Todeyya the Brâhman, and other very distinguished and wealthy
Brâhmans\[2\].

\[1. Burnouf, in a long note at 'Lotus,' &c., p. 491, already attempted
to show that the river A*k*iravatî is the same as the modern Rapti,
which he supposed to be a corruption of the latter part of the longer
name. Hiouen Thsang mentions a river A-chi-lo-fa-ti, which is doubtless
the same. It is evidently the river on which stood the town of Sâvatthi,
and near to which lay the *G*etavana monastery (see 'Buddhist Birth
Stories,' p. 331); and it must therefore, in accordance with Burnouf's
conjecture, be the Rapti, which is the Sanskrit Irâvati. The Phayre
Burmese MS. has almost always A*k*îravatî.

2 Buddhaghosa says that

Ka<u>n</u>kî lived at Opasâda,  
Târukkha lived at I*kkh*agala, {footnote p. 167}  
Pokkharasâdi (sic MS.) lived at Ukka*tth*a,  
*G*ânusso*n*i lived at Sâvatthi, and  
Todeyya lived at Tudigâma.

There is some difference in the MSS. as to the spelling of these names:
T. reads *K*a<u>n</u>kî; P. T. and D. Pokkharasâti (Sanskrit
Paushkarasâdi); P. *G*ânuyoni, T. *G*â*n*uso*n*i, D. *G*ânusoni; P.
Toreyya, and Burnouf Nodeyya (which is possibly merely a misreading).
Gâ*n*uso*n*i was converted by the Bhaya-bherava Sutta, and I think it
very probable that the other names are also those of subsequent
converts.

Buddhaghosa adds that because Manasâka*t*a was a pleasant place the
Brâhmans had built huts there on the bank of the river and fenced them
in, and used to go and stay there from time to time to repeat their
mantras.\]

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

3\. Now a conversation sprung up between Vâse*tth*a and Bhâradvâ*g*a,
when they were taking exercise (after their bath) and walking up and
down in thoughtful mood, as to which was the true path, and which the
false\[1\].

4\. The young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a spake thus:

'This is the straight path, this the direct way which leads him, who
acts according to it, into a state of union with Brahmâ\[2\]--I mean
that which has been announced by the Brâhman Pokkarasâti.'

5\. The young Brâhman Bhâradvâ*g*a spake thus:

\[1. *G*a<u>n</u>ghâvihâra*m* anu*k*a<u>n</u>kamantâna*m*
anuvi*k*arantâna*m*. On the first word see *G*âtaka II, 2 7 2 (and comp.
I 1, 2 40). *K*ankamati is to walk up and down thinking. I have added
'after their bath' from Buddhaghosa, who says that this must be
understood to have taken place when, after learning by heart and
repeating all day, they went down in the evening to the river-side to
bathe, and then walked up and down on the sand.

2\. Brahma-sahavyatâya. The first part of the compound is masculine (see
below, § 12), but the Buddhists probably included under the name, when
put into the mouth of Brâhmans, all that the Brahmans included under
both Brahmâ and Brâhman. The Buddhist archangel or god Brahmâ is
different from both, being part of an entirely different system of
thought.\]

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

'This is the straight path, this the direct way which leads him, who
acts according to it, into a state of union with Brahmâ--I mean that
which has been announced by the Brâhman Târukkha.'

6\. But neither was the young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a able to convince the
young Brâhman Bhâradvâ*g*a, nor was the young Brâhman Bhâradvâga able to
convince the young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a.

7\. Then the young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a said to the young Brâhman
Bhâradvâ*g*a:

'That Sama*n*a Gotama, Bhâradvâ*g*a, of the Sakya clan, who left the
Sakya tribe to adopt the religious life, is now staying at Manasâka*t*a,
in the mango grove, on the bank of the river A*k*iravatî, to the south
of Manasâka*t*a. Now regarding that venerable Gotama, such is the high
reputation that has been noised abroad, that he is said to be "a fully
enlightened one, blessed and worthy, abounding in wisdom and goodness,
happy, with knowledge of the world, unsurpassed as a guide to erring
mortals, a teacher of gods and men, a blessed Buddha\[1\]." Come, then,
Bhâradvâga, let us go to the place where the Sama*n*a Gotama is; and
when we have come there, let us ask the Sama*n*a Gotama touching this
matter. What the Sama*n*a Gotama shall declare unto us, that let us bear
in mind.'

'Very well, my friend!' said the young Brâhman Bhâradvâ*g*a, in assent,
to the young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a.

------------------------

8\. Then the young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a and the young Brâhman Bhâradvâ*g*a
went on to the place where the Blessed One was.

\[1. See below, § 46.\]

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

And when they had come there, they exchanged with the Blessed One the
greetings and compliments of friendship and civility, and sat down
beside him.

And while they were thus seated the young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a said to the
Blessed One:

'As we, Gotama, were taking exercise and walking up and down, there
sprung up a conversation between us on which was the true path and which
the false. I said thus:

'"This is the straight path, this the direct way which leads him, who
acts according to it, into a state of union with Brahmâ--I mean that
which has been announced by the Brâhman Pokkarasâti."

'Bhâradvâga said thus:

'"This is the straight path, this the direct way which leads him, who
acts according to it, into a state of union with Brahmâ--I mean that
which has been announced by the Brâhman Târukkha."

'Regarding this matter, Gotama, there is a strife, a dispute, a
difference of opinion between us.'

------------------------

9\. 'So you say, Vâse*tth*a, that you said thus:

'"This is the straight path, this the direct way which leads him, who
acts according to it, into a state of union with Brahmâ--I mean that
which has been announced by the Brâhman Pokkarasâti."

'While Bhâradvâ*g*a said thus:

'"This is the straight path, this the direct way which leads him, who
acts according to it, into a state of union with Brahmâ--I mean that
which has been announced by the Brâhman Târukkha."

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

'Wherein, then, O Vâse*tth*a, is there a strife, a dispute, a difference
of opinion between you\[1\]?'

10\. 'Concerning the true path and the false, Gotama. Various Brâhmans,
Gotama, teach various paths--the Addhariya Brâhmans, the Tittiriya
Brâhmans, the *Kh*andoka Brâhmans, the *Kh*andava Brâhmans, the
Brahma*k*ariya Brâhmans\[2\]. Are all those saving paths? Are they all
paths which will lead him, who acts according to them, into a state of
union with Brahmâ?

'Just, Gotama, as near a village or a town there are many and various
paths\[3\], yet they all meet together in the village--just in that way
are all the various paths taught by various Brâhmans-the Addhariya
Brâhmans, the Tittiriya Brâhmans, the *Kh*andoka Brâhmans, the
*Kh*andava Brâhmans, the Brahma*k*ariya Brâhmans. Are all these saving
paths? Are they all paths which will lead him, who acts according to
them, into a state of union with Brahmâ?'

11\. 'Do you say that they all lead aright, Vâse*tth*a

'I say so, Gotama.'

'Do you really say that they all lead aright, Vâse*tth*a?'

'So I say, Gotama.'

\[1. This is either mildly sarcastic--as much as to say, 'that is six to
one, and half a dozen to the other'--or is intended to lead on
Vâse*tth*a to confess still more directly the fact that the different
theologians held inconsistent opinions.

2\. P. here Atthariyâ, but below Addhariyâ (Sans. Adhvaryu); D.
Titittiriyâ, T. Tattiriyâ, P. apparently Titthiriyâ (Sans. Taittirîya);
D. *Kh*andâva, T. P. omit (? Sans. *Kh*ândasa); all three MSS.
*Kh*andoka (Sans. *Kh*andoga); p. Bavhadi*g*â here and below
*K*avhadi*g*â for Brahma*k*ariyâ (? Sans. Brahma*k*ârî). See 'Lotus,' p.
493.

3\. Maggâni, which is noteworthy as a curious change of gender.\]

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

12\. 'But then, Vâse*tth*a, is there a single one of the Brâhmans versed
in the Three Vedas who has ever seen Brahmâ face to face?'

'No, indeed, Gotama!'

'But is there then, Vâse*tth*a, a single one of the teachers of the
Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas who has seen Brahmâ face to face?'

'No, indeed, Gotama!'

'But is there then, Vâse*tth*a, a single one of the pupils of the
teachers of the Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas who has seen Brahmâ
face to face?'

'No, indeed, Gotama!'

'But is there then, Vâse*tth*a, a single one of the Brâhmans up to the
seventh generation who has seen Brahmâ face to face?'

'No, indeed, Gotama!'

13\. 'Well then, Vâse*tth*a, those ancient *Ri*shis of the Brâhmans
versed in the Three Vedas, the authors of the verses, the utterers of
the verses, whose ancient form of words so chaunted, uttered, or
composed, the Brâhmans of to-day chaunt over again or repeat; intoning
or reciting exactly as has been intoned or recited--to wit, A*tth*aka,
Vâmaka, Vâmadeva, Vessâmitta, Yamataggi, A<u>n</u>girasa, Bhâradvâ*g*a,
Vâse*tth*a, Kassapa, and Bhagu\[1\]--did even they speak thus, saying:
"We know it, we have seen it, where Brahmâ is, whence Brahmâ is, whither
Brahmâ is?"'

'Not so, Gotama!'

14\. 'Then you say, Vâse*tth*a \[that not one of the Brâhmans, or of
their teachers, or of their pupils, even up to the seventh generation,
has ever seen Brahmâ face to face. And that even the *Ri*shis of

\[1. See Mahâ Vagga VI, 35, 2.\]

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

old, the authors and utterers of the verses, of the ancient form of
words which the Brâhmans of to-day so carefully intone and recite
precisely as they have been handed down--even they did not pretend to
know or to have seen where or whence or whither Brahmâ
is\]<sup>\[1\]</sup>. So that the Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas
have forsooth said thus: "What we know not, what we have not seen, to a
state of union with that we can show the way, and can say: 'This is the
straight path, this is the direct way which leads him, who acts
according to it, into a state of union with Brahmâ!'"

'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? Does it not follow, this being so, that
the talk of the Brâhmans, versed though they be in the Three Vedas, is
foolish talk?'

'In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that the talk of the
Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas is foolish talk!'

15\. 'Verily, Vâse*tth*a, that Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas should
be able to show the way to a state of union with that which they do not
know, neither have seen--such a condition of things has no existence!

'Just, Vâse*tth*a, as when a string of blind men are clinging one to the
other\[2\], neither can the foremost

\[1. In the text §§ 12, 13 are repeated word for word.

2\. Andhave*n*î parampara*m* sa*m*sattâ. The Phayre MS. has replaced
ve*n*î by pave*n*î, after the constant custom of the Burmese MSS. to
improve away unusual or difficult expressions. Buddhaghosa explains
andhave*n*i by andhapave*n*i, and tells a tale of a wicked wight, who
meeting a company of blind men, told them of a certain village wherein
plenty of good food was to be had. When they besought him for hire to
lead them there, be took the money, made one blind man catch hold of his
stick, the next of that one, and so on, and then led them on till they
came to a wilderness. There he deserted them, and they all--still
{footnote p. 174} holding each the other, and vainly, and with tears,
seeking both their guide and the path--came to a miserable end!\]

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

see, nor can the middle one see, nor can the hindmost see--just even so,
methinks, Vâse*tth*a, is the talk of the Brâhmans versed in the Three
Vedas but blind talk: the first sees not, the middle one sees not, nor
can the latest see. The talk then of these Brâhmans versed in the Three
Vedas turns out to be ridiculous, mere words, a vain and empty thing!'

------------------------

16\. 'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? Can the Brâhmans versed in the
Three Vedas--like other, ordinary, folk--see the sun and the moon as
they pray to, and praise, and worship them, turning round with clasped
hands towards the place whence they rise and where they set?'

'Certainly, Gotama, they \[can\]<sup>\[1\]</sup>.'

17\. 'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? The Brâhmans versed in the Three
Vedas, who can very well--like other, ordinary, folk--see the sun and
the moon as they pray to, and praise, and worship them, turning round
with clasped hands to the place whence they rise and where they set--are
those Brâhmans, versed in the Three Vedas, able to point out the way to
a state of union with the sun or the moon, saying: "This is the straight
path, this the direct way which leads him, who acts according to it, to
a state of union with the sun or the moon?"'

'Certainly not, Gotama!'

18\. 'So you say, Vâse*tth*a, that the Brâhmans \[are not able to point
out the way to union with that

\[1. The words of the question are repeated in the text in this and the
following answers. It must be remembered, for these sections, that the
sun and moon were Gods just as much as Brahmâ.\]

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

which they have seen\], and you further say that \[neither any one of
them, nor of their pupils, nor of their predecessors even to the seventh
generation has ever seen Brahmâ\]. And you further say that even the
*Ri*shis of old, \[whose words they hold in such deep respect, did not
pretend to know, or to have seen where, or whence, or whither Brahmâ is.
Yet these Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas say, forsooth, that they
can point out the way to union with that which they know not, neither
have seen!\]' Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? Does it not follow that,
this being so, the talk of the Brâhmans, versed though they be in the
Three Vedas, is foolish talk?'

'In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that the talk of the
Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas is foolish talk!'

19\. 'Very good, Vâse*tth*a. Verily then, Vâse*tth*a, that Brâhmans
versed in the Three Vedas should be able to show the way to a state of
union with that which they do not know, neither have seen--such a
condition of things has no existence.

------------------------

'Just, Vâse*tth*a, as if a man should say, "How I long for, how I love
the most beautiful woman in this land!"

'And people should ask him, "Well! good friend! this most beautiful
woman in the land whom you thus love and long for, do you know whether
that beautiful woman is a noble lady or a Brâhman woman, or of the
trader class, or a *S*ûdra?"

'But when so asked he should answer "No."

'And when people should ask him, "Well! good

\[1. The text repeats at length the words of §§ 12, 13, 14.\]

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

friend! this most beautiful woman in all the land, whom you so love and
long for, do you know what the name of that most beautiful woman is, or
what is her family name, whether she be tall or short, dark or of medium
complexion, black or fair, or in what village or town or city she
dwells?"

'But when so asked he should answer "No."

'And then people should say to him, "So then, good friend, whom you know
not, neither have seen, her do you love and long for?"

'And then when so asked he should answer "Yes."'

'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? Would it not turn out, that being so,
that the talk of that man was foolish talk?'

'In sooth, Gotama, it would turn out, that being so, that the talk of
that man was foolish talk!'

20\. 'And just even so, Vâse*tth*a, though you say that the Brahmans
\[are not able to point out the way to union with that which they have
seen\], and you further say that \[neither any one of them, nor of their
pupils, nor of their predecessors even to the seventh generation has
ever seen Brahmâ\]. And you further say that even the *Ri*shis of old,
\[whose words they hold in such deep respect, did not pretend to know,
or to have seen where, or whence, or whither Brahmâ is. Yet these
Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas say, forsooth, that they can point
out the way to union with that which they know not, neither have seen!\]
Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? Does it not follow that, this being so,
the talk of the Brâhmans, versed though they be in the Three Vedas, is
foolish talk?'

'In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

the talk of the Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas is foolish talk!'

'Very good, Vâse*tth*a. Verily then, Vâse*tth*a, that Brâhmans versed in
the Three Vedas should be able to show the way to a state of union with
that which they do not know, neither have seen--such a condition of
things has no existence.'

------------------------

21\. 'Just, Vâse*tth*a, as if a man should make a staircase in the place
where four roads cross, to mount up into a mansion. And people should
say to him, "Well, good friend, this mansion, to mount up into which you
are making this staircase, do you know whether it is in the east, or in
the south, or in the west, or in the north? whether it is high or low or
of medium size?'

'And when so asked he should answer "No."'

'And people should say to him, "But then, good friend, you are making a
staircase to mount up into something--taking it for a mansion--which,
all the while, you know not, neither have seen!"

'And when so asked he should answer "Yes."'

'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? Would it not turn out, that being so,
that the talk of that man was foolish talk?'

'In sooth, Gotama, it would turn out, that being so, that the talk of
that man was foolish talk!'

22\. 'And just even so, Vâse*tth*a, though you say that the Brâhmans
\[are not able to point out the way to union with that which they have
seen\], and you further say that \[neither any one of them, nor of their
pupils, nor of their predecessors even to the seventh generation has
ever seen Brahmâ\]. And you further say that even the *Ri*shis of old,
\[whose

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

words they hold in such deep respect, did not pretend to know, or to
have seen where, or whence, or whither Brahmâ is. Yet these Brâhmans
versed in the Three Vedas say, forsooth, that they can point out the way
to union with that which they know not, neither have seen!\] Now what
think you, Vâse*tth*a? Does it not follow that, this being so, the talk
of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas is foolish talk?'

'In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that the talk of the
Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas is foolish talk!'

23\. 'Very good, Vâse*tth*a. Verily then, Vâse*tth*a, that Brâhmans
versed in the Three Vedas should be able to show the way to a state of
union with that which they do not know, neither have seen--such
condition of things has no existence.'

24\. 'Again, Vâse*tth*a, if this river A*k*iravatî were full of water
even to the brim, and overflowing\[1\]. And a man with business on the
other

\[1. Samatittikâ kâkapeyyâ, a stock phrase used of a river in flood
time. Buddhaghosa says, Samatittikâ ti samaharitâ (sic ? samâharitâ):
kâkapeyyâ ti yatthakattha*k*i tîre *th*itena kâkena sakkâ pâtun ti
kâkapeyyâ, which does not seem to me to solve the question as to the
origin and history of these difficult terms. With respect to the right
form of samatittikâ it should be noticed that the northern Buddhist
spelling is samatîrthakâ (Sukhavatîvyûha, ed. Max Müller in J. R. A. S.
for 1880, p. 182), and that both Childers and Oldenberg have read
samatitthikâ in the Burmese MSS. of Mahâparinibbâna Sutta I, 33 = Mahâ
Vagga VI, 28. Now the difference in Burmese letters between tt and tth
(\#\#\# and \#\#\#) is so very small that the copyists frequently write
one for the other; and even in good MSS. where the two are not
confounded, it is sometimes difficult to tell which is really meant.
When talking of rivers the mention of titthas seems so appropriate
{footnote p. 179} that a copyist, and especially a Burmese copyist,
would naturally read a doubtful combination as tth; so that even if all
Burmese MSS. spell this word with tth (which is by no means certain),
very little reliance should be placed upon the fact. On the other hand,
the distinction in Sinhalese between tt and tth is very marked (\#\#\#
and \#\#\#) and the Sinhalese MSS. all read tt. I think therefore that
Childers was right in finally adopting samatittikâ as the correct Pâli
form. In the numerous words in which Buddhist Sanskrit has a form
differing in a way which sets philological rules at defiance from the
corresponding Pâli form, Childers thought (see Dict. p. xi, where the
list of words might be greatly extended) that the Sanskrit was always
derived from the Pâli, and the Sanskrit writers had merely blundered. I
venture, with great diffidence, to doubt this. It seems more likely
that, at least in many instances, both Pâli and Sanskrit were alike
derived from a previous Prâkrit form, and that in differently
interpreting a difficult word, both Sanskrit and Pâli authors made
mistakes. That may be the case here; and it is almost certain that the
original word had nothing to do with tîrtha. How easily this idea could
be adopted we see from the fact that Childers when first editing the
MSS. (in the J. R. A. S. for 1874), and when he had only Sinhalese MSS.
then before him, altered their reading into samatitthikâ, and put this
form into his Dictionary; though he afterwards (in the separate
edition), and after noting that reading in the Phayre MS., chose the
other. But what, after all, does 'having equal or level tîrthas or
landing-places' mean, when spoken of a river? Comp. Samatittika*m*
bhu*ñg*âmi (Mil. 213, 214); Sabbato titta*m* pokkhara*n*i*m* (*G*ât. I,
339, text tittha*m*); and Samatittiko telapatto (ibid. 393, text ºiyo,
but see p. 400). The root perhaps is TR*I*P.

Kâkapeyya, according to Buddhaghosa, would mean 'crow-drinkable.' Crows
do not drink on the wing; and they could stand to drink either when a
river actually overflowed its banks and formed shallows on the adjoining
land; or when in the hot season it had formed shallows in its own bed.
'Crow-drinkable' might mean therefore just as well 'shallow' as
'overflowing.' Had the word originally anything to do with kâka after
all?\]

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

side, bound for the other side, should come up, and want to cross over.
And he, standing on this bank, should invoke the further bank, and say,
"Come hither, O further bank! come over to this side!"

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? Would the further bank of the river
A*k*iravatî, by reason of that man's invoking and praying and hoping and
praising, come over to this side?'

'Certainly not, Gotama!'

25\. 'In just the same way, Vâse*tth*a, do the Brahmans versed in the
Three Vedas--omitting the practice of those qualities which really make
a man a Brâhman, and adopting the practice of those qualities which
really make men not Brâhmans--say thus: "Indra we call upon, Soma we
call upon, Varu*n*a we call upon, Îsâna we call upon, Pa*g*âpati we call
upon, Brahma we call upon, Mahiddhi we call upon, Yama we call
upon\[1\]!" Verily, Vâse*tth*a, that those Brâhmans versed in the Three
Vedas, but omitting the practice of those qualities which really make a
man a Brâhman, and adopting the practice of those qualities which really
make men not Brâhmans--that they, by reason of their invoking and
praying and hoping and praising, should, after death and when the body
is dissolved, become united with Brahmâ--verily such a condition of
things has no existence!'

------------------------

26\. 'Just, Vâse*tth*a, as if this river A*k*iravatî were full, even to
the brim, and overflowing. And a man with business on the other side,
bound for the other side, should come up, and want to cross over. And
he, on this bank, were to be bound tightly, with his arms behind his
back, by a strong

\[1. The Sinhalese MSS. omit Mahiddhi and Yama, but repeat the verb 'we
call upon' three times after Brahmâ. It is possible that the Burmese
copyist has wrongly inserted them to remove the strangeness of this
repetition. The comment is silent.\]

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

chain. Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a, would that man be able to get
over from this bank of the river A*k*iravatî to the further bank?'

'Certainly not, Gotama!'

27\. 'In the same way, Vâse*tth*a, there are five things leading to
lust, which are called in the Discipline of the Noble One a "chain" and
a "bond."'

'What are the five?'

'Forms perceptible to the eye; desirable, agreeable, pleasant,
attractive forms, that are accompanied by lust and cause delight. Sounds
of the same kind perceptible to the ear. Odours of the same kind
perceptible to the nose. Tastes of the same kind perceptible to the
tongue. Substances of the same kind perceptible to the body by touch.
These five things predisposing to passion are called in the Discipline
of the Noble One a "chain" and a "bond." And these five things
predisposing to lust, Vâse*tth*a, do the Brâhmans versed in the Three
Vedas cling to, they are infatuated by them, guilty of them, see not the
danger of them, know not how unreliable they are, and so enjoy them.

28\. 'And verily, Vâse*tth*a, that Brâhmans versed in the Three Vedas,
but omitting the practice of those qualities which really make a man a
Brâhman, and adopting the practice of those qualities which really make
men non-Brâhmans--clinging to these five things predisposing to passion,
Infatuated by them, guilty of them, seeing not their danger, knowing not
their unreliability, and so enjoying them-that these Brâhmans should
after death, on the dissolution of the body, become united to
Brahmâ--such a condition of things has no existence.'

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

29\. 'Again, Vâse*tth*a, if this river A*k*iravatl were full of water
even to the brim, and overflowing. And a man with business on the other
side, bound for the other side, should come up, and want to cross over.
And if he covering himself up, even to his head, were to lie down, on
this bank, to sleep.

'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a? Would that man be able to get over from
this bank of the river Akiravatl to the further bank?'

'Certainly not, Gotama!'

30\. 'And in the same way, Vâse*tth*a, there are these five hindrances,
in the Discipline of the Noble One, which are called "veils\[1\]," and
are called "hindrances\[2\]," and are called "obstacles\[3\]," and are
called entanglements\[4\]."

'Which are the five?'

'The hindrance of lustful desire,

The hindrance of malice,

The hindrance of sloth and idleness,

The hindrance of pride and self-righteousness,

The hindrance of doubt.

These are the five hindrances, Vâse*tth*a, which, in the Discipline of
the Noble One, are called veils, and are called hindrances, and are
called obstacles, and are called entanglements.

31\. 'Now with these five hindrances, Vâse*tth*a, the Brâhmans versed in
the Three Vedas are veiled, hindered, obstructed, and entangled.

32\. 'And verily, Vâse*tth*a, that Brahmans versed

\[1. Âvara*n*â.

2\. Nîvara*n*â.

3\. All three MSS. onahâ. S. V. reads onaddha*m* in the text, and
explains it by onahâ.

4\. All three MSS. pariyonahâ. S. V. reads pariyoddha*m* in the text,
and explains it by pariyonahâ.\]

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

in the Three Vedas, but omitting the practice of those qualities which
really make a man a Brâhman, and adopting the practice of those
qualities which really make men non-Brâhmans--veiled, hindered,
obstructed, and entangled by these Five Hindrances--that these Brahmans
should after death, on the dissolution of the body, become united to
Brahmâ--such a condition of things has no existence.'

------------------------

33\. 'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a, and what have you heard from the
Brâhmans aged and well-stricken in years, when the learners and teachers
are talking together? Is Brahmâ in possession of wives and wealth, or is
he not\[1\]?'

'He is not, Gotama.'

'Is his mind full of anger, or free from anger?'

'Free from anger, Gotama.'

'Is his mind full of malice, or free from malice?'

'Free from malice, Gotama.'

'Is his mind depraved, or pure?'

'It is pure, Gotama.'

'Has he self-mastery, or has he not\[3\]?'

'He has, Gotama.'

34\. 'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a, are the

\[1. Sapariggaho vâ Brahmâ apariggaho vâ ti. Buddhaghosa says on
Vâse*tth*a's reply, 'Kâma*kkh*andassa abhâvato itthipariggaheno
apariggaho,' thus restricting the 'possession' to women, with especial
reference to the first 'hindrance;' but the word in the text, though
doubtless alluding to possession of women in particular, includes more.
Compare, on the general idea of the passage, the English expression 'no
encumbrances.'

2\. Asa<u>n</u>kili*tth*a-*k*itto. That is, says Buddhaghosa, 'free from
mental sloth and idleness, self-righteous ness, and pride.'

3\. Vasavattî vi avasavattî va. Buddhaghosa says, in explanation of the
answer: 'By the absence of doubt he has his mind under control' (vase
vatteti).\]

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

Brahmans versed in the Vedas in the possession of wives and wealth, or
are they not?'

'They are, Gotama.'

'Have they anger in their hearts, or have they not?'

'They have, Gotama.'

'Do they bear malice, or do they not?'

'They do, Gotama.'

'Are they pure in heart, or are they not?'

'They are not, Gotama.'

'Have they self-mastery, or have they not?'

'They have not, Gotama.'

35\. 'Then you say, Vâse*tth*a, that the Brahmans are in possession of
wives and wealth, and that Brahmâ is not. Can there, then, be agreement
and likeness between the Brâhmans with their wives and property, and
Brahmâ, who has none of these things?'

'Certainly not, Gotama!'

36\. 'Very good, Vâse*tth*a. But, verily, that these Brahmans versed in
the Vedas, who live married and wealthy should after death, when the
body is dissolved, become united with Brahmâ, who has none of these
things--such a condition of things has no existence.'

------------------------

37\. 'Then you say, too, Vâse*tth*a, that the Brâhmans bear anger and
malice in their hearts, and are sinful and uncontrolled, whilst Brahmâ
is free from anger and malice, and sinless, and has self-mastery. Now
can there, then, be concord and likeness between the Brahmans and
Brahmâ?'

'Certainly not, Gotama!'

38\. 'Very good, Vâse*tth*a. That these Brâhmans versed in the Vedas and
yet bearing anger and malice in their hearts, sinful, and uncontrolled,

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

should after death, when the body is dissolved, become united to Brahmâ,
who is free from anger and malice, sinless, and has self-mastery--such a
condition of things has no existence.'

39\. 'So that thus then, Vâse*tth*a, the Brâhmans, versed though they be
in the Three Vedas, while they sit down (in confidence), are sinking
down (in the mire)\[1\]; and so sinking they are arriving only at
despair, thinking the while that they are crossing over into some
happier land.

'Therefore is it that the threefold wisdom of the Brâhmans, wise in
their Three Vedas, is called a waterless desert, their threefold wisdom
is called a pathless jungle, their threefold wisdom is called
destruction!'

========================

40\. When he had thus spoken, the young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a said to the
Blessed One:

'It has been told me, Gotama, that the Sama*n*a Gotama knows the way to
the state of union with Brahmâ.

41\. 'What do you think, Vâse*tth*a, is not Manasâka*t*a near to this
spot, not distant from this spot?'

'Just so, Gotama. Manasâka*t*a is near to, is not far from here.'

42\. 'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a, suppose there were a man born in
Manasâka*t*a, and people should

\[1. Âsîditva sa*m*sîdanti. I have no doubt the commentator is right in
his explanation of these figurative expressions. Confident in their
knowledge of the Vedas, and in their practice of Vedic ceremonies, they
neglect higher things; and so, sinking into sin and superstition, 'they
are arriving only at despair, thinking the while that they are crossing
over into some happier land.'\]

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

ask him, who never till that time had left Manasâka*t*a, which was the
way to Manasâka*t*a. Would that man, born and brought up in
Manasâka*t*a, be in any doubt or difficulty?'

'Certainly not, Gotama! And why? If the man had been born and brought up
in Manasâka*t*a, every road that leads to Manasâka*t*a would be
perfectly familiar to him.'

43\. 'That man, Vâse*tth*a, born and brought up at Manasâka*t*a might,
if he were asked the way to Manasâka*t*a, fall into doubt and
difficulty, but to the Tathâgata, when asked touching the path which
leads to the world of Brahmâ, there can be neither doubt nor difficulty.
For Brahmâ, I know, Vâse*tth*a, and the world of Brahmâ, and the path
which leadeth unto it. Yea, I know it even as one who has entered the
Brahma world, and has been born within it!'

------------------------

44\. When he had thus spoken, Vâse*tth*a the young Brâhman said to the
Blessed One:

'So has it been told me, Gotama, even that the Sama*n*a Gotama knows the
way to a state of union with Brahmâ. It is well! Let the venerable
Gotama be pleased to show us the way to a state of union with Brahma,
let the venerable Gotama save the Brâhman race!'

45\. 'Listen then, Vâse*tth*a, and give ear attentively, and I will
speak!'

'So be it, Lord!' said the young Brâhman Vâse*tth*a, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

46\. Then the Blessed One spake, and said:

Know, Vâse*tth*a, that\[1\] (from time to time) a

\[1. From here down to the end of p. 200 is a repetition word for
{footnote p. 187} word of Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, pp. 133 and following;
including the passages there parallel to those in Subha Sutta, p. 157,
and in Brahma-*g*âla Sutta, pp. 5-16.\]

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span> Tathâgata is born into the world, a
fully Enlightened One, blessed and worthy, abounding in wisdom and
goodness, happy, with knowledge of the world, unsurpassed as a guide to
erring mortals, a teacher of gods and men, a Blessed Buddha\[1\]. He, by
himself, thoroughly understands, and sees, as it were, face to face this
universe--the world below with all its spirits, and the worlds above, of
Mara and of Brahma--and all creatures, Sama*n*as and Brâhmans, gods and
men, and he then makes his knowledge known to others. The truth doth he
proclaim both in its letter and in its spirit, lovely in its origin,
lovely in its progress, lovely in its consummation: the higher life doth
he make known, in all its purity and in all its perfectness.

47\. 'A householder (gahapati), or one of his children, or a man of
inferior birth in any class, listens to that truth\[2\]. On hearing the
truth he has faith in the Tathâgata, and when he has acquired that faith
he thus considers with himself:

'"Full of hindrances is household life, a path defiled by passion: free
as the air is the life of him who has renounced all worldly things. How
difficult is it for the man who dwells at home to live the higher life
in all its fulness, in all its purity, in all its bright perfection! Let
me then cut off my hair and beard, let me clothe myself in the

\[1. See above, § 7.

2\. The point is, that the acceptance of this 'Doctrine and Discipline'
is open to all, not of course that Brâhmans never accept it.\]

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

orange-coloured robes, and let me go forth from a household life into
the homeless state!"

48\. 'Then before long, forsaking his portion of wealth, be it great or
be it small; forsaking his circle of relatives, be they many or be they
few, he cuts off his hair and beard, he clothes himself in the
orange-coloured robes, and he goes forth from the household life into
the homeless state.

49\. 'When he has thus become a recluse he passes a life self-restrained
according to the rules of the Pâtimokkha; uprightness is his delight,
and he sees danger in the least of those things he should avoid; he
adopts and trains himself in the precepts; he encompasses himself with
holiness in word and deed; he sustains his life by means that are quite
pure; good is his conduct, guarded the door of his senses; mindful and
self-possessed, he is altogether happy\[1\]!'

\[1. The argument is resumed after the Three Sîlas, or Descriptions of
Conduct--a text, doubtless older than the Suttas in which it occurs,
setting forth the distinguishing moral characteristics of a member of
the Order.

The First Sîla is an expansion of the Ten Precepts ('Buddhism,' p. 160),
but omitting the fifth, against the use of intoxicating drinks. The
Second Sîla is a further expansion of the first and then of the last
four, and finally of the fourth Precept. The Third Sîla is directed
against auguries, divinations, prophecies, astrology, quackery,
ritualism, and the worship of Gods (including Brahmâ).

These Three Sîlas may perhaps have been inserted in the Sutta as a kind
of counterpoise to the Three Vedas. Our Sutta really reads better
without them; but they are interesting in themselves, and the third is
especially valuable as evidence of ancient customs and beliefs.\]

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### THE SHORT PARAGRAPHS ON CONDUCT.

#### THE *K*ÛLA SÎLA*M*<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

1\. 'Now wherein, Vâse*tth*a, is his conduct good?'

'Herein, O Vâse*tth*a, that putting away the murder of that which lives,
he abstains from destroying life. The cudgel and the sword he lays
aside; and, full of modesty and pity, he is compassionate and kind to
all creatures that have life!

'This is the kind of goodness that he has.

2\. 'Putting away the theft of that which is not his, he abstains from
taking anything not given. He takes only what is given, therewith is he
content, and he passes his life in honesty and in purity of heart!

'This, too, is the kind of goodness that he has.

3\. 'Putting away inchastity, he lives a life of chastity and purity,
averse to the low habit of sexual intercourse.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)\[2\]

\[1. There is no division into actual chapters in the original, but it
is convenient to arrange the following enumeration of moral precepts
separately, as they occur in various suttas in the same order--and are
always divided into the three divisions of Lower, Medium, and Higher
Morality.

2\. The clause 'this, too, is the kind of goodness that he has' is
repeated in the text after each section. The clause, which differs
{footnote p. 190} in the different suttas in which this enumeration of
Buddhist morality is found, is distinct from the enumeration itself,
and, like the opening reference to Vâse*tth*a, characteristic only of
the particular Sutta.\]

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

4\. 'Putting away lying, he abstains from speaking falsehood. He speaks
truth, from the truth he never swerves; faithful and trustworthy, he
injures not his fellow man by deceit.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

5\. 'Putting away slander, he abstains from calumny. What he hears here
he repeats not elsewhere to raise a quarrel against the people here:
what he hears elsewhere he repeats not here to raise a quarrel against
the people there. Thus he lives as a binder together of those who are
divided, an encourager of those who are friends, a peacemaker, a lover
of peace, impassioned for peace, a speaker of words that make for peace.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

6\. 'Putting away bitterness of speech, he abstains from harsh language.
Whatever word is humane, pleasant to the ear, lovely, reaching to the
heart, urbane, pleasing to the people, beloved of the people--such are
the words he speaks.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

7\. 'Putting away foolish talk, he abstains from vain conversation. In
season he speaks; he speaks that which is; he speaks fact; he utters
good doctrine; he utters good discipline; he speaks, and at the right
time, that which redounds to profit, is well-grounded, is well-defined,
and is full of wisdom.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

8\. 'He refrains from injuring any herb or any creature. He takes but
one meal a day; abstaining

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

from food at night time, or at the wrong time. He abstains from dancing,
singing, music, and theatrical shows. He abstains from wearing, using,
or adorning himself with garlands, and scents, and unguents, and he
abstains from lofty couches and large beds.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

9\. 'He abstains from the getting of silver or gold. He abstains from
the getting of grain uncooked. He abstains from the getting of flesh
that is raw. He abstains from the getting of any woman or girl. He
abstains from the getting of bondmen or bondwomen. He abstains from the
getting of sheep or goats. He abstains from the getting of fowls or
swine. He abstains from the getting of elephants, cattle, horses, and
mares. He abstains from the getting of fields or lands.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

10\. 'He refrains from carrying out those commissions on which
messengers can be sent. He refrains from buying and selling. He abstains
from tricks with false weights, alloyed metals, or false measures. He
abstains from bribery, cheating, fraud, and crooked ways.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

11\. 'He refrains from maiming, killing, imprisoning, highway robbery,
plundering villages, or obtaining money by threats of violence.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)'

------------------------

End of the Short Paragraphs on Conduct.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

### THE MIDDLE PARAGRAPHS ON CONDUCT.

#### THE MA*GGH*IMA SÎLA*M*.

1\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to injuring plants or vegetables: that
is to say, the germs arising from roots, the germs arising from trunks
of trees, the germs arising from joints, the germs arising from buds, or
the germs arising, from seeds. He, on the other hand, refrains from
injuring such plants or animals.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

2\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to storing up property: that is to say,
meat, drink, clothes, equipages, beds, perfumes, and grain. He, on the
other hand, refrains from storing up such property.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

3\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brahmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to witnessing public spectacles: that is
to say, dancing, singing, concerts, theatrical representations,
recitations, instrumental music, funeral ceremonies, drummings, balls,
gymnastics, tumblings, feasts in honour of the dead, combats between
elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, cocks, and quails,
cudgel playing, boxing, wrestling, fencing, musters, marching, and
reviews of troops. He, on the other hand, refrains from such public
spectacles.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

4\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to occupying their time with games
detrimental to their progress in virtue: that is to say, with a board of
sixty-four squares, or of one hundred squares; tossing up; hopping over
diagrams formed on the ground; removing substances from a heap without
shaking the remainder; dicing; trap-ball; sketching rude figures;
tossing balls; blowing trumpets; ploughing matches; tumbling; forming
mimic windmills; guessing at measures; chariot races; archery; shooting
marbles from the fingers; guessing other people's thoughts; and
mimicking other people's acts. He, on the other hand, refrains from such
games detrimental to virtue.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

5\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to the use of elevated and ornamented
couches or things to recline upon: that is to say, of large couches;
ornamented beds; coverlets with long fleece; embroidered counterpanes;
woollen coverlets, plain or worked with thick flowers; cotton coverlets,
worked with knots, or dyed with figures of animals; fleecy carpets;
carpets inwrought with gold or with silk; far-spreading carpets; rich
elephant housings, trappings, or harness; rugs for chariots; skins of
the tiger or antelope; and pillows or cushions ornamented with gold lace
or embroidery. He, on the other hand, refrains from the use of such
elevated or ornamented couches or things to recline upon.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

6\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to the use of articles for the adornment
of their persons: that is to say, unguents; fragrant oils; perfumed
baths; shampooings; mirrors; antimony for the eyebrows and eyelashes;
flowers; cosmetics; dentifrices; bracelets; diadems; handsome
walking-sticks; tiaras; swords; umbrellas; embroidered slippers;
fillets; jewelry; fans of the buffalo tail; and long white garments. He,
on the other hand, refrains from the use of such articles for the
adornment of the person.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

7\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to mean talk: that is to say, tales of
kings, of robbers, or of ministers of state; tales of arms, of war, of
terror; conversation respecting meats, drinks, clothes, couches,
garlands, perfumes, relationships, equipages, streets, villages, towns,
cities, provinces, women, warriors, demigods; fortune-telling; hidden
treasures in jars; ghost stories; empty tales; disasters by sea;
accidents on shore; things which are, and things which are not. He, on
the other hand, refrains from such mean conversation.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

8\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to wrangling: that is to say, to saying,
"You are ignorant of this doctrine and discipline, but I understand
them!" "What do you know of doctrine or discipline?" "You are heterodox,
but I am orthodox!" "My discourse is profitable, but yours is
worthless!" "That which you should speak

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

first you speak last, and that which you should speak last you speak
first!" "What you have long studied I have completely overturned!" "Your
errors are made quite plain!" "You are disgraced!" "Go away and escape
from this disputation; or if not, extricate yourself from your
difficulties!" He, on the other hand, refrains from such wrangling.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

9\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brahmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue addicted to performing the servile duties of a
go-between: that is to say, between kings, ministers of state, soldiers,
Brahmans, people of property, or young men, who say, "Come here!" "Go
there!" "Take this to such a place!" "Bring that here!" But he refrains
from such servile duties of a messenger.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

10\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided
by the faithful, continue addicted to hypocrisy: that is to say, they
speak much; they make high professions; they disparage others; and they
are continually thirsting after gain. But he refrains from such
hypocritical craft.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)'

------------------------

End of the Middle Paragraphs on Conduct.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

### THE LONG PARAGRAPHS ON CONDUCT.

#### THE MAHÂ SÎLA*M*.

1\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue to gain a livelihood by such low arts, by such
lying practices as these: that is to say, by divination from marks on
the body; by auguries; by the interpretation of prognostics, of dreams,
and of omens, good or bad; by divinations from the manner in which cloth
and other such things have been bitten by rats; by sacrifices to the god
of fire, offerings of Dabba grass, offerings with a ladle, offerings of
husks, of bran, of rice, of clarified butter, of oil, and of liquids
ejected from the mouth; and by bloody sacrifices; by teaching spells for
preserving the body, for determining lucky sites, for protecting fields,
for luck in war, against ghosts and goblins, to secure good harvests, to
cure snake bites, to serve as antidotes for poison, and to cure bites of
scorpions or rats; by divination, by the flight of hawks, or by the
croaking of ravens; by guessing at length of life; by teaching spells to
ward off wounds; and by pretended knowledge of the language of beasts.--

'He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a livelihood by such low
arts, by such lying practices.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

2\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue to gain a livelihood by such low arts, by such
lying

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

practices as these: that is to say, by explaining the good and bad
points in jewels, sticks, garments, swords, arrows, bows, weapons of
war, women, men, youths, maidens, male and female slaves, elephants,
horses, bulls, oxen, goats, sheep, fowl, snipe, iguanas, long-eared
creatures, turtle, and deer.--

'He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a livelihood by such low
arts, by such lying practices.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

3\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such
lying practices as these: that is to say, by foretelling future events,
as these:

'"There will be a sortie by the king." "There will not be a sortie by
the king." "The king within the city will attack." "The king outside the
city will retreat." "The king within the city will gain the victory."
"The king outside the city will be defeated." "The king outside the city
will be the conqueror." "The king inside the city will be vanquished."
Thus prophesying to this one victory and to that one defeat.--

'He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a livelihood by such low
arts, by such lying practices.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

4\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brahmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such
lying practices as these: that is to say, by predicting--

'"There will be an eclipse of the moon." "There will be an eclipse of
the sun." "There will be an eclipse of a planet." "The sun and the moon
will be in conjunction." "The sun and the moon will be in

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

opposition." "The planets will be in conjunction." "The planets will be
in opposition." "There will be falling meteors, and fiery coruscations
in the atmosphere." "There will be earthquakes, thunderbolts, and forked
lightnings." "The rising and setting of the sun, moon, or planets will
be cloudy or clear." And then: "The eclipse of the moon will have such
and such a result." "The eclipse of the sun will have such and such a
result." "The eclipse of the moon will have such and such a result."
"The sun and the moon being in conjunction will have such and such a
result." "The sun and the moon being in opposition will have such and
such a result." "The planets being in conjunction will have such and
such a result." "The planets being in opposition will have such and such
a result." "The falling meteors and fiery coruscations in the atmosphere
will have such and such a result." "The earthquakes, thunderbolts, and
forked lightnings will have such and such a result." "The rising and
setting of the sun, moon, or planets, cloudy or clear, will have such
and such a result."

'He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a livelihood by such low
arts, by such lying practices.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

5\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such
lying practices as these: that is to say, by predicting--

'"There will be an abundant rainfall." "There will be a deficient
rainfall." "There will be an abundant harvest." "There will be famine."
"There will be tranquillity." "There will be disturbances." "The season
will be sickly." "The season will be healthy." <span id="page_199">p.
199</span> Or by drawing deeds, making up accounts, giving pills, making
verses, or arguing points of casuistry.--

'He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a livelihood by such low
arts, by such lying practices.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

6\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such
lying practices as these: that is to say, by giving advice touching the
taking in marriage, or the giving in marriage; the forming of alliances,
or the dissolution of connections; the calling in property, or the
laying of it out. By teaching spells to procure prosperity, or to cause
adversity to others; to remove sterility; to produce dumbness,
locked-jaw, deformity, or deafness. By obtaining oracular responses by
the aid of a mirror, or from a young girl, or from a god. By worshipping
the sun, or by worshipping Brahmâ; by spitting fire out of their mouths,
or by laying hands on people's heads.--

'He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a livelihood by such low
arts, by such lying practices.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2)

7\. 'Or whereas some Sama*n*a-Brâhmans, who live on the food provided by
the faithful, continue to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such
lying practices as these: that is to say, by teaching the ritual for
making vows and performing them; for blessing fields; for imparting
virility and rendering impotent; for choosing the site of a house; for
performing a house-warming. By teaching forms of words to be used when
cleansing the mouth, when bathing, and when making offerings to the god
of

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

fire. By prescribing medicines to produce vomiting or purging, or to
remove obstructions in the higher or lower intestines, or to relieve
head-ache. By preparing oils for the ear, collyriums, catholicons,
antimony, and cooling drinks. By practising cautery, midwifery, or the
use of root decoctions or salves.--

'He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a livelihood by such low
arts, by such lying practices.

'This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)'

------------------------

End of the Long Paragraphs on Conduct.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

### CHAPTER III.

1\. <sup>\[1\]</sup> 'And he lets his mind pervade one quarter of the
world with thoughts of Love, and so the second, and so the third, and so
the fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around, and
everywhere, does he continue to pervade with heart of Love,
far-reaching, grown great, and beyond measure.

2\. 'Just, Vâse*tth*a, as a mighty trumpeter makes himself heard--and
that without difficulty--in all the four directions; even so of all
things that have shape or life, there is not one that he passes by or
leaves aside, but regards them all with mind set free, and deep-felt
love.

'Verily this, Vâse*tth*a, is the way to a state of union with Brahmâ.

3\. 'And he lets his mind pervade one quarter of the world with thoughts
of pity, sympathy, and equanimity, and so the second, and so the third,
and so the fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around,
and everywhere, does he continue to pervade with heart of pity,
sympathy, and equanimity, far-reaching, grown great, and beyond measure.

4\. 'Just, Vâse*tth*a, as a mighty trumpeter makes himself heard--and
that without difficulty--in all the four directions; even so of all
things that have

\[1. This paragraph occurs frequently; see, inter alia, below,
Mahâ-Sudassana Sutta II, 8. It will be seen from 'Buddhism,' pp. 170,
171, that these meditations play a great part in later Buddhism, and
occupy very much the place that prayer takes in Christianity. A fifth,
the meditation on Impurity, has been added, at what time I do not know,
before the last. All five are practised in Siam (Alabaster, 'Wheel of
the Law,' p. 168).\]

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

shape or life, there is not one that he passes by or leaves aside, but
regards them all with mind set free, and deep-felt pity, sympathy, and
equanimity.

'Verily this, Vâse*tth*a, is the way to a state of union with Brahmâ.'

5\. 'Now what think you, Vâse*tth*a, will the Bhikkhu\[1\] who lives
thus be in possession of women and of wealth, or will he not?'

'He will not, Gotama!'

'Will he be full of anger, or free from anger?'

'He will be free from anger, Gotama!'

'Will his mind be full of malice, or free from malice?'

'Free from malice, Gotama!'

'Will his mind be sinful, or pure?'

'It will be pure, Gotama!'

'Will he have self-mastery, or will he not?'

'Surely he will, Gotama!'

6\. 'Then you say, Vâse*tth*a, that the Bhikkhu is free from household
cares, and that Brahmâ is free from household cares. Is there then
agreement and likeness between the Bhikkhu and Brahmâ?'

'There is, Gotama!'

7\. 'Very good, Vâse*tth*a. Then in sooth, Vâse*tth*a, that the Bhikkhu
who is free from household cares should after death, when the body is
dissolved, become united with Brahmâ, who is the same--such a condition
of things is every way possible!

8\. 'And so you say, Vâse*tth*a, that the Bhikkhu is free from anger,
and free from malice, pure in mind, and master of himself; and that
Brahmâ is

\[1. Or 'Member of our Order.' See the note on Mahâparinibbâna Sutta I,
6.\]

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

free from anger, and free from malice, pure in mind, and master of
himself. Then in sooth, Vâse*tth*a, that the Bhikkhu who is free from
anger, free from malice, pure in mind, and master of himself should
after death, when the body is dissolved, become united with Brahmâ, who
is the same-such a condition of things is every way possible!'

------------------------

9\. When he had thus spoken, the young Brahmans Vâse*tth*a and
Bhâradvâga addressed the Blessed One, and said:

'Most excellent, Lord, are the words of thy mouth, most excellent! just
as if a man were to set up that which is thrown down, or were to reveal
that which is hidden away, or were to point out the right road to him
who has gone astray, or were to bring a lamp into the darkness, so that
those who have eyes can see external forms;--just even so, Lord, has the
truth been made known to us, in many a figure, by the Blessed One. And
we, even we, betake ourselves, Lord, to the Blessed One as our refuge,
to the Truth, and to the Brotherhood. May the Blessed One accept us as
disciples, as true believers, from this day forth, as long as life
endures!'

========================

End of the Tevi*gg*a Suttanta.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Âkankheyya Sutta: If He Should Desire](sbe1106)
