[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1103)  [Next](sbe1105.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

# DHAMMA-*K*AKKA-PPAVATTANA SUTTA

### INTRODUCTION

#### TO THE

## FOUNDATION OF THE KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

THIS translation is made from a transcript of the text as found in the
very beautiful Ceylon MS. on silver plates, now in the British
Museum\[1\]. The letters, which are perfectly formed, are cut into the
silver; and the MS. has this peculiarity, that every sentence is
repeated with a slight change in the collocation of the words. Thus the
first sentence is given as follows:--

Eva*m* me suta*m*. Eka*m* samaya*m* Bhagavâ Bârâ*n*asiya*m* viharati
Isipatane Migadâye. Me eva*m* suta*m*. Eka*m* samaya*m* Bhagavâ
Bârâ*n*asiya*m* Isipatane Migadâye viharati.

As this repetition is merely carried out for the further security of the
text it has not been followed in the translation.

This text belongs to the A<u>n</u>guttara Nikâya. M. Léon Feer has
lithographed the Sa*m*yutta treatment in his 'Textes tirés du
Kandjour\[2\],' together with the text of the corresponding passage in
the Lalita Vistara, and the Tibetan translation from that poem. The
Sanskrit text, so far as it runs parallel with our Sutta, will also be
found in Rajendra Lal Mitra's edition of the Lalita Vistara (p. 540 and
foll.) and the Tibetan text, with a French translation, in M. Foucaux's
'rGya Cher Rol Pa.' Dr. Oldenberg has just published the Vinaya
treatment contained in the Mahâ Vagga I, 6. It is the same word for word
as our Sutta (except § 1, which is of course not found there). The
Samyutta expands the idea of the portion numbered below §§ 9-20, having
also similar paragraphs in reference to the bhikkhus themselves. The

\[1. MS. Egerton, 794; bought from a bookseller named Rodel in 1839

2\. Livraison, No. X.\]

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

Lalita Vistara differs a good deal in minor details, but is
substantially the same as regards the Noble Truths, and the eight
divisions of the Noble Path.

A translation of this Sutta, found among Mr. Gogerly's papers after his
death, was published in the journal of the Ceylon Asiatic Society for
1865: and the journal Asiatique for 1870 contained a translation and
full analysis by M. Léon Feer.

------------------------

It would be difficult to estimate too highly the historical value of
this Sutta. There can be no reasonable doubt that the very ancient
tradition accepted by all Buddhists as to the substance of the discourse
is correct, and that we really have in it a summary of the words in
which the great Indian thinker and reformer for the first time
successfully promulgated his new ideas. And it presents to us in a few
short and pithy sentences the very essence of that remarkable system
which has had so profound an influence on the religious history of so
large a portion of the human race.

The name given to it by the early Buddhists--the setting in motion
onwards of the royal chariot-wheel of the supreme dominion of the
Dhamma--means, as I have shown elsewhere\[1\], not 'the turning of the
wheel of the law,' as it has been usually rendered; but 'the
inauguration, or foundation, of the Kingdom of Righteousness.'

Is it possible that the praying wheels of Thibet have led to the
misapprehension and mistranslation now so common? But who would explain
a passage in the New Testament by a superstition current, say, in Spain
in the twelfth century? And so when Mr. Da Cuñha thinks that the Dhamma
is symbolised by the wheel, because 'Gotama ignored the beginning, and
was uncertain as to the end\[2\],' he seems to me to be following a
vicious method of interpreting such figures of speech. It cannot be
disputed that the term 'wheel' might have implied such an idea as he
puts into it. But if we want to know what it did imply, we must be
guided wholly by the previous use of the word at the

\[1. 'Buddhism,' p. 45.

2\. 'Memoir on the Tooth Relic,' &c., p. 15.\]

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

time when it was first used in a figurative sense: and that previous use
allows only of the interpretation given above. Perhaps, however, Mr. Da
Cuñha is only copying (not very exactly) Mr. Alabaster, who has said,
'Buddha, as I have tried to show in other parts of this book, did not
attempt to teach the beginning of existence, but assumed it as a rolling
circle of causes or effects. This was his circle or wheel of the
law\[1\].'

Mr. Alabaster therefore calls his very useful book on Siamese Buddhism,
'The Wheel of the Law;'--an expression which he on the first page of his
preface takes to be about equivalent to Buddhism. But his theory of the
meaning of the term seems to be based upon a misunderstanding of a
passage in the Siamese 'Life of Buddha,' which he there translates. At
page 78 he renders his text, 'The Holy Wheel which the Law taught is
plenteous in twelve ways,' and he explains this on p. 169 as referring
to the twelve Nidânas, the chain of causes and effects. But the passage
in the Siamese text is evidently a reminiscence of the 'twelvefold
manner' spoken of in the same connection in our Sutta (§ 21), and does
not refer to the Nidânas at all.

A better comment on the word is the legend of the Treasure of the Wheel,
which will be found below in the 'Book of the Great King of Glory\[2\],'
a passage which shows that this figure belonged to that circle of
poetical imagery which the early Buddhists so often borrowed from the
previous poets of Vedic literature to aid them in their attempts to
describe the most important events in the life of their revered Teacher.
And, like the day of Pentecost by the early Christians, this
Inauguration of the Kingdom of Righteousness was rightly regarded by
them as a turning-point in the history of their faith. We find this even
in the closing sections of our Sutta; and in later times the poets of
every Buddhist clime have vied one with another in endeavouring to
express their sense of the importance of the occasion.

'The evening was like a lovely maiden; the stars

\[1. 'Wheel of the Law,' p. 288.

2\. Chap. I, §§ 10-20.\]

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

were the pearls upon her neck; the dark clouds her braided hair; the
deepening space her flowing robe. As a crown she had the heavens where
the angels dwell; these three worlds were as her body; her eyes were the
white lotus flowers which open to the rising moon; and her voice was as
it were the humming of the bees. To do homage to the Buddha, and to hear
the first preaching of his word, this lovely maiden came.' The angels
(devas) throng to hear the discourse until the heavens are empty; and
the sound of their approach is like the rain of a storm; all the worlds
in which there are sentient beings are made void of life, so that the
congregation assembled was in number infinite, but at the sound of the
blast of the glorious trumpet of Sakka, the king of the gods, they
became still as a waveless sea. And then each of the countless listeners
thought that the sage was looking towards himself, and was speaking to
him in his own tongue, though the language used was Mâgadhi!

It is most curious that this last figure should be so closely analogous
to the language used with respect to the corresponding event in the
history of the Christian church: and I do not know the exact source from
which Hardy (Manual of Buddhism, p. 186) derives it. But I think it is
highly improbable that there is any borrowing on the one side or on the
other.

It cannot be denied that there is a real beauty of an Oriental kind in
the various expressions which the Buddhists use; and that there was real
ground for the enthusiasm which gave them birth. Never in the history of
the world had a scheme of salvation been put forth so simple in its
nature, so free from any superhuman agency, so independent of, so even
antagonistic to the belief in a soul, the belief in God, and the hope
for a future life. And we must not allow our estimate of the importance
of the event to be influenced by our disagreement from the opinions put
forth. Whether these be right or wrong, it was a turning-point in the
religious history of man when a reformer, full of the most earnest moral
purpose, and trained in all the intellectual culture

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

of his time, put forth deliberately, and with a knowledge of the
opposing views, the doctrine of a salvation to be found here, in this
life, in an inward change of heart, to be brought about by perseverance
in a mere system of self-culture and of self-control.

------------------------

That system, it will be seen, is called the Noble Path, and is divided
into eight sections or divisions, each of which commences with the word
sammâ--a word for which we have no real equivalent in English, though it
has been rendered by such terms as 'right,' 'perfect,' and 'correct.'
Our word 'right,' in some of its uses, would be a sufficiently adequate
translation, but it is based on a different derivation, and connotes a
set of ideas not alluded to by sammâ. If used as an adjective this
word--signifying literally 'going with'--means either 'general, common,'
or 'corresponding, mutual,' and as an adverb, 'commonly, usually,
normally,' or 'fittingly, properly, correctly;' and hence, in a
secondary sense, and with allusion to both these ideas, 'round, fit, and
perfect, normal and complete.' When used to characterise such widely
different things as language, livelihood, and belief, the meaning of the
term is by no means difficult to grasp; but it is difficult, if not
impossible, to find any single English word which in each case would
convey its full force without importing also some extraneous idea. From
a desire to follow closely the Pâli form of expression I had first in my
manual of 'Buddhism' adopted the one word 'right' throughout the
translation of the text; and I have kept to this below, though I feel
that that word quite fails to give the force of the preposition sam
({Greek sun-}, con-), which is the essential part of the Pâli sammâ. But
I think the meaning of the Buddhist ideal, of the summary which is the
most essential doctrine, the very pith of Buddhism, would be better
brought out by a diversified rendering in the way I afterwards attempted
in an article in the Fortnightly Review (No. CLVI); or, as above (p.
107), with the authorised interpretation appended. It would then run

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

1\. Right Views; free from superstition or delusion.

2\. Right Aims; high, and worthy of the intelligent, earnest man.

3\. Right Speech; kindly, open, truthful.

4\. Right Conduct; peaceful, honest, pure.

5\. Right Livelihood; bringing hurt or danger to no living thing.

6\. Right Effort; in self-training, and in self-control.

7\. Right Mindfulness; the active, watchful mind.

8\. Right Contemplation; earnest thought on the deep mysteries of life.

It is interesting to notice that Gogerly, who first rendered sammâ
throughout by correct\[1\], afterwards adopted the other method\[2\];
and as these eight divisions of the perfect life are of such vital
importance for a correct understanding of what Buddhism really was, I
here add in parallel columns his two versions of the terms used:--

|                                               |                                       |
|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| 1\. Correct views (of truth).                 | Correct doctrines.                    |
| 2\. Correct thoughts.                         | A clear perception (of their nature). |
| 3\. Correct words.                            | Inflexible veracity.                  |
| 4\. Correct conduct.                          | Purity of conduct.                    |
| 5\. Correct (mode of obtaining a) livelihood. | A sinless occupation.                 |
| 6\. Correct efforts.                          | Perseverance in duty.                 |
| 7\. Correct meditation.                       | Holy meditation.                      |
| 8\. Correct tranquillity.                     | Mental tranquillity.                  |

 

The varying expressions in these two lists are intended in all cases,
(except perhaps the second,) to convey the same idea. The second
division (sammâ-sa<u>n</u>kappo) is not really open to any doubt.
Sa<u>n</u>kappo is will, volition, determination, desire; that exertion
of the will in the various affairs of life which results from the
feeling that a certain result will be desirable. The only variation in
the meaning is that sometimes more stress is laid upon the implied
exertion of the will, sometimes more stress upon the implied desire

\[1. Journal of the Ceylon Asiatic Society, 1845.

2\. Ibid. 1865.\]

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

which calls it into action. 'Motive' would be somewhat too impersonal,
'volition' too metaphysical a rendering; 'aims' or 'aspirations' seems
to me to best express the sense intended in this passage.

In No. 7 (sammâ-sati) sati is literally 'memory,' but is used with
reference to the constantly repeated phrase 'mindful and thoughtful'
(sato sampa*g*âno); and means that activity of mind and constant
presence of mind which is one of the duties most frequently inculcated
on the good Buddhist. Gogerly's rendering of the term should have been
reserved for the last division (sammâ-samâdhi), that prolonged
meditation on the deep mysteries of life, which is stated in the Great
Decease\[1\] to be the necessary complement and accessory to
intelligence and goodness. Reason and works are good in themselves, but
they require to be made perfect by that samâdhi which in Buddhism
corresponds to faith in Christianity.

------------------------

This Buddhist ideal of the perfect life has an analogy most instructive
from a historical point of view with the ideals of the last pagan
thinkers in Europe before the rise of Christianity, and of the modern
exponents of what has been called fervent atheism. When after many
centuries of thought a pantheistic or monotheistic unity has been
evolved out of the chaos of polytheism,--which is itself a modified
animism or animistic polydæmonism,--there has always arisen at last a
school to whom theological discussions have lost their interest, and who
have sought for a new solution of the questions to which the theologies
have given inconsistent answers, in a new system in which man was to
work out here, on earth, his own salvation. It is their place in the
progress of thought that helps us to understand how it is that there is
so much in common between the Agnostic philosopher of India, the Stoics
of Greece and Rome, and some of the newest schools in France, in
Germany, and among ourselves.

\[1. Chap . I, § 12, and often afterwards.\]

### THE FOUNDATION

###### OF THE

## KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

#### DHAMMA-*K*AKKA-PPAVATTANA-SUTTA.

Reverence to the Blessed One, the Holy One, the Fully-Enlightened One.

1\. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was once staying at Benares, at
the hermitage called Migadâya. And there the Blessed One addressed the
company of the five Bhikkhus\[1\], and said:

2\. 'There are two extremes, O Bhikkhus, which the man who has given up
the world\[2\] ought not to follow--the habitual practice, on the one
hand of those things whose attraction depends upon the passions, and
especially of sensuality--a low and pagan\[3\] way (of seeking
satisfaction) unworthy, unprofitable, and fit only for the
worldly-minded--

\[1. These are the five mendicants who had waited on the Bodisat during
his austerities, as described in 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' pp. 88, 89.
Their names are given on p. 113 of that book; see below, the note on §
32.

2\. Pabba*g*ito, one who has gone forth, who has renounced worldly
things, a 'religious.'

3\. Gamma, a word of the same derivation as, and corresponding meaning
to, our word 'pagan.'\]

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

and the habitual practice, on the other hand, of asceticism (or
self-mortification), which is painful, unworthy, and unprofitable.

3\. 'There is a middle path, O Bhikkhus, avoiding these two extremes,
discovered by the Tathâgata\[1\]--a path which opens the eyes, and
bestows understanding, which leads to peace of mind, to the higher
wisdom, to full enlightenment, to Nirvâ*n*a!

4\. 'What is that middle path, O Bhikkhus, avoiding these two extremes,
discovered by the Tathâgata--that path which opens the eyes, and bestows
understanding, which 'leads to peace of mind, to the higher wisdom, to
full enlightenment, to Nirvâ*n*a? Verily! it is this noble eightfold
path that is to say

'Right views;  
Right aspirations;  
Right speech;  
Right conduct;  
Right livelihood;  
Right effort;  
Right mindfulness;  
and Right contemplation.

'This, O Bhikkhus, is that middle path, avoiding these two extremes,
discovered by the Tathâgata--that path which opens the eyes, and bestows
understanding,

\[1. The Tathâgata is an epithet of a Buddha. It is interpreted by
Buddhaghosa, in the Samangala Vilâsinî, to mean that he came to earth
for the same purposes, after having passed through the same training in
former births, as all the supposed former Buddhas; and that, when he had
so come, all his actions corresponded with theirs.

'Avoiding these two extremes' should perhaps be referred to the
Tathâgata, but I prefer the above rendering.\]

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

which leads to peace of mind, to the higher wisdom, to full
enlightenment, to Nirvâ*n*a!

------------------------

5\. 'Now\[1\] this, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth concerning suffering.

'Birth is attended with pain\[2\], decay is painful, disease is painful,
death is painful. Union with the unpleasant is painful, painful is
separation from the pleasant; and any craving that is unsatisfied, that
too is painful. In brief, the five aggregates which spring from
attachment (the conditions of individuality and their cause)\[3\] are
painful.

'This then, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth concerning suffering.

6\. 'Now this, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth concerning the origin of
suffering.

'Verily, it is that thirst (or craving), causing the renewal of
existence, accompanied by sensual delight, seeking satisfaction now
here, now there--that is to say, the craving for the gratification of
the passions, or the craving for (a future) life, or the craving for
success (in this present life)\[4\].

\[1. On the following 'four truths' compare Dhammapada, verse 191, and
Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta II, 2, 3, and IV, 7, 8.

2\. Or 'is painful.'

3\. Pa*ñk*' upâdânakkhandhâ. On the Khandhâ, or the material and mental
aggregates which go to make up an individual, see my 'Buddhism,' Chap.
III. Upâdâna, or 'grasping' is their source, and the uprooting of this
upâdâna from the mind is Arahatship.

One might express the central thought of this First Noble Truth. in the
language of the nineteenth century by saying that pain results from
existence as an individual. It is the struggle to maintain one's
individuality which produces pain--a most pregnant and far-reaching
suggestion. See for a fuller exposition the Fortnightly Review for
December, 1879.

4\. 'The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life'
{footnote p. 149} correspond very exactly to the first and third of
these three ta*n*hâs. 'The lust of the flesh, the lust of life, and the
pride of life,' or 'the lust of the flesh, the lust of life, and the
love of this present world,' would be not inadequate renderings of all
three.

The last two are in Pâli bhava-ta*n*hâ and vibhava-ta*n*hâ, on which
Childers, on the authority of Vigesi*n*ha, says: 'The former applies to
the sassata-di*tth*i, and means a desire for an eternity of existence;
the latter applies to the u*kkh*eda-di*tth*i, and means a desire for
annihilation in the very first (the present) form of existence.'
Sassata-di*tth*i may be called the 'everlasting life heresy,' and
u*kkh*eda-di*tth*i the 'let-us-eat-and-drink-for-to-morrow-we-die
heresy.' These two heresies, thus implicitly condemned, have very close
analogies to theism and materialism.

Spence Hardy says ('Manual of Buddhism,' p. 496): 'Bhawa-ta*n*hâ
signifies the pertinacious love of existence induced by the supposition
that transmigratory existence is not only eternal, but felicitous and
desirable. Wibhawa-ta*n*hâ is the love of the present life, under the
notion that existence will cease therewith, and that there is to be no
future state.'

Vibhava in Sanskrit means, 1. development; 2. might, majesty,
prosperity; and 3. property: but the technical Buddhist sense, as will
be seen from the above, is something more than this.\]

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

'This then, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth concerning the origin of
suffering.

7\. Now this, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth concerning the destruction
of suffering.

'Verily, it is the destruction, in which no passion remains, of this
very thirst; the laying aside of, the getting rid of, the being free
from, the harbouring no longer of this thirst.

'This then, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth concerning the destruction of
suffering.

8\. 'Now this, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth concerning the way\[1\]
which leads to the destruction of sorrow. Verily! it is this noble
eightfold path\[2\]; that is to say:

\[1. Pa*t*ipadâ.

2\. Ariyo ata<u>n</u>giko Maggo.\]

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

Right views;  
Right aspirations;  
Right speech;  
Right conduct;  
Right livelihood;  
Right effort;  
Right mindfulness;  
and Right contemplation.

This then, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth concerning the destruction of
sorrow.

------------------------

9\. 'That this was the noble truth concerning sorrow, was not, O
Bhikkhus, among the doctrines handed down, but there arose within me the
eye (to perceive it), there arose the knowledge (of its nature), there
arose the understanding (of its cause), there arose the wisdom (to guide
in the path of tranquillity), there arose the light (to dispel darkness
from it)\[1\].

10\. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I should comprehend that this was the
noble truth concerning sorrow, though it was not among the doctrines
banded down, there arose within me the eye, there arose the knowledge,
there arose the understanding, there arose the wisdom, there arose the
light.

11\. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I had comprehended that this was the
noble truth concerning sorrow, though it was not among the doctrines
handed down, there arose within me the eye, there

\[1. The words in parentheses have been added by Gogerly, doubtless from
some comment not accessible to me; and I have included them also, but in
parentheses, as they seem to complete the ideas actually involved in the
text.\]

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

arose the knowledge, there arose the understanding, there arose the
wisdom, there arose the light.

12\. 'That this was the noble truth concerning the origin of sorrow,
though it was not among the doctrines handed down, there arose within me
the eye; but there arose within me the knowledge, there arose the
understanding, there arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

13\. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I should put away the origin of
sorrow, though the noble truth concerning it was not among the doctrines
handed down, there arose within me the eye, there arose the knowledge,
there arose the understanding, there arose the wisdom, there arose the
light.

14\. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I had fully put away the origin of
sorrow, though the noble truth concerning it was not among the doctrines
handed down, there arose within me the eye, there arose the knowledge,
there arose the understanding, there arose the wisdom, there arose the
light.

15\. 'That this, O Bhikkhus, was the noble truth concerning the
destruction of sorrow, though it was not among the doctrines handed
down; but there arose within me the eye, there arose the knowledge,
there arose the understanding, there arose the wisdom, there arose the
light.

16\. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I should fully realise the destruction
of sorrow, though the noble truth concerning it was not among the
doctrines handed down, there arose within me the eye, there arose the
knowledge, there arose the understanding, there arose the wisdom, there
arose the light.

17\. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I had fully realised the destruction
of sorrow, though the noble

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

truth concerning it was not among the doctrines handed down, there arose
within me the eye, there arose the knowledge, there arose the
understanding, there arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

18\. 'That this was the noble truth concerning the way which leads to
the destruction of sorrow, was not, O Bhikkhus, among the doctrines
handed down; but there arose within me the eye, there arose the
knowledge, there arose the understanding, there arose the wisdom, there
arose the light.

19\. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I should become versed in the way
which leads to the destruction of sorrow, though the noble truth
concerning it was not among the doctrines handed down, there arose
within me the eye, there arose the knowledge, there arose the
understanding, there arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

20\. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I had become versed in the way which
leads to the destruction of sorrow, though the noble truth concerning it
was not among the doctrines handed down, there arose within me the eye,
there arose the knowledge, there arose the understanding, there arose
the wisdom, there arose the light.

------------------------

21\. 'So long, O Bhikkhus, as my knowledge and insight were not quite
clear, regarding each of these four noble truths in this triple order,
in this twelvefold manner--so long was I uncertain whether I had
attained to the full insight of that wisdom which is unsurpassed in the
heavens or on earth, among the whole race of Sama*n*as and Brâhmans, or
of gods or men.

22\. 'But as soon, O Bhikkhus, as my knowledge

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

and insight were quite clear regarding each of these four noble truths,
in this triple order, in this twelvefold manner--then did I become
certain that I had attained to the full insight of that wisdom which is
unsurpassed in the heavens or on earth, among the whole race of
Sama*n*as and Brâhmans, or of gods or men.

23\. 'And now this knowledge and this insight has arisen within me.
Immovable is the emancipation of my heart. This is my last existence.
There will now be no rebirth for me!'

------------------------

24\. Thus spake the Blessed One. The company of the five Bhikkhus, glad
at heart, exalted the words of the Blessed One. And when the discourse
had been uttered, there arose within the venerable Konda*ññ*a the eye of
truth, spotless, and without a stain, (and he saw that) whatsoever has
an origin, in that is also inherent the necessity of coming to an
end\[1\].

------------------------

25\. And when the royal chariot wheel of the truth had thus been set
rolling onwards by the Blessed One, the gods of the earth gave forth a
shout, saying:

'In Benâres, at the hermitage of the Migadâya, the supreme wheel of the
empire of Truth has been set rolling by the Blessed One--that wheel
which not by any Sama*n*a or Brâhman, not by any god,

\[1. It is the perception of this fact which is the Dhamma*k*akkhu, the
Eye of Truth, or the Eye for Qualities as it might be rendered with
reference to the meaning of Dhamma in the words that follow.

They are in Pâli yam ki*ñk*i samudaya-dhamma*m*, sabba*m* ta*m*
nirodha-dhamma*m*, literally, 'whatever has the quality of beginning,
that has the quality of ceasing.'\]

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

not by any Brahma or Mâra, not by any one in the universe, can ever be
turned back!'

26\. And when they heard the shout of the gods of the earth, the
attendant gods of the four great kings\[1\] (the guardian angels of the
four quarters of the globe) gave forth a shout, saying:

'In Benâres, at the hermitage of the Migadâya, the supreme wheel of the
empire of Truth has been set rolling by the Blessed One--that wheel
which not by any Sama*n*a or Brâhman, not by any god, not by any Brahma
or Mâra, not by any one in the universe, can ever be turned back!'

27\. \[And thus as the gods in each of the heavens heard the shout of
the inhabitants of the heaven beneath, they took up the cry until the
gods in the highest heaven of heavens\] gave forth the shout, saying:

'In Benâres, at the hermitage of the Migadâya, the supreme wheel of the
empire of Truth has been set rolling by the Blessed One--that wheel
which not by any Sama*n*a or Brâhman, not by any god, not by any Brahma
or Mâra, not by any one in the universe, can ever be turned back\[2\]!'

\[1. Their names are given in the Mahâ Samaya Sutta in Grimblot's 'Sept
Suttas Palis.'

2\. The text repeats § 26 for each of the heavens; and the gods thus
enumerated are as follows, beginning with Bhummâ Devâ in § 25:

 1. Bhummâ Devâ.  
 2. *K*atumahârâ*g*ika Devâ.  
 3. Yâmâ Devâ.  
 4. Tusitâ Devâ.  
 5. Nimmânaratî Devâ.  
 6. Paranimmitavasavattî Devâ.  
 7. Brahmakâyikâ Devâ.

See the Mahâ Samaya Sutta in Grimblot's 'Sept Suttas Palis,' and
{footnote p. 155} compare Professor Max Müller's note in 'Buddhaghosha's
Parables,' p. xxxiii, and Hardy in the 'Manual of Buddhism,' p. 25.\]

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

28\. And thus, in an instant, a second, a moment, the sound went up even
to the world of Brahmâ: and this great ten-thousand-world-system quaked
and trembled and was shaken violently, and an immeasurable bright light
appeared in the universe, beyond even the power of the gods!

29\. Then did the Blessed One give utterance to this exclamation of joy:
'Konda*ññ*a hath realised it. 'Konda*ññ*a hath realised it!' And so the
venerable 'Konda*ññ*a acquired the name of A*ññ*âta-Konda*ññ*a ('the
'Konda*ññ*a who realised')'.

------------------------

End of the Dhamma-*k*akka-ppavattana-sutta.

\[1. The Mahâ Vagga completes the narrative as follows: 'And then the
venerable A*ññ*âta-Konda*ññ*a having seen the truth, having arrived at
the truth, having known the truth, having penetrated the truth, having
past beyond doubt, having laid aside uncertainty, having attained to
confidence, and being dependent on no one beside himself for knowledge
of the religion of the teacher, spake thus to the Blessed One:

'"May I become, O my Lord, a novice under the Blessed One, may I receive
full ordination!"

'"Welcome, O brother!" said the Blessed One, "the truth has been well
laid down. Practice holiness to the complete suppression of sorrow!"

'And that was the ordination of the Venerable One.'

The other four, Vappa, Bhaddiya, Mahânâma, and Assa*g*i, were converted
on the following days, according to the 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' p.
113.

It is there also said that 'myriads of the angels (devas) had been
converted simultaneously with Kondanya.'\]

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tevigga-Suttanta: On Knowledge of the Vedas](sbe1105.md)
