[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1105)  [Next](sbe1107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

# ÂKANKHEYYA SUTTA.

### INTRODUCTION

JUST as the Tevi*gg*a Sutta is an argumentum ad hominem to the man wise
in the Vedas, and seeking through that knowledge for union with the
Deity, urging him to adopt rather the Buddhist method of a life of
righteousness here on earth; so the present Sutta is a similar argument
addressed to the seeker after the various things specified in its
different sections. If he should desire any of these things then let him
live the life of uprightness as set out in the opening section, and
cultivate the intelligent earnestness and spiritual insight described in
the refrain.

The two combined amount, as would naturally be expected, to the
Nirvâ*n*a of a perfect life in Arahatship--the supreme goal not only of
every good Buddhist, but of every good Buddhist argument. As applied in
the earlier sections it is only a re-statement of a familiar doctrine;
as applied in the later sections it has the additional interest of
showing us the answer of early Buddhism to the mystics, as the Tevi*gg*a
shows us its answer to the theologians. And in the answer we find the
details of some curious beliefs which existed in India when Buddhism
arose, and which in after times, and especially in the northern church,
had so disastrous an effect upon it.

With regard to the reality of these mystical powers our Sutta gives an
uncertain sound; leaving, however, an impression rather in its favour.
The argument is equally good either way, but the author of the Sutta is
so engrossed with Arahatship that he does not stay to say

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

whether he regards the belief in the powers referred to as a delusion or
not. I have no doubt that he really believed in their theoretical
possibility, which is elsewhere also in the Pâli Pi*t*akas accepted or
implied; though the practical effect of the belief has greatly varied
among Buddhists in different times and countries. In the southern
church, which adhered more closely to the simple doctrines of early
Buddhism, these beliefs have been relegated to the region of legend and
fairy tale; in the northern church there have been found, from time to
time, believers who attached to them a practical importance. There is a
useful analogy between the expressions used in 1 Samuel xxviii, and
those in the latter part of our Suttas; and between the general position
of witchcraft in the history of Christianity, and of these beliefs in
the history of Buddhism; but it would take too long to carry out the
comparison and contrast in detail here, and with due regard to the
necessary limitations under which the comparison should be made. The
analogy only reaches to their history, and to their relative importance
in the religious systems with which they were connected; the two sets of
belief themselves are fundamentally different, the Indian beliefs being
much more nearly allied to modern spiritualism and mesmerism.

We have a curious instance of the way in which such legends grow in a
parallel passage of the earlier and later lives of Gotama as accepted by
orthodox Buddhists. In the Mahâ Vagga\[1\] it is said that during the
first watch of the night following on Gotama's victory over the Evil
One, he fixed his mind upon the Chain of Causation, during the second
watch he did the same, and during the third watch he did the same--the
only difference in the narrative being the verses with which in each of
the three watches the meditation closed.

In the life of Gotama prefixed to the *G*âtakas\[2\]. the simplicity of
this account is improved away by saying that

\[1. I, 1, 2-6.

2\. *G*âtaka I, 75, translated in 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. 102.\]

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

in the first watch he acquired the knowledge of Past Births
(Pubbe-nivâsa-nânâ, described in our § 17), in the second the knowledge
of Present Births (Dibba-*k*akkhu, described in our § 19), and only in
the third the knowledge of the Chain of Causation (Pati*kk*a-samuppâda).
It is curious that in the corresponding passage of the northern Buddhist
Sanskrit poem, the Lalita Vistara\[1\], we find precisely the same
tradition, which must therefore have been current in both northern and
southern churches before the fifth century of our era.

I think it is quite possible that at that time it had become part of the
Buddhist theory that every Arahat possessed this supernatural insight;
and as Gotama was supposed by the authors of these two later works to
have acquired Arahatship by his victory over the Evil One, it naturally
seemed to them proper to say that he then also acquired these particular
powers. It is clear that even in the time when the Pi*t*akas were put
into their present form it was considered that the Buddha had acquired
them\[2\], and that they could be acquired by less exalted persons\[3\].
In the later literature several instances are given of particular
persons who possessed one or other of them in a greater or less degree;
but it is instructive to notice that these are always persons who lived
long before the time of the writer who records the instances.

The early Buddhist doctrine as to witchcraft, astrology, omens,
auguries, sacrifices, prophecies, and the like, will be found in the
Mahâ Sîla (above, pp. 196-200), and in the Third Fetter (below, p. 222).

\[1. Calcutta edition, pp. 440-448.

2\. See, for instance, the Tevi*gg*a-va*kkh*agotta Sutta.

3\. Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, pp. 144-154.\]

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

### IF HE SHOULD DESIRE--.

#### ÂKA<u>N</u>KHEYYA-SUTTA

1\. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was once staying at Sâvatthi in
Anâtha Pi*nd*ika's park.

There the Blessed One addressed the Brethren, and said, 'Bhikkhus.'
'Yea, Lord!' said the Brethren, in assent, to the Blessed One.

Then spake the Blessed One:

2\. 'Continue, Brethren, in the practice of Right Conduct\[1\], adhering
to the Rules of the Order\[2\]; continue enclosed by the restraint of
the Rules of the Order, devoted to uprightness in life\[3\]; train
yourselves according to the Precepts\[4\], taking them upon you in the
sense of the danger in the least offence.

3\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to become beloved, popular,
respected among his fellow-disciples, let him then fulfil all
righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within\[5\], let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation\[6\], let him look through things\[7\], let him be much
alone!'

\[1. Sîla.

2\. Pâtimokkhâ.

3\. Â*k*ârago*k*arâ. Comp. Tevi*gg*a Sutta I, 49.

4\. Sikkhâpadesu. The Buddhist Decalogue (given in 'Buddhism,' p. 160).

5\. A*ggh*attam *k*eto samatha*m*.

6\. *Gh*âna.

7\. Vipassanâ: it is always used, in contrast to samatha {footnote p.
211} (note 5), of insight into objective phenomena. These three
qualities are constantly referred to as parts of Arahatship. The Rev.
David da Silva makes vipassanâ identical with the sevenfold perception
(sa*ññ*â, mentioned as conditions of the welfare of a community in the
Book of the Great Decease, Chap. I, § 10).\]

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

4\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to receive the
requisites--clothing, food, lodging, and medicine, and other necessaries
for the sick--let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be devoted
to that quietude of heart which springs from within, let him not drive
back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through things, let him
be much alone!'

5\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, that to those people among
whom he receives the requisites--clothing, food, lodging, and medicine,
and other necessaries for the sick--that charity of theirs should
redound to great fruit and great advantage, let him then fulfil all
righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation, let him look through things, let him be much alone!'

6\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, that those relatives of his,
of one blood with him, dead and gone, who think of him with believing
heart should find therein great fruit and great advantage\[1\], let him
then fulfil all righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude of
heart which springs from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation, let him look through things, let him be much alone!'

7\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, that he

\[1. Even after death those who remember the Buddha, the Truth, or the
Order with believing heart can reap spiritual advantage. Compare the
Dhammapada commentary, p. 97.\]

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

should be victorious over discontent and lust\[1\], that discontent
should never overpower him, that he should master and subdue any
discontent that had sprung up within him, let him then fulfil all
righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation, let him look through things, let him be much alone!'

8\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, that he should be victorious
over (spiritual) danger and dismay, that neither danger nor dismay
should ever overcome him, that he should master and subdue every danger
and dismay, let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be devoted to
that quietude of heart which springs from within, let him not drive back
the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through things, let him be
much alone!'

9\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to realise the hopes of those
spiritual men who live in the bliss which comes, even in this present
world, from the four *Gh*ânas, should he desire not to fall into the
pains and difficulties (which they avoid), let him then fulfil all
righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation, let him look through things, let him be much alone\[2\]!'

10\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to reach with his body and
remain in those stages of deliverance which are incorporeal, and pass
beyond

\[1. Aratiratisaho. Arati is the disinclination to fulfil the duties of
a Sama*n*a, discontent with the restrictions of the Order.

2\. The bliss here referred to, and described in detail below,
Mahâ-Sudassana Sutta, Chap. III, is the 'ecstasy of contemplation'
referred to in the refrain.\]

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

phenomena\[1\], let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be
devoted to that quietude of heart which springs from within, let him not
drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through things,
let him be much alone!'

11\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, by the complete destruction
of the three Bonds to become converted, to be no longer liable to be
reborn in a state of suffering, and to be assured of final
salvation\[2\], let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be
devoted to that quietude of heart which springs from within, let him not
drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through things,
let him be much alone!'

12\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, by the complete destruction
of the three Bonds, and by the reduction to a minimum of lust, hatred,
and delusion, to become a Sakadâgâmin, and (thus) on his first return to
this world to make an end of sorrow, let him then fulfil all
righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation, let him look through things, let him be much alone!'

13\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, by the complete destruction
of the five Bonds which bind people to this earth, to become an
inheritor of the highest heavens\[3\], there to pass entirely away,
thence

\[1. These are the eight Vimokkhâ, a list of which occurs in the Great
Decease, Chap. III, §§ 33-42.

2\. On this and the two following sections compare Mahâparinibbâna Sutta
II, 7, and on the Bonds or Fetters below, p. 222.

3\. Opapâtika. This is another of those words which, from their
connoting Buddhist ideas unknown in Europe, are really untranslatable.
It means a being who springs into existence without the intervention of
parents, and therefore, as it were, {footnote p. 214} uncaused, and
seeming to appear by chance. All the higher devas (angels or gods) are
opapâtika, there being no sex or birth in the highest heavens; and it is
with especial allusion to this that the word is here used. There is of
course from the Buddhist point of view (which admits of nothing without
a cause) a very sufficient cause for the sudden appearance of an
opapâtika in heaven, viz. the karma of a being who has past away
somewhere else; but the Buddhist theory necessitated the choice of an
expression which would give no countenance to the (heretical) idea of a
soul flying away after the death of its body from one world to another.

In the expression 'which bind people to this world,' by world is meant
the Rûpa-loka, or world of form, which include all those parts of the
universe whose inhabitants have an outward form and are subject to
lusts.\]

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

never to return, let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be
devoted to that quietude of heart which springs from within, let him not
drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through things,
let him be much alone!'

14.<sup>\[1\]</sup> 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to exercise
one by one each of the different Iddhis, being one to become multiform,
being multiform to become one; to become visible, or to become
invisible; to go without being stopped to the further side of a wall, or
a fence, or a mountain, as if through air; to penetrate up and down
through solid ground, as if through water; to walk on the water without
dividing it, as if on solid ground; to travel cross-legged through the
sky, like the birds on wing; to touch and feel with the hand even the
sun and the moon, mighty and powerful though they be; and to reach in
the body even up to the heaven of Brahmâ; let him then fulfil all
righteousness,

\[1. With this paragraph compare Mahâparinibbâna Sutta III, 14, and
Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, p. 145.\]

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which springs from within,
let him not drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look
through things, let him be much alone!'

15.<sup>\[1\]</sup> 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to hear with
clear and heavenly ear, surpassing that of men, sounds both human and
celestial, whether far or near, let him then fulfil all righteousness,
let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which springs from within,
let him not drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look
through things, let him be much alone!'

16.<sup>\[2\]</sup> 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to comprehend
by his own heart the hearts of other beings and of other men; to discern
the passionate mind to be passionate, and the calm mind calm; the angry
mind to be angry, and the peaceable peaceable; the deluded mind to be
deluded, and the wise mind wise; the concentrated thoughts to be
concentrated, and the scattered to be scattered; the lofty mind to be
lofty, and the narrow mind narrow; the sublime thoughts to be sublime,
and the mean to be mean; the steadfast mind to be steadfast, and the
wavering to be wavering; the free mind to be free, and the enslaved mind
to be enslaved; let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be
devoted to that quietude of heart which springs from within, let him not
drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through things,
let him be much alone!'

17\. 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to be able to call to mind
his various temporary states in days gone by; such as one birth, two
births,

\[1. With this paragraph compare Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, p. 146.

2\. Compare M. P. S. I, 16, and Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, p. 147.\]

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred or a
thousand, or a hundred thousand births\[1\]; his births in many an æon
of destruction, in many an æon of renovation, in many an æon of both
destruction and renovation\[2\]; (so as to be able to say), "In that
place such was my name, such my family, such my caste\[3\], such my
subsistence, such my experience of comfort or of pain, and such the
limit of my life; and when I passed from thence, I took form again in
that other place where my name was so and so, such my family, such my
caste, such my subsistence, such my experience of comfort or of joy, and
such my term of life; and when I fell from thence, I took form in such
and such a place\[4\];"--should he desire thus to call to mind his
temporary states in days gone by in all their modes and all their
details let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be devoted to
that quietude of heart which springs from within, let him not drive back
the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through things, let him be
much alone!'

18.<sup>\[5\]</sup> 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to see with
pure and heavenly vision, surpassing that of

\[1. The Lalita Vistara (p. 442) characteristically carries this
enumeration further up into innumerable ko*t*is and niyutas of births.

2\. This is based on the Buddhist theory of the periodical destruction
and renovation of the universe, each of which takes countless years to
be accomplished.

3\. Va*nn*a, colour.

4\. The text of this clause recurs nearly word for word in the
Brahma-*g*âla Sutta, pp. 17-21: and in the Lalita Vistara, Chap. XXII,
p. 442; and exactly in the Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, p. 148.

5\. This paragraph recurs in the Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, p. 150, and in
nearly the same words in the Lalita Vistara, Chap. XXII.\]

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

men, beings as they pass from one state of existence and take form in
others; beings base or noble, good-looking or ill-favoured, happy or
miserable, according to the karma they inherit--(if he should desire to
be able to say), "These beings, reverend sirs, by their bad conduct in
action, by their bad conduct in word, by their bad conduct in thought,
by their speaking evil of the Noble Ones\[1\], by their adhesion to
false doctrine, or by their acquiring the karma of false doctrine\[2\],
have been reborn, on the dissolution of the body after death, in some
unhappy state of suffering or woe\[3\]." "These beings, reverend sirs,
by their good conduct in action, by their good conduct in word, by their
good conduct in thought, by their not speaking evil of the Noble Ones,
by their adhesion to right doctrine, by their acquiring the karma of
right doctrine, have been reborn, on the dissolution of the body after
death, into some happy state in heaven;"--should he desire thus to see
with pure and heavenly vision, surpassing that of men, beings as they
thus pass from one state of existence and take form in others; beings
base or noble, good-looking or ill-favoured, happy or miserable,
according to the karma they inherit; let him then fulfil all
righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs

\[1. This is a collective term, meaning Buddhas, Pa*kk*eka Buddhas,
Arahats, Anâgâmins, Sakadâgâmins, and Sotâpannas; that is, those who are
walking in the Noble Eightfold Path.

2\. The Pâli is mi*kkh*a- (and below sammâ-) di*tth*i-kamma-samâdâna;
the Lalita Vistara, whose other expressions are identical with the Pâli,
has, very strangely, mithyâ- (and below samyag-)
di*tth*i-karma-dharma-samâdâna.

3\. See note on M. P. S., Chap. I, § 23.\]

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let
him look through things, let him be much alone!'

19.<sup>\[1\]</sup> 'If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, by the
destruction of the great evils (Âsavas\[2\]), by himself, and even in
this very world, to know and realise and attain to Arahatship, to
emancipation of heart, and emancipation of mind, let him then fulfil all
righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation, let him look through things, let him be much alone!'

20\. 'Continue therefore, Brethren, in the practice of Right Conduct,
adhering to the Rules of the Order; continue enclosed by the restraint
of the Rules of the Order, devoted to uprightness in life; train
yourselves according to the Precepts, taking them upon you in the sense
of the danger in the least offence. For to this end alone has all, that
has been said, been said!'

21\. Thus spake the Blessed One. And those Brethren, delighted in heart,
exalted the word of the Blessed One.

------------------------

End of the Âka<u>n</u>kheyya Sutta.

\[1. Compare Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, p. 151; Mahâparinibbâna Sutta II, 7;
and Lalita Vistara, Chap. XXII, p. 442.

2\. Sensuality, individuality, delusion, and ignorance.\]

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ketokhila-Sutta: Barreness And Bondage](sbe1107.md)
