[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1107)  [Next](sbe1109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

# MAHÂ-SUDASSANA SUTTA.

### INTRODUCTION

THE following translation is made from a text based on three MSS. from
the same sources as those referred to at the commencement of the
Tevi*gg*a Sutta, and referred to in my notes by the same letters.

This Sutta follows in the Dîgha Nikâya immediately after the Book of the
Great Decease, and is based on the same legend as the Mahâ-Sudassana
*G*âtaka, No. 95 in Mr. Fausböll's edition. As the latter differs in
several important particulars from our Sutta, it is probably not taken
directly from it, but is merely derived from the same source. To
facilitate comparison between the two I add here a translation of the
*G*âtaka, which has not been reached as yet in my 'Buddhist Birth
Stories,' and which is very short.

The part enclosed in brackets is the comment, which was probably written
in Ceylon in the fifth century of our era, and I have included that part
of the comment which is explanatory of the words in the verse, as it is
of more than usual interest. There is every reason to believe, for the
reasons given in the Introduction to the 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' that
the stories themselves belong to a very early period in the history of
Buddhism; and we may be sure that if this particular story had been
abstracted by the author of the commentary from our Sutta, he would not
have ventured to introduce such serious changes into what he regarded as
sacred writ.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

### MAHÂ-SUDASSANA *G*ÂTAKA.

## THE GREAT KING OF GLORY

\['How transient are all component things.' This the Master told when
lying on his death-couch, concerning that word of Ânanda the Thera, when
he said, 'Do not, O Blessed One, die in this little town,' and so on.

When the Tathâgata was at the *G*etavana\[1\] he thought 'the Thera
Sâriputta, who was born at Nâlagâma, has died, on the day of the full
moon in the month of Kattika, in that very village\[2\]; and Mahâ
Moggallâna in the latter, the dark half of that same month. As my two
chief disciples are thus dead; I too will pass away at Kusinârâ.'
Thereupon he proceeded straight on to that place, and lay down on the
Uttara-sîsaka couch, between the twin Sâla trees, never to rise again.

Then the venerable Ânanda besought him, saying, 'Let

\[1. It is not easy with our present materials to reconcile the
apparently conflicting statements with regard to the Buddha's last
journey. According to the Mâlâla<u>n</u>kâra-vatthu this refers here to
a residence at the *G*etavana, which took place between the end of § 30
in Chap. II, in the Book of the Great Decease, and the beginning of §
31. It will be noticed that § 31 speaks of 'the monastery,' which is
apparently an undesigned confirmation of this tradition. (Such
undesigned circumstances, however really undesigned, are very far, of
course, from proving the actual truth of the tradition. They would only
show that it was older than the time when the works in which they occur
were put into their present shape.)

Mr. Fausböll, by his punctuation, includes these words in the following
thought ascribed to the Blessed One, but I think they only describe the
time at which the thought is supposed to have arisen.

2\. Or perhaps 'at Varaka.' I do not understand the word varaka, which
has puzzled Mr. Fausböll. The modern name of the village, afterwards the
site of the famous Buddhist university of Nâlanda, is Baragaon. The
full-moon day in Kattika is the 1st of December. An account of the death
of Sâriputta will be found in the Mâlâla<u>n</u>kâra-vatthu (Bigandet,
'Legend,' &c., 3rd ed., II, 1-25), and of the murder of Moggallâna by
the Niga*nth*as in the Dhammapada commentary (Fausböll, p. 298 seq.), of
which Spence Hardy's account ('Manual of Buddhism,' p. 338) is nearly a
translation; and Bigandet's account (loc. cit. pp. 25-27) is an
abridgment.\]

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

not the Blessed One die in this little township\[1\], in this little
town in the jungle, in this branch township. Let the Blessed One die in
one of the other great cities, such as Râ*g*agaha, and the rest!'

But the Master answered, 'Say not, Ânanda, that this is a little
township, a little town in the jungle, a branch township. I was dwelling
formerly in this town at the time when I was Sudassana, the king of
kings; and then it was a great city, surrounded by a jewelled rampart,
twelve leagues in length!'

And at the request of the Thera, he, telling the tale, uttered the
Mahâ-Sudassana Sutta.\]

Now on that occasion when Queen Subhaddâ saw Mahâ Sudassana, when he had
come down out of the Palace of Righteousness, and was lying down, not
far off, on the appropriate couch, spread out in the grove of the seven
kinds of gems, and when she said: 'Thine, O king, are these four and
eighty thousand cities, of which the chief is the royal city of
Kusavâtî. Quicken thy desire after these!'

Then replied Mahâ Sudassana, 'Speak not thus, O queen! but exhort me
rather, saying, "Cast away desire for these, long not after them\[2\]!"

And when she asked, 'Why so, O king?' 'To-day my time is come, and I
shall die!' was his reply\[3\].

Then the weeping queen, wiping her eyes, brought herself with difficulty
and distress to address him accordingly. And having spoken, she wept,
and lamented; and the other four and eighty thousand women wept too, and
lamented; and of the attendant courtiers not one could restrain himself,
but all also wept.

But the Bodisat stopped them all, saying, 'Enough my friends! Be still!'
And he exhorted the queen, saying, 'Neither do thou, O queen, weep:
neither do thou lament. For even unto a grain of sesamum fruit there is
no such

\[1. Khuddaka-nagarake. See the note on Mahâparinibbâna Sutta, ver. 60.
Both these speeches are different from those given on the same occasion
in the Sutta below.

2\. This question and answer are not in the Sutta.\]

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

thing as a compound which is permanent! All are transient, all have the
inherent quality of dissolution!'

And when he had so said, he further uttered this stanza:

'How transient are all component things!  
Growth is their nature and decay:  
They are produced, they are dissolved again:  
And then is best,--when they have sunk to rest\[1\]!'

\[In these verses the words 'How transient are all component things!'
mean 'Dear lady, Subhaddâ, wheresoever and by whatsoever causes made or
come together, compounds\[2\],--that is, all those things which possess
the essential constituents (whether material or mental) of existing
things\[3\],--all these compounds are impermanence itself. For of these
form\[4\] is impermanent, reason\[5\] is impermanent, the (mental)
eye\[6\] is impermanent, and qualities\[7\] are impermanent. And
whatever treasure there be, whether conscious or unconscious, that is
transitory. Understand therefore "How transient are all component
things!"

'And why? "Growth is their nature and decay." These, all, have the
inherent quality of coming into (individual) existence, and have also
the inherent quality of growing old; or (in other words) their very
nature is to come into existence and to be broken up. Therefore should
it be understood that they are impermanent.

'And since they are impermanent, when "they are produced, they are
dissolved again." Having come into existence, having reached a
state\[8\], they are surely dissolved. For all these things come into
existence, taking an individual form; and are dissolved, being broken
up. To them as soon as there is birth, there is what is called a state;
as soon as there is a state, there is what is called

\[1. All this is omitted in the Sutta. It is true the verse occurs
there, but it is placed in the Sutta in the mouth of the Teacher, after
the account of Mahâ Sudassana's death.

The last clause is literally, 'Blessed is their cessation,' where the
word for cessation, upasamo, is derived from the word sam, 'to be calm,
to be quiet,' and means cessation by sinking into rest. Compare below.

2\. Sa<u>n</u>khârâ.

3\. Khandâyatanâdayo.

4\. Rûpa*m*.

5\. Vi*ññ*âna*m*.

6\. *K*akkhu*m*.

7\. Dhammâ.

8\. Thiti.\]

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

disintegration\[1\]. For to the unborn there is no such thing as state,
and there is no such thing as a state which is without disintegration.
Thus are all compounds, having attained to the three characteristic
marks (of impermanency, pain, and want of any abiding principle\[2\]),
subject, in this way and in that way, to dissolution. All these
component things therefore, without exception, are impermanent,
momentary\[3\], despicable, unstable, disintegrating, trembling,
quaking, unlasting, sure to depart\[4\], only for a time\[5\], and
without substance;--as temporary\[5\] as a phantom, as the mirage, or as
foam!

'How then in these, dear lady Subhaddâ, is there any sign of ease?
Understand rather that "then is best, when they have sunk to rest;" but
their sinking to rest, their cessation, comes from the cessation of the
whole round (of life), and is the same as Nirvâ*n*a. That and this are
one\[6\]. And hence there is no such thing as ease.'\]

------------------------

And when Mahâ Sudassana had thus brought his discourse to a point with
the ambrosial great Nirvâ*n*a, he made exhortation also to the rest of
the great multitude, saying, 'Give gifts! Observe the precepts! Keep the
sacred days\[7\]!' and became an inheritor of the world of the gods.

\[When the Master had concluded this lesson in the truth, he summed up
the *G*âtaka, saying, 'She who was then Subhaddâ the queen was the
mother of Râhula, the great adviser was Râhula, the rest of the retinue
the Buddha's retinue, and Mahâ Sudassana I myself.'\]

\[1. Bha<u>n</u>go.

2\. Ane*kk*a*m*, dukkha*m*, anatta*m*. See *G*âtaka I, 275; and, on the
last, Mahâparinibbâna Sutta I, to, and Mahâ Vagga I, vi, 38-47.

3\. Kha*n*ikâ. See Oldenberg's note on Dîpavamsa I, 53.

4\. Pâyâtâ, literally 'departed.' The forms payâti and payâto, given by
Childers, should be corrected into pâyâti and pâyâto. See *G*âtaka I,
146.

5\. Tâvakâlikâ, See *G*âtaka I, 121, where the word is used of a cart
let out on hire for a time only.

6\. 'Tad ev eka*m* eka*m*, which is not altogether without ambiguity.

7\. This paragraph, too, is omitted in the Sutta.\]

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

### INTRODUCTION (continued)

The word translated 'component things' or 'compounds' in this *G*âtaka
is sa<u>n</u>khârâ, literally confections, from kar, 'to do,' and sam,
'together.' It is a word very frequently used in Buddhist writings, and
a word consequently of many different connotations; and there is, of
course, no exactly corresponding word in English. 'Production' would
often be very nearly correct, although it fails entirely to give the
force of the preposition sam; but a greater objection to that word is
the fact that it is generally used, not of things that have come into
being of themselves, but of things that have been produced by some one
else. It suggests, if it does not imply, a producer; which is contrary
to the whole spirit of the Buddhist passages in which the word
sa<u>n</u>khârâ occurs. In this important respect the word 'compound' is
a much more accurate translation, though it lays somewhat too much
stress on the sam.

The term Confections (to coin a rendering) is sometimes used, as in the
first line of these verses (as used in this connection), to denote all
things which have been brought together, made up, by pre-existing
causes; and in this sense it includes, as the commentator here points
out, all those material or mental qualities which unite to form an
individual, a separate thing or being, whether conscious or unconscious.

It is more usually used, with special reference to their origin from
pre-existing causes, and with allusion to the wider class denoted by the
same word, of the mental confections only, of all sentient beings
generally, or of man alone. In this sense it forms by itself one of the
five classes or aggregates (khandhâ) into which the material and mental
qualities of each separate individual are divided in Buddhist
writings--the class of dispositions, capabilities, and all that goes
together to make what we call character. This class has naturally enough
been again divided and subdivided; and a full list of the Confections in
this sense, as now acknowledged by orthodox Buddhists, will be found in
my manual 'Buddhism.' At the time when the Pâli Pi*t*akas reached their
present form, no such elaborate list of Confections in detail seems to
have been made; but the

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

general sense of the word was, as is quite clear from the passages in
which it occurs, the idea which these details together convey. It is
this second and more usual meaning of the term which is more especially
emphasised in the concluding verse of the above stanza.

------------------------

I have ventured to dwell so far on the word Confections, because the
commentator here says that the cessation of these Confections is the
same thing as Nirvâ*n*a; and the question of Nirvâ*n*a engrosses so
large a share of the attention of those who are interested in Buddhism.

Whether it is entitled to do so is open to serious question. The
Buddhist salvation was held to consist in a change of heart, a
modification of personal character, to be attained to in this world, and
forming the subject of Gotama's first discourse, 'The Foundation of the
Kingdom of Righteousness\[1\].' When looked at from different points of
view this state of mind was denoted, in the very numerous passages in
which it is mentioned or referred to, under a great variety of different
names or epithets, suggestive of the different points of view from which
it could be regarded. The term Nibbâna, or Nirvâ*n*a, is only one of
those epithets; and it is a most significant fact, to which I would
invite especial attention, that it is an epithet comparatively very
seldom employed in the Pâli Pi*t*akas themselves. It is to the state of
mind itself, the salvation which every Arahat has reached while yet
alive, in a word, to Arahatship, that importance ought to be attached,
rather than to that particular connotation of it suggested by the word
Nirvâ*n*a.

One of the many ideas involved in Arahatship was the absolute
dissolution of individuality. Gotama, whether rightly or wrongly is here
of no importance, held that freedom from pain, absolute ease, happiness,
was incompatible with existence as a distinct individual (whether
animal, god, or man). The cessation of the Confections, so far from
being a thing to be dreaded, was the inevitable result of the
emancipation of heart and mind in Arahatship.

\[1. The Dhamma-*k*akka-ppavattana Sutta, translated below.\]

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span> But it was not a thing to be desired,
and could not, in fact, be brought about apart from all the other things
involved in Arahatship. The formation of these Confections ceases in
Nirvâ*n*a, and in Nirvâ*n*a alone; and when the poet declares that their
cessation is blessed, he is saying the same thing as if he had said
'Nirvâ*n*a is blessed\[1\].'

------------------------

Turning now to the Sutta itself, we find that the portion of the legend
omitted in the *G*âtaka throws an unexpected light upon the tale; for it
commences with a long description of the riches and glory of Mahâ
Sudassana, and reveals in its details the instructive fact that the
legend is nothing more nor less than a spiritualist's sun-myth.

It cannot be disputed that the sun-myth theory has become greatly
discredited, and with reason, by having been used too carelessly and
freely as an explanation of religious legends of different times and
countries which have really no historical connection with the earlier
awe and reverence inspired by the sun. The very mention of the word
sun-myth is apt to call forth a smile of incredulity, and the
indubitable truth which is the basis of the theory has not sufficed to
protect it from the shafts of ridicule. The 'Book of the Great King of
Glory' seems to afford a useful example both of the extent to which the
theory may be accepted, and of the limitations under which it should
always be applied.

It must at once be admitted that whether the whole story is based on a
sun-story, or whether certain parts or details of it are derived from
things first spoken about the sun, or not, it is still essentially
Buddhistic. A large proportion of its contents has nothing at all to do
with the worship of the sun; and even that which has, had not, in

\[1. In this respect it should be noticed that the very word here used
for cessation, upasamo, is used as one among a string of epithets of
Arahatship at Dhamma-kakka-ppavattana Sutta, § 3, = *G*âtaka I, 97, and
again in Dhammapada, verses 368, 381. In this last passage the whole of
the phrase in the last verse in our stanza recurs in the accusative case
as an equivalent to Arahatship, and the comma inserted by Mr. Fausböll
between sa<u>n</u>khârûpasama*m* and sukha*m* is, in both verses,
unnecessary.\]

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

the mind of the author, when the book was put together. Whether indebted
to a sun-myth or not, it is therefore perfectly true and valid evidence
of the religious belief of the people among whom it was current; and no
more shows that the Buddhists were unconscious sun worshippers than the
story of Samson, under any theory of its possible origin, would prove
the same of the Jews.

What we really have is a kind of wonderful fairy tale, a gorgeous poem,
in which an attempt is made to describe in set terms the greatest
possible glory and majesty of the greatest possible king, in order to
show that all is vanity, save only righteousness-just such a poem as a
Jewish prophet might have written of Solomon in all his glory. It would
have been most strange, perhaps impossible, for the author to refrain
from using the language of the only poets he knew, who had used their
boldly figurative language in an attempt to describe the appearance of
the sun.

To trace back all the rhetorical phrases of our Sutta to their earliest
appearance in the Vedic hymns would be an interesting task of historical
philology, though it would throw more light upon Buddhist forms of
speech than upon Buddhist forms of belief. In M. Senart's valuable work,
'La Legende du Bouddha,' he has already done this with regard to the
seven treasures (mentioned in the early part of the Sutta) on the basis
of the corresponding passage in the later Buddhist Sanskrit poem called
the Lalita Vistara. The descriptions of the royal city and of its
wondrous Palace of Righteousness have been probably originated by the
author, though on the same lines; and it reminds one irresistibly, in
many of its expressions, of the similar, but simpler and more beautiful
poem in which a Jewish author, some three centuries afterwards,
described the heavenly Jerusalem.

When the Northern Buddhists, long afterwards, had smothered the simple
teaching of the founder of their religion under the subtleties of
theological and metaphysical speculation, and had forgotten all about
the Noble Path, their goal was no longer a change of heart in the
Arahatship to be reached on earth, but a life of happiness, under a
change of outward condition, in a heaven of bliss

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

beyond the skies. One of the most popular books among the Buddhists of
China and Japan is a description of this heavenly paradise of theirs,
called the Sukhâvatî-vyûha, the 'Book of the Happy Country,' the
Sanskrit text of which has been just published by Professor Max Müller
in the volume of the journal of the Royal Asiatic Society for the
present year. It is instructive to find that several of the expressions
used are word for word the same as the corresponding phrases in the
'Book of the Great King of Glory.'

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

### THE GREAT KING OF GLORY<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

## MAHÂ-SUDASSANA-SUTTA.

#### CHAPTER I.

1\. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was once staying at Kusinârâ in
the Upavattana, the Sâla grove of the Mallas, between the twin Sâla
trees, at the time of his death.

2\. Now the venerable Ânanda went up to the place where the Blessed One
was, and bowed down before him, and took his seat respectfully on one
side. And when he was so seated, the venerable Ânanda said to the
Blessed One:

2 'Let not the Blessed One die in this little wattel and daub town, in
this town in the midst of the jungle, in this branch township. For,
Lord, there are other great cities, such as *K*ampâ, Râ*g*agaha,
Sâvatthi, Sâketa, Kosambi, and Benâres. Let the Blessed One die in one
of them. There there are many wealthy nobles and Brâhmans and heads of
houses, believers in the Tathâgata, who will pay due honour to the
remains of the Tathâgata.'

3\. 'Say not so, Ânanda! Say not so, Ânanda,

\[1. Sudassana means 'beautiful to see, having a glorious appearance,'
and is the name of many kings and heroes in Indian legend.

2\. From here down to the end of the next section is found also, nearly
word for word, in the Mahâparinibbâna Sutta, above, pp. 99, 100. Compare
also Mahâ-Sudassana *G*âtaka, No. 95.\]

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

that this is but a small wattel and daub town, a town in the midst of
the jungle, a branch township. Long ago, Ânanda, there was a king, by
name Mahâ-Sudassana, a king of kings, a righteous man who ruled in
righteousness, an anointed Kshatriya\[1\], Lord of the four quarters of
the earth, conqueror, the protector of his people, possessor of the
seven royal treasures. This Kusinârâ, Ânanda, was the royal city of king
Mahâ-Sudassana, under the name of Kusâvatî\[2\], and on the east and on
the west it was twelve leagues in length, and on the north and on the
south it was seven leagues in breadth. That royal city Kusâvatî, Ânanda,
was mighty, and prosperous, and full of people, crowded with men, and
provided with all things for food. just, Ânanda, as the royal city of
the gods, Â*l*akamandâ by name, is mighty, prosperous, and full of
people, crowded with the gods, and provided with all kinds of food, so.
Ânanda, was the royal city Kusâvatî mighty and prosperous, full of
people, crowded with men, and provided with all kinds of food. Both by
day and by night, Ânanda, the royal city Kusâvatî resounded

\[1. Khattiyo muddhâvasitto, which does not occur in the Mahâparinibbâna
Sutta, the Mahâpadhâna Sutta, the Lakkha*n*a Sutta, and other places
where this stock description of a *K*akkavatti is found. It is omitted
also in the Lalita Vistara. The Burmese Phayre MS. of the India Office
reads here muddâbhisitto, but this is an unnecessary correction. So the
name of the Hindu caste mentioned in the Sahyâdri Kha*nd*a of the Skanda
Purâ*n*a is spelt both ways. The epithet is probably inserted here from
§ 12 below.

2\. Ku*s*âvatî was the name of a famous city mentioned as the capital of
Southern Kusala in post-Buddhistic Sanskrit plays and epic poems. In the
Mahâbhârata it is called Ku*s*avatî. It is said to have been so named
after Ku*s*a, son of Râma, by whom it was built; and it is also called
Ku*s*asthalî.\]

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

with the ten cries; that is to say, the noise of elephants, and the
noise of horses, and the noise of chariots; the sounds of the drum, of
the tabor, and of the lute; the sound of singing, and the sounds of the
cymbal and of the gong; and lastly, with the cry, "Eat, drink, and be
merry\[1\]!"

------------------------

4\. 'The royal city Kusâvatî, Ânanda, was surrounded by Seven Ramparts.
Of these, one rampart was of gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl,
and one of crystal, and one of agate, and one of coral, and one of all
kinds of gems\[2\]!'

\[1. This enumeration is found also at *G*âtaka, p. 3, only that the
chank is added there--wrongly, for that makes the number of cries
eleven.

2\. Beryl, agate, and coral are doubtful renderings of Pâli names of
precious substances, the exact meaning of which has been discussed on
the very slender evidence available (and hence, it seems to me, with
very little certain result) by Burnouf in the 'Lotus de la Bonne Loi,'
pp. 319-321; and Professor Max Müller has a further note in the journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1890, p. 178. The Pâli words here are in
the first column:

|                           |                 |
|---------------------------|-----------------|
| 1\. Sova*nn*amayo,        | Suvar*n*asya;   |
| 2\. Rûpimayo,             | Rûpasya;        |
| 3\. Ve*l*uriyamayo,       | Vai*d*ûryasya;  |
| 4\. Phalikamayo,          | Spha*t*ikasya;  |
| 5\. Lohita<u>n</u>kamayo, | Lohitamuktasya; |
| 6\. Masâragallamayo,      | Asmagarbhasya;  |
| 7\. Sabbaratanamayo,      | Musâragalvasya: |

 

those in the second being taken from the Sukhavatîvyûha in the
corresponding to § 6 below. It is quite possible that passage the
writers of these passages used the rarer words only as names of precious
substances, without attaching any clearly distinct meaning to each
(compare Rev. xxi. 19-21). The Pâli author seems to have been hard put
to it to find enough names to fill up the sacred number seven; just as
in the 'Seven jewels' of the Dhamma, the sacred number seven is reached
by giving to one jewel two distinct names (Pa*ñ*k indriyâni = pa*ñk*a
balâni). At Kulla Vagga IX, 1, 4. we find the following enumeration of
{footnote p. 250} rata*n*as as found in the ocean, though only Nos. 1,
4, 5, 6 are really produced there:

|                    |                       |
|--------------------|-----------------------|
| 1\. Mutta.         | 6\. Pavâ*l*a*m*.      |
| 2\. Ma*n*i.        | 7\. Ra*g*ata*m*.      |
| 3\. Ve*l*uriyo.    | 8\. Gâtarûpam.        |
| 4\. Sa<u>n</u>kho. | 9\. Lohita<u>n</u>ko. |
| 5\. Silâ           | 10\. Masâragalla*m*.  |

 

\]

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

5\. 'To the royal city Kusâvatî, Ânanda, there were Four Gates. One gate
was of gold, and one of silver, and one of jade, and one of crystal. At
each gate seven pillars were fixed; in height as three times or as four
times the height of a man. And one pillar was of gold, and one of
silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal, and one of agate, and one
of coral, and one of all kinds of gems.

6\. 'The royal city Kusâvatî, Ânanda, was surrounded by Seven Rows of
Palm Trees. One row was of palms of gold, and one of silver, and one of
beryl, and one of crystal, and one of agate, and one of coral, and one
of all kinds of gems.

7\. 'And the Golden Palms had trunks of gold, and leaves and fruits of
silver. And the Silver Palms had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits
of gold. And the Palms of Beryl had trunks of beryl, and leaves and
fruits of crystal. And the Crystal Palms had trunks of crystal, and
leaves and fruits of beryl. And the Agate Palms had trunks of agate, and
leaves and fruits of coral. And the Coral Palms had trunks of coral, and
leaves and fruits of agate. And the Palms of every kind of Gem had
trunks and leaves and fruits of every kind of gem.

8.<sup>\[1\]</sup> 'And when those rows of palm trees, Ânanda,

\[1. This section and § 9 should be compared with one in the
Sukhavatîvyûha, translated by Professor Max Müller as follows (journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1880, p. 170):

'And again, O *S*âriputra, when those rows of palm trees and {footnote
p. 251} strings of bells in that Buddha country are moved by the wind, a
sweet and enrapturing sound proceeds from them. Yes, O *S*âriputra, as
from a heavenly musical instrument consisting of a hundred thousand
ko*t*is of sounds, when played by Âryas, a sweet and enrapturing sound
proceeds; a sweet and enrapturing sound proceeds from those rows of palm
trees and strings of bells moved by the wind.

'And when the men there hear that sound, reflection on Buddha arises in
their body, reflection on the Law, reflection on the Assembly.'

Compare also below, § 81, and *G*âtaka I, 32.\]

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

were shaken by the wind, there arose a sound sweet, and pleasant, and
charming, and intoxicating.

'Just, Ânanda, as the seven kind of instruments yield, when well played
upon, to the skilful man, a sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and
intoxicating-just even so, Ânanda, when those rows of palm trees were
shaken by the wind, there arose a sound sweet, and pleasant, and
charming, and intoxicating.

9\. 'And whoever, Ânanda, in the royal city Kusâvatî were at that time
gamblers, drunkards, and given to drink, they used to dance round
together to the sound of those palms when shaken by the wind.

------------------------

10\. 'The Great King of Glory, Ânanda, was the possessor of Seven
Precious Things, and was gifted with Four Marvellous Powers.'

'What are those seven?'

11.<sup>\[1\]</sup> 'In the first place, Ânanda, when the Great King of
Glory, on the Sabbath day\[2\], on the day of

\[1. The following enumeration is found word for word in several other
Pâli Suttas, and occurs also, in almost identical terms, in the Lalita
Vistara (Calcutta edition, pp. 14-19).

2\. 'Uposatha, a weekly sacred day; being full-moon day, new-moon day,
and the two equidistant intermediate days. Comp. § 21.\]

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

the full moon, had purified himself, and had gone up into the upper
story of his palace to keep the sacred day, there then appeared to him
the heavenly Treasure of the Wheel\[1\], with its nave, its tire, and
all its thousand spokes complete.

12\. 'When he beheld it the Great King of Glory thought:

'"This saying have I heard, 'When a king of the warrior race, an
anointed king, has purified himself on the Sabbath day, on the day of
the full moon, and has gone up into the upper story of his palace to
keep the sacred day; if there appear to him the heavenly Treasure of the
Wheel, with its nave, its tire, and all its thousand spokes
complete-that king becomes a king of kings invincible.' May I, then,
become a king of kings invincible\[2\]."

13\. 'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory rose from his seat, and
reverently uncovering from one shoulder his robe, he held in his left
hand a pitcher, and with his right hand he sprinkled water up over the
Wheel, as he said:

'"Roll onward, O my Lord, the Wheel! O my Lord, go forth and overcome!"

14\. 'Then the wondrous Wheel, Ânanda, rolled onwards towards the region
of the East, and after it went the Great King of Glory\[3\], and with
him his

\[1. *K*akka-ratana*m*, where the *k*akka is the disk of the sun.

2\. *K*akkavattirâ*g*â.

3\. Atha kho *k*akka-ratana*m* puratthima*m* disa*m* pavatti anvad eva
râ*g*â Mahâsudassano, &c. Here anvad must be the Sanskrit anva*ñk*. The
Lalita Vistara has anveti in the corresponding passage, and the (Phayre
Burmese) MS. here reads anud eva. The verb in the second clause must be
supplied, as {footnote p. 253} is the case in the one or two other
passages where I have met with this phrase.\]

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

army, horses, and chariots, and elephants, and men. And in whatever
place, Ânanda, the Wheel stopped, there the Great King of Glory took up
his abode, and with him his army, horses, and chariots, and

elephants, and men.

15\. 'Then, Ânanda, all the rival kings in the region of the East came
to the Great King of Glory and said:

'"Come, O mighty king! Welcome, O mighty king! All is thine, O mighty
king! Do thou, O mighty king, be a Teacher to us!"

16\. 'Thus spake the Great King of Glory:

'"Ye shall slay no living thing.

'"Ye shall not take that which has not been given.

'"Ye shall not act wrongly touching the bodily desires.

'"Ye shall speak no lie.

'"Ye shall drink no maddening drink.

'"Ye shall eat as ye have eaten\[1\]."

17\. 'Then, Ânanda, all the rival kings in the region of the East became
subject unto the Great King of Glory.

18\. 'But the wondrous Wheel, Ânanda, having plunged down into the great
waters in the East, rose up out again, and rolled onward to the region
of the South \[and there all happened as had happened

\[1. Yathâbhutta*m*bhu*ñg*atha. Buddhaghosa has no comment on this. I
suppose it means, 'Observe the rules current among you regarding clean
and unclean meats.' If so, the Great King of Glory disregards the
teaching of the Âmagandha Sutta, quoted in 'Buddhism,' p. 131.\]

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

in the region of the East. And in like manner the wondrous Wheel rolled
onward to the extremest boundary of the West and of the North; and
there, too, all happened as had happened in the region of the East\].

19\. 'Now when the wondrous Wheel, Ânanda, had gone forth conquering and
to conquer o'er the whole earth to its very ocean boundary, it returned
back again to the royal city of Kusâvatî and remained fixed on the open
terrace in front of the entrance to the inner apartments of the Great
King of Glory, as a glorious adornment to the inner apartments of the
Great King of Glory.

20\. 'Such, Ânanda, was the wondrous Wheel which appeared to the Great
King of Glory.

------------------------

21\. 'Now further, Ânanda, there appeared to the Great King of Glory the
Elephant Treasure\[1\], all white, sevenfold firm\[2\], wonderful in
power, flying through the sky--the Elephant-King, whose name was "The
Changes of the Moon\[3\]."

22\. 'When he beheld it the Great King of Glory was pleased at heart at
the thought

\[1. Hatthi-ratana.

2\. Satta-ppatittho, that is, perhaps, in regard to its four legs, two
tusks, and trunk. The expression is curious, and Buddhaghosa has no note
upon it. It is quite possible that it merely signifies 'exceeding firm,'
the number seven being used without any hard and fast interpretation.

3\. Uposatho. In the Lalita Vistara its name is 'Wisdom' (Bodhi).
Uposatha is the name for the sacred day of the moon's changes-first, and
more especially the full-moon day; next, the new-moon day; and lastly,
the days equidistant between these two. It was therefore a weekly sacred
day, and, as Childers says, may often be well rendered 'Sabbath.'\]

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

'"Auspicious were it to ride upon that Elephant, if only it would submit
to be controlled!"

23\. 'Then, Ânanda, the wondrous Elephant--like a fine elephant of noble
blood long since well trained--submitted to control.

24\. 'When as before, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory, to test that
wondrous Elephant, mounted on to it early in the morning, it passed over
along the broad earth to its very ocean boundary, and then returned
again, in time for the morning meal, to the royal city of Kusâvatî\[1\].

25\. 'Such, Ânanda, was the wondrous Elephant that appeared to the Great
King of Glory.

26\. 'Now further, Ânanda, there appeared to the Great King of Glory the
Horse Treasure\[2\], all white with a black head, and a dark mane,
wonderful in power, flying through the sky-the Charger-King, whose name
was "Thunder-cloud\[3\]."

27\. 'When he beheld it, the Great King of Glory was pleased at heart at
the thought:

'"Auspicious were it to ride upon that Horse if only it would submit to
be controlled!"

28\. 'Then, Ânanda. the wondrous Horse--like

\[1. Compare on this and § 29 my 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. 85, where
a similar phrase is used of Kanthaka.

2 Assa-ratana*m*.

3 Valâhako. Compare the Valâhassa *G*âtaka (Fausböll, No. 196, called in
the Burmese MS. Valâhakassa *G*âtaka), of which the Chinese story
translated by Mr. Beal at pp. 332-340 of his 'Romantic History,' &c., is
an expanded and altered version. In the Valâhaka Sa*m*yutta of the
Sa*m*yutta Nikâya the spirits of the skies are divided into
U*n*ha-valâhakâ Devâ, Sîta-valâhakâ Devâ, Abbha-valâhakâ Devâ,
Vâta-valâhakâ Devâ, and Vassa-valâhakâ Devâ, that is, the cloud-spirits
of cold, heat, air, wind, and rain respectively.\]

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

a fine horse of the best blood long since well trained--submitted to
control.

29\. 'When as before, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory, to test that
wondrous Horse, mounted on to it early in the morning, it passed over
along the broad earth to its very ocean boundary, and then returned
again, in time for the morning meal, to the royal city of Kusâvatî.

30\. 'Such, Ânanda, was the wondrous Horse that appeared to the Great
King of Glory.

------------------------

31\. 'Now further, Ânanda, there appeared to the Great King of Glory the
Gem-Treasure\[1\]. That Gem was the Ve*l*uriya, bright, of the finest
species, with eight facets, excellently wrought, clear, transparent,
perfect in every way.

32\. 'The splendour, Ânanda, of that wondrous Gem spread round about a
league on every side.

33\. 'When as before, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory, to test that
wondrous Gem, set all his fourfold army in array and raised aloft the
Gem upon his standard top, he was able to march out in the gloom and
darkness of the night.

34\. 'And then too, Ânanda, all the dwellers in the villages, round
about, set about their daily work, thinking, "The daylight hath
appeared."

35\. 'Such, Ânanda, was the wondrous Gem that appeared to the Great King
of Glory.

------------------------

36\. 'Now further, Ânanda, there appeared to the Great King of Glory the
Woman-Treasure\[2\], graceful in figure, beautiful in appearance,
charming in manner, and of the most fine complexion; neither

\[1. Ma*n*i-ratana*m*.

2 Itthi-ratana*m*.\]

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

very tall, nor very short; neither very stout, nor very slim; neither
very dark, nor very fair; surpassing human beauty, she had attained unto
the beauty of the gods\[1\].

37\. 'The touch too, Ânanda, of the skin of that wondrous Woman was as
the touch of cotton or of cotton wool: in the cold her limbs were warm,
in the heat her limbs were cool; while from her body was wafted the
perfume of sandal wood and from her mouth the perfume of the lotus.

38\. 'That Pearl among Women too, Ânanda, used to rise up before the
Great King of Glory, and after him retire to rest; pleasant was she in
speech, and ever on the watch to hear what she might do in order so to
act as to give him pleasure.

39\. 'That Pearl among Women too, Ânanda, was never, even in thought,
unfaithful to the Great King of Glory--how much less then could she be
so with the body!

40\. 'Such, Ânanda, was the Pearl among Women who appeared to the Great
King of Glory.

------------------------

41\. 'Now further, Ânanda, there appeared unto the Great King of Glory a
Wonderful Treasurer\[2\], possessed, through good deeds done in a

\[1. The above description of an ideally beautiful woman is of frequent
occurrence.

2\. Gahapati-ratana*m*. The word gahapati has been hitherto usually
rendered 'householder,' but this may often, and would certainly here,
convey a wrong impression. There is no single word in English which is
an adequate rendering of the term, for it connotes a social condition
now no longer known among us. The gahapati was the head of a family, the
representative in a village community of a family, the pater familias.
So the god of fire, with allusion to the sacred fire maintained in each
household, is called in the Rig-veda the g*ri*hapati, the pater
familias, {footnote p. 258} of the human race. Thence it is often used
in opposition to brâhma*n*a very much as we might use 'yeoman' in
opposition to 'clerk' (*G*âtaka I, 83, and below, § 53); and the two
combined are used in opposition to people of other ranks and callings
held to be less honourable than that of clerk or yeoman (*G*âtaka I,
218). In this respect the term gahapati is nearly equivalent, though
from a different point of view, to the Kshatriyas and Vai*s*yas of the
Hindu caste division; but the compound brâhma*n*a-gahapatikâ as a
collective term comes to be about equivalent to 'priests and laymen'
(see, for instance, below, § 53, and Mahâ Vagga I, 22; 3, 4, &c.). Then
again the gahapati is distinct from the subordinate members of the
family, who had not the control and management of the common property
(Sâma*ññ*a Phala Sutta, 133, = Tevi*gg*a Sutta I, 47); and it is this
implication of the term that is emphasised in the text. Buddhaghosa
uses, as an explanatory phrase, the words se*tth*i-gahapati. See further
the passages quoted in the index to the *K*ulla Vagga (p. 354).\]

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

former birth, of a marvellous power of vision by which he could discover
treasure, whether it had an owner or whether it had not.

42\. 'He went up to the Great King of Glory, and said:

'"Do thou, O king, take thine case! I will deal with thy wealth even as
wealth should be dealt with."

43\. 'Then, as before, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory, to test that
wonderful Treasurer, went on board a boat, and had it pushed out into
the current in the midst of the river Ganges. Then he said to the
wonderful steward:

'"I have need, O Treasurer, of yellow gold!"

'"Let the ship then, O Great King, go alongside either of the banks."

'"It is here, O Treasurer, that I have need of yellow gold."

44\. 'Then the wonderful Treasurer reached down to the water with both
his hands, and drew up a jar

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

full of yellow gold, and said to the Great King of Glory--

'"Is that enough, O Great King? Have I done enough, O Great King?"

'And the Great King of Glory replied:

'"It is enough, O Treasurer. You have done enough, O Treasurer. You have
offered me enough, O Treasurer!"

45\. 'Such was the wonderful Treasurer, Ânanda, who appeared to the
Great King of Glory.

------------------------

46\. 'Now further, Ânanda, there appeared to the Great King of Glory a
Wonderful Adviser\[1\], learned, clever, and wise; and qualified to lead
the Great King of Glory to undertake what he ought to undertake, and to
leave undone what he ought to leave undone.

47\. 'He went up to the Great King of Glory, and said:

'"Do thou, O King, take thine ease! I will be thy guide."

48\. 'Such, Ânanda, was the wonderful Adviser who appeared to the Great
King of Glory.

'The Great King of Glory was possessed of these Seven Precious Things.

------------------------

49\. 'Now further, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory was gifted with Four
Marvellous Gifts\[2\].'

'What are the Four Marvellous Gifts?'

\[1. Pari*n*âyaka-ratana*m*. Buddhaghosa says that he was the eldest son
of the king; but this is probably a mere putting back into the Sutta of
a later idea derived from the summary in the *G*âtaka. The Lalita
Vistara makes him a general.

2\. *K*atûhi iddhîhi. Here again, as elsewhere, it will be noticed that
there is nothing supernatural about these four Iddhis. See {footnote p.
260} the notes above on the 'Book of the Great Decease,' I, 1; III, 2.
They are merely attributes accompanying or forming part of the majesty
(iddhi) of the *K*akkavatti.\]

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

50\. 'In the first place, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory was graceful
in figure, handsome in appearance, pleasing in manner, and of most
beautiful complexion, beyond what other men are.

'The Great King of Glory, Ânanda, was endowed with this First Marvellous
Gift.

51\. 'And besides that, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory was of long
life, and of many years, beyond those of other men.

'The Great King of Glory, Ânanda, was endowed with this Second
Marvellous Gift.

52\. 'And besides that, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory was free from
disease, and free from bodily suffering; and his internal fire was
neither too hot nor too cold, but such as to promote good digestion,
beyond that of other men\[1\].

\[1. Samavepâkiniyâ gaha*n*iyâ samannâgato nâtisîtâya nâ*kk*unhâya. The
same thing is said of Ra*tth*apâla in the Ra*tth*apâla Sutta, where
Gogerly renders the whole passage, 'Ra*tth*apâla is healthy, free from
pain, having a good digestion and appetite, being troubled with no
excess of either heat or cold' (journal of the Ceylon Asiatic Society,
1847-1848, p. 98). The gaha*n*i is a supposed particular organ or
function situate at the junction of the stomach and intestines.
Moggallâna explains it, udare tu tathâ pâ*k*analasmi*m* gaha*n*i
(Abhidhâna-ppadîpikî, 972), where Subhûti's Sinhalese version is
'kukshi, pakâgni,' and his English version, 'the belly, the internal
fire which promotes digestion.' Buddhaghosa explains samavipâkiyâ
kamma*g*â-te*g*o-dhâtuyâ, and adds, 'If a man's food is dissolved the
moment he has eaten it, or if it remains like a lump, he has not the
samavepâkini gaha*n*i, but he who has appetite (bhatta*kkh*ando) when
the time for food comes round again, he has the samavepâkini
gaha*n*i,'--which is delightfully naïve.\]

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

'The Great King of Glory, Ânanda, was endowed with this Third Marvellous
Gift.

53\. 'And besides that, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory was beloved and
popular with Brâhmans and with laymen alike\[1\]. Just, Ânanda, as a
father is near and dear to his own sons, just so, Ânanda, was the Great
King of Glory beloved and popular with Brâhmans and with laymen alike.
And just, Ânanda, as his sons are near and dear to a father, just so,
Ânanda, were Brâhmans and laymen alike near and dear to the Great King
of Glory.

54\. 'Once, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory marched out with all his
fourfold army to the pleasure ground. There, Ânanda, the Brâhmans and
laymen went up to the Great King of Glory, and said:

'"O King, pass slowly by, that we may look upon thee for a longer time!"

'But the Great King of Glory, Ânanda, addressed his charioteer, and
said:

'"Drive on the chariot slowly, charioteer, that I may look upon my
people (Brâhmans and laymen) for a longer time!"

55\. 'This was the Fourth Marvellous Gift, Ânanda, with which the Great
King of Glory was endowed.

56\. 'These are the Four Marvellous Gifts, Ânanda, with which the Great
King of Glory was endowed.

------------------------

57\. 'Now to the Great King of Glory, Ânanda, there occurred the
thought:

'"Suppose, now, I were to make Lotus-ponds

\[1. Brâhma*n*a-gahapatikâna*m*. See the note on § 41.\]

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

in the spaces between these palms, at every hundred bow lengths."

'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory, in the spaces between those
palms, at distances of a hundred bow lengths, made Lotus-ponds.

58\. 'And those Lotus-ponds, Ânanda, were faced with tiles of four
kinds. One kind of tile was of gold, and one of silver, and one of
beryl, and one of crystal.

59\. 'And to each of those Lotus-ponds, Ânanda, there were four flights
of steps, of four different kinds. One flight of steps was of gold, and
one of silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal. The flight of
golden steps had balustrades of gold, with the cross bars and the figure
head of silver. The flight of silver steps had balustrades of silver,
with the cross bars and the figure head of gold. The flight of beryl
steps had balustrades of beryl, with the cross bars and the figure head
of crystal. The flight of crystal steps had balustrades of crystal, with
cross bars and figure head of beryl.

60\. 'And round those Lotus-ponds there ran, Ânanda, a double railing.
One railing was of gold, and one was of silver. The golden railing had
its posts of gold, and its cross bars and its capitals of silver. The
silver railing had its posts of silver, and its cross bars and its
capitals of gold\[1\].

\[1. Pokkhara*n*i, the word translated Lotus-pond, is an artificial pool
or small lake for water plants. There are some which are probably nearly
as old as this passage still in good preservation in Anurâdhapuru in
Ceylon. Each is oblong, and has its tiles and its four flights of steps,
and some had railings. The balustrades, cross bars, figure head, and
railing are in Pâli thambhâ, sû*k*iyo, unhîsa*m*, and vedikâ, of the
exact meaning of which I am not quite confident. They do not occur in
the description {footnote p. 263} of the Lotus-lakes in Sukhavatî.
General Cunningham says that the cross bars of the Buddhist railings are
called sû*k*iyo in the inscriptions at Bharhut (The Stupa of Bharhut, p.
127). Buddhaghosa, who is good enough to tell us the exact number of the
ponds-to wit, 84,000, has no explanation of these words, merely saying
that of the two vedikâs one was at the limit of the tiles and one at the
limit of the parive*n*a. The phrases in the text are repeated below, §§
73-87, of the Palace of Righteousness.\]

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

61\. 'Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ânanda, there occurred the
thought:

'"Suppose, now, I were to have flowers of every season planted in those
Lotus-ponds for the use of all the people-to wit, blue water lilies and
blue lotuses, white lotuses and white water lilies."

'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory had flowers of every season
planted in those Lotus-ponds for the use of all the people-to wit, blue
water lilies and blue lotuses, white lotuses and white water lilies.

62\. 'Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ânanda, occurred the thought:

'"Suppose, now, I were to place bathing-men on the banks of those
Lotus-ponds, to bathe such of the people as come there from time to
time."

'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory placed bathing-men on the banks
of those Lotus-ponds, to bathe such of the people as come there from
time to time.

63\. 'Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ânanda, occurred the thought:

'"Suppose, now, I were to establish a perpetual grant by the banks of
those Lotus-ponds--to wit, food for the hungry, drink for the thirsty,
raiment for the naked, means of conveyance for those who have need of
it, couches for the tired, wives for

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

those who want wives, gold for the poor, and money for those who are in
want."

'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory established a perpetual grant by
the banks of those Lotus-ponds--to wit, food for the hungry, drink for
the thirsty, raiment for the naked, means of conveyance for those who
needed it, couches for the tired, wives for those who wanted wives, gold
for the poor, and money for those who were in want.

------------------------

64\. 'Now, Ânanda, the people (Brâhmans and laymen) went to the Great
King of Glory, taking with them much wealth. And they said:

'"This abundant wealth, O King, have we brought here for the use of the
King of Kings. Let the King accept it of us!"

'"I have enough wealth, my friends, laid up for myself, the produce of
righteous taxation. Do you keep this, and take away more with you!"

65\. 'When those men were thus refused by the King they went aside and
considered together, saying:

'"It would not beseem us now, were we to take back this wealth to our
own houses. Suppose, now, we were to build a mansion for the Great King
of Glory."

66\. 'Then they went to the Great King of Glory, and said:

'"A mansion would we build for thee, O King!"'

'"Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory signified, by silence, his
consent.

------------------------

67\. 'Now, Ânanda, when Sakka, the king of the gods, became aware in his
mind of the thoughts that

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

were in the heart of the Great King of Glory, he addressed Vissakamma
the god\[1\], and said:

'"Come now, Vissakamma, create me a mansion for the Great King of
Glory--a palace which shall be called 'Righteousness\[2\].'"

68\. '"Even so, Lord!" said Vissakamma, in assent, Ânanda, to Sakka, the
king of the gods. And as instantaneously as a strong man might stretch
forth his folded arm, or draw in his arm again when it was stretched
forth, so quickly did he vanish from the heaven of the Great
Thirty-Three, and appeared before the Great King of Glory.

69\. 'Then, Ânanda, Vissakamma the god said to the Great King of Glory:

'"I would create for thee, O King, a mansion--a palace which shall be
called 'Righteousness!'"

'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory signified, by silence, his
consent.

------------------------

70\. 'So Vissakamma the god, Ânanda, created for the Great King of Glory
a mansion--a palace to be called "Righteousness."

71\. 'The Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, was on the east and on the
west a league in length, and on the north and on the south half a league
in breadth.

72\. 'The ground-floor, Ânanda, of the Palace of Righteousness\[3\], in
height as three times the height to which a man can reach, was built of
bricks, of four kinds. One kind of brick was of gold, and one of silver,
and one of beryl, and one of crystal.

\[1. Vissakamma*m* devaputta*m*, where devaputta*m* means not 'son of a
god,' but 'belonging to, born into the class of, the gods.'

2\. Dhamma*m* nâma Pâsâda*m*.

3\. Dhammassa pâsâdassa vatthu*m*.\]

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

73\. 'To the Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, there were eighty-four
thousand pillars of four kinds. One kind of pillar was of gold, and one
of silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal.

74\. 'The Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, was fitted up with seats of
four kinds. One kind of seat was of gold, and one of silver, and one of
beryl, and one of crystal.

75\. 'In the Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, there were twenty-four
staircases of four kinds. One staircase was of gold, and one of silver,
and one of beryl, and one of crystal. The staircase of gold had
balustrades of gold, with the cross bars and the figure head of silver.
The staircase of silver had balustrades of silver, with the cross bars
and the figure head of gold. The staircase of beryl had balustrades of
beryl, with the cross bars and the figure head of crystal. The staircase
of crystal had balustrades of crystal, with cross bars and figure head
of beryl.

76\. 'In the Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, there were eighty-four
thousand chambers of four kinds. One kind of chamber was of gold, and
one of silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal.

'In the golden chamber a silver couch was spread; in the silver chamber
a golden couch; in the beryl chamber a couch of ivory; and in the
crystal chamber a couch of coral.

'At the door of the golden chamber there stood a palm tree of silver;
and its trunk was of silver, and its leaves and fruits of gold.

'At the door of the silver chamber there stood a palm tree of gold; and
its trunk was of gold, and its leaves and fruits of silver.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

'At the door of the beryl chamber there stood a palm tree of crystal;
and its trunk was of crystal, and its leaves and fruits of beryl.

'At the door of the crystal chamber there stood a palm tree of beryl;
and its trunk was of beryl, and its leaves and fruits of crystal.

------------------------

77\. 'Now there occurred, Ânanda, to the Great King of Glory this
thought:

'"Suppose, now, I were to make a grove of palm trees, all of gold, at
the entrance to the chamber of the Great Complex\[1\], under the shade
of which I may pass the heat of the day."

'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory made a grove of palm trees, all
of gold, at the entrance to the chamber of the Great Complex, under the
shade of which he might pass the heat of the day.

78\. 'The Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, was surrounded by a double
railing. One railing was of gold, and one was of silver. The golden
railing had its posts of gold, and its cross bars and its figure head of
silver. The silver railing had its posts of silver, and its cross bars
and its figure head of gold\[2\].

79\. 'The Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, was hung round with two
networks of bells. One network of bells was of gold, and one was of
silver.

\[1. Mahâvyûhassa ku*t*âgârassa dvâre. The 'Great Complex' contains a
double allusion, in the same spirit in which the whole legend has been
worked out: 1. To the Great Complex as a name of the Sun-God recorded as
a unity of the four mythological deities, Vasudeva,
Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a, Pra*g*umna, and Aniruddha; and 2. To the Great
Complex as a name of a particular kind of deep religious meditation or
speculation.

2\. See above, § 60, and the note on § 54.\]

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span> The golden network had bells of
silver, and the silver network had bells of gold.

80\. 'And when those networks of bells, Ânanda, were shaken by the wind
there arose a sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and intoxicating.

'Just, Ânanda, as the seven kind of instruments yield, when well played
upon, to the skilful man, a sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and
intoxicating--just even so, Ânanda, when those networks of bells were
shaken by the wind, there arose a sound sweet, and pleasant, and
charming, and intoxicating.

81\. 'And whoever, Ânanda, in the royal city Kusâvatî were at that time
gamblers, drunkards, and given to drink, they used to dance round
together to the sound of those networks of bells when shaken by the
wind.

------------------------

82\. 'When the Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, was finished it was hard
to look at, destructive to the eyes. just, Ânanda, as in the last month
of the rains in the autumn time, when the sky has become clear and the
clouds have vanished away, the sun, springing up along the heavens, is
hard to look at, and destructive to the eyes,--just so, Ânanda, when the
Palace of Righteousness was finished was it hard to look at, and
destructive to the eyes.

------------------------

83\. 'Now there occurred, Ânanda, to the Great King of Glory this
thought:

'"Suppose, now, in front of the Palace of Righteousness, I were to make
a Lotus-lake to bear the name of 'Righteousness.'"

'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory made a Lotus-lake to bear the
name of "Righteousness."

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

84\. 'The Lake of Righteousness, Ânanda, was on the east and on the west
a league in length, and on the north and on the south half a league in
breadth.

85\. 'The Lake of Righteousness, Ânanda, was faced with tiles of four
kinds. One kind of tile was of gold, and one of silver, and one of
beryl, and one of crystal.

86\. 'The Lake of Righteousness, Ânanda, had four and twenty flights of
steps, of four different kinds. One flight of steps was of gold, and one
of silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal. The flight of golden
steps had balustrades of gold, with the cross bars and the figure head
of silver. The flight of silver steps had balustrades of silver, with
the cross bars and the figure head of gold. The flight of beryl steps
had balustrades of beryl, with the cross bars and the figure head of
crystal. The flight of crystal steps had balustrades of crystal, with
cross bars and figure head of beryl.

87\. 'Round the Lake of Righteousness, Ânanda, there ran a double
railing. One railing was of gold, and one was of silver. The golden
railing had its posts of gold, and its cross bars and its capitals of
silver. The silver railing had its posts of silver, and its cross bars
and its capitals of gold.

88\. 'The Lake of Righteousness, Ânanda, was surrounded by seven rows of
palm trees. One row was of palms of gold, and one of silver, and one of
beryl, and one of crystal, and one of agate, and one of coral, and one
of all kinds of gems.

89\. 'And the golden palms had trunks of gold, and leaves and fruits of
silver. And the silver palms had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits
of gold. And the palms of beryl had trunks of beryl,

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

and leaves and fruits of crystal. And the crystal palms had trunks of
crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. And the agate palms had trunks
of agate, and leaves and fruits of coral. And the coral palms had trunks
of coral, and leaves and fruits of agate. And the palms of every kind of
gem had trunks and leaves and fruits of every kind of gem.

90\. 'And when those rows of palm trees, Ânanda, were shaken by the
wind, there arose a sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and
intoxicating.

'Just, Ânanda, as the seven kind of instruments yield, when well played
upon, to the skilful man, a sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and
intoxicating,--just even so, Ânanda, when those rows of palm trees were
shaken by the wind, there arose a sound sweet, and pleasant, and
charming, and intoxicating.

91\. 'And whoever, Ânanda\[1\], in the royal city Kusâvatî were at that
time gamblers, drunkards, and given to drink, they used to dance round
together to the sound of those palms when shaken by the wind.

------------------------

92\. 'When the Palace of Righteousness, Ânanda, was finished, and the
Lotus-lake of Righteousness was finished, the Great King of Glory
entertained with all good things those of the Sama*n*as who, at that
time, were held in high esteem, and those of the Brâhmans who, at that
time, were held in high esteem. Then he ascended up into the Palace of
Righteousness.'

------------------------

End of the First Portion for Recitation.

\[1. This paragraph is perhaps repeated by mistake; but it is scarcely
less in harmony with its context at § 8 than it is here. It is more
probable that § 92 followed, originally, immediately after § 82, with
the Lotus-lake clause omitted.\]

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

### CHAPTER II.

1\. 'Now there occurred, Ânanda, this thought to the Great King of
Glory:

'"Of what previous character, now, may this be the fruit, of what
previous character the result, that I am now so mighty and so great?"

2\. 'And then occurred, Ânanda, to the Great King of Glory this thought:

'"Of three qualities is this the fruit, of three qualities the result,
that I am now so mighty and so great,--that is to say, of giving, of
self-conquest, and of self-control\[1\]."

------------------------

3\. 'Now the Great King of Glory, Ânanda, ascended up into the chamber
of the Great Complex; and when he had come there he stood at the door,
and there he broke out into a cry of intense emotion:

'"Stay here, O thoughts of lust!

'"Stay here, O thoughts of ill-will!

'"Stay here, O thoughts of hatred!

'"Thus far only, O thoughts of lust!

'"Thus far only, O thoughts of ill-will

'"Thus far only, O thoughts of hatred!"

4\. 'And when, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory had entered the chamber
of the Great Complex,

\[1. I have here translated kamma by 'previous character' and by
'quality.' The easiest plan would, no doubt, have been, to preserve in
the translation the technical term karma, which is explained at some
length in 'Buddhism,' pp. 99-106.\]

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

and had seated himself upon the couch of gold, having put away all
passion and all unrighteousness, he entered into, and remained in, the
First *Gh*âna,--a state of joy and ease, born of seclusion, full of
reflection, full of investigation.

5\. 'By suppressing reflection and investigation, he entered into, and
remained in, the Second *Gh*âna,--a state of joy and ease, born of
serenity, without reflection, without investigation, a state of
elevation of mind, of internal calm.

6\. 'By absence of the longing after joy, he remained indifferent,
conscious, self-possessed, experiencing in his body that ease which the
noble ones announce, saying, "The man indifferent and self-possessed is
well at ease," and thus he entered into, and remained in, the Third
*Gh*âna.

7\. 'By putting away ease, by putting away pain, by the previous dying
away both of gladness and of sorrow, he entered into, and remained in,
the Fourth *Gh*âna,--a state of purified self-possession and equanimity,
without ease, and without pain\[1\].

------------------------

8\. 'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory went out from the chamber of
the Great Complex, and entered the golden chamber and sat himself down
on the silver couch. And he let his mind pervade

\[1. The above paragraphs are an endeavour to express the inmost
feelings when they are first strung to the uttermost by the intense
effects of deep religious emotion, and then feel the effects of what may
be called, for want of a better word, the reaction. Most deeply
religious natures have passed through such a crisis; and though the
feelings are perhaps really indescribable, this passage is dealing, not
with a vain mockery, but with a very real event in spiritual
experience.\]

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

one quarter of the world with thoughts of Love; and so the second
quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth. And thus the whole wide
world, above, below, around, and everywhere, did he continue to pervade
with heart of Love, far-reaching, grown great, and beyond measure, free
from the least trace of anger or ill-will.

9\. 'And he let his mind pervade one quarter of the world with thoughts
of Pity; and so the second quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth.
And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around, and everywhere, did
he continue to pervade with heart of Pity, far-reaching, grown great,
and beyond measure, free from the least trace of anger or ill-will.

10\. 'And he let his mind pervade one quarter of the world with thoughts
of Sympathy; and so the second quarter, and so the third, and so the
fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around, and
everywhere, did he continue to pervade with heart of Sympathy,
far-reaching, grown great, and beyond measure, free from the least trace
of anger or ill-will.

11\. 'And he let his mind pervade one quarter of the world with thoughts
of Equanimity\[1\]; and so the second quarter, and so the third, and so
the fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around, and
everywhere, did he continue to pervade with heart of Equanimity,
far-reaching, grown great, and beyond measure, free from the least trace
of anger or ill-will.

\[1. These are the four Appama*ññ*as or infinite feelings, also called
(e.g. below, § II, 36) the four Brahma-vihâras. They are here very
appropriately represented to follow immediately after {footnote p. 274}
the state of feeling described in the *Gh*ânas; but they ought to be the
constant companions of a good Buddhist (see Khaggavisâna Sutta 8; and
compare also Tevi*gg*a Sutta III, 7; *G*âtaka, vol. i. p. 246; and the
Araka *G*âtaka, No. 169).\]

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

12\. 'The Great King of Glory, Ânanda, had four and eighty thousand
cities, the chief of which was the royal city of Kusâvatî:

'Four and eighty thousand palaces, the chief of which was the Palace of
Righteousness:

'Four and eighty thousand chambers, the chief of which was the chamber
of the Great Complex:

'Four and eighty thousand divans, of gold, and silver, and ivory, and
sandal wood, spread with long-haired rugs, and cloths embroidered with
flowers, and magnificent antelope skins; covered with lofty canopies;
and provided at both ends with purple cushions:

'Four and eighty thousand state elephants, with trappings of gold, and
gilded flags, and golden coverings of network,--of which the king of
elephants, called "the Changes of the Moon," was chief:

'Four and eighty thousand state horses, with trappings of gold, and
gilded flags, and golden coverings of network,--of which
"Thunder-cloud," the king of horses, was the chief:

'Four and eighty thousand chariots, with coverings of the skins of
lions, and of tigers, and of panthers,--of which the chariot called "the
Flag of Victory" was the chief:

'Four and eighty thousand gems, of which the Wondrous Gem was the chief:

'Four and eighty thousand wives, of whom the Queen of Glory was the
chief:

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

'Four and eighty thousand yeomen, of whom the Wonderful Steward was the
chief:

'Four and eighty thousand nobles, of whom the Wonderful Adviser was the
chief:

'Four and eighty thousand cows, with jute trappings, and horns tipped
with bronze:

'Four and eighty thousand myriads of garments, of delicate textures, of
flax, and cotton, and silk, and wool:

'Four and eighty thousand dishes, in which, in the evening and in the
morning, rice was served\[1\].

------------------------

13\. 'Now at that time, Ânanda, the four and eighty thousand state
elephants used to come every evening and every morning to be of service
to the Great King of Glory.

14\. 'And this thought occurred to the Great King of Glory:

'"These eighty thousand elephants come every evening and every morning
to be of service to me. Suppose, now, I were to let the elephants come
in alternate forty thousands, once each, every alternate hundred years!"

15\. 'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory said to the Great Adviser:

'"O, my friend, the Great Adviser! these eighty thousand elephants come
every evening and every morning to be of service to me. Now, let the
elephants come, O my friend, the Great Adviser, in

\[1. Most of the trappings and cloths here mentioned are the same as
those referred to in the Ma*ggh*ima Sîla, §§ 5, 6, 7 recurring in the
Tevi*gg*a Sutta, and in the Brahma*g*âla Sutta. The whole paragraph is
four times repeated below, §§ 29, 31, 33, 37.\]

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

alternate forty thousands, once each, every alternate hundred years!"

'"Even so, Lord!" said the Wonderful Adviser, in assent, to the Great
King of Glory.

16\. 'From that time forth, Ânanda, the elephants came in alternate
forty thousands, once each, every alternate hundred years.

------------------------

17\. 'Now, Ânanda, after the lapse of many years, of many hundred years,
of many thousand years, there occurred to the Queen of Glory\[1\] this
thought:

'"'Tis long since I have beheld the Great King of Glory. Suppose, now, I
were to go and visit the Great King of Glory."

18\. 'Then, Ânanda, the Queen of Glory said to the women of the harem:

'"Arise now, dress your hair, and clad yourselves in fresh raiment. 'Tis
long since we have beheld the Great King of Glory. Let us go and visit
the Great King of Glory!"

19\. "'Even so, Lady!" said the women of the harem, Ânanda, in assent,
to the Queen of Glory. And they dressed their hair, and clad themselves
in fresh raiment, and came near to the Queen of Glory.

20\. 'Then, Ânanda, the Queen of Glory said to the Great Adviser:

'"Arrange, O Great Adviser, the fourfold army in array. 'Tis long since
I have beheld the Great King of Glory. I am about to go to visit the
Great King of Glory."

\[1. Subhaddâ Devî. Subhadda, 'glorious, magnificent,' is a not uncommon
name both for men and women in Buddhist and post-Buddhistic Hindu
literature.\]

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

21\. '"Even so, O Queen!" said the Great Adviser, Ânanda, in assent, to
the Queen of Glory. And he set the fourfold army in array, and had the
fact announced to the Queen of Glory in the words:

'"The fourfold army, O Queen, is set for thee in array. Do now whatever
seemeth to thee fit."

22\. 'Then, Ânanda, the Queen of Glory, with the fourfold army,
repaired, with the women of the harem, to the Palace of Righteousness.
And when she had arrived there she mounted up into the Palace of
Righteousness, and went on to the chamber of the Great Complex. And when
she had reached it, she stopped and leant against the side of the door.

23\. 'When, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory heard the noise he thought:

'"What, now, may this noise, as of a great multitude of people, mean?"

24\. And going out from the chamber of the Great Complex, he beheld the
Queen of Glory standing leaning up against the side of the door. And
when he beheld her, he said to the Queen of Glory:

'"Stop there, O Queen! Enter not!"

------------------------

25\. 'Then the Great King of Glory, Ânanda, said to one of his
attendants:

'"Arise, good man! take the golden couch out of the chamber of the Great
Complex, and make it ready under that grove of palm trees which is all
of gold."

26\. '"Even so, Lord!" said the man, in assent, to the Great King of
Glory. And he took the golden couch out of the chamber of the Great
Complex, and made it ready under that grove of palm trees which was all
of gold.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

27\. 'Then, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory laid himself down in the
dignified way a lion does; and lay with one leg resting on the other,
calm and self-possessed.

------------------------

28\. 'Then, Ânanda, there occurred to the Queen of Glory this thought:

'"How calm are all the limbs of the Great King of Glory! How clear and
bright is his appearance! O may it not be that the Great King of Glory
is dead\[1\]!"

29\. 'And she said to the Great King of Glory:

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand cities, the chief of
which is the royal city of Kusâvatî. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire
for these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand palaces, the chief
of which is the Palace of Righteousness. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy
desire for these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand chambers, the chief
of which is the chamber of the Great Complex. Arise, O King, re-awaken
thy desire for these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand divans, of gold, and
silver, and ivory, and sandal wood, spread with long-haired rugs, and
cloths embroidered with flowers, and magnificent antelope skins; covered
with lofty canopies; and provided at both ends with purple cushions.
Arise,

\[1. The rather curious connexion between these clauses is worthy of
notice in comparison with the legend of the 'Transfiguration' just
before the Buddha's death (above, pp. 80-82).\]

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span> O King, re-awaken thy desire for
these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand state elephants,
with trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings of
network,-of which the king of elephants, called 'the Changes of the
Moon,' is chief. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these! quicken
thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand state horses, with
trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings of network, of
which 'Thunder-cloud,' the king of horses, is the chief. Arise, O King,
re-awaken thy desire for these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand chariots, with
coverings of the skins of lions, and of tigers, and of panthers,-of
which the chariot called 'the Flag of Victory' is the chief. Arise, O
King, re-awaken thy desire for these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand gems, of which the
Wondrous Gem is the chief. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for
these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand wives, of whom the
Queen of Glory is the chief. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for
these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand yeomen, of whom the
Wonderful Steward is the chief. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for
these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand nobles, of whom the
Wonderful Adviser is the

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

chief Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these! quicken thy longing
after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand cows, with jute
trappings, and horns tipped with bronze. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy
desire for these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand myriads of garments,
of delicate textures, of flax, and cotton, and silk, and wool. Arise, O
King, re-awaken thy desire for these! quicken thy longing after life!

'"Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thousand dishes, in which, in
the evening and in the morning, rice is served. Arise, O King, re-awaken
thy desire for these! quicken thy longing after life!"

------------------------

30\. 'When she had thus spoken, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory said to
the Queen of Glory:

'"Long hast thou addressed me, O Queen, in pleasant words, much to be
desired, and sweet. Yet now in this last time you speak in words
unpleasant, disagreeable, not to be desired."

31\. '"How then, O King, shall I address thee?"

'"Thus, O Queen, shouldst thou address me:--The nature of all things
near and dear to us, O King, is such that we must leave them, divide
ourselves from them, separate ourselves from them\[1\]. Pass not away, O
King, with longing in thy heart. Sad is the death of him who longs,
unworthy is the death of him who longs\[2\]. Thine, O King, are these

\[1. The Pâli words are the same as those at the beginning of the
constantly repeated longer phrase to the same effect in the Book of the
Great Decease.

2\. Compare Gâtaka, No. 34.\]

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

four and eighty thousand cities, the chief of which is the royal city of
Kusâvatî. Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand palaces, the chief
of which is the Palace of Righteousness. Cast away desire for these!
long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand chambers, the chief
of which is the chamber of the Great Complex. Cast away desire for
these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand divans, of gold, and
silver, and ivory, and sandal wood, spread with long-haired rugs, and
cloths embroidered with flowers, and magnificent antelope skins; covered
with lofty canopies; and provided at both ends with purple cushions.
Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand state elephants,
with trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings of
network,--of which the king of elephants, called 'the Changes of the
Moon,' is chief. Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand state horses, with
trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings of
network,--of which 'Thunder-cloud,' the king of horses, is the chief
Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand chariots, with
coverings of the skins of lions, and of tigers, and of panthers,--of
which the chariot called 'the Flag of Victory' is the chief. Cast away
desire for these! long not after life!

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand gems, of which the
Wondrous Gem is the chief. Cast away desire for these! long not after
life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand wives, of whom the
Queen of Glory is the chief. Cast away desire for these! long not after
life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand yeomen, of whom the
Wonderful Steward is the chief Cast away desire for these! long not
after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand nobles, of whom the
Wonderful Adviser is the chief. Cast away desire for these! long not
after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and. eighty thousand cows, with jute
trappings, and horns tipped with bronze. Cast away desire for these!
long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand myriads of garments,
of delicate textures, of flax, and cotton, and silk, and wool. Cast away
desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand dishes, in which, in
the evening and in the morning, rice is served. Cast away desire for
these! long not after life!"

------------------------

32\. 'When he thus spake, Ânanda, the Queen of Glory wept and poured
forth tears.

33\. 'Then, Ânanda, the Queen of Glory wiped away her tears, and
addressed the Great King of Glory, and said:

'"The nature of all things near and dear to us, O King, is such that we
must leave them, divide

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

ourselves from them, separate ourselves from them. Pass not away, O
King, with longing in thy heart. Sad is the death of him who longs,
unworthy is the death of him who longs. Thine, O King, are these four
and eighty thousand cities, the chief of which is the royal city of
Kusâvatî. Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand palaces, the chief
of which is the Palace of Righteousness. Cast away desire for these!
long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand chambers, the chief
of which is the chamber of the Great Complex. Cast away desire for
these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand divans, of gold, and
silver, and ivory, and sandal wood, spread with long-haired rugs, and
cloths embroidered with flowers, and magnificent antelope skins; covered
with lofty canopies; and provided at both ends with purple cushions.
Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand state elephants,
with trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings of
network,--of which the king of elephants, called 'the Changes of the
Moon,' is chief Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand state horses, with
trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings of
network,--of which 'Thunder-cloud,' the king of horses, is the chief.
Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

chariots, with coverings of the skins of lions, and of tigers, and of
panthers,--of which the chariot called 'the Flag of Victory' is the
chief. Cast away desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand gems, of which the
Wondrous Gem is the chief. Cast away desire for these! long not after
life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand wives, of whom the
Queen of Glory is the chief. Cast away desire for these! long not after
life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand yeomen, of whom the
Wonderful Steward is the chief. Cast away desire for these! long not
after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand nobles, of whom the
Wonderful Adviser is the chief. Cast away desire for these! long not
after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand cows, with jute
trappings, and horns tipped with bronze. Cast away desire for these!
long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand myriads of garments,
of delicate textures, of flax, and cotton, and silk, and wool. Cast away
desire for these! long not after life!

'"Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thousand dishes, in which, in
the evening and in the morning, rice is served. Cast away desire for
these! long not after life!

------------------------

34\. 'Then immediately, Ânanda, the Great King of Glory died. Just,
Ânanda, as when a yeoman has eaten a hearty meal he becomes all drowsy,

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

just so were the feelings he experienced, Ânanda, as death came upon the
Great King of Glory.

35\. 'When the Great King of Glory, Ânanda, had died, he came to life
again in the happy world of Brahmâ.

36\. 'For eight and forty thousand years, Ânanda, the Great King of
Glory lived the happy life of a prince; for eight and forty thousand
years he was viceroy and heir-apparent; for eight and forty thousand
years he ruled the kingdom; and for eight and forty thousand years he
lived, as a layman, the noble life in the Palace of Righteousness. And
then, when full of noble thoughts, he died; he entered, after the
dissolution of the body, the noble world of Brahma\[1\].

------------------------

37\. 'Now it may be, Ânanda, that you may think "The Great King of Glory
of that time was another person." But, Ânanda, you should not view the
matter thus. I at that time was the Great King of Glory.

'Mine at that time were the four and eighty thousand cities, of which
the chief was the royal city of Kusâvatî.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand palaces, of which the chief was
the Palace of Righteousness.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand chambers, of which the chief was
the chamber of the Great Complex.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand divans,

\[1. The 'noble thoughts' are the Brahma-vihâras, described above, Chap.
II, §§ 8-11. The 'noble life' is the Brahma*k*ariya*m*, which does not
mean the same as it does in Sanskrit. The adjective Brahma may have
reference here also to the subsequent (and consequent?) rebirth in the
Brahma-loka.\]

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

of gold, and silver, and ivory, and sandal wood, spread with long-haired
rugs, and cloths embroidered with flowers, and magnificent antelope
skins; covered with lofty canopies; and provided at both ends with
purple cushions.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand state elephants, with trappings
of gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings of network,--of which
the king of elephants, called "the Changes of the Moon," was chief.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand state horses, with trappings, of
gold, and gilded flags, and golden coverings of network,--of which
"Thunder-cloud," the king of horses, was the chief.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand chariots, with coverings of the
skins of lions, and of tigers, and of panthers,--of which the chariot
called "the Flag of Victory" was the chief.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand gems, of which the Wondrous Gem
was the chief.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand wives, of whom the Queen of
Glory was the chief.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand yeomen, of whom the Wonderful
Steward was the chief.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand nobles, of whom the Wonderful
Adviser was the chief,

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand cows, with jute trappings, and
horns tipped with bronze.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand myriads of garments, of delicate
textures, of flax, and cotton, and silk, and wool.

'Mine were the four and eighty thousand dishes, in which, in the evening
and in the morning, rice was served.

------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

38\. 'Of those four and eighty thousand cities, Ânanda, one was that
city in which, at that time, I used to dwell--to wit, the royal city of
Kusâvatî.

'Of those four and eighty thousand palaces too, Ânanda, one was that
palace in which, at that time, I used to dwell--to wit, the Palace of
Righteousness.

'Of those four and eighty thousand chambers too, Ânanda, one was that
chamber in which, at that time, I used to dwell--to wit, the chamber of
the Great Complex.

Of those four and eighty thousand divans too, Ânanda, one was that divan
which, at that time, I used to occupy--to wit, one of gold, or one of
silver, or one of ivory, or one of sandal wood.

'Of those four and eighty thousand state elephants too, Ânanda, one was
that elephant which, at that time, I used to ride--to wit, the king of
elephants, "the Changes of the Moon."

'Of those four and eighty thousand horses too, Ânanda, one was that
horse which, at that time, I used to ride--to wit, the king of horses,
"the Thunder-cloud."

'Of those four and eighty thousand chariots too, Ânanda, one was that
chariot in which, at that time, I used to ride--to wit, the chariot
called "the Flag of Victory."

'Of those four and eighty thousand wives too, Ânanda, one was that wife
who, at that time, used to wait upon me--to wit, either a lady of noble
birth, or a Velâmikânî.

'Of those four and eighty thousand myriads of suits of apparel too,
Ânanda, one was the suit of apparel which, at that time, I wore--to wit,
one of delicate texture, of linen, or cotton, or silk, or wool.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

'Of those four and eighty thousand dishes too, Ânanda, one was that dish
from which, at that time, I ate a measure of rice and the curry suitable
thereto.

------------------------

39\. 'See, Ânanda, how all these things are now past, are ended, have
vanished away. Thus impermanent, Ânanda, are component things; thus
transitory, Ânanda, are component things; thus untrustworthy, Ânanda,
are component things. Insomuch, Ânanda, is it meet to be weary of, is it
meet to be estranged from, is it meet to be set quite free from the
bondage of all component things!

------------------------

40\. 'Now I call to mind, Ânanda, how in this spot my body had been six
times buried. And when I was dwelling here as the righteous king who
ruled in righteousness, the lord of the four regions of the earth, the
conqueror, the protector of his people, the possessor of the seven royal
treasures--that was the seventh time.

41\. 'But I behold not any spot, Ânanda, in the world of men and gods,
nor in the world of Mâra, nor in the world of Brahma,--no, not among the
race of Sama*n*as or Brâhmans, of gods or men,--where the Tathâgata for
the eighth time will lay aside his body\[1\].'

\[1. The whole of this conversation between the Great King of Glory and
the Queen is very much shorter in the *G*âtaka, the enumeration of the
possessions of the Great King being omitted (except the first clause
referring to the four and eighty thousand cities), and clauses 34-38,
40, and 41 being also left out, § 39 and the concluding being placed in
the mouth of the King immediately after § 33. This may be perhaps partly
explained by the narrative style in which the *G*âtakas are composed--a
style incompatible {footnote p. 289} with the repetitions of the Suttas,
and confined to the facts of the story.

But I think that no one can read this Sutta in comparison with the short
passage found in the Book of the Great Decease (above, pp. 99-101)
without feeling that the latter is the more original of the two, and
that the legend had not, when the Book of the Great Decease was
composed, attained to its present extended form.

We seem therefore really to have three stages of the legend before us,
and though the *G*âtaka story was actually put into its present shape at
a known date (the fifth century of our era) long after the latest
possible date for the Book of the Great King of Glory, it has probably
preserved for us a reminiscence of what the legend was at the time when
the Book of the Great Decease was composed.\]

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

42\. Thus spake the Blessed One; and when the Happy One had thus spoken,
once again the Teacher said:

How transient are all component things!  
Growth is their nature and decay:  
They are produced, they are dissolved again:  
And then is best, when they have sunk to rest\[1\]!'

------------------------

End of the Mahâ-Sudassana Sutta.

\[1. On this celebrated verse, see the note at Mahâparinibbâna Sutta VI,
16, where it is put into the mouth of Sakka, the king of the gods, and
the discussion in the Introduction to this Sutta.\]

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sabbasâva Sutta: All the Âsavas](sbe1109)
