<div class="filenav">

[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titles by Keyword](tkwidx)  [Subjects by Keyword](skwidx)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Intangible Textual Heritage Catalog

### Authors by Keyword

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Authors: A](ak_a)  
[Authors: B](ak_b)  
[Authors: C](ak_c)  
[Authors: D](ak_d)  
[Authors: E](ak_e)  
[Authors: F](ak_f)  
[Authors: G](ak_g)  
[Authors: H](ak_h)  
[Authors: I](ak_i)  
[Authors: J](ak_j)  
[Authors: K](ak_k)  
[Authors: L](ak_l)  
[Authors: M](ak_m)  
[Authors: N](ak_n)  
[Authors: O](ak_o)  
[Authors: P](ak_p)  
[Authors: Q](ak_q)  
[Authors: R](ak_r)  
[Authors: S](ak_s)  
[Authors: T](ak_t)  
[Authors: U](ak_u)  
[Authors: V](ak_v)  
[Authors: W](ak_w)  
[Authors: X](ak_x)  
[Authors: Y](ak_y)  
[Authors: Z](ak_z)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an automatically generated searchable catalog of all electronic
texts at Intangible Textual Heritage. It currently indexes over 1,200
separate books at this site. It does not include links to the
copyrighted collections, in particular, the Internet Book of Shadows,
the Zen and Tibetan files and the UFO files. Most of the works in this
catalog are public domain in the US. However, the fact that a book is
listed in this catalog is no indication of its copyright status, or lack
thereof: some copyrighted items are listed here, and some files based on
public domain material have specific restrictions on reuse. For more
information on copyrights, please refer to the site [Terms of
Service](../tos) and [Copyright](../cnote) pages.

If you notice anything *at this site* that hasn't been cataloged here
but should, please feel free to [contact us](../contact). (If so, please
indicate which file you think should be cataloged by specifying its URL:
there are tens of thousands of files at the site and we may or may not
be able to guess which one you are referring to).

The catalog has two kinds of listings. The first three sections are
alphabetical lists of keywords from each title, author and subject
listing. If you only know the first name of an author, or a couple of
words from the title, or want to find a books on a particular topic
which doesn't have an index page at this site (e.g. fairies, mysticism,
poetry, etc.), you can look it up here. The keywords are split at white
space and punctuation, so occasionally there are fragmentary entries in
this section. We have also excluded a few common words such as 'the,'
'and,' and 'this.'

The last two sections are alphabetical lists of titles and authors. The
titles are collated without initial articles, and the authors are
collated last name first. This will be useful if you know the last name
of an author, want to find all books by a particular author at the site,
or know the exact title of a book.

Note that the subject keywords are extracted from data manually supplied
by the etext preparer. It is not a comprehensive listing of keywords,
nor is it a full-text index of the site. To search the full text of the
site, you will need to use [the search page](../search), (or the box at
the upper right hand corner of this page).

The term 'Author' here, for convenience, includes principal authors,
translators, illustrators, editors, pseudonyms and authors of prefaces,
etc. Please refer to the specific linked book for complete bibliographic
information.

NOTES ON CATALOG SEARCH: The catalog search is case insensitive. The
results show hits for all words (technically an 'OR' search) in the left
hand column, and only matches for all words (an 'AND' search) in the
right hand column. A short list of common words such as 'the' and 'and'
are skipped.
