<span id="P1300_353755"></span> <sup>1</sup> A discourse of Gregory
Thaumaturgus published by Joannes Aloysius Mingarelli, Bologna, 1770.

<span id="P1304_353944"></span> <sup>2</sup> The codex gives
dhmosieu/ousan, for which we read dhmosieu/ein.

<span id="P1305_354128"></span> <sup>3</sup> The codex gives a0telh/j,
for which eu0telh/j is read by the editor.

<span id="P1306_354802"></span> <sup>4</sup> Reading qar0r9ou/ntwj for
qar0r9ou=ntoj.

<span id="P1307_354907"></span> <sup>5</sup> This is supposed by the
Latin annotator to refer to the bishop, and perhaps to Phaedimus of
Amasea, as in those times no one was at liberty to make an address in
the church when the bishop was present, except by his request or with
his permission.

<span id="P1308_355425"></span> <sup>6</sup> Or, the Word.

<span id="P1309_355967"></span> <sup>7</sup> sfi/gcwsi.

<span id="P1310_356058"></span> <sup>8</sup> Or, keys.

<span id="P1311_356281"></span> <sup>9</sup> kubistw=ntej.

<span id="P1312_356545"></span> <sup>10</sup> 1 Cor. xv. 55.

<span id="P1313_358019"></span> <sup>11</sup> Xristo/thtoj, for which,
however, xrhsto/thtoj, *benignity*, is suggested. \[Sometimes are
intended ambiguity.\]

<span id="P1314_358551"></span> <sup>12</sup> metaba/sei.

<span id="P1315_358609"></span> <sup>13</sup> sugkatabaj/ei.

<span id="P1316_358662"></span> <sup>14</sup> Or, benignity.

<span id="P1329_361219"></span> <sup>1</sup> A fragment. (Gallandi,
*Vet. Patr. Biblioth.*, xiv. p. 119; from a Catena on Matthew, Cod. ms.
168, Mitarelli.)

<span id="P1334_362108"></span> <sup>2</sup> The text is apparently
corrupt here: a@cia me\\n sko/touj pra/guata e/nnoou0menon e@swqen'
dia\\ de tw=n e@cwqen merw=n fwto\\j ei\\nai dokou=nta proferon
r0h/mata. Migne suggests e0nnoou=men to/n and profe9ronta.

<span id="P1355_363130"></span> <sup>1</sup> In opposition to Noëtus, a
bishop in Egypt. Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl.*, vii. 24 and 25. Eusebius
introduces this extract in the following terms: "There are also two
books of his on the subject of the promises. The occasion of writing
these was furnished by a certain Nepos, a bishop in Egypt, who taught
that the promises which were given to holy men in the sacred Scriptures
were to be understood according to the Jewish sense of the same; and
affirmed that there would be some kind of a millennial period, plenished
with corporeal delights, upon this earth. And as he thought that he
could establish this opinion of his by the Revelation of John, he had
composed a book on this question, entitled *Refutation of the
Allegorists*. This, therefore, is sharply attacked by Dionysius in his
books on the Promises. And in the first of these books he states his own
opinion on the subject; while in the second he gives us a discussion on
the Revelation of John, in the introduction to which he makes mention of
Nepos," \[Of this Noëtus, see the *Philosophumena*, vol. v., this
series.\]

<span id="P1357_364260"></span> <sup>2</sup> As it is clear from this
passage that this work by Dionysius was written against Nepos, it is
strange that, in his preface to the eighteenth book of his Commentaries
on Isaiah, Jerome should affirm it to have been composed against
Irenaeus of Lyons. Irenaeus was certainly of the number of those who
held millennial views, and who had been persuaded to embrace such by
Papias, as Jerome himself tells us in the *Catalogus* and as Eusebius
explains towards the close of the third book of his *History*. But that
this book by Dionysus was written not against Irenaeus but against
Nepos, is evident, not only from this passage in Eusebius, but also from
Jerome himself, in his work *On Ecclesiastical Writers*, where he speaks
of Dionysius.- Vales. \[Compare (this series, *infra*) the comments of
Victorinus of Petau for a Western view of the millennial subject.\]

<span id="P1358_365469"></span> <sup>3</sup> th=j pollh=j yalmw\|di/aj.
Christophorsonus interprets this of psalms and hymns composed by Nepos.
It was certainly the practice among the ancient Christians to compose
psalms and hymns in honour of Christ. Eusebius bears witness to this in
the end of the fifth book of his *History*. Mention is made of these
psalms in the Epistle of the Council of Antioch against Paul of
Samosata, and in the penultimate canon of the Council of Laodicea, where
there is a clear prohibition of the use of yalmoi9 i9diwtikoi/ in the
church, i.e., of psalms composed by private individuals. For this custom
had obtained great prevalence, so that many persons composed psalms in
honour of Christ, and got them sung in the church. It is psalms of this
kind, consequently, that the Fathers of the Council of Laodicea forbid
to be sung thereafter in the church, designating them i/diwtikoi, i.e.,
composed by unskilled men, and not dictated by the Holy Spirit. Thus is
the matter explained by Agobardus in his book *De ritu canendi psalmos
in Ecclesia.*-Vales, \[See vol. v., quotation from Pliny.\]

<span id="P1359_366659"></span> <sup>4</sup> tauth\|= ma=llon h\|\\
proanepau/sato: it may mean, perhaps, *for the way in which he has gone
to his rest before us.*

<span id="P1360_367667"></span> <sup>5</sup> katepaggellome/nwn, i.e.,
*diu ante promittunt quam tradunt.* The metaphor is taken from the
mysteries of the Greeks, who were wont to promise great and marvellous
discoveries to the initiated, and then kept them on the rack by daily
expectation, in order to confirm their judgment and reverence by such
suspense in the conveyance of knowledge, as Tertullian says in his book
*Against the Valentinians.*-Vales. \[Vol. iii. p. 503.\]

<span id="P1361_368527"></span> <sup>6</sup> Reading e0lpizein
a/napeiqo/ntwn for e0lpizo/mena peiqo/ntwn, with the Codex Mazarin.

<span id="P1363_368950"></span> <sup>7</sup> e0n me\\n ou\\n tw\|='
Arsenoei/th\| . In the three codices here, as well as in Nicephorus and
Ptolemy, we find this scription, although it is evident that the word
should be written Arsinoei/th\|, as the district took its name from
Queen Arsinoe.-Vales.

<span id="P1364_370279"></span> <sup>8</sup> ei9 kai\\ fai/nointo. There
is another reading, ei9 kai\\ mh fai/nointo, *although they might not
appear to be correct.* Christophorsonus renders it: ne illis quae
fuerant ante ab ipsis decreta, si quidquam in eis veritati repugnare
videretur, mordicus adhaererent praecavebant.

<span id="P1365_370909"></span> <sup>9</sup> h0plwme/naij tai=j
kardi/aij. Christophorsonus renders it, *puris erga Deum ac simplicibis
animis*; Musculus gives, *cordibus ad Deum expansis*; and Rufinus,
*patefactis cordibus.* \[The picture here given of a primitive synod
searching the Scriptures under such a presidency, and exhibiting such
tokens of brotherly love, mutual subordination (1 Pet. v. 5), and a
prevailing love of the truth, is to me one of the most fascinating of
patristic sketches. One cannot but reflect upon the contrast presented
in every respect by the late Council of the Vatican.\]

<span id="P1367_372716"></span> <sup>10</sup> This passage is given
substantially by Eusebius also in book iii. c. 28.

<span id="P1368_373218"></span> <sup>11</sup> The text gives
o0neiropolei=n, for which for which o0neiropolei=/ or w0neiropo/l/\\ei
is to be read.

<span id="P1369_373655"></span> <sup>12</sup> di' w\\n enfhmo/teron
tau=ta w\|0h/qh poriei=sqai. The old reading was eu0qumo/teron; but the
present reading is given in the Mss., Cod. Maz., and Med., as also in
Eusebius, iii. 28, and in Nicephorus, iii. 14. So Rufinus renders it:
*et ut aliquid sacratius dicere videretur, legales aiebat festivitates
rursum celebrundas*. \[These gross views of millennial perfection
entailed upon subsequent ages a reactionary neglect of the study of the
Second Advent. A Papal aphorism, preserved by Roscoe, embodies all this:
"Sub umbilico nulla religio." It was fully exemplified, even under Leo
X.\]

<span id="P1370_375069"></span> <sup>13</sup> \[The humility which
moderates and subdues our author's pride of intellect in this passage
is, to me, most instructive as to the limits prescribed to argument in
what Coleridge calls "the faith of reason."\]

<span id="P1372_375753"></span> <sup>14</sup> Rev. xxii. 7, 8.

<span id="P1373_376273"></span> <sup>15</sup> diecagwgh=j legome/nhj.
Musculus renders it *tractatum libri*; Christophorsonus gives
*discursum*; and Valesius takes it as equivalent to oi0konomi0an, as
diecagagei=n is the same as dioikei=n.

<span id="P1375_377164"></span> <sup>16</sup> Rev. i. 1, 2.

<span id="P1376_377620"></span> <sup>17</sup> 1 John i. 1.

<span id="P1377_377856"></span> <sup>18</sup> Matt. xvi. 17.

<span id="P1378_378471"></span> <sup>19</sup> Rev. i. 9.

<span id="P1379_378650"></span> <sup>20</sup> Rev. xxii. 7, 8.

<span id="P1381_379683"></span> <sup>21</sup> It is worth while to note
this passage of Dionysius on the ancient practice of the Christians, in
giving their children the names of Peter and Paul, which they did both
in order to express the honour and affection in which they held these
saints, and to secure that their children might be dear and acceptable
to God, just as those saints were. Hence it is that Chrysostom in his
first volume, in his oration on St. Meletius, says that the people of
Antioch had such love and esteem for Meletius, that the parents called
their children by his name, in order that they might have their homes
adorned by his presence. And the same Chrysostom, in his twenty-first
homily on Genesis, exhorts his hearers not to call their children
carelessly by the names of their grandfathers, or great-grandfathers, or
men of fame; but rather by the names of saintly men, who have been
shining patterns of virtue, in order that the children might be fired
with the desire of virtue by their example.-Vales. \[A chapter in the
history of civilization might here be given on the origin of Christian
names and on the motives which should influence Christians in the
bestowal of names. The subject is treated, after Plato, by De Maistre.\]

<span id="P1382_381131"></span> <sup>22</sup> Acts xiii. 5.

<span id="P1383_381437"></span> <sup>23</sup> Acts xiii. 13.

<span id="P1385_381787"></span> <sup>24</sup> This is the second
argument by which Dionysius reasoned that the Revelation and the Gospel
of John are not by one author. For the first argument he used in proof
of this is drawn from the character and usage of the two writers; and
this argument Dionysius has prosecuted up to this point. Now, however,
he adduces a second argument, drawn from the words and ideas of the two
writers, and from the collocation of the expressions. For, with Cicero,
I thus interpret the word su/ntacin. See the very elegant book of
Dionysius Hal. entitled Peri su/nta/cewj o9noma/twn-On the Collocation
of Names; although in this passage su/ntacij appears to comprehend the
disposition of sentences as well as words. Further, from this passage we
can see what experience Dionysius had in criticism; for it is the
critic's part to examine the writings of the ancients, and distinguish
what is genuine and authentic from what is spurious and
counterfeit.-Vales.

<span id="P1386_383083"></span> <sup>25</sup> John i. 14.

<span id="P1387_383325"></span> <sup>26</sup> \*1 John.

<span id="P1388_383754"></span> <sup>27</sup> \*1 John.

<span id="P1390_385864"></span> <sup>28</sup> The old reading was, ton
lo/gon, th\\n gnw=sin. Valesius expunges the th0n gnw=sin, as disturbing
the sense, and as absent in various codices. Instead also of the
reading, to/n te th=j sofiaj, to/n te th=j gnw/sewj, the same editor
adopts to/n te th=j gne/sewj, to/n te th=j fra/sewj, which is the
reading of various manuscripts, and is accepted in the translation.
Valesius understands that by the e0ka/teron logon Dionysus means the
logoj e/ndia/qetoj and the logoj proforiko/j, that is, the subjective
discourse, or reason in the mind, and the objective discourse, or
utterance of the same.

<span id="P1391_387118"></span> <sup>29</sup> \[The jealousy with which,
while the canon of New Testament Scripture was forming, every claim was
sifted, is well illustrated in this remarkable essay. Observe its
critical skill and the fidelity with which he exposes the objections
based on the style and classicality of the Evangelist. The Alexandrian
school was one of bold and original investigation, always subject in
spirit, however, to the great canon of Prescription.\]

<span id="P1394_387580"></span> <sup>30</sup> Against the Epicureans. In
Eusebius, *Praepar. Evangel.*, book xiv. ch. 23-27. Eusebius introduces
this extract in terms to the following effect: It may be well now to
subjoin some few arguments out of the many which are employed in his
disputation against the Epicureans by the bishop Dionysius, a man who
professed a Christian philosophy, as they are found in the work which he
composed on Nature. But peruse thou the writer's statements in his own
terms.

<span id="P1398_388665"></span> <sup>31</sup> ou9si/an.

<span id="P1399_388797"></span> <sup>32</sup> a0prono/hton.
