<span id="P2300_646150"></span> <sup>20</sup> In Georgius Syncellus,
*Chron.*, p. 106, al 85.

<span id="P2304_646311"></span> <sup>21</sup> In the same, p. 148, al.
118, from the Third Book of the *Chron.* of Africanus.

<span id="P2306_646412"></span> <sup>22</sup> sunta/gmatoj.

<span id="P2307_646465"></span> <sup>23</sup> Others write Ogyges.
Josephus (*in Apionem*), Euseb. (*de Praepar.*). Tatian \[vol. ii. p.
81\], Clemens \[not so, vol. ii. p. 324\], and others write Ogygus.

<span id="P2308_646677"></span> <sup>24</sup> The text is, o@j toy=
prwtou= prwtou= kataklusmou= gegonen epw/numoj. The word e0pw/numoj is
susceptible of two meanings, either "taking the name from" or "giving
the name to." 'Wgugia kaka/ was a proverbial expression for primeval
ills.

<span id="P2309_647033"></span> <sup>25</sup> The text is here, kata\\
th\\n e9c Ai@gupton tou= laou= meta\\ Mwu&gt;\\se/wj i@codon gene/sqai,
for which we may read kata\\ th\\n e9c Ai0guptou, etc.

<span id="P2310_647359"></span> <sup>26</sup> 9Wgugon 9Aktai=on h= ta\\
pgasso/mena tw=n o0noma/twn. Compare xiii. 6, where we have to\\n ga\\r
meta\\ 9Wgugon 9Aktai=on, etc.

<span id="P2313_647699"></span> <sup>27</sup> From Georgius Syncellus,
*Chron.*, Third Book. In Euseb., *Praepar.*, x. 40. \[Compare vol. ii.
pp. 324-334.\]

<span id="P2315_648026"></span> <sup>28</sup> h0kribw=nto.

<span id="P2318_650813"></span> <sup>29</sup> There is a difficulty in
the text; Viger omits "Athenian."

<span id="P2319_651147"></span> <sup>30</sup> The Latin translator
expunges the "and" (kai/), and makes it = more careful *than* all the
Attic writers.

<span id="P2321_651603"></span> <sup>31</sup> The original here, as in
the same passage above, is corrupt. It gives kata\\ thn Ai@gupton, which
Migne would either omit entirely or replace by a0p' Ai@guptou.

<span id="P2323_653100"></span> <sup>32</sup> These words are inserted
according to Viger's proposal, as there is a manifest omission in the
text.

<span id="P2328_656801"></span> <sup>33</sup> From Georgius Syncellus,
Third Book. In the *Chron. Paschal.*, p. 104, ed. Paris, 84 Venet.

<span id="P2333_657084"></span> <sup>34</sup> From the same, Book III.,
and from Book IV. In Syncellus p. 197, al. 158.

<span id="P2335_657336"></span> <sup>35</sup> The text is, a0nagrafh=nai
de\\ prw/thn th\\n tessareskaideka/thn. etc.

<span id="P2338_657622"></span> <sup>36</sup> From Book v. In Eusebius,
*Demonst. Evang.*, Book VIII ch. ii. p. 389, etc. The Latin version of
this section is by Bernardinus Donatus of Verona. There is also a
version by Jerome given in his commentary on Dan ix. 24.

<span id="P2343_660626"></span> <sup>37</sup> Jerome in his version
gives the 15th (*quintum decimum*).

<span id="P2347_661915"></span> <sup>38</sup> In Syncellus, p. 307, al.
244.

<span id="P2351_663770"></span> <sup>39</sup> The sense is doubtful
here: kai\\ w9j ou0den h0ci/ou pisteu/esqai e@st' a@n kataxqh\|\\ ei0j
tn\\n e9autou= a0rxh/n, etc.

<span id="P2352_664485"></span> <sup>40</sup> There is a break here in
the original.

<span id="P2354_664816"></span> <sup>41</sup> This is according to the
rendering of the Latin version.

<span id="P2355_665983"></span> <sup>42</sup> Here again there is a
blank in the original.

<span id="P2357_666079"></span> <sup>43</sup> The text is corrupt here.
It gives, e0n tw\|= mesaioli/w\|, a word unknown in Greek. Scaliger
reads Maisaio/lion. Goarus proposes Mauswlaion, which we adopt in the
translation.

<span id="P2358_666406"></span> <sup>44</sup> i.e., *sun* and *moon.*

<span id="P2360_667278"></span> <sup>45</sup> Samaria was so named in
reference to its restoration by Gabinius, the proconsul of Syria. See
Josephus (*Antiq.*, book xiv. ch. x. ), who states that Gabinius
traversed Judea, and gave orders for the rebuilding of such towns as he
found destroyed; and that at this way Samaria, Azotus, Scythopolis,
Antedon, Raphia, Dora, Marissa, and not a few others, were restored.

<span id="P2362_668381"></span> <sup>46</sup> The text is: h@n
'Olumpia\\j rpq 9, h@tij pro/j 9 kalansw=n Marti/wn kata\\ 'Antioxei/j
kd 9 e@tei h@cqh, di' h9j e0pi\\ tw=n i/di/wn o9ri/wn w@sth o9
e\\niauto/j. In every fourth year the 24th day of February ( = vi. Cal.
Mart.) was reckoned twice. There were three different eras of Antioch,
of which the one most commonly used began in November 49 B.C. Migne
refers the reader to the notes of Goarus on the passage, which we have
not seen. The sense of this obscure passage seems to be, that that
period formed another fixed point in chronology.

<span id="P2365_668940"></span> <sup>47</sup> In Georgius Syncellus,
*Chron.*, p. 322 or 256.

<span id="P2369_670250"></span> <sup>48</sup> e@n kata\\ th\\n o@yin.
\[Vol. iii. p. 58, Elucid. V., this series.\]

<span id="P2371_672145"></span> <sup>49</sup> dia\\ th\\n leptologi/an=.

<span id="P2372_672272"></span> <sup>50</sup> Or, on a table; w9j e0n
grafh\|=.

<span id="P2374_672736"></span> <sup>51</sup> The text in the beginning
of this section is hopelessly corrupt. Scaliger declares that neither
could he follow these things, nor did the man that dreamt them
understand them. We may subjoin the Greek text as it stands in Migne:
Metacu/ de\\ tou= le/gein to\\n e0niauto\\n h/merw=n tce, kai\\
tetramori/ou, kai tw=n a0po\\ iq' th=j nuxqhme/rou, merw=n e0...ei0j
ta\\ uoe/, hme/rai to\\ para/llhlon ei0si\\ j/, kai\\ tetramorion. 9Eti
ge mh\\n to\\n th=j selh/nhj mh=na kata\\ th\\n a0kribh= leptologi/an
eu/ri/skomen kq', kai\\ h\\me/raj kai\\ nukto/j diaireqei/shj ei/j me/rh
se/, tou/twn ta\\ o', kai\\ h@misu ...a@ gi/netai e0nnenhkostotetarta
tri/a.

<span id="P2375_673392"></span> <sup>52</sup> katagi/netai.

<span id="P2377_674609"></span> <sup>53</sup> Dan. viii. 1.

<span id="P2378_674804"></span> <sup>54</sup> Dan. viii. 13, 14.

<span id="P2379_675004"></span> <sup>55</sup> Dan. viii. 13, 14.

<span id="P2382_676263"></span> <sup>56</sup> In Basil, *De Spiritu
Sancto*, ch. xxix. ยง 73; *Works*, vol. iii. p. 61, edit. Paris.
\[Elucidation II.\]

<span id="P2384_676417"></span> <sup>57</sup> For r0hmatwn, words, three
Mss. give r/htw=n, sayings.

<span id="P2385_676548"></span> <sup>58</sup> For h9mi=n Patri/ there is
another reading, h9mwn patra/si = to Him who gave to our fathers.

<span id="P2386_676730"></span> <sup>59</sup> These words, "and our
Lord," are wanting in three mss..

<span id="P2391_676906"></span> <sup>1</sup> Gallandi, *Bibl. Patrum*,
vol. i. Proleg. p. lxxi. and p. 329.

<span id="P2395_679722"></span> <sup>2</sup> See Eusebius, *Life of
Constatine*, ii. 50.

<span id="P2396_680193"></span> <sup>3</sup> The Martyrologies celebrate
their memory on the 10th June: one of the Colbert Mss. gives *Zoticus*
for *Getulius*.

<span id="P2397_680829"></span> <sup>4</sup> A Colbert ms. gives
"laudantes" = praising.

<span id="P2399_681324"></span> <sup>5</sup> This response, along with
the next interrogation, is wanting in the Colbert manuscript.
