<span id="P2700_730085"></span> <sup>31</sup> mete/wroj.

<span id="P2701_730158"></span> <sup>32</sup> Of Miletus, the third in
the series of Ionic philosophers.

<span id="P2702_730549"></span> <sup>33</sup> apexousin a0llh/lwn.

<span id="P2715_731056"></span> <sup>1</sup> *De Decret. Nic. Syn.*, 25,
Works, vol. i. part i. p. 230.

<span id="P2716_731201"></span> <sup>2</sup> Epist. 4, to Serapion, sec.
9, vol. i. part ii. p. 702.

<span id="P2717_731353"></span> <sup>3</sup> *Bibl.*, cod. 106.

<span id="P2725_731456"></span> <sup>1</sup> A fragment. In Eusebius
*Hist. Eccles.*, book vi. ch. xi.

<span id="P2727_732015"></span> <sup>2</sup> It was the opinion of
Jerome in his *Catalogus* that the Clement spoken of by Alexander was
Clement of Alexandria. This Clement, at any rate, did live up to the
time of the Emperor Severus, and sojourned in these parts, as he tells
us himself in the first book of his *Stromateis*. And he was also the
friend of bishop Alexander, to whom he dedicated his book *On the
Ecclesiastical Canon, or Against the Jews*, as Eusebius states in his
*Eccles. Hist.*, book vi. ch. xiii. (Migne). \[But from the third of
these epistles one would certainly draw another inference. How could he,
a pupil of Clement, describe and introduce his *master* in such terms as
he uses here?\]

<span id="P2730_732918"></span> <sup>3</sup> In Euseb., *Hist. Eccles.*,
book vi. ch. xi.

<span id="P2732_733102"></span> <sup>4</sup> sunectazomeno/j moi dia\\
tw=n eu0xwn. Jerome renders it: *Salutat vos Narcissus, qui ante me hic
tenuit episcopalem locum et nunc mecum eundem orationibus regit.*

<span id="P2733_733298"></span> <sup>5</sup> h0nukw/j.

<span id="P2734_733390"></span> <sup>6</sup> The text gives o0moi/wj
e0moi\\ f@ronh=sai. Several of the codices and also Nicephorus give the
better reading, o9moi/wj e0moi\\ o9mofronh=sai, which is confirmed by
the interpretations of Rufinus and Jerome.

<span id="P2737_733632"></span> <sup>7</sup> In Euseb., *Hist. Eccles.*,
ch. xiv.

<span id="P2739_734251"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[This contemporary tribute
confirms the enthusiastic eulogy of the youthful Gregory. See p. 38,
*supra*\]

<span id="P2742_734413"></span> <sup>9</sup> In Euseb., *Hist. Eccles.*,
ch. xix.

<span id="P2744_734459"></span> <sup>10</sup> Demetrius is, for honour's
sake, addressed in the third person. Perhaps h9 sh\\ a9gio/thj or some
such form preceded.

<span id="P2745_734762"></span> <sup>11</sup> o\\milei=n.

<span id="P2746_735321"></span> <sup>12</sup> \[This precise and
definite testimony is not to be controverted. It follows the traditions
of the Synagogue (Acts xiii. 15), and agrees with the Pauline
prescription as to the use of the *charismata* in 1 Cor. xiv. The chiefs
of the Synagogue retained the power of giving this liberty, and this
passed to the Christian authorities.\]

<span id="P2765_736264"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[See Introductory Note, p.
143, *supra*; also p. 99, note 8, *supra*.\]

<span id="P2766_736429"></span> <sup>2</sup> *Hist. Eccl.*, vii. 32.

<span id="P2767_736718"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[Perhaps only
speculatively (see Frag. II. *infra*), not dogmatically. Compare
Wordsworth's Platonic *Ode on Immortality.*\]

<span id="P2768_736918"></span> <sup>4</sup> Lardner (part ii. book i.
chap. xxiv.) does not think that there was a commentary written by
Pierius on this epistle, but only that the word of Paul, mentioned
below, was expounded at length in some work or other by Pierius.
Fabricius holds the opposite opinion.-Tr.

<span id="P2769_737317"></span> <sup>5</sup> See Eusebius as above,
Jerome in the preface to Hosea, *Photius*, cod. 118, 119; *Epiphanius*,
69, 2; *Lardner*, part ii. book i. chap. 24; &c.

<span id="P2777_738369"></span> <sup>1</sup> From book ii. In
Athanasius, *On the Decrees of the Nicene Council*, sec. xxv. From the
edition BB., Paris, 1698, vol. i. part i. p. 230. Athanasius introduces
this fragment in the following terms:-Learn then, ye Christ-opposing
Arians, that Theognostus, a man of learning, did not decline to use the
expression "*of the substance*" (e0k th=j ou0siaj). For, writing of the
Son in the second book of his *Outlines*, he has spoken thus: *The
substance of the Son*.-Tr.

<span id="P2779_738845"></span> <sup>2</sup> ousia.

<span id="P2780_738907"></span> <sup>3</sup> e!cwqen e0feureqei=sa.

<span id="P2781_738974"></span> <sup>4</sup> e0k mh\\ o!ntwn
e0peish/xqh.

<span id="P2782_739284"></span> <sup>5</sup> The words in italics were
inserted by Routh from a Catena on the Epistle to the Hebrews, where
they are ascribed to Theognostus: "He Himself" is the Son.

<span id="P2783_739454"></span> <sup>6</sup> a0po/r0r9oia.

<span id="P2786_739773"></span> <sup>7</sup> In Athanasius, Epist. 4, to
Serapion, sec. 11, vol. i. part ii. p. 703.

<span id="P2788_739949"></span> <sup>8</sup> o\#ron

<span id="P2789_740277"></span> <sup>9</sup> teleiw/sei. \[i.e., making
the disciples te/leioi. Jas. i. 4.\]

<span id="P2790_740598"></span> <sup>10</sup> Jno. xvi. 12, 13.

<span id="P2793_740626"></span> <sup>11</sup> From Athanasius, as above,
p. 155.

<span id="P2795_740763"></span> <sup>12</sup> ta\\ te/leia.

<span id="P2796_741332"></span> <sup>13</sup> Heb. vi. 4. \[Compare
Matt. xii. 31.\]
