<span id="P2903_760617"></span> <sup>17</sup> \[The teachings of Clement
had formed the minor morals of Christians, See vol. ii. book ii. pp.
237, 284.\]

<span id="P2906_761813"></span> <sup>18</sup> \[Thus is reflected the
teaching of St. Paul, 1 Tim. v. 2. All women to be *honoured*, and "all
purity" to characterize society with them.\]

<span id="P2907_762199"></span> <sup>19</sup> Col. iv. 6.

<span id="P2911_762620"></span> <sup>20</sup> 2 Cor. xi. 19.

<span id="P2912_762886"></span> <sup>21</sup> Mark xi. 25.

<span id="P2913_762999"></span> <sup>22</sup> Rom. xvi. 20.

<span id="P2914_763264"></span> <sup>23</sup> \[Blessed spirit of
primitive piety! Is not this rule too much relaxed in our own Laodicean
age?\]

<span id="P2915_763838"></span> <sup>24</sup> Phil. iv. 7. \[How much
there is in this letter which ought to prick the consciences of wealthy
and "fashionable" Christians of our day!\]

<span id="P2929_764141"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Another glorious product
of the school of Alexandria.\]

<span id="P2930_764525"></span> <sup>2</sup> *Apol. contr. Ruf.*, book
i. num. 9, Works, ii. p. 465.

<span id="P2931_766232"></span> <sup>3</sup> *Proprii operis nihil
omnino scripsit, exceptis epistolis quas ad amicos forte mittebat; in
tantum se humilitate dejecerat.*

<span id="P2936_766512"></span> <sup>1</sup> In Eusebius, *Hist.
Eccles.*, viii. 10.

<span id="P2940_767344"></span> <sup>2</sup> Phil. ii. 6-8.

<span id="P2941_767405"></span> <sup>3</sup> xristofo/roi. So Ignatius
of Antioch was called qeofo/roj, God-bearer. \[Vol. i. pp. 45, 49, this
series.\]

<span id="P2942_767883"></span> <sup>4</sup> 1 John iv. 18.

<span id="P2946_768099"></span> <sup>5</sup> culoij. What is meant,
however, may be the instrument called by the Romans *equuleus*, a kind
of rack in the shape of a horse, commonly used in taking the evidence of
slaves.

<span id="P2947_768627"></span> <sup>6</sup> magga/noij tisi/.

<span id="P2948_768746"></span> <sup>7</sup> The text gives
a@munthri/oij e0ko/lazon, for which Nicephorus reads a0munthrioij ta\\j
kola/seij. The a0munthria were probably the Latin *ungulae*, an
instrument of torture like claws. So Rufinus understands the phrase.

<span id="P2949_769554"></span> <sup>8</sup> h0gemw/n. That is probably
the Roman Praefectus Augustalis.

<span id="P2953_771655"></span> <sup>9</sup> th=j e0para/tou
e0leuqeri/aj.

<span id="P2954_771835"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[It is impossible to
accept modern theories of the *inconsiderable* number of the primitive
martyrs, in view of the abounding evidences of a chronic and continuous
persecution always evidenced by even these fragments of authentic
history. See vol. iv. p. 125.\]

<span id="P2955_772252"></span> <sup>11</sup> Exod. xxii. 20.

<span id="P2956_772283"></span> <sup>12</sup> Exod. xx. 3.

<span id="P2957_772344"></span> <sup>13</sup> Eusebius, after quoting
these passages, adds:-"These are the words of a true philosopher, and
one who was no less a lover of God than of wisdom, which, before the
final sentence of his judge, and while he lay yet in prison, he
addressed to the brethren in his church, at once to represent to them in
what condition he was himself, and to exhort them to maintain
steadfastly, even after his speedy death, their piety towards
Christ."-Tr.

<span id="P2966_772917"></span> <sup>1</sup> This epistle was first
edited by Scipio Maffeius from an ancient Verona manuscript in the
*Osserv. Letter*, vol. iii. pp. 11-17, where is given the *Fragment of a
History of the Meletian Schism.* See Neander's important remarks on this
whole document, *Church History*, iii. p. 310 (Bohn).-Tr.

<span id="P2968_774577"></span> <sup>2</sup> *Zelo meliorum.*

<span id="P2969_774719"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[*Parishes* = dioceses (so
called now); but they were very small territorially, and every city had
its "bishop." See Bingham, book ix. cap. 2, and Euseb., book v. cap. 23.
Comp. note 1, p. 106, *supra*\]

<span id="P2970_774972"></span> <sup>4</sup> *Bene nimis magna.*

<span id="P2971_775697"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[The bishops of Alexandria
are called *popes* to this day, and were so from the beginning. See vol.
v. p. 154.\]

<span id="P2972_775817"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[Peter succeeded Theonas
as sixteenth bishop and primate of Alexandria. See vol. iv. p. 384; also
Neale, *Pat of Alex.*, i. p. 90.\]

<span id="P2973_776820"></span> <sup>7</sup> *Oportuerat ex populo
properare ac nos exigere pro merito.*

<span id="P2974_777214"></span> <sup>8</sup> *Sub arguente.*

<span id="P2975_778338"></span> <sup>9</sup> The manuscript reads
*chrismata*, for which *schismata* is proposed.

<span id="P2976_778631"></span> <sup>10</sup> *Provisoris*-perhaps
rather, The Provider-*the saint who with careful forethought has mapped
out our proper course in such matters.*

<span id="P2977_778969"></span> <sup>11</sup> 1 Tim. v. 22.

<span id="P2978_779053"></span> <sup>12</sup> *Erga illum providentiam.*

<span id="P2979_779239"></span> <sup>13</sup> The manuscript gives
*ordinando adnuntias*, for which is proposed *ordinandi. Adnuntiamus.*

<span id="P2980_779399"></span> <sup>14</sup> Reading *studeas* for
*studetur.*

<span id="P2984_780138"></span> <sup>15</sup> *Cupiditatem.*

<span id="P2985_780342"></span> <sup>16</sup> *Ut cogniscatur
concupiscentia Meletii.*

<span id="P2986_780707"></span> <sup>17</sup> The text is-*Commendans ei
occasionem Meletius, separavit eos*, &c.; on which see especially
Neander, iii. p. 311 (Bohn).

<span id="P2987_781014"></span> <sup>18</sup> This epistle is given
elsewhere. \[This volume, *infra*\]
