<span id="P3203_815215"></span> <sup>4</sup> Thus Cyril of Jerusalem, in
the sixth book of his *Catecheses*, §§ 27 and 30, tells us how Manes
fled into Mesopotamia, and was met there by that shield of righteousness
(o\#plon dikaiosu/nhj) Bishop Archelaus, and was refuted by him in the
presence of a number of Greek philosophers, who had been brought
together as judges of the discussion. Epiphanius, in his *Heresies*,
lxvi., and again in his work *De Mensuris et Poderibus*, § 20, makes
reference to the same occasion, and gives some excerpts from the *Acts
of the Disputation*. And there are also passages of greater or less
importance in Jerome (*De vir. illustr*., ch. 72), Socrates (*Hist.
Eccles.*, i. 22), Heraclianus bishop of Chalcedon (as found in Photius,
*Bibliotheca*, Cod. xcv.), Petrus Siculus (*Historia Manichaeorum*, pp.
25, 35, 37), Photius (*Adversus Manichaeos*, book i., edited in the
Biblioth. Coislin., Montfaucon, pp. 356, 358), and the anonymous authors
of the *Libellus Synodicus*, ch 27, and the *Historia Haereseos
Manichaeorum* in the Codex Regius of Turin. \[See Cyril's text in Routh,
*R. S.*, vol. v. pp. 198-205.\]

<span id="P3204_816671"></span> <sup>5</sup> As by Zacagnius at Rome, in
1698, in his *Collectanea Monumentorum Veterum Ecclesiae Graecae ac
Latinae*; by Fabricius, in the *Spicilegium Sanctorum Patrum Saeculi*,
iii., in his edition of Hippolytus, etc.

<span id="P3223_819632"></span> <sup>1</sup> See vol. ii. p. 342,
Elucidation II., this series. Note also, in the same volume, what is
said, pp. 166-167.

<span id="P3224_820877"></span> <sup>2</sup> Lewin, *St. Paul*, vol. ii.
p. 340.

<span id="P3232_825908"></span> <sup>1</sup> Of Archelaus, bishop of
Caschar in Mesopotamia.

<span id="P3235_825994"></span> <sup>2</sup> *Treasury.*

<span id="P3236_826092"></span> <sup>3</sup> In Epiphanius, *Haeres.*,
lxvi. 10, it is Marsipus.

<span id="P3237_828113"></span> <sup>4</sup> *Pietatis pretia.*

<span id="P3238_828212"></span> <sup>5</sup> Nec numero aliquo nec
discretione ulla distinguit. For *distinguit*, some propose
*distribuit.*

<span id="P3239_828532"></span> <sup>6</sup> Reading *commonentur*, as
in the text. *Commoventur* is also suggested, = "were deeply moved."

<span id="P3240_828771"></span> <sup>7</sup> On the attitude of the
Christians of the primitive Church towards warfare, see Tertullian's *De
Corona Militis*, ch. 11, and the twelfth canon of the Nicene Council.

<span id="P3242_829976"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[The similar institution
of the Rogation fasts in the West is referred to the fifth century.
Pellicia, p. 372; Hooker, book v. cap. xli. 2.\]

<span id="P3243_830574"></span> <sup>9</sup> Reading *cervicibus
degravatis et laxis, demisso capite, frontem genibus elidit.* The text
gives *demerso.*

<span id="P3246_836877"></span> <sup>10</sup> At this point begins the
portion of the work edited by Valesius from the Codex Bobiensis, which
is preserved now in the Ambrosian Library.

<span id="P3247_838049"></span> <sup>11</sup> The Codex Bobiensis reads
*Adda Turbonem.* This Adda, or Addas, as the Greek gives it below in ch.
xi., was one of those disciples of Manes whom he charged with the
dissemination of his heretical opinions in the East, as we see from ch.
xi.

<span id="P3248_838764"></span> <sup>12</sup> Codex Bobiensis adds, *ad
vesperam*, towards evening.

<span id="P3249_838824"></span> <sup>13</sup> The text gives *veluti
peregrinans.* The Codex Bobiensis has *quippe peregrinans.*

<span id="P3250_839035"></span> <sup>14</sup> On the attention paid by
the primitive Church to the duties of hospitality, see Tertullian, *De
Praescriptionibus*, ch. 20 \[vol. iii. p. 252, this series\]: Gregory
Nazianzenus, in his *First Invective against Julian*; also Priorius, *De
literis canonicis*, ch. 5, etc.; and Thomassin, *De Tesseris
hospitalitatis*, ch. 26.

<span id="P3251_839685"></span> <sup>15</sup> In the text, *ignotum*; in
the Codex Bobiensis, *ignoratum.*

<span id="P3253_840364"></span> <sup>16</sup> This letter, along with
the reply of Marcellus, is given by Epiphanius in his *Heresies*, n. 6,
from which the Greek text is taken.

<span id="P3256_841136"></span> <sup>17</sup> feido/menoj, The Latin
gives *subveniens*, relieving.

<span id="P3257_841494"></span> <sup>18</sup> The Greek text of
Epiphanius gave pro\\j to\\ a0dia/kriton. Petavius substituted pro\\j
to\\ mh\\ a0dia/kriton; and that reading is confirmed by the Latin, *uti
ne indiscretos animos geras.*

<span id="P3258_841893"></span> <sup>19</sup> apo tou autou fe/resqai.

<span id="P3259_842558"></span> <sup>20</sup> w\\n to\\ te/loj kata/raj
e0ggu/j. Cf. Heb. vi. 8.

<span id="P3260_842713"></span> <sup>21</sup> The text gives e0n toi=j
ei0rhme/noij eu\\aggeli/oij, for which toi=j ei0rhme/noij e0n toi=j
eu0aggeli/oij may be proposed.

<span id="P3261_842950"></span> <sup>22</sup> Matt. vii. 18.

<span id="P3262_843316"></span> <sup>23</sup> John i. 18.

<span id="P3263_843441"></span> <sup>24</sup> th=j a@llhj duswdi/aj tw=n
gunaikw=n.

<span id="P3264_843826"></span> <sup>25</sup> fei/dh\|.

<span id="P3265_843902"></span> <sup>26</sup> 1 Cor. vii. 35.

<span id="P3267_844258"></span> <sup>27</sup> The text gives
*infrendebat*; the Codex Bobiensis has *infringebat.* \[It seems to be a
proverb, and I have so marked it. We should say, "he *chafed* like a
lion," etc.\]

<span id="P3271_845699"></span> <sup>28</sup> *Ex pueris suis.*

<span id="P3272_845963"></span> <sup>29</sup> Epiphanius, under this
*Heresy*, num. 7, says that this was a fort situated on the other side
of the river Stranga, between Persia and Mesopotamia.

<span id="P3273_846929"></span> <sup>30</sup> The section extending from
this point on to ch. xii. is found word for word in the Greek of
Epiphanius, num. 25.

<span id="P3275_847591"></span> <sup>31</sup> micin de htoi sugkrasin.

<span id="P3276_848189"></span> <sup>32</sup> proba/llein e\\c au0tou=
du/namin. But the Codex Bobiensis gives *produxit ex virtute*, put forth
from His power one, etc. The Codex Casinensis has *produxerit et esse
virtutem*, etc.

<span id="P3277_848499"></span> <sup>33</sup> The text is simply kai\\
au0th\\n probeblhke/nai to\\n prw=ton a@nqrwpon, ta\\ pe/nte stoixe=ia.
The Latin, with emendations from the Codex Bobiensis and Epiphanius,
gives *quâ virtute circumdedit primum hominem, quae sunt quinque
elementa*, etc., = with which power He begirt the first man, which is
the same as the five elements, etc. With slight differences the Codex
Bobiensis reads *quâ circumdedit*, and the Codex Casinensis, *quae
virtute.* Petavius pointed out that there is probably an omission in the
text here. And from a passage in Epiphanius, *Hoer.*, lxvi. n. 45, it
has been proposed to fill out the sentence thus: proba/llein e\\c
e9autou= du/namin mhte0ra th=j zwh=j, kai au0th\\n probeblhke/nai to\\n
prw=ton a@nqrwpon, au0th\\n de\\ th\\n mhte/ra th=j zwh=j to/n te
prw=ton a@nqrwpon ta\\ pe/nte stoixei=a. The sense might then be that
the good Father put forth from Himself a power called the *Mother of
Life*, that this Mother of Life put forth the *first man*, and that the
said Mother of Life and the first man put forth (or constituted) the
five elements. See the note in Routh's *Reliquiae Sacrae*, v. p. 49.

<span id="P3278_849647"></span> <sup>34</sup> The Codex Bobiensis omits
the *ventus*, wind.

<span id="P3279_850824"></span> <sup>35</sup> The Greek gives
e0stere/wsen e0n tw\|= sterew/mati. The Latin version has, "crucifixit
eos in firmamento." And Routh apparently favours the reading
e0stau/rwsen = crucified them, etc. Valesius and the Codex Bobiensis
have, "descendens eduxit principes Jesu, exiens in firmamentum quod
est," etc.

<span id="P3280_851404"></span> <sup>36</sup> ei0j ei@dh o0ktw/. The
Latin however, gives *et sunt octo*, "and they are eight;" thus
apparently having read ei0si/de' o0ktw/, instead of ei/j ei@dh o0ktw/.

<span id="P3281_851583"></span> <sup>37</sup> i.e., one who bears on his
shoulders, the upholder.

<span id="P3282_851908"></span> <sup>38</sup> Reading e0k tw=n ko/lpwn,
*de sinibus suis.* But the Codex Bobiensis gives *de finibus*, from His
own territories.

<span id="P3283_852145"></span> <sup>39</sup> The Greek text is, o@pwj
au0tw\\\| thn prosh/kousan e0pitimi/an dw\\\|. The Latin gives, "quo
illum, ut par erat, coerceret." The Codex Bobiensis reads, "quod illum,
ut pareret, coerceret." It is clear also that Petavius read correctly
e/pitimi/an for e0piqumi/an in Epiphanius.

<span id="P3284_852625"></span> <sup>40</sup> ta\\ futa/.

<span id="P3285_852903"></span> <sup>41</sup> e!dhsen. The Codex
Bobiensis gives, "vexit animam in eo."

<span id="P3287_853422"></span> <sup>42</sup> But certain codices read
*et parebat*, "and was obedient," in stead of *apparebat.*

<span id="P3288_853747"></span> <sup>43</sup> ka/douj.

<span id="P3289_854108"></span> <sup>44</sup> porqmei=n.

<span id="P3290_854246"></span> <sup>45</sup> a0po/krousin. The Codex
Casinensis has *apocrisin*; but the Codex Bobiensis gives *apocrusin.*

<span id="P3291_854561"></span> <sup>46</sup> The text gives th=j
yuxh=j. But from the old Latin version, which has *animarum*, we may
conjecture that tw=n yuxw=n was read.

<span id="P3292_854985"></span> <sup>47</sup> The Latin version has
"*vir* perfectus",-a reading which is due apparently to the fact that
the author had mistaken the a0h/r of the Greek for a0nh/r \[See note 2,
p. 176, *supra*\]

<span id="P3293_856314"></span> <sup>48</sup> o9 qerismo\\j a@rxwn. The
version of Petavius has "Sic et princeps alter, messor appellatus."
Perhaps the reading should be o9 qerismou= a@rxwn.

<span id="P3294_856533"></span> <sup>49</sup> loimo/n. Other codices
give *famem*, as reading limo/n, famine.

<span id="P3295_857126"></span> <sup>50</sup> e0a\\n de\\ ta\\ a@nw th=j
r9i/zhj po/nw\| saleu/sh. It may be also = And if the upper parts of the
root shake under the exertion.

<span id="P3297_857505"></span> <sup>51</sup> pw=j metaggi/zetai h9
yuxh\\ ei0j pe/nte sw/mata. But the Codex Bobiensis reads
*transferuntur*; and the Latin version gives "quomodo et animae in alia
quoque corpora transfunduntur" = how the souls are also transfused into
other bodies.

<span id="P3298_857989"></span> <sup>52</sup> The text gives kelefw=n,
which is spoken of in Migne as an unknown animal, though ke/lefoj (thus
accentuated) occurs in ecclesiastical writers in the sense of a *leper*.
It is proposed to read e/lefantiw=n, "of elephants;" and so the Codex
Bobiensis gives "elephantorum corpora," and Codex Casinensis has "in
elefantia eorum corpora," which is probably an error for "in
elephantiacorum corpora." Routh suggests e0lefanteiwn. \[*Reliqu. Sac.*,
vol. v. p. 58.\]

<span id="P3299_858501"></span> <sup>53</sup> qerisasa, reaping.
