<span id="P3300_858685"></span> <sup>54</sup> nou=j, e@nnoia, fronhsij,
e0nqu/mhsij, logismo/j. The Latin version renders, *mens, sensus,
prudentia, intellectus, cogitatio.* Petavius gives, *mens, notio,
intelligentia, cogitatio, ratiocinatio.*

<span id="P3301_858989"></span> <sup>55</sup> toi=j a0parxh=j ou\\sin
ei0j sko/toj. But the Latin version gives "qui ex materia orti,"
etc.-who, having sprung from matter, are in darkness.

<span id="P3302_859495"></span> <sup>56</sup> o0rniqion.

<span id="P3303_859953"></span> <sup>57</sup> Explained as a species of
Egyptian tree, in which the fruit grows from the stem. The Codex
Casinensis has the strange reading, *per se ad illam*, for *perseam*,
etc. See also Epiphanius, num. 9.

<span id="P3304_860307"></span> <sup>58</sup> ei/j ta\\ o@la sw/mata.

<span id="P3305_860370"></span> <sup>59</sup> ph/ssei. But the Latin
version gives *vulnerat*, "wounds," from the reading plh/ssei. \[Note 2,
p. 176, *supra*\]

<span id="P3306_860533"></span> <sup>60</sup> eu0se/beian. But the Latin
version gives *alimenta.*

<span id="P3307_860648"></span> <sup>61</sup> ei/j ta\\j genea/j. But
the Latin version has "poenis subdetur gehennae" = will suffer the pains
of hell. \[Compare p. 185, *infra*infra, "Gehen."\]

<span id="P3308_861368"></span> <sup>62</sup> But the Latin version
gives, "respondet ad eum qui ei detulit" = he makes answer to the person
who brought it to him.

<span id="P3309_861983"></span> <sup>63</sup> The text is, kai\\ pa/lin
ei/lin ei0si\\n e@teroi ko/smoi tine\\j, tw=n fwsth/rwn duna/ntwn a0po\\
tou/tou touj kosmou, e0c w\\n a0nate/llousi. Routh suggests oi\\j
tine\\j, deleting e0c w\\n.

<span id="P3310_862406"></span> <sup>64</sup> Reading ei@ tij, as in the
text. Routh suggests ei@ ti, = As to everything existing in this world,
I have told you that the body thereof does, etc.

<span id="P3312_862798"></span> <sup>65</sup> But the Latin has "qui
vocatur," etc. = which is called, etc. And Routh thereof proposes o@j
kalei=tai for ou0 kalei=tai

<span id="P3313_863104"></span> <sup>66</sup> The text gives simply h9
gnw=sij. The Codex Bobiensis has *et scientia.* Hence Routh would read
kai\\ h gnwsij, *and* the knowledge.

<span id="P3314_864001"></span> <sup>67</sup> Retaining the reading
u0mi=n, though Petavius would substitute h9mi=n, us \[Routh corrects
Petav., *R. S.*, vol. v. pp. 63, 64.\]

<span id="P3315_864983"></span> <sup>68</sup> a9pla/rioi, in the Latin
version *Simpliciores*, a name apparently given to the Catholics by thc
Manichaeans. See Ducangii *Glossarium mediae et infimae Graecitatis.*
\[Routh, v. p. 65, worth noting.\]

<span id="P3316_865663"></span> <sup>69</sup> The text gives o0 e0sti\\
prw=toj a@nqrwpoj. Routh proposes o@ e0sti\\, etc.

<span id="P3317_865781"></span> <sup>70</sup> Or, they.

<span id="P3319_866851"></span> <sup>71</sup> met' au9tou= e@xousi
deqh=nai.

<span id="P3320_867097"></span> <sup>72</sup> e0pi\\ te@lei.

<span id="P3321_867180"></span> <sup>73</sup> The text is ka/qwj
au0to\\j e@grayen' 9O presbu/thj, etc. The Codex Bobiensis gives, "Sicut
ipse senior scripsit: Cum manifestam feceris," etc., = As the elder
himself wrote: When thou hast, etc. The *elder* here is probably the
same as the *third elder* farther on.

<span id="P3322_867611"></span> <sup>74</sup> The Greek is, a0fi/hsi
t\\on bwslon meta\\ touj ne/on ai/wsnoj; but the Latin version has the
strangely diverse rendering, "dimittunt animam quae objicitur inter
medium novi saeculi" = they let go the soul that is placed in the midst
of the new age. \[Routh has th\\n bw=lon.\]

<span id="P3323_868013"></span> <sup>75</sup> a0ndria/j.

<span id="P3324_868039"></span> <sup>76</sup> But the Latin gives, "cum
statuta venerit dies" = when the appointed day has come.

<span id="P3325_868166"></span> <sup>77</sup> ai0 de\\ probolai\\
pa=sai.

<span id="P3326_868241"></span> <sup>78</sup> ploi/w. \[See Routh, p.
68, on this *locus mire depravatus.*\]

<span id="P3327_868354"></span> <sup>79</sup> kubernh=tai.

<span id="P3328_868486"></span> <sup>80</sup> tei=xoj.

<span id="P3329_868871"></span> <sup>81</sup> tw=n du/o fu/sewn. But the
Latin version gives *duorum luminarium*, and the Codex Casinensis has
*luminariorum*, the two luminaries.

<span id="P3330_869250"></span> <sup>82</sup> Reading kli/mata, with
Petavius, for klh/mata.

<span id="P3331_869358"></span> <sup>83</sup> The Codex Casinensis makes
no mention of Thomas.

<span id="P3332_869642"></span> <sup>84</sup> Here ends the Greek of
Epiphanius.

<span id="P3334_870158"></span> <sup>85</sup> The words, *the bishop*,
are omitted in the Codex Bobiensis.

<span id="P3335_870349"></span> <sup>86</sup> But Codex Bobiensis gives
*duodecim*, twelve.

<span id="P3336_870733"></span> <sup>87</sup> But the Codex Bobiensis
gives *trisolium*, the trisole. Strabo, book xv., tells us that the
Persians wore high shoes.

<span id="P3337_870909"></span> <sup>88</sup> Aërina, sky-like. \[This
portrait seems from life.\]

<span id="P3338_871035"></span> <sup>89</sup> Ducange in his *Glossary*,
under the word Ebe/llinoj, shows from Callisthenes that the prophets or
interpreters of sacred things carried an ebony staff. \[Ezek. xxvii. 15;
Routh, p. 71.\]

<span id="P3339_871455"></span> <sup>90</sup> The text is, "vultus vero
ut senis Persae artificis et bellorum ducis videbatur." Philippus
Buonarruotius, in the *Osservazioni sopra alcuni frammenti di vasi
antichi di Vetro*, Florence, 1716, p. 69, thinks that this rendering has
arisen from the Latin translator's having erroneously read w/j
dhmiourgou kai\\ strathgou= instead of w9j dhma/rxou kai\\ strathgou=.
Taking strathgou=, therefore, in the civil sense which it bears in
various passages, he would interpret the sentence thus: "His whole mien
was like that of an old Persian *tribune and magistrate.*" See
Gallandi's note \[in Routh, p. 71\].

<span id="P3340_872426"></span> <sup>91</sup> The text is *secretius
factum*, etc. Routh suggests *secretius factus*, etc.

<span id="P3341_873041"></span> <sup>92</sup> The Codex Bobiensis reads
"Aegidius."

<span id="P3342_873188"></span> <sup>93</sup> Epiphanius gives
Kleo/bouloj.

<span id="P3343_873259"></span> <sup>94</sup> Codex Casinensis reads
*rectores*, governors. And Epiphanius, num. 10, makes the first a
professor of Gentile philosophy, the second a physician, the third a
grammarian, and the fourth a rhetorician.

<span id="P3344_873959"></span> <sup>95</sup> For *primum* the Codex
Casinensis reads *plurima*, = he began a lengthened statement, etc.

<span id="P3345_874090"></span> <sup>96</sup> Thus far Valesius edited
the piece from the Codex Bobiensis.

<span id="P3347_874919"></span> <sup>97</sup> Reading *emendato.* Codex
Casinensis gives *enim dato.*

<span id="P3348_875483"></span> <sup>98</sup> John xvi. 8. *Injustitia.*
This reading, *de injustitia*, may be due to an error on the part of the
scribe, but is more probably to be referred to the practice pursued by
Manes in altering and corrupting the sacred text to suit his own tenets.
See Epiphanius on this heresy, num. 53, and cap. 53, *infra* \["He
introduced much new matter."\]

<span id="P3349_875929"></span> <sup>99</sup> 1 Cor. xiii. 9.

<span id="P3350_876352"></span> <sup>100</sup> 1 Tim. i. 20.

<span id="P3351_877114"></span> <sup>101</sup> Matt. vii. 18.

<span id="P3352_877202"></span> <sup>102</sup> *Patrem diaboli.*

<span id="P3353_877271"></span> <sup>103</sup> John viii. 44.

<span id="P3354_877352"></span> <sup>104</sup> Referring, perhaps, to
John i. 5.

<span id="P3355_877491"></span> <sup>105</sup> The text gives, "ut
insequerentur....Verbum, et inimicum," etc. The sense seems to be as
above, supposing either that the verb *insequerentur* is used with the
meaning of assailing, persecuting, or that the *ut* is put for *ut ne*,
as is the case with the *excaecat ut* at the close of the sentence.

<span id="P3356_877871"></span> <sup>106</sup> Matt. xiii. 25.

<span id="P3357_878039"></span> <sup>107</sup> Eph. vi. 12; 2 Cor. iv.
4.

<span id="P3358_878235"></span> <sup>108</sup> Reading *differens.* But
Codex Casinensis gives *disserens.*

<span id="P3359_879243"></span> <sup>109</sup> *Transformare.*

<span id="P3360_880308"></span> <sup>110</sup> *Informatum.*

<span id="P3361_880399"></span> <sup>111</sup> 1 Cor. iii. 7.

<span id="P3362_880737"></span> <sup>112</sup> Cf. Heb. viii. 13.

<span id="P3363_881420"></span> <sup>113</sup> Luke xvi. 16.

<span id="P3364_881762"></span> <sup>114</sup> In inscitias ire vultis.
It is proposed to read *inficias* = and yet ye desire to deny the truth.
Routh suggests, *et odistis et in inscitiam ire vultis* = and ye hate
it, and choose to take your way into ignorance.

<span id="P3365_882007"></span> <sup>115</sup> Supplying *observetis* in
the clause *ut legem*, etc.

<span id="P3366_882339"></span> <sup>116</sup> *Praevaricatorem.* Gal.
ii. 18 \[Vulgate. But see p. 176\].

<span id="P3367_882507"></span> <sup>117</sup> Gal. iv. 3.

<span id="P3369_882722"></span> <sup>118</sup> Or, standard.

<span id="P3370_882780"></span> <sup>119</sup> *Titulo.*

<span id="P3371_883076"></span> <sup>120</sup> *Ergastula.*

<span id="P3372_883186"></span> <sup>121</sup> Or, in the wicked one. 1
John v. 19.

<span id="P3373_883356"></span> <sup>122</sup> The text gives "extra
*eum.*" Routh suggests *Deum*, outside of God.

<span id="P3374_884128"></span> <sup>123</sup> *Vas.*

<span id="P3375_884147"></span> <sup>124</sup> The text gives simply
"quod Dei substantia," etc. We may perhaps adopt, with Routh, "quod *si*
Dei," etc.

<span id="P3376_884709"></span> <sup>125</sup> Sedes. \["Thrones," as in
Milton.\] Routh suggests *sidera*, luminaries.

<span id="P3377_885573"></span> <sup>126</sup> *Ingenitae.*

<span id="P3378_886004"></span> <sup>127</sup> *Fructus.*

<span id="P3379_886872"></span> <sup>128</sup> The reference is to the
ancient custom of using wax and certain earths and clays for the purpose
of affixing, by means of the ring, a seal with an impression on any
object which it was desired to secure. Thus Herodotus, ii. 38, tell us
how the Egyptians marked the pure victim by wrapping it round the horns
with papyrus, and then smearing some sealing earth (gh=n shmantri/da) on
it, and stamping it with a ring. See also Cicero, *Pro Flacco*, where he
speaks of the *laudatio obsignata cretâ illa Asiatica*; and Plautus,
*Pseudolus*, Scene i., where he mentions the *expressam in cera ex
annulo suam imaginem*, etc. \[Compare vol. v. p. 466, note 3, this
series.\]

<span id="P3381_889095"></span> <sup>129</sup> The text is "quid dixerit
adversarii;" some propose "quod" or "*quia* dixerit," etc.

<span id="P3382_889589"></span> <sup>130</sup> The manuscript reading
is, "tam si quidem ex hoc arbitratus est se affirmaturum." For this it
is proposed to read, as in the translation, "tametsi quidem ex hoc
arbitratus es me affirmaturum."

<span id="P3383_889835"></span> <sup>131</sup> The text gives
*ingentem.* Routh suggests *inscientem*, stupid.

<span id="P3384_890331"></span> <sup>132</sup> \[Vol. iii. 301-302. See
Coleridge (on Donne), *English Divines*, vol. i. p. 87.\]

<span id="P3385_890525"></span> <sup>133</sup> Adopting the proposed
reading, "et ideo *duae*, ingenitae naturae esse non possunt." The text
omits the *duae*, however; and in that case the sense would be simply,
And consequently there cannot be unbegotten natures; or perhaps, And so
they (the creatures) cannot be of an unbegotten nature.

<span id="P3386_891275"></span> <sup>134</sup> \[Matt. vii. 15-20.\]

<span id="P3387_891606"></span> <sup>135</sup> *Propria.*

<span id="P3388_891851"></span> <sup>136</sup> Didicisti. But perhaps we
ought to read dixisti, which you have been uttering.

<span id="P3389_892658"></span> <sup>137</sup> Aliena, of what is alien.

<span id="P3391_893009"></span> <sup>138</sup> The text runs thus: "ut
si dicamus, Judaeus, si velit fieri Christianus, aut si Christianus
velit esse gentilis, haec species est convertibilitatis et causa."

<span id="P3392_893635"></span> <sup>139</sup> The text gives
*convertibiles.* Routh suggests *inconvertibiles*, inconvertible.

<span id="P3393_894229"></span> <sup>140</sup> The text is *unum dicamus
ingenitum.* Routh suggests *unum bonum*, etc. = Why should we not speak
of only one unbegotten good?

<span id="P3394_894888"></span> <sup>141</sup> The text is, "quod si
suis eum dicas extitisse malum, sine dubio ergo ostenditur illum bonae
esse naturae." Routh suggests, "quia istis suis adversatur qui mali
sunt," etc. = The fact that he is adverse to those who are of his own
kin, and who are evil, would be a proof that he comes of a good nature.

<span id="P3395_895343"></span> <sup>142</sup> Mark iii. 23.

<span id="P3396_895695"></span> <sup>143</sup> Or, kin to it, *vicinum
habet interitum.*

<span id="P3397_895869"></span> <sup>144</sup> Mark iii. 27.

<span id="P3398_896152"></span> <sup>145</sup> The text is "creati
hominis causa invenitur exstitisse malitiae," for which we read "creatio
hominis," etc.
