<span id="P3400_897359"></span> <sup>146</sup> Matt. vii. 16.

<span id="P3401_898036"></span> <sup>147</sup> *Ingenitam.*

<span id="P3402_899928"></span> <sup>148</sup> The text gives "quoniam
quod futurum est nescio, homo enim sum, non tamen," etc. Routh suggests
"*quonam?* quod futurum," etc. = What has that to do with the matter?
The future I know not, etc.

<span id="P3403_900664"></span> <sup>149</sup> The text is, "sed homo a
mala natura plasmatus manifestum est quia ipse sit fructus," etc.

<span id="P3405_901493"></span> <sup>150</sup> Routh, however, points
differently, so that the sense is: Be assured that it is necessary to
give some proof, etc....For the quality of a wine, etc.

<span id="P3406_902880"></span> <sup>151</sup> The text is, "ex hominis
tempore a se creati cur malus ostendatur," which is taken to be
equivalent to, "ex tempore quo hominem ipse creavit," etc.

<span id="P3407_903363"></span> <sup>152</sup> The reading adopted by
Migne is, "si ergo ex eo homo est, mala natura, demonstratur quomodo
suus fuit, ut frequenter ostendi," Others put the sentence
interrogatively = If man takes his origin from him, (and) the evil
nature is thus demonstrated, in what sense was man his own, etc.? Routh
suggests *ex quo* for *ex eo* = If the evil nature is demonstrated just
from the time of man's existence, how was man, etc.?

<span id="P3408_905322"></span> <sup>153</sup> The reading is
*inutilitatem.* But Routh points that this is probably the translation
of th/n eu0te9leian, *vilitatem*, meanness.

<span id="P3409_907261"></span> <sup>154</sup> Matt. ix. 17.

<span id="P3410_907552"></span> <sup>155</sup> *Dominatione et
observantiae usu.*

<span id="P3411_908496"></span> <sup>156</sup> Matt. ix. 16.

<span id="P3412_909480"></span> <sup>157</sup> 1 Cor. xii. 18.

<span id="P3414_909758"></span> <sup>158</sup> 1 Cor. iii. 17; 2 Cor.
vi. 16.

<span id="P3415_910508"></span> <sup>159</sup> The reading is *scit et
audit.* Routh somewhat needlessly suggests *scite audit* = he who hears
intelligently.

<span id="P3416_910705"></span> <sup>160</sup> The codex gives "hic enim
qui exstruis." It is proposed to read "sic enim qui exstruit" = For in
this very way he who constructs.

<span id="P3417_911528"></span> <sup>161</sup> The text gives "quod si
dicat quis inimicum esse eum qui plasmaverit corpus; Deus qui Creator,"
etc. The Codex Casinensis reads *Deum*. We adopt the emendation *Deo*
and the altered punctuation, thus: "quod si dicat quis inimicum esse eum
qui plasmaverit corpus Deo qui creator est animae," etc.

<span id="P3418_913403"></span> <sup>162</sup> Reading "*per*
conjunctionem" for the simple *conjunctionem.*

<span id="P3420_915173"></span> <sup>163</sup> Reading "natus est et
creatus." The Codex Casinensis has "natus est creatus."

<span id="P3421_915543"></span> <sup>164</sup> Matt. vi. 9; Luke xi. 2.

<span id="P3422_915629"></span> <sup>165</sup> Matt. vi. 6.

<span id="P3423_915750"></span> <sup>166</sup> Luke x. 18.

<span id="P3424_916413"></span> <sup>167</sup> Codex Casinensis gives
*introduceret*; but, retaining the reference to the Gentiles we read
*introducerent.*

<span id="P3426_917304"></span> <sup>168</sup> Matt. xxiii. 25; Luke xi.
39.

<span id="P3427_917656"></span> <sup>169</sup> Luke xi. 42.

<span id="P3428_917868"></span> <sup>170</sup> Matt. xxiii. 6; Mark xii.
38; Luke xx. 46.

<span id="P3429_917959"></span> <sup>171</sup> The Codex Casinensis
gives a strangely corrupt reading here: "primos discipulos subitos in
coenis, quod scientes Dominus." It is restored thus: "primos discubitus
in coenis, quos sciens Dominus," etc.

<span id="P3430_918847"></span> <sup>172</sup> 1 Cor. ix. 9.

<span id="P3431_919140"></span> <sup>173</sup> *Dividitur.*

<span id="P3432_919391"></span> <sup>174</sup> Reading *majus* for the
inept *malus* of the Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3433_919666"></span> <sup>175</sup> Routh refers us here to
Maximus, *De Natura*, ยง 2. See *Reliquiae Sacrae*, ii. 89-91.

<span id="P3434_919959"></span> <sup>176</sup> The text is "multo
inferior virtutis humanae," which is probably a Graecism.

<span id="P3435_920481"></span> <sup>177</sup> Reading *ceu* for the
*eu* of the Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3436_920666"></span> <sup>178</sup> The Codex Casinensis
gives "nec quae vellem quidem," for which "nec aequalem quidem," etc.,
is suggested, as in the translation.

<span id="P3438_921082"></span> <sup>179</sup> Matt v. 16.

<span id="P3439_921262"></span> <sup>180</sup> The text gives *a quo
si*, etc. Routh suggests *atqui si,* etc.

<span id="P3440_921991"></span> <sup>181</sup> *Medietas.*

<span id="P3441_922098"></span> <sup>182</sup> Reading
*objectu...creaturarum*, instead of *obtectu*, etc., in Codex
Casinensis.

<span id="P3442_923110"></span> <sup>183</sup> The text of this sentence
stands thus in Migne and Routh: "cui enim non fiat manifestum, solem
istum visibilem, cum ab oriente fuerit exortus, et tetenderit iter suum
ad occidentem, cum sub terram ierit, et interior effectus fuerit ea quae
apud Graecos *sphaera* vocatur, quod tunc objectu corporum obumbratus
non appareat?" The Codex Casinensis reads *quod nunc oblectu*, etc. We
should add that it was held by Anaximander and others that there was a
species of globe or sphere (sfai=ra) which surrounded the universe
\[Vol. ii. p. 136. n. 2\]

<span id="P3443_924182"></span> <sup>184</sup> Reading *ex suimet ipsius
umbra* for *exuet ipsius umbra*, which is given in the Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3444_924715"></span> <sup>185</sup> *Plagam.*

<span id="P3445_925307"></span> <sup>186</sup> *Ministrante.*

<span id="P3446_925610"></span> <sup>187</sup> The text is "Sicut autem
ante," etc. Routh suggests, *Sole adeunte*, etc.

<span id="P3447_926145"></span> <sup>188</sup> Reading "ex aequo et
justo, solis fulgore," etc. The Codex Casinensis has "ex ea quo solis
fulgure."

<span id="P3448_926587"></span> <sup>189</sup> The text is altogether
corrupt-*sed non intui hunc fieri ratus sum*; so that the sense can only
be guessed at. Routh suggests *istud* for *intui.*

<span id="P3449_926874"></span> <sup>190</sup> Codex Casinensis gives
"omni nisi," for which we adopt "omni nisu."

<span id="P3451_928707"></span> <sup>191</sup> Reading *utriusque
majus.* The Codex Casinensis has *utrunque majus.*

<span id="P3452_928799"></span> <sup>192</sup> The text is *dicit*, for
which *dicitur* may be adopted.

<span id="P3453_928931"></span> <sup>193</sup> Gen. i. 4.

<span id="P3455_930845"></span> <sup>194</sup> Reading "patefaceret" for
the "partum faceret" of Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3456_932466"></span> <sup>195</sup> The text gives *sine hoc
uno.* But perhaps Routh is right in suggesting *muro* for *uno* =
without this wall.

<span id="P3457_933113"></span> <sup>196</sup> Some suppose that
Archelaus refers here to the taking of Charrae by the Persians in the
time of Valerianus Augustus, or to its recapture and restoration to the
Roman power by the Eastern king Odenathus during the empire of
Gallienus.

<span id="P3458_933451"></span> <sup>197</sup> The ballista was a large
engine fitted with cords somewhat like a bow, by which large masses of
stone and other missiles were hurled to a great distance.

<span id="P3459_934283"></span> <sup>198</sup> The sense is obscure
here. The text gives, "non substantia id est proposito adversarius quis
dejecit," etc. Migne edits the sentence without an interrogation. We
adopt the interrogative form with Routh. The idea perhaps is, Did no
adversary with materials such as the kings of earth use, and that is as
much as to say also with a determinate plan, overthrow, etc.?

<span id="P3460_935895"></span> <sup>199</sup> The Codex Casinensis has
"nec mirum putandum est consortio," etc. We read with Routh and others,
*si ejus consortio*, or *quod ejus consortio*, etc.

<span id="P3461_936779"></span> <sup>200</sup> John i. 5.

<span id="P3462_936917"></span> <sup>201</sup> The text gives simply,
*sicut enim haec.* Routh suggests *hae.*

<span id="P3463_937044"></span> <sup>202</sup> Reading *illaesis oculis*
for the *illius oculis* of Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3465_937378"></span> <sup>203</sup> Matt. xix. 11.

<span id="P3466_937413"></span> <sup>204</sup> The text gives *et jam
quidem* for the *etiam quidem* of the Cod. Casin.

<span id="P3467_937552"></span> <sup>205</sup> John x. 27.

<span id="P3468_938917"></span> <sup>206</sup> *Apprehensus est hoc
ingenio.* For *hoc* here, Routh suggests *hic* in reference to the *leo*
so that the sense might be = But by this plan the lion was caught, and
hereafter He will save the soul.

<span id="P3469_939711"></span> <sup>207</sup> The text is, "Quando enim
pastor, nonne David de ore leonis," etc. We adopt the amended reading,
"Quando enim pastor hoc fecit? Nonne David," etc.

<span id="P3470_940190"></span> <sup>208</sup> Routh would put this
interrogatively = Can he bring out of the mouth or the belly of the lion
what it has once devoured?

<span id="P3471_940715"></span> <sup>209</sup> This seems to be the
sense intended. The text in the Codex Casinensis runs thus: "Cur igitur
quod possit non illud potius asseris quod poterit propria virtute
vincere leonem, si et pura Dei potentia," etc. For *si et pura* we may
read *sive pura*, or *si est pura*, etc.

<span id="P3472_941969"></span> <sup>210</sup> Routh takes it as a
direct assertion = It follows, then, that these two objects are of one
substance, etc.

<span id="P3473_942720"></span> <sup>211</sup> The text runs. "sed aliud
alio longe differre ignorantiam pastori ascribimus;" for which we adopt
the emendation, "sed alium ab alio longe differre si dicamus,
ignorantiam pastori ascribimus."

<span id="P3475_944190"></span> <sup>212</sup> Migne reads *irrueret.*
Routh gives *irruerat*, had made an assault.

<span id="P3476_944491"></span> <sup>213</sup> The text gives *si causa
traditus*, etc. Routh suggests *sive causa.* *Traditus*, etc.; so that
the sense would be, For on what creature can the shepherd of the kids
and lambs pronounce judgment, seeing that he is himself proved to be in
fault to them, or to be the cause of their position? For the lamb,
having been given up, etc.

<span id="P3477_945493"></span> <sup>214</sup> Reading *eum ipse* for
*eum ipsum.*

<span id="P3478_946687"></span> <sup>215</sup> Reading *si quis* for the
simple *quis* of Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3479_946885"></span> <sup>216</sup> Reading "quaestione
*rejecta*" for the *relecta* of Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3480_947658"></span> <sup>217</sup> This seems to be the
general sense of the corrupt text here, *et non longe possit ei Paulus*,
etc., in which we must either suppose something to have been lost, or
correct it in some such way as this: "ut non longe post sit ei Paulus."
Compare what Manes says also of Paul and himself in ch. xiii. above. It
should be added, however, that another idea of the passage is thrown out
in Routh. According to this the *ei* refers to *Jesus*, and the text
being emended thus, *etsi non longe post sit ei*, the sense would be:
although not long after His departure He had Paul as an elect vessel,
etc. The allusion thus would be to the circumstance that Manes made such
a claim as he did, in spite of the fact that after Christ's departure
Paul was gifted with the Spirit in so eminent a measure for the building
up of the faithful.

<span id="P3481_948594"></span> <sup>218</sup> Reading *aiebat* for the
*agebat* of Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3482_948706"></span> <sup>219</sup> 2 Cor. xiii. 3. The
reading here is, "Aut documentum quaeritis," etc. The Vulgate also gives
*An experimentum*, for the Greek e0pei/, etc.

<span id="P3483_948940"></span> <sup>220</sup> The text is, "et quidem
quod dico tali exemplo sed clarius." For *sed* it is proposed to read
*fit*, or *sit*, or *est.*

<span id="P3484_949886"></span> <sup>221</sup> Codex Casinensis has
*quicunque.* We adopt the correction, *qui cum nec.*

<span id="P3485_950246"></span> <sup>222</sup> Reading *confutatus* for
*confugatus.*

<span id="P3486_950767"></span> <sup>223</sup> The text gives "et ideo
ut consequenter erat," etc. Codex Casinensis omits the *ut.* Routh
proposes, "et ideo consequenter thesaurus," etc. = and thus, of course,
the treasure was preserved, etc. Comp. ch. xxvii. and xxxiv.

<span id="P3488_951658"></span> <sup>224</sup> The text has, "sedens
ipse per se," etc.; for which we adopt "sed et ipse," etc.

<span id="P3489_951885"></span> <sup>225</sup> The Codex Casinensis
gives, "deinde die moriturus," which may be either a mistake for "deinde
moriturus," or a contraction for "deinde die qua moriturus"-then on the
day that he was about to die, etc.

<span id="P3490_952777"></span> <sup>226</sup> The codex has, "Sin autem
conderem se dicens, exposceret, devitarent persequi," etc.; which is
corrected to, "Sin autem cohaeredem se dicens exposceret, devitarent
atque," etc., which emendation is followed in the translation.

<span id="P3491_953209"></span> <sup>227</sup> *Opus autem magis facere
debere.*

<span id="P3492_954520"></span> <sup>228</sup> The same sort of argument
is employed against the Montanists by Theodorus of Heracleia on John's
Gospel, ch. xiv. 17.

<span id="P3493_954875"></span> <sup>229</sup> It is remarked in Migne,
that it is only in the heat of his contention that this statement is
made by Archelaus as to the date of the appearance of Manes; for from
the death of Christ on to the time of this discussion there are only
some 249 years. \[Is it not probable that here is a token of the
spurious character of not a little of this work?\]

<span id="P3494_955590"></span> <sup>230</sup> John xvi. 8.

<span id="P3495_955783"></span> <sup>231</sup> John xiv. 18.

<span id="P3496_956117"></span> <sup>232</sup> Reading "sed absit hoc a
Domino nostro Jesu Christo Salvatore omnis animae," instead of the
codex's "sed absit hanc a Domino Jesu Christo Salvatore omne animae."

<span id="P3497_956335"></span> <sup>233</sup> If the reference,
however, is to 2 Pet. iii. 9, as Routh suggests, it may rather be = He
was not slack concerning His promises. The text is, "non enim moratus
est in promissionibus suis." \[A noteworthy reference to the second
Epistle of St. Peter. For, if this work be a mere romance, yet its
undoubted antiquity makes it useful, not only in this, but in many other
critical matters.\]

<span id="P3498_956808"></span> <sup>234</sup> John xiv. 12, xvi. 28.

<span id="P3499_956991"></span> <sup>235</sup> Reading "abundantius vero
conferens Paulo," instead of the corrupt text in the Codex Casinensis,
"abundantibus vero confitens Paulo."
