<span id="P4212_1235196"></span> <sup>1</sup> This first date is
conjectural.

<span id="P4221_1238564"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[After Gallandi, by the
translator, the Rev. James B. H. Hawkins, M.A.\]

<span id="P4223_1238893"></span> <sup>3</sup> qei=on e0pisko/pwn xrh=ma,
bi/ou te kai\\ a0reth=j e\#neka kai\\ th=j tw=n i9erw=n lo/gwn
sunaskh/sewj. Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles.*, lib. ix. cap. 6; lib. viii.
cap. 13; lib. vii. cap. 32, towards the end.

<span id="P4224_1239457"></span> <sup>4</sup> pro\\ tou= diwgmou=
tri/sin ou0d' o\#loij h9ghsa/menoj th=j Ekklhsi/aj.

<span id="P4225_1239846"></span> <sup>5</sup> Dodwell, *Dissert. Sing.
ad. Pears.*, cap. 6, sec. 21, p. 74.

<span id="P4226_1240282"></span> <sup>6</sup> Lequien, *Oriens Christ*,
tom. ii. p. 397.

<span id="P4227_1240342"></span> <sup>7</sup> Renaudot, *Hist.
Patriarch. Alex.*, p. 60.

<span id="P4229_1240628"></span> <sup>8</sup> Sunodiko\\n. Vol. ii. p.
8, fol., Oxon., 1672.

<span id="P4230_1240804"></span> <sup>9</sup> Tillemont, *Mem.*, tom. v.
p. 450.

<span id="P4231_1240895"></span> <sup>10</sup> Renaudot, *l.c.*, p. 61,
*seqq.*

<span id="P4233_1241900"></span> <sup>11</sup> Maffei, *Osservazione
Letterarie*, tom. iii. p. 17.

<span id="P4234_1242361"></span> <sup>12</sup> Athanasius, *Apol. contra
Arian*, sec. 39, tom. i. p. 177.

<span id="P4235_1242747"></span> <sup>13</sup> Maffei, *l.c.*, p. 24.

<span id="P4236_1242807"></span> <sup>14</sup> Baronius, *Ad Annum*,
306, sec. 44.\[Elucidation I.\]

<span id="P4240_1243503"></span> <sup>15</sup> Luke i. 80, ix. 10; Gal.
i. 17. But compare 1 Kings xix. 9.

<span id="P4241_1243789"></span> <sup>16</sup> *Patriarchate*, etc.,
vol. i. p. 107. Antony was born *circa* A.D. 251, died A.D. 356.

<span id="P4242_1244084"></span> <sup>17</sup> *Antiqu.*, book vii. cap.
i.

<span id="P4243_1244281"></span> <sup>18</sup> Matt. xix. 21 and Matt.
vi. 34.

<span id="P4244_1244840"></span> <sup>19</sup> Montalembert's *Monks of
the West* is but a fascinating romance, but is well worthy of attention.

<span id="P4249_1245453"></span> <sup>1</sup> As interpreted by
Anastasius Bibliothecarius. Apud Maium, *Spioilegii*, tom. iii. p. 671.
That Anastasius Bibliothecarius translated from the Greek the *Passion*
of St. Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, is affirmed by Anastasius himself in
his prologue, *Ad Passionem Martyrum*, MCCCCLXXX., published by Mabillon
in the *Museum Italicum*, tom. i. part ii, p. 80: "Post translatam a me
ad petitionem sanctitatis tunae (he is addressing Peter, Bishop of
Gavinum), passionem praecipui doctoris et martyris, Petri Alexandrinae
urbis episcopi." And then an anonymous biographer of John viii., in
*Muratori R. I. S.*, tom. iii. p. i. p. 269, confirms the same.
Anastasius, the librarian of the Roman church, translated from the Greek
into Latin the *Passion* of St. Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria. But it
is a matter of conjecture which of the different *Passions* of St. Peter
Anastasius translated. Of the Acts of St. Peter, there are three
different records:-(1) *Acta Sincera*, which, according to Baronius, are
the most genuine. (2) A shorter Latin version, by Surius. (3) A Greek
version, by Combefis.

<span id="P4252_1247391"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[Significant to find this
term applied from Western thought to this great bishopric by such a
translator as Anastasius.\]

<span id="P4253_1247578"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[See p. 257, *supra*, and
p. 263, *infra*, note 2. Not his final rejection after the Nicene
Council.\]

<span id="P4255_1248270"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[He is here speaking of
its civil importance only.\]

<span id="P4257_1249347"></span> <sup>5</sup> Hor., *Od.*, ii. 10, 11.

<span id="P4258_1250161"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[Anastasius, *more
Romano*, uses the Middle-Age terminology as if it had existed in the
Ante-Nicene period. So all the successors of the apostles at Rome,
including St. Peter himself, are transformed into "Popes." We owe this
abuse to the "False Decretals," of which we treat hereafter. But why is
exploded fiction and demonstrated untruth perpetuated by enlightened
historians? See vol. v. p. 155.\]

<span id="P4260_1252422"></span> <sup>7</sup> Matt. v. 29.

<span id="P4264_1254833"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[Post-Nicene terminology,
condemned even by the Gallicans, as, e g., Dupin. Alexandria, founded by
St. Mark, was virtually an Apostolic See, though commonly called the
Evangelic See.\]

<span id="P4265_1255764"></span> <sup>9</sup> Thus watched the faithful
at Milan around Ambrose, their bishop, against whom the wrath of the
Arian Empress Justina was directed, according to the testimony of
Augustine, who was an eye-witness. Cf. *Confess.*, lib. ix. cap. 7.

<span id="P4267_1257231"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[i.e, deacon; Isa. lxvi.
21. So Clement of Rome, cap. xl. p. 14, vol. i., this series.\]

<span id="P4269_1258642"></span> <sup>11</sup> The *Acta Combefisiana*
add, "quemadmodem ille Dei Filium a paterna gloria et substantia
sequestravit," even as he has separated the Son of God from the glory
and substance of His Father. But Arius had not as yet laid bare his
heresy, but had been excluded from the Church for joining in the
Meletian schism, and a suspicious course of action.

<span id="P4270_1259157"></span> <sup>12</sup> \["The dying are wont to
vaticinate;" but the prophetic *charismata* (1 Cor. xiv. 31) were not
yet extinct in the Church, in all probability, hence this conjecture was
natural.\]

<span id="P4271_1260361"></span> <sup>13</sup> kolo/bion-this is the
tunicle, tunica, tunicella, dalmatica. It originally had no sleeves; it
is said that wide sleeves were added in the West about the fourth
century; and the garment was then called dalmatic, and was the deacon's
vestment when assisting at the holy communion; while that worn by
sub-deacons, called by the Anglo-Saxons "roc", and "tunicle" generally
after the 13th century, was of the same form, but smaller and less
ornamented (Palmer, *Orig. Liturgicae*, vol. ii. p. 314). The word, in
its classical use, meant an under-garment with its sleeves curtailed
(kolobo/j)-i.e., reaching only half down to the elbow, or entirely
without sleeves. \[But the reference here is clearly to St. John xix.
23; and the introduction of the mediaeval *dalmatic*, to translate
kolo/bion, is out of place.\]

<span id="P4274_1264016"></span> <sup>14</sup> Of Scripture.

<span id="P4277_1266119"></span> <sup>15</sup> *Cf.* 1 Tim. iv. 1.

<span id="P4278_1266515"></span> <sup>16</sup> \[Another anachronism,
but noteworthy as applied to the See of Alexandria. See p. 261, note
2.\]

<span id="P4279_1267349"></span> <sup>17</sup> *Cf.* St. Paul's farewell
address to the elders at Miletus, Acts. xx. 28. \[Acts xx. 32. The whole
of this affecting address is borrowed from the touching eloquence of St.
Paul.\]

<span id="P4280_1268275"></span> <sup>18</sup> \[Acts xx. 38. The spirit
of Ignatius and of Polycarp is here clearly to be recognized in the
fourth century.\]

<span id="P4283_1269489"></span> <sup>19</sup> \[Another anachronism;
but, as applied to the Alexandrian primate, it is a concession to truth.
The word was already used in the West, but not exclusively with respect
to the Apostolic Sees. See vol. v. p. 270, note 1.\]

<span id="P4284_1270109"></span> <sup>20</sup> John x. 11.

<span id="P4285_1271725"></span> <sup>21</sup> Matt. x. 28.

<span id="P4287_1272602"></span> <sup>22</sup> \[Another anachronism. No
such invocation of saints at this period. See note 6, p. 261, *supra*\]

<span id="P4288_1274702"></span> <sup>23</sup> \[Wholly apocryphal in
all probability, or based on a mere apostrophe. Such "patronage" was yet
unknown.\]

<span id="P4290_1276744"></span> <sup>24</sup> \[Gen. xxxii. 26.\]

<span id="P4291_1277081"></span> <sup>25</sup> The Latin reads here:
"Spread out, ye aged men, the skins which ye are carrying."

<span id="P4292_1277397"></span> <sup>26</sup> a0gwnoqe/thj-the
president of the Grecian games, the judge.

<span id="P4293_1277571"></span> <sup>27</sup> \[Probably he wore
*ordinarily* what afterwards became an ecclesiastical ornament. So the
*casula* and other vestments were retained by the clergy after they
ceased to be commonly worn. Marriott, *Vestiar. Christian.*, p. 198.\]
The *omophorion*, which is worn by every Eastern bishop, resembles the
Latin pallium, except that it is broader, and tied round the neck in a
knot. *Cf.* following passage from Neale's *Introduction to the
Translation of the Eastern Liturgies*: "But while the Gospel is being
read, the bishop lays aside his *omophorion*, thereby making profession
of his service to the Lord. For since it is the Lord who is represented
as speaking by the Gospel, and is, as it were, Himself present, the
bishop at that time ventures not to be arrayed with the symbol of His
incarnation-I mean, the *omophorion*, but taking it off from his
shoulders, he gives it to the deacon, who holds it folded in his right
hand, himself standing near the bishop, and preceding the holy gifts.
When he has finished the liturgy, and comes to the communion, he again
assumes the *omophorion*, manifesting that before this he was one of the
ministers, and was afraid to put upon himself that holy garment. But
when the work is accomplished, and he goes on to elevate the bread, and
to divide it into parts, and to receive it himself, and distribute it to
others, it is necessary that he should put on all the sacred symbols of
his dignity; and since the *omophorion* is the principal vest of a
pontiff, he necessarily assumes that, and in that is partaker of the
most divine things." \[All this unknown to antiquity.\]

<span id="P4295_1279678"></span> <sup>28</sup> A *solidus* or *aureus*
worth 25 denarii, being 8 1/2d.; it was worth 17s. 8 1/2d.; five solidi,
£4, 8s. 61/2d. \[More than $20.\]

<span id="P4297_1279895"></span> <sup>29</sup> Virgil, *Aen.*, book iii.
56:-

\\special rtab\\-*Dryden.*

<span id="P4298_1280808"></span> <sup>30</sup> \[Here "standing" =
continuing. He knelt, no doubt, to be beheaded; but the corpse
*remained* in this posture. A noble horse, shot on the field of
Antietam, remained on the field in an attitude of raising himself from
the ground, as I saw it myself.\]
