<span id="P6500_2002101"></span> <sup>54</sup> The Peripatetics called
God the *locus rerum*, to/poj pa/ntwn, the "locality and the area of all
things;" that is, the being in whom all else was contained.

<span id="P6502_2004474"></span> <sup>55</sup> \[This prayer of Arnobius
is surely worthy of admiration.\]

<span id="P6504_2004867"></span> <sup>56</sup> Diagoras of Melos and
Theodorus of Cyrene, called the Atheists. The former flourished about
B.C. 430, the latter about B.C. 310. See Cic., *Nat. Deor.*, i. 2.
\[Note the *universal* faith, cap. 34, *infra*\]

<span id="P6505_2005124"></span> <sup>57</sup> Protagoras of Abdera, b.
B.C. 480, d. 411.

<span id="P6506_2005223"></span> <sup>58</sup> Democritus of Abdera, b.
B.C. 460, and Epicurus, b. B.C. 342, d. 270.

<span id="P6507_2005548"></span> <sup>59</sup> *Obstinatione*, literally
"stubbornness;" Walker conjectures *opinatione*, "imaginings," which
Orelli approves.

<span id="P6512_2009145"></span> <sup>60</sup> So the ms.; for which
Meursius would read, *nobis vobisque, communis esset* (for *cessat*)-
"is to us and to you, the anger of the gods would be *shared in*
common."

<span id="P6514_2010096"></span> <sup>61</sup> So Ursinus, followed by
most edd., for the reading of the ms. *Fenta Fatua*, cf. v. 18. A later
writer has corrected the ms. *Fanda*, which, Rigaltius says, an old
gloss renders "mother."

<span id="P6515_2011444"></span> <sup>62</sup> So restored by Salmasius
for *Dioscuri*, and understood by him as meaning Dea Syria, i.e. Venus,
because it is said that a large egg having been found by the fish in the
Euphrates, was pushed up by them to the dry land, when a dove came down,
and sat upon it until the goddess came forth. Such was the form of the
legend according to Nigidius; but Eratosthenes spoke of both Venus and
Cupid as being produced in this manner. The Syrian deities were
therefore Venus, Cupid, and perhaps Adonis. It should be remembered,
however, that the Syrians paid reverence to pigeons and fish as gods.
(Xen., *Anab.*, i. 4, 9), and that these may therefore be meant.

<span id="P6518_2014664"></span> <sup>63</sup> So all edd., except those
of Hildebrand and Oehler, for the ms. *censum*-"list."

<span id="P6519_2015507"></span> <sup>64</sup> That is, that God is a
Spirit. \[Note our author's spirit of faith in Christ.\]

<span id="P6520_2015934"></span> <sup>65</sup> Orelli would refer these
words to God; he thinks that with those immediately following they may
be understood of God's spiritual nature,-an idea which he therefore
supposes Arnobius to assert had never been grasped by the heathen.

<span id="P6521_2016333"></span> <sup>66</sup> So Gelenius, followed by
Orelli and others, for the corrupt reading of the ms., *idem ne quis*;
but possibly both this and the preceding clause have crept into the text
from the margin, as in construction they differ from the rest of the
sentence, both that which precedes, and that which follows.

<span id="P6522_2016728"></span> <sup>67</sup> The phrase *animalibus
causis* is regarded by commentators as equal to *animatis causis*, and
refers to the doctrine of the Stoics, that in the sun, moon, stars,
etc., there was an intelligent nature, or a certain impulse of mind,
which directed their movements.

<span id="P6523_2017566"></span> <sup>68</sup> Lit. "shall
see"-*visuri*, the reading of the ms.; changed in the first ed. and
others to *victuri*-"shall live."

<span id="P6524_2017751"></span> <sup>69</sup> Some have suggested a
different construction of these words-*memoriam nullam nostri sensus et
recordationis habituri*, thus-"have no memory of ourselves and senses of
recollection;" but that adopted above is simpler, and does not force the
words as this seems to do.

<span id="P6525_2018040"></span> <sup>70</sup> The ms. and 1st and 2d
Roman edd. read, *qui constringit*- "who restrains."

<span id="P6527_2018925"></span> <sup>71</sup> It was a common practice
with the Romans to hang the spoils of an enemy on a tree, which was thus
consecrated to some deity. Hence such trees were sacred, and remained
unhurt even to old age. Some have supposed that the epithet "old" is
applied from the fact that the heathen used to offer to their gods
objects no longer of use to themselves; thus it was only old trees, past
bearing fruit, which were generally selected to hang the *spoila* upon.

<span id="P6528_2019564"></span> <sup>72</sup> \[This interesting
personal confession deserves especial note.\]

<span id="P6529_2020087"></span> <sup>73</sup> *Vel personae vel
capiti.*

<span id="P6531_2021858"></span> <sup>74</sup> So all the later edd.;
but in the ms., 1st and 2d Roman edd., and in those of Gelenius and
Canterus, this clause reads, *cruciatoris perpetitur saevitatem*-"but
suffers the cruelty of his persecutor."

<span id="P6533_2022610"></span> <sup>75</sup> The words *post paenas*
in the text are regarded as spurious by Orelli, who supposes them to
have crept in from the preceding sentence: but they may be defended as
sufficiently expressing the agonies which Hercules suffered through the
fatal shirt of Nessus.

<span id="P6534_2022998"></span> <sup>76</sup> The words *deum
propitium* are indeed found in the ms., but according to Rigaltius are
not in the same handwriting as the rest of the work.

<span id="P6535_2023196"></span> <sup>77</sup> Cybele whose worship was
conjoined with that of Atys.

<span id="P6536_2023274"></span> <sup>78</sup> So Orelli, but the ms.
*Attis.*

<span id="P6537_2023538"></span> <sup>79</sup> This refers to the
practice of placing the images of the gods on pillows at feasts. In the
temples there were *pulvinaria*, or couches, specially for the purpose.

<span id="P6539_2024700"></span> <sup>80</sup> The phrase *potentiarum
interiorum* is not easily understood. Orelli is of opinion that it means
those powers which in the Bible are called the "powers of heaven," the
"army of heaven," i.e., the angels. The Jews and the early Fathers of
the Church divided the heaven into circles or zones, each inhabited by
its peculiar powers or intelligent natures, differing in dignity and in
might. The central place was assigned to God Himself, and to Christ, who
sat on His right hand, and who is called by the Fathers of the Church
the "Angel of the Church," and the "Angel of the New Covenant." Next in
order came "Thrones," "Archangels," "Cherubim and Seraphim," and most
remote from God's throne the "Chorus of Angels," the tutelar genii of
men. The system of zones and powers seems to have been derived from the
Chaldeans, who made a similar division of the heavens. According to this
idea, Arnobius speaks of Christ as nearest to the Father, and God of the
"inner powers," who enjoyed God's immediate presence. Reference is
perhaps made to some recondite doctrine of the Gnostics. It may mean,
however, the more subtile powers of nature, as affecting both the souls
of men and the physical universe.

<span id="P6540_2026425"></span> <sup>81</sup> So Orelli with most edd.,
following Ursinus, for the ms. *suo ge*-ne-*ri*-s *sub limine*, which
might, however, he retained, as if the sense were that these ordinances
were coeval with man's origin, and translated, "tribes saw at the
beginning of their race."

<span id="P6542_2027022"></span> <sup>82</sup> *Magus*, almost
equivalent to sorcerer.

<span id="P6543_2027183"></span> <sup>83</sup> Arnobius uses *nomina*,
"names," with special significance, because the Magi in their
incantations used barbarous and fearful names of angels and of powers,
by whose influence they thought strange and unusual things were brought
to pass.

<span id="P6544_2028741"></span> <sup>84</sup> All these different
effects the magicians of old attempted to produce: to break family ties
by bringing plagues into houses, or by poisons; open doors and unbind
chains by charms (Orig, *contra Cels.*, ii.); affect horses in the
race-of which Hieronymus in his *Life of Hilarion* gives an example; and
use philters and love potions to kindle excessive and unlawful desires.

<span id="P6546_2029767"></span> <sup>85</sup> So Orelli and most edd.,
following a marginal reading of Ursinus, *auxiliaribus plenum bonis*
(for the ms. *nobis*).

<span id="P6548_2029927"></span> <sup>86</sup> In the height of his
indignation and contempt, the writer stops short and does not apply to
his opponents any new epithet.

<span id="P6549_2030186"></span> <sup>87</sup> This is contrasted with
the mutterings and strange words used by the magicians.

<span id="P6550_2030758"></span> <sup>88</sup> So the ms. according to
Oehler, and seemingly Heraldus; but according to Orelli, the ms. reads
*immoderati* (instead of-*os*) *cohibebant fluores*, which Meursius
received as equivalent to "the excessive flow stayed itself."

<span id="P6551_2031077"></span> <sup>89</sup> *Penetrabilis*,
"searching," i.e., finding its way to all parts of the body.

<span id="P6552_2031384"></span> <sup>90</sup> So Orelli, LB.,
Elmenhorst, and Stewechius, adopting a marginal reading of Ursinus,
which prefixes *im*-to the ms. *mobilitates*- "looseness"-retained by
the other edd.

<span id="P6554_2032707"></span> <sup>91</sup> Cf. John ii. 25. \[He
often replies to *thoughts* not uttered.\]

<span id="P6555_2033007"></span> <sup>92</sup> No such miracle is
recorded of Christ, and Oehler suggests with some probability that
Arnobius may have here fallen into confusion as to what is recorded of
the apostles on the day of Pentecost.

<span id="P6556_2033941"></span> <sup>93</sup> The Latin is, *per purae
speciem simplicitatis*, which is not easily understood, and is less
easily expressed.

<span id="P6558_2034483"></span> <sup>94</sup> \[I have already directed
attention to Dominic Diodati's essay, *De Christo Graece loquente.* ed.
London, 1843.\]

<span id="P6559_2035161"></span> <sup>95</sup> So almost all edd.; but
the ms. and 1st and 2d Roman edd. read *scire*-"to know," etc.

<span id="P6561_2037030"></span> <sup>96</sup> See book ii. chap. 36,
*infra*

<span id="P6562_2037348"></span> <sup>97</sup> The gods in whose temples
the sick lay ordered remedies through the priests.

<span id="P6563_2037515"></span> <sup>98</sup> So all edd. except LB.,
which reads with the ms. *superponere*- "that (one) place the juices,"
etc.

<span id="P6564_2038466"></span> <sup>99</sup> That is, the physician.

<span id="P6566_2039474"></span> <sup>100</sup> So the edd. reading
*tri-v-erunt*, for the ms. *tri-bu-erunt*- "given up," which is retained
in the first ed.

<span id="P6567_2039649"></span> <sup>101</sup> *Pietatis*, "of mercy,"
in which sense the word is often used in late writers. Thus it was from
his clemency that Antoninus, the Roman emperor, received the title of
*Pius.*

<span id="P6568_2040888"></span> <sup>102</sup> So most edd., following
a marginal reading of Ursinus, which prefixes *in*-to the ms.
*firmitate.*

<span id="P6570_2042135"></span> <sup>103</sup> "They, too,...those
labouring under the inflictions of these:" so LB., with the warm
approval of Orelli (who, however, with previous edd., retains the ms.
reading in his text) and others, reading *sub eorum t-ortantes* (for ms.
*p*-) *et illi se casibus*; Heraldus having suggested *rotantes.* This
simple and elegant emendation makes it unnecessary to notice the harsh
and forced readings of earlier edd.

<span id="P6572_2043942"></span> <sup>104</sup> So understood by Orelli,
who reads *quo Dius est*, adopting the explanation of Dialis given by
Festus. The ms., however, according to Crusius, reads, *Dialem, quod
ejus est, flaminem isto jure donavit*; in which case, from the position
of the *quod*, the meaning might be, "which *term* is his," or possibly,
"because he (i.e. the priest) is his," only that in the latter case a
pronoun would be expected: the commentators generally refer it to the
succeeding *jure*, with this "right" which is his. Canterus reads, *quod
majus est*, i.e., than the Pontifex Maximus. \[Compare vol. iv. p. 74,
note 7.\]

<span id="P6573_2045432"></span> <sup>105</sup> So the ms. reading
*aequalitas*, which is retained by Hild. and Oehler; all other editions
drop *ae*- "that the quality of deed and doer might be one."

<span id="P6575_2045933"></span> <sup>106</sup> This passage has
furnished occasion for much discussion as to text and interpretation. In
the text Orelli's punctuation has been followed, who regards Arnobius as
mentioning four Zoroasters-the Assyrian or Chaldean, the Bactrian (cf.
c. 5 of this book), the Armenian, and finally the Pamphylian, or
Pamphilos, who, according to Clem. Alex. (*Strom.* \[vol. ii. p. 469\]),
is referred to in Plato's *Republic*, book x., under the name Er;
Meursius and Salmasius, however, regarding the whole as one sentence,
consider that only three persons are so referred to, the first being
either Libyan or Bactrian, and the others as with Orelli. To seek to
determine which view is most plausible even, would be a fruitless task,
as will be evident on considering what is said in the index under
Zoroaster. \[Jowett's Plato, ii. 121.\]

<span id="P6576_2046826"></span> <sup>107</sup> So Orelli, reading
*veniat qu-is su-per igneam zonam.* LB. reads for the second and third
words, *quae-so per*- "let there come, I pray you, through," etc., from
the ms. *quae super*; while Heraldus would change the last three words
into Azonaces, the name of the supposed teacher of Zoroaster. By the
"fiery zone" Salmasius would understand Libya; but the legends should be
borne in mind which spoke of Zoroaster as having shown himself to a
wondering multitude from a hill blazing with fire, that he might teach
them new ceremonies of worship, or as being otherwise distinguished in
connection with fire. \[Plato, *Rep.*, p. 446, Jowett's trans.\]

<span id="P6577_2047654"></span> <sup>108</sup> So Stewechius, Orelli,
and others, for the ms. *Zostriani*- "grandson of Zostrianus," retained
in the 1st ed. and LB.

<span id="P6579_2049017"></span> <sup>109</sup> So the edd., reading *in
rebus eximiis* for the ms. *exi*-gu-*is*, which would, of course, give
an opposite and wholly unsuitable meaning.

<span id="P6580_2049412"></span> <sup>110</sup> So generally, Heraldus
having restored *delitu-it in Christo* from the ms., which had omitted
*-it*, for the reading of Gelenius, Canterus, and Ursinus, *delicti*-"no
deceit, no sin *was*," etc.

<span id="P6581_2050115"></span> <sup>111</sup> So emended by Salmasius,
followed by most later edd. In the earlier edd. the reading is *et
merito exutus a corpore* (Salm. reading *at* instead of *a*, and
inserting a period after *mer.*)-"and when rightly freed from the body,"
etc.

<span id="P6582_2050771"></span> <sup>112</sup> It may be instructive to
notice how the simpler narrative of the Gospels is amplified. Matthew
(xxvii. 51) says that the earth trembled, and Luke (xxiii. 45) that the
sun was darkened; but they go no further. \[ See p. 301, note 4,
*supra*\]

<span id="P6584_2051519"></span> <sup>113</sup> Or, "which if...itself,
would never," etc. \[Note the confidence of this appeal to general
assent.\]

<span id="P6586_2052467"></span> <sup>114</sup> That is, by the climate
and the inclination of the earth's surface.

<span id="P6587_2053106"></span> <sup>115</sup> So the 1st ed., Ursinus,
Elmenhorst, Orelli, and Hildebrand, reading *munerandis*, which is found
in the ms. in a later handwriting, for the original reading of the ms.
*munera dis.*

<span id="P6589_2053641"></span> <sup>116</sup> According to Rigaltius
the ms. reads *ista promiserunt in immensum*-"have put forth (i.e.
exaggerated) these things to an immense degree falsely, small matters
and trivial affairs have magnified," etc.; while by a later hand has
been superscribed over *in immensum*, in ink of a different colour,
*extulere*-"have extolled."

<span id="P6590_2054081"></span> <sup>117</sup> So the ms., 1st ed., and
Hildebrand, while all others read *atqu-i*-"but."

<span id="P6591_2054477"></span> <sup>118</sup> So LB., reading *quo*
for the ms. *quod.*

<span id="P6592_2055069"></span> <sup>119</sup> So most edd., reading
*intercipere* for the ms. *intercipi*-"it is that the progress be
obstructed," etc.

<span id="P6596_2058760"></span> <sup>120</sup> So Orelli and
Hildebrand, reading *glabre* from a conjecture of Grotius, for the ms.
*grave.*

<span id="P6597_2060461"></span> <sup>121</sup> i.e., that the one
should be masculine, the other feminine.

<span id="P6598_2061344"></span> <sup>122</sup> i.e., does not one of
you make the plural of *uter* masc., another neut.? \[Note the
opponent's witness to the text of the Gospels.\]
