<span id="P6800_2137214"></span> <sup>135</sup> Lit., "equal to the
highness (*summitati*) of the prince."

<span id="P6801_2137291"></span> <sup>136</sup> So LB. and Orelli,
reading *qui-a*; the rest, *qui*-"who."

<span id="P6802_2138524"></span> <sup>137</sup> So Gelenius, reading
*divinitus* for the ms. *divinas*, i.e., "with a divine nature and
origin," which is retained in the first ed. and Orelli.

<span id="P6803_2138735"></span> <sup>138</sup> The ms., both Roman
edd., Hild., and Oehler, read *ut*, "so that there are."

<span id="P6804_2139051"></span> <sup>139</sup> Cf. on this Platonic
doctrine, ch. 24, p. 443, *infra*.

<span id="P6806_2140042"></span> <sup>140</sup> Lit., "a feeling of
cold."

<span id="P6807_2140162"></span> <sup>141</sup> Lit., "sound of voice at
all."

<span id="P6808_2140279"></span> <sup>142</sup> Lit., "of heaven
terribly crashing."

<span id="P6809_2140487"></span> <sup>143</sup> So the later edd.,
adopting the emendation of Scaliger, *nothum*-"spurious," which here
seems to approach in meaning to its use by Lucretius (v. 574 sq.), of
the moon's light as borrowed from the sun. The ms. and first four edd.
read *notum*, "known."

<span id="P6810_2140790"></span> <sup>144</sup> According to Huet
(quoted by Oehler), "between that spurious and the true light;" but
perhaps the idea is that of darkness interposed at intervals to resemble
the recurrence of night.

<span id="P6812_2141292"></span> <sup>145</sup> Lit., "born, and that,
too (*et* wanting in almost all edd.), into the hospice of that place
which has nothing, and is inane and empty."

<span id="P6813_2142920"></span> <sup>146</sup> So most edd. reading
*porrigetur* for the ms. *corrigetur*-"be corrected," i.e., need to be
corrected, which is retained in the first ed.

<span id="P6815_2143856"></span> <sup>147</sup> So Gelenius, followed by
Canterus, Elmenh., and Oberthür, reading *portione-m et*, while the
words *tam laetam*, "that he is so joyous a part" are inserted before
*et* by Stewechius and the rest, except both Roman edd. which retain the
ms. *portione jam laeta.*

<span id="P6816_2144589"></span> <sup>148</sup> Lit., "sent to."

<span id="P6817_2144918"></span> <sup>149</sup> So the ms., reading
*milvus*, for which all edd. (except Oberthuer) since Stewechius read
*mulus*, "a mule."

<span id="P6819_2145108"></span> <sup>150</sup> *Carduus*, no doubt the
esculent thistle, a kind of artichoke.

<span id="P6820_2145307"></span> <sup>151</sup> So, according to an
emendation in LB., *esui*, adopted by Orelli and others, instead of the
ms. reading *et sui.*

<span id="P6821_2145563"></span> <sup>152</sup> There has been much
discussion as to whether the *solifuga* or *solipuga* here spoken of is
an ant or spider.

<span id="P6822_2145871"></span> <sup>153</sup> The ms. reads
*discriminare, discernere*, with the latter word, however, marked as
spurious.

<span id="P6823_2146094"></span> <sup>154</sup> A kind of rug.

<span id="P6824_2146136"></span> <sup>155</sup> *Mitra.*

<span id="P6825_2146156"></span> <sup>156</sup> *Strophium*, passing
round the breast, by some regarded as a kind of corset.

<span id="P6826_2146296"></span> <sup>157</sup> *Mastruca*, a garment
made of the skins of the *muflone*, a Sardinian wild sheep.

<span id="P6827_2146457"></span> <sup>158</sup> *Tribula*, for rubbing
out the corn.

<span id="P6828_2146764"></span> <sup>159</sup> *Aurum* is omitted in
all edd., except those of LB., Hild., and Oehler.

<span id="P6829_2146864"></span> <sup>160</sup> *Liber*, a roll of
parchment or papyrus, as opposed to the preceding *codex*, a book of
pages.

<span id="P6830_2147105"></span> <sup>161</sup> The ms. reads *vobis*
unintelligibly, corrected by Meursius *bovis*.

<span id="P6831_2147229"></span> <sup>162</sup> So Orelli and modern
edd.; but Crusius gives as the ms. reading *conspici-etur* (not *-et*),
as given by Ursinus, and commonly received- "Will he not...be seen?"

<span id="P6832_2147445"></span> <sup>163</sup> The ms. and first five
edd. read *et*-"and," changed in LB. to *sed*.

<span id="P6834_2147773"></span> <sup>164</sup> In this dialogue (st. p.
81) Socrates brings forward the doctrine of reminiscence as giving a
reasonable ground for the pursuit of knowledge, and then proceeds to
give a practical illustration of it by leading an uneducated slave to
solve a mathematical problem by means of question and answer.

<span id="P6835_2148460"></span> <sup>165</sup> Lit., "his knowledge of
things."

<span id="P6836_2148899"></span> <sup>166</sup> So the ms. and edd.,
reading *i-gnarum rerum*, except LB., which by merely omitting the *i*
gives the more natural meaning, "acquainted with the things," etc.

<span id="P6837_2149096"></span> <sup>167</sup> Lit., "established in
the limits of humanity."

<span id="P6838_2149313"></span> <sup>168</sup> i.e., a square
numerically or algebraically. The ms., both Roman edd., and Canterus
read *di-bus aut dynam-us*, the former word being defended by Meursius
as equivalent to *binio*, "a doubling,"- a sense, however, in which it
does not occur. In the other edd., *cubus aut dynamis* has been received
from the margin of Ursinus.

<span id="P6839_2150099"></span> <sup>169</sup> *Aeneid*, vi. 472.

<span id="P6840_2150288"></span> <sup>170</sup> This clause is with
reason rejected by Meursius as a gloss.

<span id="P6842_2150740"></span> <sup>171</sup> Founded on Plato's words
(*Phaedrus*, st. p. 247), tw\\\| d' (i.e. Zeus) e@petai stratia\\ qew=n
te kai\\ daimo/nwn, the doctrine became prevalent that under the supreme
God were lesser gods made by Him, beneath whom again were daemons, while
men stood next. To this Orelli supposes that Arnobius here refers.

<span id="P6843_2151094"></span> <sup>172</sup> The vessels in which
according to Plato (*Timaeus*, st. p. 41), the Supreme Being mixed the
vital essence of all being. Cf. c. 52.

<span id="P6844_2151271"></span> <sup>173</sup> Lit., "and endowed."

<span id="P6845_2151618"></span> <sup>174</sup> The text and meaning are
both rather doubtful, and the edd. vary exceedingly. The reading of
Orelli, *demoretur iners, valeat in aere quamvis*, has been translated
as most akin to the ms., with which, according to Oehler, it agrees,
although Orelli himself gives the ms. reading as *aer-io*.

<span id="P6846_2152311"></span> <sup>175</sup> Lit., "acknowledge
turnings in the course."

<span id="P6848_2152943"></span> <sup>176</sup> Lit., "but retaining its
own things, bind itself in earthly bodies."

<span id="P6849_2153511"></span> <sup>177</sup> Lit., "of."

<span id="P6850_2153616"></span> <sup>178</sup> So the ms. and edd.,
reading *sua-de-ri*, for which Oehler reads very neatly *sua de vi*-"can
anything of its own power destroy," etc.

<span id="P6851_2154022"></span> <sup>179</sup> Lit., "not suffer
forgetfulness."

<span id="P6852_2154134"></span> <sup>180</sup> I.it., "however the most
solid unions of bodies may have bound them round."

<span id="P6853_2154317"></span> <sup>181</sup> So the edd. reading
*privat immortalitate has omni*, for which, according to Hildebrand, the
ms. reads *-tatem has omnis*-"all these of immortality."

<span id="P6855_2155008"></span> <sup>182</sup> Lit., "put on the
blindness of oblivion."

<span id="P6856_2155817"></span> <sup>183</sup> Cf. Lucretius, iii. 969,
where life is thus spoken of.

<span id="P6858_2156088"></span> <sup>184</sup> The ms. reads *ne
videamu-s*, changed in both Roman edd. into *-amur*- "that we may not be
seen by you (as ignorant), how say you," etc. Gelenius proposed the
reading of the text, *audiamus*, which has been received by Canterus and
Orelli. It is clear from the next words-*quemadmodum dicitis*-that in
this case the verb must be treated as a kind of interjection, "How say
you, let us hear." LB. reads, to much the same purpose, *scire avemus*,
"we desire to know."

<span id="P6859_2157054"></span> <sup>185</sup> Lit., "before man."

<span id="P6860_2157250"></span> <sup>186</sup> Lit., "placed outside."

<span id="P6861_2157339"></span> <sup>187</sup> *Quod enim.*

<span id="P6862_2157402"></span> <sup>188</sup> *Rebus ingressis.*

<span id="P6863_2157795"></span> <sup>189</sup> So read by Orelli,
*artes suas antiquas*, omitting *atque*, which he says, follows in the
ms. It is read after *suas*, however, in the first ed., and those of
Gelenius, Canterus, Hildebrand; and according to Oehler, it is so given
in the ms., "its own and ancient." Oberthür would supply *res*-"its own
arts and ancient things."

<span id="P6864_2158167"></span> <sup>190</sup> So the ms., reading
*constitut-a*, followed by all edd. except those of Ursinus, Hildebrand,
and Oehler, who read *-ae*, "how do they remember when established in
the bodies," which is certainly more in accordance with the context.

<span id="P6865_2158540"></span> <sup>191</sup> Lit., "of immortality."

<span id="P6866_2158800"></span> <sup>192</sup> Cf. ch. 16, p. 440.

<span id="P6867_2159226"></span> <sup>193</sup> Lit., "of a lost
memory."

<span id="P6868_2159308"></span> <sup>194</sup> Lit., "of (a memory)
preserved."

<span id="P6870_2159599"></span> <sup>195</sup> *Capite cum censeatur.*

<span id="P6871_2159690"></span> <sup>196</sup> Lit., "poor in hearth,
and of a poor hut."

<span id="P6872_2159915"></span> <sup>197</sup> So the ms., reading
*malis*, for which Ursinus suggested *alis*, "on the wings of which."

<span id="P6873_2160461"></span> <sup>198</sup> i.e., to death.

<span id="P6874_2160556"></span> <sup>199</sup> The ms. reads *securus,
intrepidus*-"heedless, fearless;" the former word, however, being marked
as a gloss. It is rejected in all edd., except LB.

<span id="P6875_2160912"></span> <sup>200</sup> Lit., "by the freedom of
impunity."

<span id="P6876_2161366"></span> <sup>201</sup> Lit., "the one
(immortality)...in respect of the equality of condition of the
other"-*nec in alterius (immortalatatis) altera (immortalitatas) possit
aequalitate conditionis vexari*; the reference being clearly to the
immediately preceding clause, with which it is so closely connected
logically and grammatically. Orelli, however, would supply *anima*,
a0po\\ tou= koinou=, as he puts it, of which nothing need be said.
Meursius, with customary boldness, emends *nec vi alterius altera*, "nor
by the power of one can the other," etc.

<span id="P6878_2161935"></span> <sup>202</sup> So the ellipse is
usually supplied, but it seems simpler and is more natural thus: "But
punishments (have been) spoken of" (*memoratae*), etc.

<span id="P6879_2162191"></span> <sup>203</sup> So ms. and Oehler, for
which the edd. read *ec quis*, "will any one."

<span id="P6880_2162317"></span> <sup>204</sup> Lit., "the consequences
of things."

<span id="P6881_2162526"></span> <sup>205</sup> Lit., "the moving of
wheels whirling."

<span id="P6883_2163243"></span> <sup>206</sup> Lit., "in the unbroken
course of ages"-*perpetuitate aevorum.*

<span id="P6884_2163618"></span> <sup>207</sup> Lit., "and to scatter
the unbridled eagerness of boundless lust through," etc.

<span id="P6886_2164213"></span> <sup>208</sup> Lucretius (iii. 417
sqq.) teaches at great length that the soul and mind are mortal, on the
ground that they consist of atoms smaller than those of vapour, so that,
like it, on the breaking of their case, they will be scattered abroad;
next, on the ground of the analogy between them and the body in regard
to disease, suffering, etc.; of their ignorance of the past, and want of
developed qualities; and finally, on the ground of the adaptation of the
soul to the body, as of a fish to the sea, so that life under other
conditions would be impossible.

<span id="P6887_2164935"></span> <sup>209</sup> The ms. and first four
edd. read *has*, "that these souls," etc.; in the other edd., *hac* is
received as above from the margin of Ursinus.

<span id="P6888_2165133"></span> <sup>210</sup> Cf. Plato, *Phaedo* (st.
p. 64 sq.), where death is spoken of as only a carrying further of that
separation of the soul from the pleasures and imperfections of the body
which the philosopher strives to effect in this life.

<span id="P6889_2165377"></span> <sup>211</sup> Lit., "in common."

<span id="P6890_2165429"></span> <sup>212</sup> Pl.

<span id="P6891_2165498"></span> <sup>213</sup> This refers to the
second argument of Lucretius noticed above.

<span id="P6893_2166110"></span> <sup>214</sup> i.e., the abandoned and
dissolute immortal spoken of in last chapter.

<span id="P6894_2166337"></span> <sup>215</sup> Lit., "with."

<span id="P6895_2166678"></span> <sup>216</sup> Lit., "degenerate into
mortal nature."

<span id="P6896_2166794"></span> <sup>217</sup> Arnobius seems in this
chapter to refer to the doctrine of the Stoics, that the soul must be
material, because, unless body and soul were of one substance, there
could be no common feeling or mutual affection (so Cleanthes in *Nemes.
de Nat. Hom.*, ii, p. 33); and to that held by some of them, that only
the souls of the wise remained after death, and these only till the
conflagration (Stob., *Ecl. Phys.*, p. 372) which awaits the world, and
ends the Stoic great year or cycle. Others, however, held that the souls
of the wise became daemons and demigods (Diog., *Laert.*, vii. 157 and
151).

<span id="P6897_2167497"></span> <sup>218</sup> Lit., "they"-*eas.*

<span id="P6899_2167803"></span> <sup>219</sup> Lit., "from the gapings
and," etc.
