<span id="P6900_2168055"></span> <sup>220</sup> There may be here some
echo of the words (John xvii. 3), "This is eternal life, that they may
know Thee, the only true God," etc.; but there is certainly not
sufficient similarity to found a direct reference on, as has been done
by Orelli and others.

<span id="P6901_2168389"></span> <sup>221</sup> i.e. souls.

<span id="P6902_2168551"></span> <sup>222</sup> This passage presents no
difficulty in itself, its sense being obviously that, as by God's grace
life is given to those who serve Him, we must strive to fit ourselves to
receive His blessing. The last words, however, have seemed to some
fraught with mystery, and have been explained by Heraldus at some length
as a veiled or confused reference to the Lord's Supper, as following
upon baptism and baptismal regeneration, which, he supposes, are
referred to in the preceding words, "laying aside," etc. \[It is not,
however, the language of a mere catechumen.\]

<span id="P6903_2169413"></span> <sup>223</sup> These "thin plates,"
*laminae*, Orelli has suggested, were amulets worn as a charm against
serpents.

<span id="P6904_2169534"></span> <sup>224</sup> ms. *Phyllis.*

<span id="P6905_2169584"></span> <sup>225</sup> So the edd., reading
*instit-oribus* for the ms. *instit-ut-oribus*, "makers."

<span id="P6906_2169744"></span> <sup>226</sup> Lit., "that colds and
violent suns may not," etc.

<span id="P6907_2169860"></span> <sup>227</sup> Lit., "of."

<span id="P6909_2169974"></span> <sup>228</sup> Lit., "is set before."

<span id="P6910_2170102"></span> <sup>229</sup> So the ms., first ed.,
Gelenius, Canterus, Hildebrand, reading *ex commodi sensu*, for which
all the other edd., following Ursinus and Meursius, read *ex
communi*-"from common sense," i.e., wisely.

<span id="P6911_2170439"></span> <sup>230</sup> Perhaps, as Orelli
evidently understands it, "prefer Him to our own souls"-*animis
praeponimus.*

<span id="P6912_2170554"></span> <sup>231</sup> So Oehler, reading *ea*
for the ms. *ut*, omitted in all edd.

<span id="P6913_2170742"></span> <sup>232</sup> Lit., "by your own and
internal exertion."

<span id="P6914_2170996"></span> <sup>233</sup> Lit., "of things."

<span id="P6915_2171130"></span> <sup>234</sup> Lit., "wings will be at
hand."

<span id="P6916_2171268"></span> <sup>235</sup> The ms. reads
*di*-cimus, "say;" corrected *du*, as above.

<span id="P6917_2171374"></span> <sup>236</sup> The first four edd. read
*res*, "things above," for which Stewechius reads, as above, *sedes.*

<span id="P6918_2171638"></span> <sup>237</sup> *Sponte.*

<span id="P6920_2172404"></span> <sup>238</sup> Here, as in c. 7, p.
436, n. 3, the edd. read *Phaedone*, with the exception of the first
ed., LB., Hildebrand, and Oehler, who follow the ms. as above.

<span id="P6921_2172739"></span> <sup>239</sup> Lit., "to the end of
promising."

<span id="P6922_2173124"></span> <sup>240</sup> Meursius suggests
*numini*, "deity," on which it may be well to remark once for all, that
*nomen* and *numen* are in innumerable places interchanged in one or
other of the edd. The change, however, is usually of so little moment,
that no further notice will be taken of it.

<span id="P6923_2173548"></span> <sup>241</sup> So the ms., according to
Rigaltius and Hildebrand, reading *vitae aeternitate*, while Crusius
asserts that the ms. gives *vita et*-"with life and eternity."

<span id="P6925_2173759"></span> <sup>242</sup> The ms. reading is,
*mortalis est qualitatis*. The first five edd. merely drop *est*-"of
mortal, of neutral," etc.; LB. and the others read, *es et*, as above.

<span id="P6926_2174081"></span> <sup>243</sup> Lit., "heard from."

<span id="P6927_2174192"></span> <sup>244</sup> So the ms., according to
Crusius, the edd. reading *cred-id-imus*-"have believed."

<span id="P6928_2174351"></span> <sup>245</sup> Lit., "if we believe
that."

<span id="P6929_2174450"></span> <sup>246</sup> So the ms., reading *ad
modum obsecutionis paratum*-"prepared to the mode of compliance;" for
which the edd. read *adm. executioni*-"quite prepared for performing,"
except Hildebrand, who gives *adm. obsecutioni*-"for obedience."

<span id="P6930_2174755"></span> <sup>247</sup> So the ms., according to
Crusius, but all edd. read *sequ-a-tur* (for *i*)-"Is there anything
which He has willed which it does not follow," etc.

<span id="P6931_2175450"></span> <sup>248</sup> So all edd., reading
*mutabiles*, except the two Roman edd. and Oehler, who gives, as the
reading of the ms., *nu.*-"tottering."

<span id="P6932_2175618"></span> <sup>249</sup> Lit., "in the doubtful
condition of their lot."

<span id="P6933_2175828"></span> <sup>250</sup> Lit., "which may have
been of a name."

<span id="P6934_2176036"></span> <sup>251</sup> LB., followed by the
later edd., inserted *si*, "if they are," which is certainly more
consistent with the rest of the sentence.

<span id="P6936_2176604"></span> <sup>252</sup> The ms. reading is
utterly corrupt and meaningless-*immortalitatis largiter est donum dei
certa prolatis*. Gelenius, followed by Canterus, Oberthür, and Orelli,
emended *largi-tio...certe*, as above. The two Roman edd. read, *-tatem
largitus...certam*-"bestowed, assured immortality as God's gift on,"
etc.

<span id="P6937_2176975"></span> <sup>253</sup> i.e., who must therefore
have received it if they have it at all.

<span id="P6938_2177203"></span> <sup>254</sup> Lit., "out, reduced to
nothing with annihilation, not to be returned from."

<span id="P6939_2177575"></span> <sup>255</sup> Lit., "they are held in
a lasting bond," i.e., of being.

<span id="P6940_2177682"></span> <sup>256</sup> Plato makes the supreme
God, creator of the inferior deities, assure these lesser gods that
their created nature being in itself subject to dissolution, His will is
a surer ground on which to rely for immortality, than the substance or
mode of their own being (*Timaeus*, st. p. 41; translated by Cicero, *de
Univ.*, xi., and criticised *de Nat. Deor.*, i. 8 and iii. 12).

<span id="P6941_2178206"></span> <sup>257</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read *neque ullo ab-olitio-nis* unintelligibly, for which Gelenius
proposed *nexusque aboltitione*-"and by the destruction of the bond;"
but the much more suitable reading in the margin of Ursinus, translated
above, *ullo ab alio nis-i*, has been adopted by later edd.

<span id="P6942_2178642"></span> <sup>258</sup> Lit., "be gifted with a
saving order." So the ms., reading *salutari iussione*, followed by both
Rom. edd.; LB. and Orelli read *vinctione*-"bond;" Gelenius, Canterus,
Elmenh., and Oberthür, *m-issione*-"dismissal."

<span id="P6943_2179065"></span> <sup>259</sup> Lit., "that to the gods
themselves the natures are intermediate."

<span id="P6944_2179178"></span> <sup>260</sup> Lit.,
"supreme"-*principali.*

<span id="P6945_2179592"></span> <sup>261</sup> Cf. i. 48. On this
passage Orelli quotes Irenaeus, i. 21, where are enumerated several
gnostic theories of the creation of the world and men by angels, who are
themselves created by the "one unknown Father." Arnobius is thought,
both by Orelli and others, to share in these opinions, and in this
discussion to hint at them, but obscurely, lest his cosmology should be
confounded by the Gentiles with their own polytheistic system. It seems
much more natural to suppose that we have here the indefinite statement
of opinions not thoroughly digested.

<span id="P6947_2180386"></span> <sup>262</sup> Lit., "a generation of."

<span id="P6948_2180809"></span> <sup>263</sup> Canterus, Elmenhorst,
Oberthür, and Orelli omit *ut*, which is retained as above by the rest.

<span id="P6949_2181019"></span> <sup>264</sup> Lit., "obscene."

<span id="P6950_2181306"></span> <sup>265</sup> Elmenhorst endeavours to
show that Arnobius coincides in this argument with the Epicureans, by
quoting Lucr. v. 165 sqq. and Lact. vii. 5,where the Epicurean argument
is brought forward, What profit has God in man, that He should have
created him? In doing this, it seems not to have been observed that the
question asked by Arnobius is a very different one: What place has man
in the *world*, that God should be supposed to have sent him to fill it?

<span id="P6951_2182386"></span> <sup>266</sup> i.e., so far from this
being the case.

<span id="P6953_2183564"></span> <sup>267</sup> i.e., from one horse to
another-*desultores.*

<span id="P6954_2184128"></span> <sup>268</sup> *Rationibus et
constitutionibus.*

<span id="P6955_2184204"></span> <sup>269</sup> Lit., "it should be
believed."

<span id="P6956_2184353"></span> <sup>270</sup> Lit., "unless there were
joined."

<span id="P6957_2184435"></span> <sup>271</sup> So the ms., reading
*contentio*, which Orelli would understand as meaning "contents," which
may be correct. LB. reads *conditio*-"condition," ineptly; and Ursinus
in the margin, *completio*-"the filling up."

<span id="P6959_2184795"></span> <sup>272</sup> So the later edd., from
the margin of Ursinus, reading *quod temeritatis est maximae* for the
ms. *quem*-"whom it shows the greatest rashness to speak of."

<span id="P6960_2184987"></span> <sup>273</sup> Lit., "goddesses."

<span id="P6961_2185081"></span> <sup>274</sup> So Gelenius (acc. to
Orelli), reading as in the margin of Ursinus, *terrenae
circumscriptionis*, for the unintelligible reading of the ms.,
*temerariae*, retained in both Roman edd., Canterus, and (acc. to
Oehler) Gelenius. LB. reads *metariae*-"a limiting by boundaries."

<span id="P6962_2185572"></span> <sup>275</sup> Lit., "motions."

<span id="P6963_2185649"></span> <sup>276</sup> Cf. Lucr., v. 229 sq.
The same idea comes up again in iv. 21.

<span id="P6964_2185841"></span> <sup>277</sup> Lit., "in."

<span id="P6965_2185906"></span> <sup>278</sup> According to Hildebrand,
the ms. reads *dissimular-ent circumscribere*, so that, by merely
dropping *nt*, he reads, "to dissemble and cheat;" but according to
Crusius, *iri* is found in the ms. between these two words, so that by
prefixing *m* Sabaeus in the first ed. read *m-ent-iri* as above,
followed by all other edd.

<span id="P6966_2186314"></span> <sup>279</sup> Lit., "to roll...in the
mind."

<span id="P6967_2186409"></span> <sup>280</sup> Rigaltius and Hildebrand
regard *decipere* as a gloss.

<span id="P6968_2186598"></span> <sup>281</sup> So the ms., reading
*formari*, followed by Hildebrand and Oehler; but all the other edd.
give the active form, *-are*.

<span id="P6969_2186884"></span> <sup>282</sup> Lit., "from."

<span id="P6970_2187193"></span> <sup>283</sup> The condition, i.e., of
freedom.

<span id="P6971_2187501"></span> <sup>284</sup> LB., seemingly received
by Orelli, though not inserted into his text, reads *poscerent eos* for
the ms. *-entur*, which Hildebrand modifies *-ent ea* as above.

<span id="P6972_2188367"></span> <sup>285</sup> Lit., "certain."

<span id="P6973_2188422"></span> <sup>286</sup> Lit., "by error."

<span id="P6975_2188767"></span> <sup>287</sup> Lit., "the sad necessity
should be laid upon them, that," etc.

<span id="P6976_2189009"></span> <sup>288</sup> Lit., "for the want of
daily things," *diurnorun egestati*, for which Stewechius would read
*diurna egestate*-"from daily necessity."

<span id="P6977_2189180"></span> <sup>289</sup> Lit., "of."

<span id="P6978_2189397"></span> <sup>290</sup> Lit., "poured forth all
their blood."

<span id="P6979_2189531"></span> <sup>291</sup> Lit., "of their labour."

<span id="P6980_2189616"></span> <sup>292</sup> Lit,, "at last by force
of."

<span id="P6981_2190274"></span> <sup>293</sup> So the ms. and edd.,
reading *vilitatem*, for which Meursius proposed very needlessly
*utilitatem*-"and at an advantage."

<span id="P6982_2190543"></span> <sup>294</sup> So, adhering very
closely to the ms., which gives *e-t sanguine supputandis augere-t
insomnia milibus*, the *t* of *e-t* being omitted and *n* inserted by
all. The first five edd. read, *-tandi se angerent insania:
millibus*-"harass themselves with the madness of reckoning; by miles
should extend," etc.,-the only change in Heraldus and Orelli being a
return to *insomnia*-"harass with sleeplessness," etc.

<span id="P6984_2191623"></span> <sup>295</sup> So restored by Cujacius,
followed by LB. and Orelli, reading *in grat-i-am* (ms. wants *i*)
*voluptatemque*, while the first five edd. merely drop *-que*-"to the
grateful pleasure," etc.

<span id="P6985_2192158"></span> <sup>296</sup> Lit., "most cruel."

<span id="P6986_2192214"></span> <sup>297</sup> Lit., "among," *in
oris*, the ms. reading, and that of the first four edd., for which the
others have received from the margin of Ursinus *moribus*-"(indulging)
in so fierce and savage customs."

<span id="P6987_2192526"></span> <sup>298</sup> Lit., "tables."

<span id="P6988_2192575"></span> <sup>299</sup> Lit., "they should
live."

<span id="P6989_2192934"></span> <sup>300</sup> Lit., "lessen."

<span id="P6990_2193006"></span> <sup>301</sup> In the ms. this clause
follows the words "loss of their purity," where it is very much in the
way. Orelli has followed Heraldus in disposing of it as above, while LB.
inserts it after "tips of their ears." The rest adhere to the
arrangement of the ms., Ursinus suggesting instead of *his*-"with
these," *catenis*-"with chains;" Heraldus, *linis*-"with strings (of
pearls);" Stewechius, *taeniis*- "with fillets."

<span id="P6991_2193440"></span> <sup>302</sup> So LB. and Orelli
reading, *con-fic-iendis corporibus* for the ms. *con-sp-iendis*, for
which the others read *-spic-*, "to win attention." A conjecture by
Oudendorp, brought forward by Orelli, is worthy of
notice-*con-spu-endis*, "to cover," i.e., so as to hide defects.

<span id="P6993_2194111"></span> <sup>303</sup> Lit., "passages of
ways."

<span id="P6994_2194177"></span> <sup>304</sup> Lit., "substitute."

<span id="P6995_2194568"></span> <sup>305</sup> So the later edd.,
reading *botulos*; the ms. and early edd. give *boletos*-"mushrooms."

<span id="P6996_2194713"></span> <sup>306</sup> For *his*, Heinsius
proposes *hiris*-"with the intestines."

<span id="P6997_2194799"></span> <sup>307</sup> Lit., "in a frozen
condition." As to the meaning of this there is difference of opinion:
some supposing that it means, as above, preserved by means of ice, or at
least frozen; while others interpret figuratively, "as hard as ice."
\[Our Scottish translators have used their local word, "iced
*haggises*:" I have put *puddings* instead, which gives us, at least, an
idea of something edible. To an American, what is iced conveys the idea
of a drink. The *budinarius*, heretofore noted, probably made these iced
saucisses.\]

<span id="P6998_2195374"></span> <sup>308</sup> Lit., "things"-*res*.

<span id="P6999_2195631"></span> <sup>309</sup> *Scabilla* were a kind
of rattles or castanets moved by the feet.
