<span id="P7001_2196058"></span> <sup>310</sup> *Sambuca*, not
corresponding to the modern triangle, but a stringed instrument of that
shape. Its notes were shrill and disagreeable, and those who played on
it of indifferent character.

<span id="P7002_2196361"></span> <sup>311</sup> So the ms. and first
four edd., reading *virilitatem sui populo publicarent*. Meursius
emended *utilitatem*-"made common the use," etc.; and Orelli, from the
margin of Ursinus, *vilitatem*-"their vileness."

<span id="P7003_2196621"></span> <sup>312</sup> The ms. reads *in
fornicibus obvi-t-ae*, which, dropping *t*, is the reading translated,
and was received by Elmenhorst, LB., and Hildebrand, from the margin of
Ursinus. The other edd. insert *nc* before *t*-"bound."

<span id="P7004_2196911"></span> <sup>313</sup> The translation does not
attempt to bring out the force of the words *ad oris stuprum paratae*,
which are read by Orelli after Ursinus and Gelenius. The text is so
corrupt, and the subject so obscene, that a bare reference to the
practice nay be sufficient.

<span id="P7006_2197413"></span> <sup>314</sup> The ms. reads, *habitare
atque habitare juss-e-r-unt*. All edd. omit the first two words, the
first ed. without further change; but the active verb is clearly out of
place, and therefore all other edd. read *jussae sunt*, as above.
Oehler, however, from *habitare* omitted by the others, would emend
*aditare*, "to approach,"-a conjecture with very little to recommend it.

<span id="P7007_2198300"></span> <sup>315</sup> These are all
substantives in the original.

<span id="P7009_2198529"></span> <sup>316</sup> So the ms., reading *non
missione*-"not by the sending;" but, unaccountably enough, all edd.
except Hildebrand and Oehler read, *jussione*-"not by the command."

<span id="P7010_2198712"></span> <sup>317</sup> So the ms..

<span id="P7011_2198815"></span> <sup>318</sup> Lit., "royal sublimity."

<span id="P7012_2199027"></span> <sup>319</sup> Lit., "causes."

<span id="P7013_2199327"></span> <sup>320</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read *abscondere*-"to hide," for which the other edd. read, as
above, *abscedere*, from the margin of Ursinus.

<span id="P7015_2199875"></span> <sup>321</sup> Lit., "go."

<span id="P7016_2199961"></span> <sup>322</sup> By Hildebrand and
Oehler, *procreator* is with reason regarded as a gloss.

<span id="P7017_2200292"></span> <sup>323</sup> The ms., both Roman
edd., and Hildebrand read *jussisset*; but this would throw the sentence
into confusion, and the other edd. therefore drop *t.*

<span id="P7018_2200488"></span> <sup>324</sup> LB., Hildebrand, and
Oehler read *quorum indu-c-tae c?rceribus*-"led into the prisons of
which," all other edd. omitting *c* as above. According to Oehler, the
ms. has the former reading.

<span id="P7019_2201020"></span> <sup>325</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read *in-f-ernarum paterentut aliae laniatus muscularum*, which has
no meaning, and is little improved by Galenius changing *ut* into *ur*,
as no one knows what "infernal flies" are. LB. and Orelli, adopting a
reading in the margin of Ursinus, change *intern.* into *ferarum*, and
join *musc.* with the words which follow as above. Another reading, also
suggested by Ursinus, seems preferable, however,
*internorum...musculorum*-"suffer rendings (i.e., spasms) of the inner
muscles."

<span id="P7020_2201610"></span> <sup>326</sup> Lit., "bound."

<span id="P7021_2201769"></span> <sup>327</sup> Lit., "dilaceration of."

<span id="P7023_2202298"></span> <sup>328</sup> Lit., "again and more
frequently."

<span id="P7024_2202428"></span> <sup>329</sup> Lit., "the salvation
of."

<span id="P7025_2202512"></span> <sup>330</sup> Lit., "height of."

<span id="P7026_2202654"></span> <sup>331</sup> Lit., "things perfect,
and preserving the measure of their completeness;" i.e., continuing so.

<span id="P7027_2202820"></span> <sup>332</sup> So the ms., LB.,
Oberthür and Oehler, reading *claudum et quod minus esset a recto*. All
other edd. read *eminus*-"at a distance from the right."

<span id="P7028_2203173"></span> <sup>333</sup> Lit., "less than."

<span id="P7029_2203571"></span> <sup>334</sup> Lit., "material."

<span id="P7030_2203723"></span> <sup>335</sup> Lit., "some power latent
and cruelty."

<span id="P7032_2204037"></span> <sup>336</sup> So the ms. and all edd.;
but Orelli would change *item* into *iterum*, not seeing that the
reference is to the indicated preference of his opponents for the simple
truth.

<span id="P7033_2204264"></span> <sup>337</sup> *Nescire* Hildebrand,
with good reason, considers a gloss.

<span id="P7034_2204650"></span> <sup>338</sup> *Nihil* for the ms.
*mihi* which makes nonsense of the sentence.

<span id="P7035_2204822"></span> <sup>339</sup> This somewhat
wide-spread opinion found an amusing counterpart in the doctrines of
Rorarius (mentioned by Bayle, *Dict. Phil.*), who affirmed that the
lower animals are gifted with reason and speech, as we are.

<span id="P7036_2205263"></span> <sup>340</sup> Lit., "superior."

<span id="P7037_2205359"></span> <sup>341</sup> Lit., "tending to no
reasons."

<span id="P7039_2205905"></span> <sup>342</sup> *Omni vero verissimum
est certoque certissimum*-the superlative for the comparative.

<span id="P7040_2206217"></span> <sup>343</sup> Lit., "finished with the
perfection of."

<span id="P7041_2206419"></span> <sup>344</sup> Lit., "by
perversity"-*s-c-aevitate*, the reading of the ms., LB., Orelli, Hild.,
and Oehler, all others omitting *c*-"by the rage;" except Stewechius,
who reads *servitute*-"slavery."

<span id="P7042_2206990"></span> <sup>345</sup> Or, perhaps, "the
goodness of the Supreme planted"-*generositas eos adsereret
principalis.*

<span id="P7044_2207695"></span> <sup>346</sup> Lit., "opposition;"i.e.,
"the setting of one party against the other."

<span id="P7045_2207822"></span> <sup>347</sup> Lit., "weighed with
balancing of equality."

<span id="P7046_2208002"></span> <sup>348</sup> Lit., "bounded by the
comprehensions of names;" i.e., possibly, "the good are certainly few
enough to be numbered, perhaps even to be named."

<span id="P7047_2208533"></span> <sup>349</sup> So LB., reading *ex
cruciatibus* for the ms. *scruc.*

<span id="P7048_2208617"></span> <sup>350</sup> Lit., "of."

<span id="P7049_2208856"></span> <sup>351</sup> Lit., "admiration is
sought for by the putting together"-*congregatione.*

<span id="P7051_2209480"></span> <sup>352</sup> Lit., "a comparison of
the worst may effect that we," etc.

<span id="P7052_2209635"></span> <sup>353</sup> So all edd. except
Hildebrand, who gives as the reading of the ms., *gui-d*-"what! do they
assert."

<span id="P7053_2209856"></span> <sup>354</sup> Lit., "by the force of,"
*vi*,-an emendation of Heraldus for the ms. *in*.

<span id="P7054_2210096"></span> <sup>355</sup> So most edd., reading
*pertinaci* for the ms. *-ium*-"by the opposition of persistent
virtues," which is retained in both Roman edd., Gelenius, Canterus,
Hildebrand, and Oehler.

<span id="P7055_2210472"></span> <sup>356</sup> So Stewechius and later
edd., reading *ut...auferant*, except Hildebrand, who gives as the ms.
reading, *et...-unt*-"shun...and remove," etc. The first four edd. read
*ne...afferant*-"that they may not bring upon themselves," etc.

<span id="P7056_2211000"></span> <sup>357</sup> So the ms. and first
four edd., Orelli (who, however, seems to have meant to give the other
reading), and Oehler, reading *corri-p-i*, for which the others read
*-igi*-"corrected," except Hildebrand, who without due reason gives
*-rumpi*-"corrupted."

<span id="P7057_2211605"></span> <sup>358</sup> In the ms. *imperfectum*
is marked as a gloss, but is retained in all edd., while *improbabilem*
is omitted, except in LB., when *im* is omitted, and *probabilem* joined
to the next clause-"however he may strive to be acceptable," in order to
provide an object for "strive;" and with a similar purpose Orelli
thrusts in *contrarium*, although it is quite clear that the verb refers
to the preceding clause, "struggles to amend."

<span id="P7059_2212568"></span> <sup>359</sup> The ms. reads *se esse*,
without meaning, from which LB., followed by Hildebrand, and Oehler
derived *se ex se*-"himself of himself." The rest simply omit *esse* as
above.

<span id="P7060_2213205"></span> <sup>360</sup> Lit., "hold."

<span id="P7061_2213728"></span> <sup>361</sup> Lit., "hold."

<span id="P7062_2213773"></span> <sup>362</sup> Lit., "set in the."

<span id="P7064_2214136"></span> <sup>363</sup> Lit., "utter the same
(conjectures)," *easdem*, the reading of LB. and Hildebrand, who says
that it is so in the ms.; while Crusius asserts that the ms. has *idem*,
which, with Orelli's punctuation, gives-"we have the same power; since
it is common (i.e., a general right) to bring forth what you ask," i.e.,
to put similar questions.

<span id="P7065_2214522"></span> <sup>364</sup> i.e., may be retorted
upon you.

<span id="P7066_2214691"></span> <sup>365</sup> Here, as elsewhere,
instead of *muli*, the ms. reads *milvi*-"kites."

<span id="P7067_2214922"></span> <sup>366</sup> Cf. Plato, *Timaeus*,
st. p. 41, already referred to.

<span id="P7068_2215060"></span> <sup>367</sup> Or, perhaps,
"cray-fish," *locusta*.

<span id="P7069_2215207"></span> <sup>368</sup> The ms. reads
*quidem*-"indeed," retained by the first four edd., but changed into
*quia*-"because," by Elmenhorst, LB., and Orelli, while Oehler suggests
very happily *si quidem*-"if indeed," i.e., because.

<span id="P7070_2215457"></span> <sup>369</sup> Lit., "from."

<span id="P7071_2215560"></span> <sup>370</sup> *Rationes.*

<span id="P7072_2215735"></span> <sup>371</sup> Cf. chs. 9 and 10 \[p
416, *supra*\].

<span id="P7073_2215948"></span> <sup>372</sup> Orelli, retaining this
as a distinct sentence, would yet enclose it in brackets, for what
purpose does not appear; more especially as the next sentence follows
directly from this in logical sequence.

<span id="P7074_2216380"></span> <sup>373</sup> Lit., "the constitutions
of things."

<span id="P7075_2216795"></span> <sup>374</sup> Lit., "did not choose
the souls of the human race to be mixtures of the same purity,"
*noluit*, received from the margin of Ursinus by all except the first
four edd., which retain the ms. *voluit*-"did choose," which is absurd.
Arnobius here refers again to the passage in the *Timaeus*, p. 41 sq.,
but to a different part, with a different purpose. He now refers to the
conclusion of the speech of the Supreme God, the first part of which is
noticed in ch. 36 (cf. p. 447, n. 20). There the Creator assures the
gods He has made of immortality through His grace; now His further
invitation that they in turn should form men is alluded to. That they
might accomplish this task, the dregs still left in the cup, in which
had been mixed the elements of the world's soul, are diluted and given
to form the souls of men, to which they attach mortal bodies.

<span id="P7077_2218049"></span> <sup>375</sup> Lit., "things not
principal." Orelli here quotes from Tertullian, *de Anim.*, xxiii., a
brief summary of Gnostic doctrines on these points, which he considers
Arnobius to have followed throughout this discussion.

<span id="P7078_2218396"></span> <sup>376</sup> *Si* was first inserted
in LB., not being found in the ms., though demanded by the context.

<span id="P7079_2218873"></span> <sup>377</sup> Lit., "have begun to
leave."

<span id="P7081_2219046"></span> <sup>378</sup> The ms. and first three
edd., read *vobis*-"you," corrected *nobis*, as above, by Ursinus.

<span id="P7082_2219246"></span> <sup>379</sup> So the ms.; but most
edd., following the Brussels transcript, read *dominum*-"Lord."

<span id="P7083_2219644"></span> <sup>380</sup> *Ut* is omitted in the
ms., first four edd., and Hild.

<span id="P7084_2220299"></span> <sup>381</sup> So LB., reading
*p-uncta* for the ms. *c-uncta.*

<span id="P7085_2220642"></span> <sup>382</sup> So the ms., Hild., and
Oehler, reading *imman-ior*; LB., from the margin of Ursinus,
*major*-"greater;" the rest, *inanior*-"more foolish."

<span id="P7086_2220927"></span> <sup>383</sup> The difficulty felt by
Arnobius as to the origin of evil perplexed others also; and, as
Elmenhorst has observed, some of the Fathers attempted to get rid of it
by a distinction between the evil of guilt and of punishment,-God being
author of the latter, the devil of the former (Tertullian, *adv.
Marcionem*, ii. 14). It would have been simpler and truer to have
distinguished deeds, which can be done only if God will, from
wickedness, which is in the sinful purpose of man s heart.

<span id="P7088_2221478"></span> <sup>384</sup> i.e., ills.

<span id="P7089_2221715"></span> <sup>385</sup> Lit., "with all the
ages, in steady continuance."

<span id="P7090_2222070"></span> <sup>386</sup> The ms., followed by
Oehler alone, reads *ducetis*-"and you will think;" while all the other
edd. read, as above, *ducentes.*

<span id="P7091_2222352"></span> <sup>387</sup> Here, too, there has
been much unnecessary labour. These words-*per voluntatem*-as they
immediately follow *sine deo dicere nihil fieri*-"to say that without
God nothing is made"-were connected with the preceding clause. To get
rid of the nonsense thus created, LB. emended *dei...voluntate*-"without
God's will;" while Heraldus regards them as an explanation of *sine
deo*, and therefore interprets the sentence much as LB. Orelli gets rid
of the difficulty by calling them a gloss, and bracketing them. They
are, however, perfectly in place, as will be seen above.

<span id="P7092_2222954"></span> <sup>388</sup> Pl.

<span id="P7093_2223371"></span> <sup>389</sup> It would not be easy to
understand why Orelli omitted these words, if we did not know that they
had been accidentally omitted by Oberthür also.

<span id="P7094_2224367"></span> <sup>390</sup> Lit., "that apart from
these it is pernicious."

<span id="P7096_2224633"></span> <sup>391</sup> It must be observed that
this sentence is very closely connected with the last words of the
preceding chapter, or the meaning may be obscured. The connection may be
shown thus: This one thing- that God is author of no evil-we are assured
of; but as for all other questions, we neither know, nor care to know,
about them.

<span id="P7097_2225143"></span> <sup>392</sup> This seems the most
natural arrangement; but the edd. punctuate thus: "have been connected
and associated with us for that which we desire." The last part of the
sentence is decidedly obscure; but the meaning may perhaps be, that the
circumstances of man's life which absorb so much attention and cause
such strife, have no bearing, after all, upon his salvation.

<span id="P7098_2225591"></span> <sup>393</sup> So the ms., reading
*labefactare dissolvere*; the latter word, however, being marked as
spurious.

<span id="P7099_2225788"></span> <sup>394</sup> Lit., "pure."
