<span id="P7100_2226271"></span> <sup>395</sup> Lit., "hidden and
enwrapt in darkness of nature," *abdita et caligine involuta
naturae*,-the reading of all edd. except Hild. and Oehler, who follow
the ms. *abditae cal.*-"enwrapt in darkness of hidden nature."

<span id="P7101_2226564"></span> <sup>396</sup> This has been supposed
to refer to Heraclitus, as quoted by Clem. Alex., *Stromata*, v. p. 469
B., where his words are, "Neither God nor man made the world; but there
was always, and is, and will be, an undying flame laying hold of its
limits, and destroying them;" on which cf. p. 437. n. 8, *supra*. Here,
of course, fire does not mean that perceived by the senses, but a
subtle, all-penetrating energy.

<span id="P7102_2227047"></span> <sup>397</sup> Cf. ch. 52, p. 453.

<span id="P7103_2227186"></span> <sup>398</sup> Lit., "by ordinary
necessity." The Stoics (Diog. Laert., vii. 134) said that the world was
made by God working on uncreated matter, and that it was perishable (ยง
141), because made through that of which perception could take
cognizance. Cf. ch. 31, n. 9, p. 446.

<span id="P7104_2227737"></span> <sup>399</sup> Orelli thinks that there
is here a confusion of the parts of the world with its elements, because
he can nowhere find that any philosopher has fixed the number of the
elements either above or below four. The Stoics, however (Diog. Laert.,
vii. 134), said "that the elements (a0rxa/j of the world are two-the
active and passive;" while, of course, the cosmic theories of the early
philosophers affirm that the world sprang from one, and it seems clear
enough that Arnobius here uses the word "element" in this sense.

<span id="P7105_2228378"></span> <sup>400</sup> Lit., "its material."

<span id="P7106_2228481"></span> <sup>401</sup> A conjecture of Meursius
adopted by Oehler, merely dropping *u* from *aut*-"or," which is read in
the ms. and edd.

<span id="P7107_2228791"></span> <sup>402</sup> Lit., "refute falsities
placed."

<span id="P7108_2229183"></span> <sup>403</sup> Cf. Cicero, *de Nat.
Deor.*, i. 1, 12, 19, 23, etc.

<span id="P7110_2229954"></span> <sup>404</sup> Lit., "something is
given to them to life." So the Stoics taught, although Chrysippus (cf.
n. 9, ch. 31, p. 446) held that only the souls of the wise remained at
all after death.

<span id="P7111_2230525"></span> <sup>405</sup> The ms., first four
edd., and Oehler read *et rerum contrarietatibus dissonare*-"and that
they disagree from the oppositions of things." Hild. reads *dissonora*,
a word not met with elsewhere, while the other edd. merely drop the last
two letters, *-re*, as above; a reading suggested in the margin of
Ursinus.

<span id="P7112_2231052"></span> <sup>406</sup> Lit., "a most vain
thing," etc.

<span id="P7113_2231412"></span> <sup>407</sup> So the ms., LB.,
Elmenh., Hild., and Oehler, reading *conjectamus*, the other edd.
reading *commetamur* or *-imur*-"measure," except Gelenius and Canterus,
who read *commentamur*-"muse upon."

<span id="P7115_2232124"></span> <sup>408</sup> Lit., "audacity of."

<span id="P7116_2232229"></span> <sup>409</sup> Lit., "world which holds
us."

<span id="P7117_2232716"></span> <sup>410</sup> The first five edd.
insert the mark of interrogation after "hollow:" "Whether does a solid
axis," etc.

<span id="P7118_2233054"></span> <sup>411</sup> So the edd. except.
Hild., who retains the ms. reading *in scientissime*-"most unskilfully"
(the others omitting *in-*), and Oehler, who changes *e* into *i*-"and
being most witless show," etc.

<span id="P7119_2233453"></span> <sup>412</sup> Lit., "touch."

<span id="P7120_2233729"></span> <sup>413</sup> So the later edd.,
reading from the margin of Ursinus *figi ? cur alia*, for the ms.
*figuralia*, except LB., which reads *figurari*-"be formed."

<span id="P7122_2234101"></span> <sup>414</sup> So the ms.; but all edd.
except Hild. and Oehler omit *nobis.*

<span id="P7123_2234584"></span> <sup>415</sup> So the ms., reading ,
followed by LB.

<span id="P7124_2234948"></span> <sup>416</sup> *Salsa*, corrected from
the ms. *sola.*

<span id="P7125_2235609"></span> <sup>417</sup> *Alites et volucres*;
i.e., according to Orelli, the birds from whose flight auguries were
drawn, as opposed to the others.

<span id="P7126_2236650"></span> <sup>418</sup> So Heraldus, whose
punctuation also is here followed, omitting *id est sapor*-"that is,
taste," which Meursius and LB., followed by Orelli, amend, *ut est*-"as
taste is" *in each thing*.

<span id="P7127_2237052"></span> <sup>419</sup> *Vel* is here inserted
in all edd., most of which read, as above, *oloris*, which is found in
the ms., in later writing, for the original, *coloris*-"colour,"
retained by Ursinus, LB., and Oehler.

<span id="P7129_2238249"></span> <sup>420</sup> Lit., "that the nature
of man is."

<span id="P7130_2238484"></span> <sup>421</sup> So the ms., according to
Crusius, reading *nec pro suis*; while, according to Hild., the reading
is *prorsus*-"and are utterly without hesitation," adopted in the edd.
with the substitution of *et* for *nec*-"and that they altogether
hesitate," which, besides departing from the ms. runs counter to the
sense.

<span id="P7131_2239204"></span> <sup>422</sup> Lit., "transfer to Him
the undecided conversions of the breast."

<span id="P7132_2239356"></span> <sup>423</sup> Lit., "He can be formed
by no imagination."

<span id="P7133_2239546"></span> <sup>424</sup> Lit., "which the
obscurity of sacred divinity contains;" which Orelli interprets, "the
most exalted being holds concealed from mortals."

<span id="P7134_2239930"></span> <sup>425</sup> Lit., "and being fixed
on."

<span id="P7136_2240084"></span> <sup>426</sup> i.e., Christ.

<span id="P7137_2240287"></span> <sup>427</sup> As Heraclitus is
reported to have said.

<span id="P7138_2240629"></span> <sup>428</sup> The ms., first five
edd., and Oehler read *supernatum*, for which the other edd. read, as
above, *semper natum*, from the margin of Ursinus. The soul is referred
to.

<span id="P7139_2241120"></span> <sup>429</sup> So the later edd.,
following Elmenhorst, who emended *dico* for the ms. *dici*, omitted by
the first four edd.

<span id="P7141_2241611"></span> <sup>430</sup> So most edd., reading
*sciolis*, from the emendation of Gelenius; but the ms., first five
edd,, Hild., and Oehler read *scholis*-"by some schools, and (these)
arrogating very much to themselves."

<span id="P7142_2242074"></span> <sup>431</sup> Cf. ch. 13, p. 439;
Plato, *Rep.*, ii. st. p. 364, where Glaucon speaks of certain
fortune-telling vagrant seers, who persuade the rich that they have
power with the gods, by means of charms and sacrifices, to cleanse from
guilt; and also Origen, *contra Cels.*, i. 69, where the Magi are spoken
of as being on familiar terms with evil powers, and thus able to
accomplish whatever is within these spirits' power.

<span id="P7143_2242690"></span> <sup>432</sup> Mentioned by Servius (on
*Aen.*, viii. 399) as composed by Tages, cap. 69 \[p. 460, *supra*\],
and seemingly containing directions as to expiatory sacrifices.

<span id="P7144_2242903"></span> <sup>433</sup> Pl.

<span id="P7145_2243203"></span> <sup>434</sup> Lit., "a spirit of
perpetuity."

<span id="P7146_2243531"></span> <sup>435</sup> i.e., than the Supreme
God.

<span id="P7147_2243616"></span> <sup>436</sup> Lit., "are."

<span id="P7148_2243807"></span> <sup>437</sup> Lit., "all human
things."

<span id="P7149_2244008"></span> <sup>438</sup> i.e., reason.

<span id="P7150_2244095"></span> <sup>439</sup> The ms. reads *fuisse me
risui*, which has no meaning; corrected, *fuisse irrisui* in most edd.,
and *derisui* by Meursius, Hild., and Oehler,-the sense being in either
case as above.

<span id="P7151_2244316"></span> <sup>440</sup> Lit., "when it begins to
approach to the feeling," *cum ad sensum*; so read by Gelenius for the
unintelligible ms. *cum absens cum*.

<span id="P7153_2244737"></span> <sup>441</sup> So the edd., reading
*quid sit cum eis animis actum* for the ms. *cum ejus nimis.*

<span id="P7154_2244850"></span> <sup>442</sup> Lit., "of ancient and
very old men."

<span id="P7155_2245216"></span> <sup>443</sup> So the ms., LB., Hild.,
and Oehler, reading *vinctionis*; the other edd. *junctionis*- "union."

<span id="P7156_2245703"></span> <sup>444</sup> Lit., "unknown
questions."

<span id="P7157_2245812"></span> <sup>445</sup> Pl.

<span id="P7158_2245844"></span> <sup>446</sup> Lit., "has run over."

<span id="P7160_2246209"></span> <sup>447</sup> So the ms. and Oehler,
reading *ut*, which is omitted in all other edd.; in this case, the
words in italics are unnecessary.

<span id="P7161_2246352"></span> <sup>448</sup> So Orelli, reading *cur*
(*quur* in most edd.) for the ms. *quos*. Instead of *non*-"not," which
follows, the ms., according to Oehler, reads *nos*, and he therefore
changes *quos* into *quaeso*- "I ask, does He free all of us
altogether?"

<span id="P7162_2246945"></span> <sup>449</sup> There is clearly no
reference here to a particular passage of Scripture, but to the general
tone of Christ's teaching: "Him that cometh unto me, I will in nowise
cast out." Orelli, however with his usual infelicity, wishes to see a
direct reference, either to Christ's words to the woman of Samaria (John
iv. 13-15), or, which is rather extraordinary, to John vi. 35-37: "I am
the bread of life," etc. Cf. n. 9, p. 459.

<span id="P7163_2247423"></span> <sup>450</sup> Lit., "the right of
drinking."

<span id="P7164_2247509"></span> <sup>451</sup> Lit., "the kindness of."

<span id="P7165_2247702"></span> <sup>452</sup> Lit., "what waits He
for, inviting," *quid invitans expectat*; the reading of the ms., both
Roman edd. and Oehler. Gelenius, followed by Canterus and Elmenhorst,
changed the last word into *peccat*-"in what does He sin," adopted by
the other edd., with the addition of *in te*-"against you."

<span id="P7166_2248093"></span> <sup>453</sup> Lit., "exposes under
decision of your own right."

<span id="P7167_2248217"></span> <sup>454</sup> Cf. Plato, *Rep.*, ii.
st. p. 379: "of a few things God would be the cause, but of many He
would not;" and x. st. p. 617 fin.

<span id="P7168_2248921"></span> <sup>455</sup> So LB., Orelli, Oehler,
adopting the emendation of Ursinus, *tu te muneris commoditate
privaveris*, for the unintelligible reading of the ms., *tuti m. c.
probaveris.*

<span id="P7169_2249276"></span> <sup>456</sup> i.e., immortal, *deos*,
so corrected by Gelenius for the ms. *deus*-"if either God made us."

<span id="P7171_2249680"></span> <sup>457</sup> So most edd., reading
*inanis* for the ms. *animi*; retained, though not very intelligible, in
LB., while Hild. reads *anilis*-"foolish."

<span id="P7172_2250193"></span> <sup>458</sup> So the ms. now reads
*verti*; but this word, according to Pithoeus, is in a later
handwriting, and some letters have been erased.

<span id="P7173_2250673"></span> <sup>459</sup> So the edd., reading
*tibi desit? opem desideras tibi*, except Hild. and Oehler, who retain
the ms. reading, *t. d. o. desideranti*-"as though He failed you
desiring *Him* to bring help."

<span id="P7174_2250932"></span> <sup>460</sup> So Ursinus, reading *in
ania cognomines* for the ms. *in alia*, which Orelli would interpret,
"call the reverse of the truth."

<span id="P7175_2251365"></span> <sup>461</sup> Lit., "For the parts of
bringing...has enjoined and given over," *partes...injunctum habet et
traditum*, where it will be important to notice that Arnobius, writing
rapidly, had carried with him only the general idea, and forgotten the
mode in which this was expressed.

<span id="P7176_2251891"></span> <sup>462</sup> *Pontificium.*

<span id="P7177_2252179"></span> <sup>463</sup> Here, too, according to
Pithoeus, there are signs of erasure.

<span id="P7178_2252383"></span> <sup>464</sup> i.e., admit.

<span id="P7179_2252659"></span> <sup>465</sup> This passage at once
suggests John x. 9 and xiv. 6, and it is therefore the more necessary to
notice the way in which Arnobius speaks ("so to say"), which is
certainly not the tone of one quoting a passage with which he is well
acquainted. \[Elucidation I.\]

<span id="P7181_2253186"></span> <sup>466</sup> Lit., "bent."

<span id="P7182_2253593"></span> <sup>467</sup> Cf. i. 13 and 58.

<span id="P7183_2253961"></span> <sup>468</sup> Lit., "crops being
invented."

<span id="P7184_2254666"></span> <sup>469</sup> So the later edd.,
reading *constiterit* from the margin of Ursinus; but in the ms. and
first four edd. the reading is *constituerit*-"has established," for
which there is no subject.

<span id="P7186_2255033"></span> <sup>470</sup> So the later edd.,
reading *aversionem ex* (LB., and preceding edd. *a*) *religione* for
the ms. *et religionem*-"against us the hatred and religion of past
ages."

<span id="P7187_2255660"></span> <sup>471</sup> Lit,, "with the
condemnation of."

<span id="P7188_2255778"></span> <sup>472</sup> This shows that the
division of the people into classes was obsolete in the time of
Arnobius.

<span id="P7189_2256015"></span> <sup>473</sup> Turnebus has explained
this as merely another way of saying the *comitia centuriata, curiata*
and *tributa*.

<span id="P7190_2256261"></span> <sup>474</sup> So the edd. reading *cum
paratis bella* (Oehler reads *reparantes*) for the ms. *reparatis.*

<span id="P7191_2256444"></span> <sup>475</sup> i.e., *per
clarigationem*, the solemn declaration of war, if restitution was not
made within thirty-three days.

<span id="P7192_2256740"></span> <sup>476</sup> This seems the most
natural way to deal with the clause *et ex acuminibus auspicatis*,
looking on the last word as an adjective, not a verb, as most edd. seem
to hold it. There is great diversity of opinion as to what this omen
was.

<span id="P7193_2257244"></span> <sup>477</sup> The ms. reads *in
penetralibus et coliginis*. LB., followed by Orelli, merely omits *et*,
as above while the first five edd. read *in pen. Vestae ignis*- "do you
maintain the hearths of Vesta's fire." Many other readings and many
explanations of the passage are also proposed.

<span id="P7195_2258484"></span> <sup>478</sup> i.e. Servius Tullius.
The first four edd. read *Tullo*, i.e., Tullus Hostilius.

<span id="P7196_2258890"></span> <sup>479</sup> Cf. v. c. 1.

<span id="P7198_2259752"></span> <sup>480</sup> The ms. reads *edi in
filosophia*; the first four edd., *Philos.*; Elmenh. and Orelli, *Etenim
phil*.-"For were phil.;" LB., *Ede an phil.*-"say whether phil.," which
is, however faulty in construction, as the indicative follows.
Rigaltius, followed by Oehler, emended as above, *Medicina phil.*

<span id="P7199_2260315"></span> <sup>481</sup> Lit., "reached the
coasts of."
