<span id="P7300_2294616"></span> <sup>36</sup> Lit., "it is fitting to
believe."

<span id="P7302_2295640"></span> <sup>37</sup> The ms., followed by
Hild., reads *habet et animum*-"has it a mind to, and does it," etc.;
for which Gelenius, followed by later edd., reads, as above, *avet
animus.*

<span id="P7303_2295961"></span> <sup>38</sup> *Cererem ab Iaccho*,
either as above, or "loved by Iacchus." Cf. Lucret. iv. 1160: *At tumida
et mammosa Ceres est ipsa ab Iaccho.*

<span id="P7304_2296218"></span> <sup>39</sup> *Sensu obscaeno.*

<span id="P7305_2296622"></span> <sup>40</sup> The first five edd. read
*hortari*-"exhorted," for which LB, followed by later edd., received
*tortari*; as above,-a conjecture of Canterus.

<span id="P7307_2297198"></span> <sup>41</sup> So Orelli, reading *nec
in contumelia quam opinamini stare* for the ms. *et*, which is retained
by all other edd.; Oehler, however, inserts *alia* before *quam*-"and
that it is found in an insult other than you think."

<span id="P7308_2298561"></span> <sup>42</sup> So later edd., omitting
*quam*, which is read in the ms., both Roman edd., Hild., and Oehler,
"to think much more...than you believe."

<span id="P7310_2299095"></span> <sup>43</sup> It is evident that
Arnobius here confuses the sceptical Sadducees with their opponents the
Pharisees, and the Talmudists.

<span id="P7311_2299271"></span> <sup>44</sup> The *ms.* reads *tribuant
et nos* unintelligibly, for which LB. and Hild. read *et os*-"as though
they attribute form and face;" the other edd, as above, *tribuamus et
nos.*

<span id="P7312_2300155"></span> <sup>45</sup> Lit., "the joinings of
the members."

<span id="P7314_2300640"></span> <sup>46</sup> Lit., "with smooth
roundness," \[Cf. Xenoph., *Mem.*, i. cap. 4.\]

<span id="P7315_2301074"></span> <sup>47</sup> Lit., "the raised gutter
of the nose, easily passed by," etc.

<span id="P7316_2301802"></span> <sup>48</sup> The veins were supposed
to be for the most part filled with blood, mixed with a little air;
while in the arteries air was supposed to be in excess. Cf. Cicero, *de
Nat. Deor.* ii. 55: "Through the veins blood is poured forth to the
whole body, and air through the arteries."

<span id="P7318_2302713"></span> <sup>49</sup> Lit., "in the
apprehension of mutual knowledge."

<span id="P7321_2305345"></span> <sup>50</sup> The ms. and first four
edd. read *dotis causa*-"for the sake of a dowry:" corrected as above,
*dicis causa* in the later edd.

<span id="P7322_2306018"></span> <sup>51</sup> This argument seems to
have been suggested by the saying of Xenophanes, that the ox or lion, if
possessed of man's power, would have represented, after the fashion of
their own bodies, the gods they would worship. \["The fair *humanities*
of old religion."-Coleridge (Schiller).\]

<span id="P7323_2307479"></span> <sup>52</sup> Ennius (Cid., *de Nat.
Deor.*, i. 35): *Simia quam similis, turpissima bestia, nobis.*

<span id="P7328_2310900"></span> <sup>53</sup> So the ms., followed by
Oehler, reading *nobis*, for which all other edd. give *vobis*-"to you."

<span id="P7329_2311081"></span> <sup>54</sup> Meursius would read
*naccas*-"fullers," for *nautas*; but the latter term may, properly
enough, be applied to the gods who watch over seamen.

<span id="P7330_2311408"></span> <sup>55</sup> Or, "for the others are
not gods," i.e., cannot be gods, as they do not possess the power of
divination. Cf. Lact., i. 11: *Sin autem divinus non sit, ne deus quidem
sit.*

<span id="P7332_2312407"></span> <sup>56</sup> The ms., followed by LB.
and Hild., reads *sidereis motibus*-"in the motions of the stars;" i.e.,
can these be in the stars, owing to their motion? Oehler conjectures
*molibus*-"in the masses of the stars;" the other edd. read *montibus*,
as above.

<span id="P7333_2312698"></span> <sup>57</sup> The ms., both Roman edd.,
and Oehler read *habetur Diana*-"is Diana esteemed;" the other edd., *ut
habeatur*, as above.

<span id="P7334_2313422"></span> <sup>58</sup> i.e., Aesculapius.

<span id="P7335_2313830"></span> <sup>59</sup> i.e., Minerva.
\[Elucidation II. Conf. n. 4, p. 467, *supra*\]

<span id="P7336_2313921"></span> <sup>60</sup> "With nice skill...for
them," *curiose iis*; for which the ms. and first five edd. read
*curiosius*-" rather skilfully."

<span id="P7337_2314078"></span> <sup>61</sup> The ms. reads
unintelligibly *et imponere*, for which Meursius emended *componat*, as
above.

<span id="P7338_2314310"></span> <sup>62</sup> Mercury, grandson of
Atlas by Maia.

<span id="P7340_2315228"></span> <sup>63</sup> Lit., "by the long
duration of time."

<span id="P7341_2315487"></span> <sup>64</sup> Lit., "skilled in
notions"-*perceptionibus*; for which *praeceptionibus*, i.e., "the
precepts of the different arts," has been suggested in the margin of
Ursinus.

<span id="P7342_2315735"></span> <sup>65</sup> Lit., "and have skill
(*sollertias*) in which individuals excel."

<span id="P7344_2316649"></span> <sup>66</sup> According to Oehler,
Portunus (Portumnus or Palaemon-"the god who protects harbours") does
not occur in the ms., which, he says, reads *per maria
proestant*-"through the seas they afford;" emended as above by Ursinus,
*proestat Portunus*. Oehler himself proposes *permarini*-"the sea gods
afford."

<span id="P7345_2317240"></span> <sup>67</sup> Pales, i e., the feeding
one; Inuus, otherwise Faunas and Pan.

<span id="P7346_2317392"></span> <sup>68</sup> Otherwise, "from the
absence of rain."

<span id="P7347_2317563"></span> <sup>69</sup> So the margin of Ursinus,
reading *meretrix*; but in the first four edd., LB., and Oberthür,
*genetrix*-"mother," is retained from the ms.

<span id="P7348_2318599"></span> <sup>70</sup> So LB., reading *cura-t*,
the MS, omitting the last letter.

<span id="P7350_2319146"></span> <sup>71</sup> Lit., "salted fruits,"
the grits mixed with salt, strewed on the victim.

<span id="P7351_2319794"></span> <sup>72</sup> Supplied by Ursinus.

<span id="P7352_2320246"></span> <sup>73</sup> So the edd. reading
*quid*, except Hild. and Oehler, who retain the ms. *qui*-"who."

<span id="P7354_2320602"></span> <sup>74</sup> The *ms.* reads *Vita.*

<span id="P7355_2320753"></span> <sup>75</sup> \[i.e., these names are
derived from their offices to men. Have they no names apart from these
services?\]

<span id="P7358_2323211"></span> <sup>76</sup> i.e., those who subdue
their own spirits. "Constancy" is the eu0pa/qeia of the Stoics.

<span id="P7359_2323475"></span> <sup>77</sup> Referring to Dido.

<span id="P7360_2323615"></span> <sup>78</sup> As despairing lovers are
said to have sought relief in death, by leaping from the Leucadian rock
into the sea.

<span id="P7362_2324008"></span> <sup>79</sup> Lit., "where, I ask, is
the (assertion) that," etc.

<span id="P7363_2324247"></span> <sup>80</sup> Lit., "hold."

<span id="P7364_2324795"></span> <sup>81</sup> In the ms. these words,
*aut si*, are wanting.

<span id="P7366_2325467"></span> <sup>82</sup> Stewechius and Orelli
would omit *rebus*, and interpret "about the same gods." Instead of
*de*-"about," the ms. has *deos.*

<span id="P7367_2326091"></span> <sup>83</sup> The ms. reads *fonti*,
corrected by Meursius *Fontis*, as above.

<span id="P7368_2326481"></span> <sup>84</sup> Lit., "circuit."

<span id="P7369_2326569"></span> <sup>85</sup> Lit., "finished."

<span id="P7370_2326820"></span> <sup>86</sup> i.e., the god.

<span id="P7371_2326858"></span> <sup>87</sup> i.e., time.

<span id="P7372_2327007"></span> <sup>88</sup> Lit., "the measuring of a
certain space included in," etc.

<span id="P7373_2327369"></span> <sup>89</sup> Cf. vi. 12.

<span id="P7375_2327541"></span> <sup>90</sup> Cf. Plato, *Phaedr.*, st.
p. 246.

<span id="P7376_2328110"></span> <sup>91</sup> Lit., "the reversed order
of the Greek name being repeated," i. e., instead of h\#-ra, a0-h/r.

<span id="P7377_2328283"></span> <sup>92</sup> The ms. gives Fluvionia.

<span id="P7378_2328458"></span> <sup>93</sup> Lit., "with the frequency
(or fame) of vain," etc.

<span id="P7379_2328549"></span> <sup>94</sup> Lit., "very."

<span id="P7381_2329623"></span> <sup>95</sup> So Meursius emended the
ms. *sali*-"sea."

<span id="P7383_2329878"></span> <sup>96</sup> Lit., "the quality of
this name has been adjusted."

<span id="P7384_2330169"></span> <sup>97</sup> So Orelli, reading *mante
vertice*; the last word, according to Oehler, not being found in the ms.

<span id="P7385_2330453"></span> <sup>98</sup> i.e., Cybele. Cf. Lucr.,
ii. 991 sqq.

<span id="P7386_2330638"></span> <sup>99</sup> Lit., "seeds."

<span id="P7387_2330994"></span> <sup>100</sup> *Fasti*-"list,"
"register."

<span id="P7389_2331770"></span> <sup>101</sup> Lit., "motions."

<span id="P7391_2332353"></span> <sup>102</sup> Cf. Servius ad Virg.,
*Georg.*, i. 5: "The Stoics say that Luna, Diana, Ceres, Juno, and
Proserpina are one; following whom, Virgil invoked Liber and Ceres for
Sol and Luna"

<span id="P7392_2332670"></span> <sup>103</sup> *Triviali*-" common,"
"vulgar," seems to be here used for *triplici.*

<span id="P7393_2333296"></span> <sup>104</sup> Actaeon.

<span id="P7395_2333697"></span> <sup>105</sup> Plato, *Timaeus*, st. p.
30.

<span id="P7396_2333813"></span> <sup>106</sup> Lit., "of which things,
however, if the opinion," etc.

<span id="P7397_2333983"></span> <sup>107</sup> i.e., deifying parts of
the universe, and giving them, as deities, the same names as before.

<span id="P7398_2334246"></span> <sup>108</sup> Lit., "the difference of
their disjunction being preserved"-*multi disjunctionis differentia
conservata*, suggested in the margin of Ursinus for the ms.
*multitudinis junctionis d. c.*, retained in the first five edd.

<span id="P7399_2334937"></span> <sup>109</sup> Lit., "of their own
name."
