<span id="P7600_2393217"></span> <sup>114</sup> *Copulatis corporibus.*

<span id="P7601_2393598"></span> <sup>115</sup> i.e. not his mother's,
but the dug of the goat Amalthea.

<span id="P7602_2394018"></span> <sup>116</sup> Lit., "rattles heard."

<span id="P7603_2394300"></span> <sup>117</sup> Lit., "the eminence of
the powers."

<span id="P7604_2394505"></span> <sup>118</sup> Lit., "inundation."

<span id="P7606_2394659"></span> <sup>119</sup> Lit., "Saturnian
gravity."

<span id="P7607_2394828"></span> <sup>120</sup> Cf. ch. 14, note 8,
*supra*.

<span id="P7608_2395018"></span> <sup>121</sup> It is worth while to
compare this passage with ch. 16. Here Arnobius makes I.atona the mother
of Apollo and Diana in accordance with the common legend; but there he
represents the first Minerva as claming them as her children.

<span id="P7609_2395296"></span> <sup>122</sup> In the ms. there is here
an evident blunder on the part of the copyist, who has inserted the
preceding line ("the archer Apollo, and of the woods") after "the same."
Omitting these words, the ms. reading is literally, "the name in Greek
is to the Dioscori." Before "the name" some word is pretty generally
supposed to have been lost, some conjecturing "to whom;" others (among
them Orelli, following Salmasius) "Castores." But it is evidently not
really necessary to supplement the text.

<span id="P7610_2396794"></span> <sup>123</sup> Lit., "scatter."

<span id="P7611_2396886"></span> <sup>124</sup> Orelli reads with the
ms., LB., and Hild., *babecali*, which he interprets *belli*, i.e.,
"handsome."

<span id="P7613_2398254"></span> <sup>125</sup> ms. and first five edd.
read *inde*-"thence;" the others *in se*, as above. \[Elucidation III.\]

<span id="P7615_2398657"></span> <sup>126</sup> Orelli, without
receiving into the text, approves of the reading of Stewechius,
*promptam*, "evident," for the ms. *propriam.*

<span id="P7616_2399289"></span> <sup>127</sup> Lit., "the benefits
diminished by which it is lived."

<span id="P7617_2399452"></span> <sup>128</sup> The ms. reads *ex
Jovis*; the first five edd. *Jove*-"from Jove," which is altogether out
of place; the others, as above, *ex ovis*. Cf. i. 36.

<span id="P7618_2399851"></span> <sup>129</sup> The ms. reads *et ablui
diebus tantis...elevari*; LB., Hild. and Oehler, *statis* or
*statutis...et levari*-"and was loosed and released on fixed days:"
Elm., Oberthür, and Orelli receive the conjecture of Ursinus, *et suis
diebus tantum...rel.*, as above.

<span id="P7619_2400135"></span> <sup>130</sup> Cf. iii. \[cap. 41, p.
475, and cap. 30, p. 472\].

<span id="P7620_2400469"></span> <sup>131</sup> i.e., hiding-place.
Virg., *Aen.*, viii. 322: *Quoniam latuisset tutus in oris.*

<span id="P7621_2400947"></span> <sup>132</sup> *Pyth.*, iii. 102 sq.

<span id="P7622_2401325"></span> <sup>133</sup> ms. *Meglac.*

<span id="P7623_2401365"></span> <sup>134</sup> The ms. and most edd.
give *filias*, making the Muses daughters of Macarus; but Orelli, Hild.,
and Oehler adopt, as above, the reading of Canterus, *filiae*, in
accordance with Clem. Alex.

<span id="P7625_2401572"></span> <sup>135</sup> So the ms. reading
*numquid dictatum*, which would refer this sentence to the end of the
last chapter. Gelenius, with Canth., Oberth., and Orelli, reads *quis
ditatam*, and joins with the following sentence thus: "Who related that
Venus, a courtezan enriched by C., was deified...? who that the
palladium," etc. Cf. v. 19.

<span id="P7626_2402344"></span> <sup>136</sup> The ms. reads *quis
mensibus in Arcadia tribus et decem vinctum*-"Who that he was bound
thirteen months in Arcadia? was it not the son," etc. To which there are
these two objections-that Homer never says so; and that Clemens
Alexandrinus \[vol. ii. p, 179, this series\], from whom Arnobius here
seems to draw, speaks of Homer as saying only that Mars was so bound,
without referring to Arcadia. The ms. reading may have arisen from
carelessness on the part of Arnobius in quoting (cf. ch. 14, n. 2), or
may be a corruption of the copyists. The reading translated is an
emendation by Jortin, adopted by Orelli.

<span id="P7627_2403339"></span> <sup>137</sup> *Sardibus*,-a conjecture
of Ursinus, adopted by LB., Hild., and Oehler for the ms. *sordibus*;
for which the others read *sordidi*- "for the sake of base lust."

<span id="P7628_2403974"></span> <sup>138</sup> Lit., "the masculine
one."

<span id="P7629_2404019"></span> <sup>139</sup> As this seems rather
extravagant when said of one of the immortals, *laesam*, "hurt," has
been proposed by Meursius.

<span id="P7630_2404449"></span> <sup>140</sup> Castor and Pollux.

<span id="P7631_2404719"></span> <sup>141</sup> Lit., "contained."

<span id="P7632_2404781"></span> <sup>142</sup> The ms. reads
*Hieronymus Pl*-"is Hier., is Pl.," while Clem. Alex. mentions only
"Hieronymus the philosopher."

<span id="P7634_2405323"></span> <sup>143</sup> These names are all in
the plural in the original.

<span id="P7635_2405419"></span> <sup>144</sup> So LB. and Orelli,
reading *Alopas*, from Clem. Alex., for the ms. *Alcyonas.*

<span id="P7636_2405708"></span> <sup>145</sup> These names are all in
the plural in the original.

<span id="P7637_2406683"></span> <sup>146</sup> Lit., "you add."

<span id="P7638_2406864"></span> <sup>147</sup> In the original,
somewhat at large-*unam potuit prolem extundere, concinnare,
compingere.*

<span id="P7640_2407648"></span> <sup>148</sup> All edd. read this
without mark of interrogation.

<span id="P7641_2407962"></span> <sup>149</sup> The ms. reads
*Phaetontem*: for which, both here and in Clem., Potter proposed
*Phaonem*, because no such amour is mentioned elsewhere.

<span id="P7643_2409227"></span> <sup>150</sup> i.e., either the arts
which belong to each god (cf. the words in ii. 18: "these (arts) are not
the gifts of science, but the discoveries of necessity"), or, referring
to the words immediately preceding, obstetric arts.

<span id="P7645_2411374"></span> <sup>151</sup> Lit., "Euhemerus being
opened."

<span id="P7646_2411524"></span> <sup>152</sup> So Elm. and Orelli,
reading *Nicanore* for the ms. *Nicagora*, retained by all other edd.

<span id="P7647_2411785"></span> <sup>153</sup> Lit., "with the care of
scrupulous diligence."

<span id="P7648_2411994"></span> <sup>154</sup> Meursius would join
*virginis* to Minerva, thinking it an allusion to her title Parqe/noj.

<span id="P7649_2412217"></span> <sup>155</sup> These terms are employed
of hetaerae.

<span id="P7650_2412460"></span> <sup>156</sup> Lit., "the title itself
of their names was."

<span id="P7652_2413240"></span> <sup>157</sup> *Qui sollicite relegit*.
*Relegit* is here used by Arnobius to denote the root of *religio*, and
has therefore some such meaning as that given above. Cf. Cicero, *de
Nat. Deorum*, ii. 28.

<span id="P7654_2414731"></span> <sup>158</sup> Lit., "an error of
inadvertence."

<span id="P7655_2414829"></span> <sup>159</sup> Lit., "with the
sacrificial bowl."

<span id="P7656_2414881"></span> <sup>160</sup> So the ms., both Roman
edd., Elm., Hild., and Oehler, reading *rursus*; the others *in
cursu*-"in the course."

<span id="P7657_2415262"></span> <sup>161</sup> *Patrimus*, i.e., one
whose father is alive, is probably used loosely for *patrimus et
matrimus*, to denote one both of whose parents were alive, who was
therefore eligible for certain religious services.

<span id="P7658_2415502"></span> <sup>162</sup> So the ms. reading
*terram tenere*, for which Hild. would read *tensam*, denoting the car
on which were borne the images of the gods, the thongs or reins of which
were held by the *patrimus et matrimus*; Lipsius, *siserram*, the
sacrificial victim. The reading of the text has been explained as
meaning to touch the ground with one's hands; but the general meaning is
clear enough,-that it was unlucky if the boy made a slip, either with
hands or feet.

<span id="P7660_2416380"></span> <sup>163</sup> Oberthür and Orelli omit
*non*.

<span id="P7661_2416480"></span> <sup>164</sup> Lit., "notions."

<span id="P7662_2416529"></span> <sup>165</sup> Lit., "placed in their
ears."

<span id="P7663_2417105"></span> <sup>166</sup> Lit., "and it has *not*
been established by you,"-a very abrupt transition in the structure of
the sentence.

<span id="P7664_2417289"></span> <sup>167</sup> Lit., "which was very
near to disgrace."

<span id="P7665_2417379"></span> <sup>168</sup> So the margin of
Ursinus, followed by later edd., prefixing *d* before the ms. *-eorum.*

<span id="P7666_2417858"></span> <sup>169</sup> Lit., "has less bite,
being weakened by the testimony of silent reviewing," *recognitionis.*

<span id="P7668_2418257"></span> <sup>170</sup> Lit., "most enduring."

<span id="P7669_2419450"></span> <sup>171</sup> *Coetu*. The ms. and
most edd. read *coalitu*,-a word not occurring elsewhere; which Gesner
would explain, "put away that it may not be established among men," the
sense being the same in either case.

<span id="P7671_2420073"></span> <sup>172</sup> Lit., "complain of the
neglected insults of the other gods."

<span id="P7672_2420337"></span> <sup>173</sup> Lit., "as a lover by."
Cf. Homer, *Il.*, 14, 312.

<span id="P7673_2420483"></span> <sup>174</sup> i.e., of himself.

<span id="P7674_2421258"></span> <sup>175</sup> Lit., "except that which
was full of religion."

<span id="P7675_2421953"></span> <sup>176</sup> i.e., according to which
such offenses should be punished.

<span id="P7677_2422508"></span> <sup>177</sup> Lit., "have willed."

<span id="P7678_2422702"></span> <sup>178</sup> Lit., "full-grown race,"
*exoleti*, a word frequently used, as here, *sensu obscaeno.*

<span id="P7679_2422800"></span> <sup>179</sup> i.e., the actors, etc.

<span id="P7680_2422901"></span> <sup>180</sup> i.e., the crowd of
adulterers, as Orelli suggests.

<span id="P7681_2422986"></span> <sup>181</sup> Lit., "draw enticements
of pleasures from."

<span id="P7682_2423774"></span> <sup>182</sup> Or, "Venus, the
mother...and loving parent," etc.

<span id="P7683_2423938"></span> <sup>183</sup> Lit., "of meretricious
vileness."

<span id="P7684_2424093"></span> <sup>184</sup> i.e., Cybele, to whom
Mount Dindymus in Mysia was sacred, whose rites, however, were
celebrated at Pessinus also, a very ancient city of Galatia.

<span id="P7685_2424412"></span> <sup>185</sup> ms. *Sofocles*,
corrected in LB. *Sophocles*. Cf. Trach. 1022 sqq.

<span id="P7686_2424725"></span> <sup>186</sup> Lit., "towards (*in*)
the last *of the* wasting consumed by the softening of his bowels
flowing apart."

<span id="P7688_2425591"></span> <sup>187</sup> Lit., "debauched and
scoffers."

<span id="P7689_2426102"></span> <sup>188</sup> So Orelli, reading *et
quando*; ms. and other edd. *et si*-"and if ever."

<span id="P7690_2426703"></span> <sup>189</sup> Arnobius is generally
thought to refer here to the persecution under Diocletian mentioned by
Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl.*, viii. 2.

<span id="P7691_2427039"></span> <sup>190</sup> The service in which
these prayers were offered was presided over by the bishop, to whom the
dead body was brought: hymns were then sung of thanksgiving to God, the
giver of victory, by whose help and grace the departed brother had been
victorious. The priest next gave thanks to God, and some chapters of the
Scriptures were read; afterwards the catechumens were dismissed; the
names of those at rest were then read in a clear voice, to remind the
survivors of the success with which others had combated the temptations
of the world. The priest again prayed for the departed, at the close
beseeching God to grant him pardon, and admission among the undying.
Thereafter the body was kissed, anointed, and buried.-Dionysius, *Eccl.
Hier.*, last chapter quoted by Heraldus. Cf. *Const. Apost.*, viii. 41.
With the Church's advance in power there was an accession of pomp to
these rites. \[Elucidation IV.\]

<span id="P7692_2428002"></span> <sup>191</sup> Cf. the younger Pliny,
*Epist.*, x. 97: "They affirmed that they bound themselves by oath not
for any wicked purpose, but to pledge themselves not to commit theft,
robbery, or adultery, nor break faith, or prove false to a trust."

<span id="P7693_2428373"></span> <sup>192</sup> Lit., "whom *our*
society joins together," *quos solidet germanitas*. \[Lardner justly
argues that this passage proves our author's familiarity with rites to
which catechumens were not admitted. *Credibil.*, vol. iii. p. 458.\]

<span id="P7695_2428787"></span> <sup>193</sup> i.e., in their sight or
estimation.

<span id="P7696_2429163"></span> <sup>194</sup> Lit., "conceive these
torches."

<span id="P7697_2429336"></span> <sup>195</sup> Lit., "have roared with
tremblings of the earth."

<span id="P7698_2429494"></span> <sup>196</sup> The ms. reads
*conru-isse auras temporum*, all except the first four edd. inserting
*p* as above. Meursius would also change *temp.* into *ventorum*- "the
breezes of the winds."

<span id="P7699_2430623"></span> <sup>197</sup> So the ms., reading
*comptu*-tie, according to Hild., followed by LB. and Orelli.
