<span id="P7700_2430727"></span> <sup>198</sup> Lit., "mixture."

<span id="P7701_2430939"></span> <sup>199</sup> The words following the
asterisk (\*) are marked in LB. as spurious or corrupt, or at least as
here out of place. Orelli transposes them to ch. 13, as was noticed
there, although he regards them as an interpolation. The clause is
certainly a very strange one, and has a kind of affected abstractness,
which makes it seem out of place; but it must be remembered that
similarly confused and perplexing sentences are by no means rare in
Arnobius. If the clause is to be retained, as good sense can be made
from it here as anywhere else. The general meaning would be: The gods,
if angry, are angry with the pagans; but if they are not subject to
passion, it would be idle to speak of them as angry with the Christians,
seeing that they cannot possibly at once be incapable of feeling anger,
and yet at the same time be angry with them. \[See cap. 13, note 4, p.
480, *supra*.\]

<span id="P7708_2432139"></span> <sup>1</sup> So most edd., inserting
*er*; in ms. and Oehler, *vid-entur.*

<span id="P7710_2433006"></span> <sup>2</sup> So named either because he
was said to have made use of the bird of Mars, i.e., a woodpecker
(*picus*), in augury, or because according to the legend he was changed
into one by Circe.

<span id="P7711_2433216"></span> <sup>3</sup> i.e., the Aventine. The
story is told by Plutarch in his Life of Numa, c. 15, and by Ovid,
*Fasti*, iii. 291 sqq.

<span id="P7712_2433375"></span> <sup>4</sup> The ms. reads *sollemniter
haec*, corrected, as above, *solenne iter huc* by all edd. except Hild.

<span id="P7713_2433599"></span> <sup>5</sup> So the ms. and most edd.,
reading *pocula non parvi numeri*, for which Elmh. and Orelli have
received from the margin of Ursinus, *poc non parva mero*- "cups of
great size, with pure wine."

<span id="P7714_2433818"></span> <sup>6</sup> i.e., *mulsum.*

<span id="P7715_2434390"></span> <sup>7</sup> i.e., Faunus and Picus.

<span id="P7716_2434780"></span> <sup>8</sup> *Capite.*

<span id="P7717_2434827"></span> <sup>9</sup> *Caepitio.*

<span id="P7718_2434908"></span> <sup>10</sup> Jupiter is supposed to
say *humano*, meaning *capite*, to be understood, i.e., "with a man's
head," while the king supplies *capillo*-"with a man's hair."

<span id="P7719_2435098"></span> <sup>11</sup> *Anima* (ms. *lia*).

<span id="P7720_2435134"></span> <sup>12</sup> *Maena*. There is here a
lacuna in the text; but there can be no difficulty in filling it up as
above, with Heraldus from Plutarch, or with Gelenius from Ovid,
*piscis*-"*with the life* of a fish."

<span id="P7721_2435570"></span> <sup>13</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read *Numa*, corrected by Gelenius, as above, *non*.

<span id="P7723_2436326"></span> <sup>14</sup> The ms. and edd. read
*cred-i-musne*-"do we believe," for which Meursius suggests *-e-* as
above.

<span id="P7724_2437735"></span> <sup>15</sup> Lit., "or whether." Below
the ms. reads corruptly *ad ipsum*-"to him."

<span id="P7725_2438171"></span> <sup>16</sup> The ms. reads *scire*,
but "knows" would hardly suit the context. Instead of adopting any
conjecture, however, it is sufficient to observe, with Oehler, that
*scire* is elsewhere used as a contraction for *sciscere.*

<span id="P7726_2438703"></span> <sup>17</sup> The ms. omits *ut*.

<span id="P7727_2438837"></span> <sup>18</sup> So Cujacius, inserting
*vi*, omitted by the ms.

<span id="P7729_2439311"></span> <sup>19</sup> Lit., "so great."

<span id="P7730_2439473"></span> <sup>20</sup> Lit., "the fumigation of
*verbenae*," i.e., of boughs of the laurel, olive, or myrtle.

<span id="P7731_2440529"></span> <sup>21</sup> The ms. omits *ut*.

<span id="P7732_2440623"></span> <sup>22</sup> Lit., "the uncertain
*things* of that ambiguity."

<span id="P7734_2440832"></span> <sup>23</sup> Lit., "unless a mortal
anticipated"-*praesumeret*, the ms. reading.

<span id="P7735_2440921"></span> <sup>24</sup> So Oehler, supplying
*quem.*

<span id="P7736_2441185"></span> <sup>25</sup> Lit., "liveliness of
heart is procured."

<span id="P7737_2441612"></span> <sup>26</sup> Lit., "why."

<span id="P7739_2442749"></span> <sup>27</sup> So Ovid also (*Metam.*,
i. 321), and others, speak of Themis as the first to give oracular
responses,

<span id="P7740_2443153"></span> <sup>28</sup> So the ms. and edd.,
reading *quam incestis*, except Orelli, who adopts the conjecture of
Barthius, *nequam*-"lustful Jupiter with lewd desires."

<span id="P7741_2443493"></span> <sup>29</sup> So the ms. and edd.,
except Hildebrand and Oehler, who throughout spell *Agdestis*, following
the Greek writers, and the derivation of the word from *Agdus*.

<span id="P7742_2443852"></span> <sup>30</sup> So Ursinus suggested,
followed by later edd., *ex utroque* (ms. *utra.*) *sexu*; for which
Meursius would read *ex utroque sexus*-"and a sex of both," i.e., that
he was a hermaphrodite, which is related by other writers.

<span id="P7744_2444593"></span> <sup>31</sup> Lit., "him."

<span id="P7745_2444673"></span> <sup>32</sup> Lit., "of thirsting."

<span id="P7746_2444789"></span> <sup>33</sup> Lit., "in time of need."

<span id="P7747_2445052"></span> <sup>34</sup> So the reading of the ms.
and edd., *unum laqueum*, may be rendered; for which Canterus
conjectured *imum*-"the lowest part of the noose."

<span id="P7748_2445439"></span> <sup>35</sup> So the edd., reading *eo
quo* (ms. *quod*) *fuerat privat sexu*; for which Hild. and Oehler read
*fu-tu-erat*-"of the sex with which he had been a fornicator."

<span id="P7749_2445681"></span> <sup>36</sup> Lit., "these (i.e., the
parts and the blood) are," etc.

<span id="P7750_2445917"></span> <sup>37</sup> The ms. here reads
*Nata*, but in c. 13 the spelling is Nana, as in other writers.

<span id="P7751_2446178"></span> <sup>38</sup> Lit., "as if."

<span id="P7752_2446322"></span> <sup>39</sup> The ms. reads *t-abulis*,
corrected as above *p-* by Jos. Scaliger, followed by Hild. and Oehler.
The other edd. read *bacculis*-"berries."

<span id="P7753_2446501"></span> <sup>40</sup> So all the edd., except
Hild. and Oehler, who retain the ms. reading
*sanguinarius*-"bloodthirsty."

<span id="P7754_2446680"></span> <sup>41</sup> So Salmasius, Orelli, and
Hild., reading *repertum nescio quis sumit Phorbas, lacte*; but no
mention of any Phorbas is made elsewhere in connection with this story,
and Oehler has therefore proposed *forma ac lacte*-"some one takes *the
child* found, nourishes it with sweet pottage of millet (*forma*) and
milk," etc.

<span id="P7755_2447217"></span> <sup>42</sup> \[See vol. ii. p. 175.\]

<span id="P7756_2447924"></span> <sup>43</sup> Lit., "his silence."

<span id="P7758_2448649"></span> <sup>44</sup> Lit., "fury and madness."

<span id="P7759_2448754"></span> <sup>45</sup> The ms., first five edd.,
and Oberthür, read *exterriti adorandorum Phryges*; for which Ursinus
suggested *ad ora deorum*-"at the faces of gods," adopted by Oehler; the
other edd. reading *ad horam*-"at the hour, i e., thereupon."

<span id="P7760_2449009"></span> <sup>46</sup> It seems probable that
part of this chapter has been lost, as we have no explanation of this
epithet; and, moreover (as Oehler has well remarked) in c. 13 this
Gallus is spoken of as though it had been previously mentioned that he
too had mutilated himself, of which we have not the slightest hint.

<span id="P7761_2449585"></span> <sup>47</sup> i.e., *genitalia.*

<span id="P7762_2449691"></span> <sup>48</sup> Lit., "so great motions
of furious hazards."

<span id="P7763_2449922"></span> <sup>49</sup> So most edd., reading
*veste prius tectis atque involutis* for the ms. reading, retained by
Hild. and Oehler, *tecta atque involuta*-"his vest being first drawn
over and wrapt about them;" the former verb being found with this
meaning in no other passage, and the second very rarely.

<span id="P7764_2450311"></span> <sup>50</sup> Lit., "from."

<span id="P7765_2450344"></span> <sup>51</sup> i.e., the pine.

<span id="P7766_2450535"></span> <sup>52</sup> Nourry supposes that this
may refer to M. Valerius Messala, a fragment from whom on auspices has
been preserved by Gellius (xiii. 15); while Hild. thinks that Antias is
meant, who is mentioned in c. 1.

<span id="P7767_2450971"></span> <sup>53</sup> So Orelli punctuates and
explains; but it is doubtful whether, even if this reading be retained,
it should not be translated, "bedewed these (violets)." The ms. reads,
*suffodit et as* (probably *has*)-"digs under these," emended as above
in LB., *suffudit et has.*

<span id="P7768_2451307"></span> <sup>54</sup> Lit., "burial."

<span id="P7769_2451536"></span> <sup>55</sup> So it has been attempted
to render the ms., reading *pausatae circum arboris robur*, which has
perplexed the different edd. Heraldus proposed *pausate*-"at intervals
round the trunk of the tree;" LB. reads *-ata*-"round...tree having
rested." Reading as above, the reference might be either to the rest
from motion after being set up in the cave, or to the absence of wind
there.

<span id="P7770_2452031"></span> <sup>56</sup> Lit., "could be done
through (i.e. as far as concerns) fate."

<span id="P7771_2452406"></span> <sup>57</sup> So Oehler, reading
*sacerdotum antistitiis* for the ms. *antistibus*, changed in both Roman
edd. and Hild. to *-stitibus*-"with priests (or overseers) of priests."
Salmasius proposed *intestibus*-"with castrated priests."

<span id="P7773_2452943"></span> <sup>58</sup> i.e., in the
ever-recurring festival of Cybele.

<span id="P7774_2453038"></span> <sup>59</sup> Lit., "length."

<span id="P7775_2453924"></span> <sup>60</sup> So the edd., reading
*orari in alicujus substantiae qualitate* for the ms. *erari* restored
by Oehler, *num-erari*-"numbered in the quality of some substance," from
the reading of an old copy adopted by Livineius.

<span id="P7776_2454468"></span> <sup>61</sup> Lit., "through the
resistance of nature."

<span id="P7777_2455023"></span> <sup>62</sup> B.C. 43.

<span id="P7779_2456146"></span> <sup>63</sup> Lit., "the feeling
commonly implanted."

<span id="P7780_2456232"></span> <sup>64</sup> Lit., "was regard of
piety wanting"-*defuit*, an emendation of Salmasius (according to
Orelli) for the ms. *depuit.*

<span id="P7781_2456793"></span> <sup>65</sup> Lit., "the depth and
patience of his sleeping mother."

<span id="P7782_2457088"></span> <sup>66</sup> Lit., "from the theft of
taking by surprise"-*obreptionis*, for which the ms., first four edd.,
Oberth., Hild., and Oehler read *object.*-"of what he proposed."

<span id="P7784_2457739"></span> <sup>67</sup> So Heraldus, reading
*conventionis hujusmodi coetum* for the ms. *coeptum.*

<span id="P7785_2458851"></span> <sup>68</sup> *Sustulisse alvos
graves.*

<span id="P7786_2459405"></span> <sup>69</sup> Most edd. read as an
interrogation.

<span id="P7787_2459758"></span> <sup>70</sup> Perhaps, "that she might
not be subject to ill-will for having borne so."

<span id="P7789_2460886"></span> <sup>71</sup> i.e., to form nooses
with. The reading translated is an emendation of Jos. Scaliger, adopted
by Orelli, *peniculamenta decurtantem cantheriorum*, for the ms.
*peniculantem decurtam tam cantherios*, emended by each ed. as he has
thought fit.

<span id="P7790_2461373"></span> <sup>72</sup> Lit., "the cares of art."

<span id="P7792_2461941"></span> <sup>73</sup> Lit., "endowed with the
honour of."

<span id="P7793_2462208"></span> <sup>74</sup> The ms. here inserts
*de*-"from the body from a divine (being)."

<span id="P7794_2462525"></span> <sup>75</sup> So the edd. (except
Oehler), reading *tum cum* for the ms. *tum quae quod.*

<span id="P7795_2462773"></span> <sup>76</sup> *Balaustiis*, the flowers
of the wild pomegranate.

<span id="P7796_2463234"></span> <sup>77</sup> *Dares* supplied by
Salmasius.

<span id="P7797_2463430"></span> <sup>78</sup> \[The Abderitans were
proverbially such. "Hinc *Abdera*, non tacente me."-Cicero, *Ep. ad
Attic.*, iv. 16.\]

<span id="P7799_2463574"></span> <sup>79</sup> Lit., "he says."
