<span id="P7800_2463756"></span> <sup>80</sup> Lit., "must
rut"-*suriant*, as deer. The ms., first four edd., and Elm. read
*surgant*-"rise," corrected as above in the margin of Ursinus.

<span id="P7801_2463957"></span> <sup>81</sup> Lit.,
"acorns"-*glandibus.*

<span id="P7802_2464263"></span> <sup>82</sup> The ms. reads *des-*,
emended as above *ded-ignatus* by Stewechius, followed by Heraldus and
Orelli.

<span id="P7803_2464606"></span> <sup>83</sup> i.e., he-goats are made
to yield milk.

<span id="P7804_2464716"></span> <sup>84</sup> Lit., "praiseworthy."

<span id="P7805_2465229"></span> <sup>85</sup> Lit., "with."

<span id="P7806_2465340"></span> <sup>86</sup> So the ms., both Roman
edd., LB., Hild. and Oehler, reading *rursus*, for which the others
receive the emendation of Gelenius, *regis*-"the king's carelessness."

<span id="P7807_2465578"></span> <sup>87</sup> Lit., "the law and fate."

<span id="P7808_2465965"></span> <sup>88</sup> i.e., Attis.

<span id="P7809_2466225"></span> <sup>89</sup> The ms. reads
*satietati-s objecisset offensi*, corrected as above by Hild., (omitting
*s*), followed by Oehler. The conjectures of previous edd. are very
harsh and forced.

<span id="P7811_2467014"></span> <sup>90</sup> Lit., "flows."

<span id="P7812_2467070"></span> <sup>91</sup> Lit., "herself with
sacred, herself with divine."

<span id="P7813_2467798"></span> <sup>92</sup> \[graw/deij mu/qouj 1
Tim. iv. 7. Compare Ignatius, vol. i. p. 62, note 3. But even the old
wives' tales among Hebrews were clean in contrast with the horrible
amusements here imputed even to the girls at the loom, and *children*,
among the Gentiles.\]

<span id="P7814_2468137"></span> <sup>93</sup> Lit., "spoke with."

<span id="P7815_2468668"></span> <sup>94</sup> i.e., the part cut off
and buried separately.

<span id="P7817_2468940"></span> <sup>95</sup> So the ms., according to
Crusius, the edd. inserting *s*, *di-s-cere*-"to learn."

<span id="P7818_2469241"></span> <sup>96</sup> Lit., "on firmness of
faith."

<span id="P7819_2470032"></span> <sup>97</sup> Lit., "sent to public
testifying."

<span id="P7821_2470612"></span> <sup>98</sup> The festival of Cybele
began on the 22d of March, when a pine tree was introduced into the
mysteries, and continued until the 27th, which was marked by a general
purification (*lavatio*), as Salmasius observed from a calendar of
Constantine the Great. \[An equinoctial feast, which the Church deposed
by the Paschal observances. March 22 is the *prima sedes Paschae*.\]

<span id="P7822_2471239"></span> <sup>99</sup> Lit., "for solace of so
great a wound."

<span id="P7823_2471415"></span> <sup>100</sup> So Stewechius, followed
by Orelli and Oehler, reading *quibus Ia* for the ms. *jam*, which would
refer the action to Cybele, whereas Arnobius expressly says (c. 7) that
it was the newly wedded wife who covered the breast of Attis with wools.
*Jam* is, however, received from the ms. by the other edd., except
Hild., who asserts that the ms. reads *Iam*, and Elmenh., who reads
*Ion*.

<span id="P7824_2472138"></span> <sup>101</sup> i.e., priests of Cybele,
their names being derived from the Phrygian river Gallus, whose waters
were supposed to bring on frenzy ending in self-mutilation.

<span id="P7825_2472496"></span> <sup>102</sup> Lit., "with wailing."

<span id="P7827_2472985"></span> <sup>103</sup> Lit., "with."

<span id="P7829_2473902"></span> <sup>104</sup> Lit., "and the duty of
defence itself."

<span id="P7830_2474135"></span> <sup>105</sup> i.e., secret rites, to
which only the initiated were admitted.

<span id="P7831_2474222"></span> <sup>106</sup> Lit., "which you
deliver"-*traditis*; so Elmenh., LB., and later edd., for the
unintelligible ms. *tradidisse*, retained in both Roman edd.

<span id="P7832_2474479"></span> <sup>107</sup> Lit., "deformity affixed
to all."

<span id="P7833_2474785"></span> <sup>108</sup> ms. *fetam f.* Cf. i.
36, n. 2, p. 422, *supra*.

<span id="P7834_2475251"></span> <sup>109</sup> So Heraldus, from
Plutarch, *Rom.*, 21, where Butas is said to have written on this
subject (ai0ti/ai) in elegiacs, for the ms. Putas.

<span id="P7835_2475457"></span> <sup>110</sup> Lit., "in like manner
and with dissimulation."

<span id="P7836_2475664"></span> <sup>111</sup> i.e., heart, lungs, and
liver, probably of a sacrifice.

<span id="P7837_2475778"></span> <sup>112</sup> i.e., "divination,
augury," etc.

<span id="P7838_2476150"></span> <sup>113</sup> *Vis Lucilii*, i.e.,
*semen.* \[He retails Pliny xxxvi. 27.\]

<span id="P7840_2476664"></span> <sup>114</sup> Cf. iv. 24.

<span id="P7842_2477908"></span> <sup>115</sup> So the ms. and edd.,
reading *gens illa*, for which Memmius proposed *Ilia*-"and all the
Trojan race."

<span id="P7843_2478217"></span> <sup>116</sup> Lit., "riding
upon"-*inequitare.*

<span id="P7844_2478640"></span> <sup>117</sup> Lit., "most open."

<span id="P7845_2478948"></span> <sup>118</sup> *Subsessoris.*

<span id="P7846_2479252"></span> <sup>119</sup> Lit.,
"growling"-*fremitum.*

<span id="P7847_2479336"></span> <sup>120</sup> The ms. reads *primo*,
emended as above by the brother of Canterus, followed by later edd.

<span id="P7849_2480165"></span> <sup>121</sup> i.e., *testiculi.*

<span id="P7850_2480239"></span> <sup>122</sup> *Virilitate pignoris
visa.*

<span id="P7851_2480386"></span> <sup>123</sup> So Ursinus suggested,
followed by Stewechius and later edd., *concepti foetus revocatur ad
curam*; the ms. reads *concepit*-"is softened and conceived," etc.

<span id="P7852_2480694"></span> <sup>124</sup> Jupiter may be here
called *Verveceus*, either as an epithet of Jupiter Ammon-"like a
wether," or (and this seems most probable from the context), "dealing
with wethers"referring to the mode in which he had extricated himself
from his former difficulty, or "stupid." The ms. reads *virviriceus.*

<span id="P7853_2481139"></span> <sup>125</sup> Lit.,
"encountered"-*aggressus.*

<span id="P7854_2481239"></span> <sup>126</sup> Lit., "sufficiently."

<span id="P7855_2481627"></span> <sup>127</sup> i.e., Ceres.

<span id="P7856_2481785"></span> <sup>128</sup> Lit., "will any one
want."

<span id="P7857_2481931"></span> <sup>129</sup> i.e., handed down by
antiquity. \[Vol. ii. p. 176, this series.\]

<span id="P7858_2482149"></span> <sup>130</sup> These seem to have been
celebrated in honour of Dionysius as well as Zeus, though, in so far as
they are described by Arnobius, they refer to the intrigue of the latter
only. Macrobius, however (*Saturn.*, i. 18), mentions that in Thrace,
Liber and Sol were identified and worshipped as Sebadius: and this
suggests that we have to take but one more step to explain the use of
the title to Jupiter also.

<span id="P7860_2483798"></span> <sup>131</sup> Lit., "of."

<span id="P7861_2484094"></span> <sup>132</sup> Lit., "that he might be
a crop of"-*seges*, a correction in the margin of Ursinus for the ms.
*sedes*-"a seat."

<span id="P7862_2484342"></span> <sup>133</sup> So all edd., reading
*scenarum* (ms. *scr-*, but *r* marked as spurious), except LB, followed
by Orelli, who gives *sentinarum*-"of the dregs." Oehler supplies *e*,
which the sense seems to require. \[Note our author's persistent scorn
of Jove *Opt. Max.*\]

<span id="P7863_2484760"></span> <sup>134</sup> Lit., "neigh with
appetites of an enraged beast."

<span id="P7865_2485168"></span> <sup>135</sup> This clearly refers to
the *Aeneid*, x. 18.

<span id="P7866_2485354"></span> <sup>136</sup> Lit., "on the rear
part."

<span id="P7867_2485401"></span> <sup>137</sup> *Suffragines.*

<span id="P7868_2485466"></span> <sup>138</sup> So the margin of
Ursinus, Elmenh. L.B., Oberth., Orelli, and Oehler, reading *molli fimo*
for the ms. *molissimo.*

<span id="P7869_2485897"></span> <sup>139</sup> Lit., "censorial."

<span id="P7870_2486037"></span> <sup>140</sup> Lit., "rage with
thunders."

<span id="P7871_2486161"></span> <sup>141</sup> So Gelenius, followed by
Stewechius and Orelli, reading *smilia* for the corrupt and
unintelligible ms. *nullas.*

<span id="P7872_2486435"></span> <sup>142</sup> *Infulae*, besides being
worn by the priest, adorned the victim, and were borne by the suppliant.
Perhaps a combination of the two last ideas is meant to be suggested
here.

<span id="P7873_2486679"></span> <sup>143</sup> i.e., seemingly so.

<span id="P7874_2486921"></span> <sup>144</sup> Lit., "under this axis
of the world."

<span id="P7875_2487134"></span> <sup>145</sup> So the ms., followed by
Hild. and Oehler; the other edd. reading *gens* for *mens.*

<span id="P7876_2487429"></span> <sup>146</sup> Lit., "felt himself to
be."

<span id="P7877_2487542"></span> <sup>147</sup> Lit., "would the thing
not be worthy that angry and roused."

<span id="P7878_2487785"></span> <sup>148</sup> i.e., reduce to chaos,
in which one thing would not be distinguished from another, but all be
mixed up confusedly.

<span id="P7880_2488279"></span> <sup>149</sup> Lit., "what are your
proper things."

<span id="P7881_2488508"></span> <sup>150</sup> Every one since
Salmasius (*ad solinum*, p. 750) has supposed Arnobius to have here
fallen into a gross error, by confounding the Eleusinian mysteries with
the Thesmophoria; an error the less accountable, because they are
carefully distinguished by Clemens Alexandrinus, whom Arnobius evidently
had before him, as usual. There seems to be no sufficient reason,
however, for charging Arnobius with such a blunder, although in the end
of ch. 26 he refers to the story just related as showing the base
character of the Eleusinia (*Eleusiniorum vestrorum notas*); as he here
speaks of *mysteria* (i.e., Eleusinia, *cf. Nepos, Alc.*, 3, 16) *et
illa divina quae Thesmophoria nominantur a Graecis*. It should be
remembered also that there was much in common between these mysteries:
the story of Ceres' wanderings was the subject of both; in both there
was a season of fasting to recall her sadness; both had indecent
allusions to the way in which that sadness was dispelled; and both
celebrated with some freedom the recovery of cheerfulness by the
goddess, the great distinguishing feature of the Thesmophoria being that
only women could take part in its rites. Now, as it is to the points in
which the two sets of mysteries were at one that allusion is made in the
passage which follows, it was only natural that Arnobius should not be
very careful to distinguish the one from the other, seeing that he was
concerned not with their differences, but with their coincidence. It
seems difficult, therefore, to maintain that Arnobius has here convicted
himself of so utter ignorance and so gross carelessness as his critics
have imagined \[Vol. ii. p. 176.\]

<span id="P7882_2490984"></span> <sup>151</sup> Lit., "caverns."

<span id="P7883_2491172"></span> <sup>152</sup> Lit., "in the whole."

<span id="P7884_2491263"></span> <sup>153</sup> The ms. is utterly
corrupt-*flammis onere pressas etneis*, corrected as above by Gelenius
from c. 35., f. *comprehensas.*-Ael.

<span id="P7886_2491581"></span> <sup>154</sup> Lit., "also."

<span id="P7887_2491697"></span> <sup>155</sup> Lit,, "(they were)
earth-born who inhabited."

<span id="P7888_2491796"></span> <sup>156</sup> The ms. wants this name;
but it has evidently been omitted by accident, as it occurs in the next
line.

<span id="P7889_2492014"></span> <sup>157</sup> Lit., "of woolly flock."

<span id="P7890_2492154"></span> <sup>158</sup> *Cecropios et qui.*

<span id="P7891_2492232"></span> <sup>159</sup> i.e. staff-bearers.

<span id="P7892_2492564"></span> <sup>160</sup> *Cinnus*, the chief
ingredients, according to Hesychius (quoted by Oehler), being wine,
honey, water, and spelt or barley. \[P. 503, *inf.*\]

<span id="P7893_2492808"></span> <sup>161</sup> Lit., "offices of
humanity."

<span id="P7894_2492940"></span> <sup>162</sup> Lit., "common health."
Arnobius is here utterly forgetful of Ceres' divinity, and subjects her
to the invariable requirements of nature, from which the divine might be
supposed to be exempt.

<span id="P7895_2493633"></span> <sup>163</sup> So the conjecture of
I.ivineius, adopted by Oehler, *gene-t-ri-cum* for the ms. *genericum.*

<span id="P7896_2493896"></span> <sup>164</sup> So Stewechius, followed
by Oehler, reading *redit ita* for the ms. *redita*; the other edd.
merely drop *a*.

<span id="P7897_2494227"></span> <sup>165</sup> *Omnia illa pudoris
loca.*

<span id="P7898_2494307"></span> <sup>166</sup> *Pubi.*
