<span id="P8000_2522893"></span> <sup>245</sup> The ms. and edd. read
*matris deae*-"of the mother goddess;" for which Meursius proposed
*deûm*-"mother of the gods," the usual form of the title. Cf. cc. 7 and
16. \[See Elucidation V. also note the reference to St. Augustine.\]

<span id="P8001_2523421"></span> <sup>246</sup> The name is wanting in
the ms. Cf. c. 28.

<span id="P8002_2523761"></span> <sup>247</sup> No Attic family of this
name is mentioned anywhere; but in Cos the Nebridae were famous as
descendants of Aesculapius through Nebros. In Attica, on the other hand,
the initiated were robed in fawn-skins (nebri/dej), and were on this
account spoken of as nebri/zontej. Salmasius has therefore suggested
(*ad Solinum*, p. 864, E) that Arnobius, or the author on whom he
relied, transferred the family to Attica on account of the similarity of
sound.

<span id="P8003_2524540"></span> <sup>248</sup> Lit., "who have attached
to themselves."

<span id="P8004_2524911"></span> <sup>249</sup> Arnobius would seem to
have beern partial to this phrase, which occurs in the middle of c. 38.

<span id="P8006_2525149"></span> <sup>250</sup> Lit., "say."

<span id="P8007_2525346"></span> <sup>251</sup> Lit., "with what shame
and insult of the gods this is said to be done."

<span id="P8008_2525975"></span> <sup>252</sup> Lit., "with."

<span id="P8009_2526144"></span> <sup>253</sup> Lit., "din of."

<span id="P8011_2526419"></span> <sup>254</sup> *Passivè.*

<span id="P8012_2526606"></span> <sup>255</sup> Lit., "strong in
chastity."

<span id="P8013_2526652"></span> <sup>256</sup> The ms., first three
edd., Elm., and Oehler read *commorantur*-"lingers," i.e., "continues to
be spoken of;"the other edd. receive *commemorantur*, as above, from the
*errata* in the 1st ed.

<span id="P8014_2526888"></span> <sup>257</sup> The ms., first four
edd., and Oehler read *gravitas*-seriousness; corrected *pr.* as above,
in all edd. after Stewechius.

<span id="P8015_2527117"></span> <sup>258</sup> So, perhaps, the
unintelligible ms. *dignorum* should be emended *digna rerum.*

<span id="P8016_2527556"></span> <sup>259</sup> So all edd. since
Stewechius, adding *s* to the ms. *voluisse.*

<span id="P8017_2527915"></span> <sup>260</sup> i.e., the mere fact that
the stories were published, showed a wish to teach; but their being
allegories, showed a reluctance to allow them to be understood.

<span id="P8018_2528246"></span> <sup>261</sup> The edd. read this
sentence interrogatively.

<span id="P8019_2528333"></span> <sup>262</sup> i.e., "if you said
exactly what you mean." The reference is not to the immediately
preceding words, but to the question on which the chapter is based-"what
prevented you from expressing," etc.

<span id="P8020_2528823"></span> <sup>263</sup> Lit., "perverse."

<span id="P8022_2529139"></span> <sup>264</sup> *Passivè.*

<span id="P8023_2529351"></span> <sup>265</sup> Lit., "is it clear to
you."

<span id="P8025_2531060"></span> <sup>266</sup> Lit., "natures."

<span id="P8026_2531135"></span> <sup>267</sup> Lit., "things."

<span id="P8028_2531487"></span> <sup>268</sup> So most edd., reading
*occultatio* for the ms. *occupatio.*

<span id="P8029_2531698"></span> <sup>269</sup> So all edd., reading
*com-*, except Hild. and Oehler, who retain the ms. reading,
*im-pressio*-"the assault of," i.e., "on."

<span id="P8031_2532146"></span> <sup>270</sup> Lit.,
"waves"-*fluctibus*, the reading of the ms., LB., Hild., and Oehler; the
other edd. reading *fustibus*-"stakes."

<span id="P8032_2532296"></span> <sup>271</sup> So Meursius, changing
the ms. *o-* into *u-rigo.*

<span id="P8033_2532459"></span> <sup>272</sup> The first four edd.
retain the ms., reading *partis*-"brought forth;" the others adopt a
suggestion of Canterus, *raptis*, as above.

<span id="P8034_2532761"></span> <sup>273</sup> Lit., "vastness."

<span id="P8035_2533339"></span> <sup>274</sup> *Addere garo gerrem*, a
proverb ridiculing a worthless addition, which nullifies something in
itself precious, *garum* being a highly esteemed sauce (or perhaps
soup), which would be thrown away upon *gerres*, a worthless kind of
salt fish. Arnobius merely means, however, that while such stories are
wrong, what follows is unspeakably worse.

<span id="P8036_2533848"></span> <sup>275</sup> Lit., "with undubitable
knowledge."

<span id="P8037_2534059"></span> <sup>276</sup> Lit., "it ought to have
been so believed, and to be held fixed in thought just," etc.

<span id="P8039_2534522"></span> <sup>277</sup> Lit., "are in this part
of censure."

<span id="P8040_2534627"></span> <sup>278</sup> Lit., "for."

<span id="P8041_2534747"></span> <sup>279</sup> Lit., "the warp,"
*stamine.*

<span id="P8042_2535158"></span> <sup>280</sup> i.e., if things are
spoken of under their proper names.

<span id="P8043_2535232"></span> <sup>281</sup> The ms. reads *ac*
unintelligibly.

<span id="P8050_2535530"></span> <sup>1</sup> Lit., "it remains that
we."

<span id="P8051_2535654"></span> <sup>2</sup> Lit., "series which is,"
etc.

<span id="P8052_2535902"></span> <sup>3</sup> Singular. \[But costly
churches were built about this time.\]

<span id="P8053_2535998"></span> <sup>4</sup> *Non altaria, non aras*,
i.e., neither to the superior nor inferior deities. Cf. Virgil, *Ecl.*,
v. 66.

<span id="P8054_2536167"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[It is not with any
aversion to incense that I note its absence, so frequently attested,
from primitive rites of the Church.\]

<span id="P8055_2536605"></span> <sup>6</sup> The earlier edd. prefix
*d* to the ms. *eos*-"that the gods," etc.

<span id="P8056_2536736"></span> <sup>7</sup> Lit., "endowed with the
eminence of this name."

<span id="P8058_2537107"></span> <sup>8</sup> Lit., "and to satiety."

<span id="P8059_2537347"></span> <sup>9</sup> The ms. wants *se* which
was supplied by Stewechius.

<span id="P8060_2538349"></span> <sup>10</sup> i.e., not act impartially
and benevolently, which may possibly be the meaning of *contrariis
agere*, or, as Oehler suggests, "to assail *men* with contrary, i.e.,
injurious things." All edd. read *egere*, except Oehler, who can see no
meaning in it; but if translated, "to wish for contrary things," it
suits the next clause very well.

<span id="P8061_2538810"></span> <sup>11</sup> Lit., "whom passion
touches, suffer."

<span id="P8062_2538880"></span> <sup>12</sup> So the ms., Stewechius,
Hild., and Oehler, while the first four edd. and Oberthür merely add *m*
to *dolore*, and join with the preceding *pati*-"suffer pain, are
weakened."

<span id="P8064_2539558"></span> <sup>13</sup> \[See note 5, book. vi.
p. 506.\]

<span id="P8065_2539801"></span> <sup>14</sup> The ms. and most edd.
read *di-vina nobiscum*-"the divine things along with us;" Heraldus
rejects *div.* as a gloss, while Meursius, followed by Orelli, corrects
*dii una*, and Oehler *divi una*, as above.

<span id="P8066_2540070"></span> <sup>15</sup> Lit., "are contained in
vital substance."

<span id="P8067_2540177"></span> <sup>16</sup> Arnobius here expressly
denies that the Christians had any temples. There has been some
controversy on the subject (Mosheim, book i. cent. 1, ch. 4, sec. 5,
Soames' ed.), surely as needless as controversy could be; for as the
Christians must at all times have had stated places of meeting (although
in time of persecution these might be changed frequently), it is clear
that, in speaking thus, the meaning must be only, that their buildings
had no architectural pretensions, and their service no splendour of
ritual. \[Diocletian's mild beginning suffered Christians to build
costly temples in many places. These he subsequently destroyed with
great severity.\]

<span id="P8068_2541025"></span> <sup>17</sup> Lit., "drawn out."

<span id="P8069_2541371"></span> <sup>18</sup> So the edd., reading
*constructa* for the corrupt ms. *conscripta*-"written."

<span id="P8070_2541518"></span> <sup>19</sup> i.e., to suppose that
temples are necessary to the gods, is to make them subject to human
weakness.

<span id="P8071_2541900"></span> <sup>20</sup> Lit. "with fortifications
of roofs."

<span id="P8072_2542046"></span> <sup>21</sup> i.e., if you have regard
merely to the weakness of men, a temple may be something wonderful.

<span id="P8073_2542237"></span> <sup>22</sup> Lit., "some."

<span id="P8074_2542360"></span> <sup>23</sup> Lit., "formed by
contrivance of a poor heart."

<span id="P8075_2542467"></span> <sup>24</sup> *Institutor*, wanting in
all edd., except Hild. and Oehler.

<span id="P8076_2542583"></span> <sup>25</sup> Arnobius here agrees with
Clemens Alexandrinus, but Jos. Scaliger has pointed out that the name
should be Cecrops. It is possible that Arnobius may have been misled by
what was merely a slip of Clement's pen. \[See the passage here referred
to, vol. ii. p. 184, this series.\]

<span id="P8077_2543654"></span> <sup>26</sup> The preceding words, from
"this of Hercules," are omitted by the first four edd. and Elmenh., and
were first restored from the ms. by Stewechius.

<span id="P8078_2543894"></span> <sup>27</sup> Lit., "first and."

<span id="P8079_2543963"></span> <sup>28</sup> So the edd., reading
*habere districtos* for the ms. *destructos.*

<span id="P8080_2544145"></span> <sup>29</sup> Lit., "that the things be
thought to be."

<span id="P8082_2545130"></span> <sup>30</sup> Lit., "knowledge being
anticipated."

<span id="P8083_2545222"></span> <sup>31</sup> These words, *et
tacitis*, omitted by Oberthür, are similarly omitted by Orelli without
remark.

<span id="P8084_2545502"></span> <sup>32</sup> So the edd., inserting
*quo-* into the ms. reading *ita-que*-"it is therefore fitting," which
is absurd, as making the connection between the members of the sentence
one not of analogy, but of logical sequence.

<span id="P8085_2546131"></span> <sup>33</sup> Cf. the speech of Thetis,
*Iliad*, i. 423-425.

<span id="P8087_2546292"></span> <sup>34</sup> So the margin of Ursinus,
Elm., LB., and Orelli, with Meursius, reading *audiamini* for the ms.
*audiamur*-"we are heard," which does not harmonize with the next
clause.

<span id="P8088_2546564"></span> <sup>35</sup> Lit., "for the purpose of
coming to know the thing."

<span id="P8089_2546807"></span> <sup>36</sup> Lit., "if there are any
others."

<span id="P8090_2547057"></span> <sup>37</sup> So the ms., reading
*c-ogitare*, corrected *r-*-"to beg," in the margin of Ursinus and Elm.
For the preceding words the ms. reads, *poscantque de numine*. The edd.
omit *que* as above, except Oehler, who reads *quae*-"what hope will
there be, what, pray, to all," etc.

<span id="P8091_2547618"></span> <sup>38</sup> So the ms., reading *si
uspiam poterit aliquando non esse*, which may be understood in two
senses, either not limited by space, or not in space, i.e., not
existing; but the reading and meaning must be regarded as alike
doubtful.

<span id="P8093_2548641"></span> <sup>39</sup> A Syracusan historian.
The rest of the chapter is almost literally translated from Clement, who
is followed by Eusebius also (*Praep. Evang.*, ii. 6). \[See vol. ii. p.
184, this series.\]

<span id="P8094_2548925"></span> <sup>40</sup> i.e., the Acropolis.

<span id="P8095_2549040"></span> <sup>41</sup> In Thessaly, whither
(acc. to Pausanias) he had fled in vain, to avoid the fulfillment of the
oracle that he should be killed by his daughter's son.

<span id="P8096_2549277"></span> <sup>42</sup> i.e., Athena Polias, or
guardian of cities. Immediately below, the ms. reads *Immarnachus*,
corrected in LB. and Orelli *Immarus* from Clem., who speaks of
"Immarus, son of Eumolpus and Daeira."

<span id="P8097_2549678"></span> <sup>43</sup> So the unintelligible
reading of the ms., *humation-ibus officia*, was emended by Heraldus,
followed by LB. and Orelli, *is habuisse.*

<span id="P8098_2550073"></span> <sup>44</sup> i.e., the temple near
Didyma, sacred to Apollo, who was worshipped then under the name
Didymus.

<span id="P8099_2550584"></span> <sup>45</sup> i.e., "lover of his
father," the name given ironically to the fourth Ptolemy, because he
murdered his father.
