<span id="P8200_2579398"></span> <sup>136</sup> Lit., "resolved into
members."

<span id="P8201_2579701"></span> <sup>137</sup> Lit., "by the charm of."

<span id="P8202_2579778"></span> <sup>138</sup> The ms. reads
*flev-itium*, for which Hild. suggests *flex-*, as above, previous edd.
reading *flat-*-"of cast plates;" which cannot, however, be correct, as
Arnobius has just said that the images were in part made of ivory.

<span id="P8203_2580261"></span> <sup>139</sup> Lit., "delays salutary
for lastingnesses." The sense is, that the lead prevents the joints from
giving way, and so gives permanence to the statue.

<span id="P8204_2580528"></span> <sup>140</sup> *Occipitiis.*

<span id="P8205_2580623"></span> <sup>141</sup> *Plantarum vestigia.*

<span id="P8206_2580934"></span> <sup>142</sup> Lit., "from the art of
obscurity."

<span id="P8207_2581156"></span> <sup>143</sup> i.e., if the nature of
the images is really concealed by the skill displayed in their
construction.

<span id="P8208_2581320"></span> <sup>144</sup> Lit., "breathing." \[Ps.
cxv. 4-8.\]

<span id="P8209_2581570"></span> <sup>145</sup> Lit., "are relaxed from
decay of rottenness."

<span id="P8210_2581771"></span> <sup>146</sup> i.e. fall from their
pedestals. For the ms. reading *situs* (retained in LB., as above), the
margin of Ursinus, followed by the other edd. except the first four and
Oberthür, read *situ-*-"lose their appearance from mould."

<span id="P8211_2582391"></span> <sup>147</sup> So LB. and Oehler,
reading *famis in spem* for the ms. *pannis*, omitted in other edd. All
prefix *p*, as above, to the next word, *annos.*

<span id="P8212_2583060"></span> <sup>148</sup> *Deonerati proluvies
podicis*. \[So Clement, vol. ii. p. 186, at note 1, this series.\]

<span id="P8213_2583453"></span> <sup>149</sup> Lit., "incited by the
truth of nature." The ms. and both Roman edd. read *d-*, all others
*instincta*, as above.

<span id="P8215_2583830"></span> <sup>150</sup> Lit., "the sacred
dedication."

<span id="P8216_2584566"></span> <sup>151</sup> Lit., "concealed in the
restraint of."

<span id="P8217_2584950"></span> <sup>152</sup> The ms. reads *inrogati*
(the next letter being erased, having probably been *s* redundant) *si
inviti*, corrected in the margin of Ursinus and Oehler, as above, *-tis
in*.

<span id="P8218_2585263"></span> <sup>153</sup> Lit., "with the assent
of voluntary compliance." "Do you say," or some such expression, must be
understood, as Arnobius is asking his opponent to choose on which horn
of the dilemma he wishes to be impaled.

<span id="P8219_2585571"></span> <sup>154</sup> Lit., "bindings."

<span id="P8220_2585683"></span> <sup>155</sup> So Gelenius, Canterus,
Elm., Oberth., and Orelli, reading *nobilitent*. No satisfactory
emendation has been proposed, and contradictory accounts are given as to
the reading of the ms. Immediately after this sentence, LB., followed by
Orelli, inserts a clause from the next chapter. Cf. the following note.

<span id="P8222_2586611"></span> <sup>156</sup> It will be seen that
these words fit into the indirect argument of Arnobius very well,
although transposed in LB. to the end of last chapter, and considered a
gloss by Orelli and Hildebrand. "See the consequences," Arnobius says,
"of supposing that the gods do not quit these images: not merely are
they in a wretched case, but they must further lose their power as
divinities." Meursius, with, more reason, transposes the clause to the
end of the next sentence, which would be justifiable if necessary.

<span id="P8223_2587669"></span> <sup>157</sup> Perhaps "into," as
Arnobius sometimes uses the abl. after *in* instead of the acc.

<span id="P8224_2587817"></span> <sup>158</sup> Lit., "compressed to the
similitude of."

<span id="P8225_2588308"></span> <sup>159</sup> Lit., "to adapt their
similitude to."

<span id="P8227_2588638"></span> <sup>160</sup> Lit., "a cutting taking
place."

<span id="P8228_2589008"></span> <sup>161</sup> i.e., of their character
as independent and not compounded. This is precisely such an expression
as that which closes the fourth book, and its occurrence is therefore an
additional ground for regarding the earlier passage as genuine.

<span id="P8230_2590549"></span> <sup>162</sup> *Claustris repagulis
pessulis.*

<span id="P8231_2590782"></span> <sup>163</sup> Cf. p. 481, n. 5. Geese
as well as dogs guarded the Capitol, having been once, as the well-known
legend tells, its only guards against the Gauls.

<span id="P8232_2591374"></span> <sup>164</sup> The ms., first four
edd., and Elm. read *nomine*-"under the name of," corrected *momine* by
Meursius and the rest.

<span id="P8234_2591933"></span> <sup>165</sup> So the ms., reading
*decem*; but as Clement says pentekai/deka phxw=n, we must either
suppose that Arnobius mistook the Greek, or transcribed it carelessly,
or, with the margin of Ursinus, read *quindecim*-"fifteen."

<span id="P8235_2592514"></span> <sup>166</sup> Stewechius and Heraldus
regard these words as spurious, and as having originated in a gloss on
the margin, *scz. junior*-"to wit, the younger." Heraldus, however,
changed his opinion, because Clement too, says, "Dionysius the younger."
The words mean more than this, however, referring probably to the fact
that Cicero (*de Nat. Deor.*, iii. 33, 34, 35) tells these and other
stories of the elder Dionysius. To this Arnobius calls attention as an
error, by adding to Clement's phrase "but."

<span id="P8236_2593643"></span> <sup>167</sup> Only rustics,
old-fashioned people, and philosophers wore the beard untrimmed; the
last class wearing it as a kind of distinctive mark, just as Juvenal
(iii. 15) speaks of a thick woolen cloak as marking a philosopher.
\[Compare vol. i. p. 160; also ii. p. 321, n. 9.\]

<span id="P8237_2594036"></span> <sup>168</sup> *Impuberi.*

<span id="P8238_2594192"></span> <sup>169</sup> Lit., "one."

<span id="P8240_2594885"></span> <sup>170</sup> Lit., "punishment of
violated religion."

<span id="P8241_2595287"></span> <sup>171</sup> Clemens says merely "the
Cyprian Pygmalion."

<span id="P8242_2595457"></span> <sup>172</sup> Lit., "of ancient
sanctity and religion."

<span id="P8243_2595828"></span> <sup>173</sup> Lit., "imagination of
empty lust."

<span id="P8244_2595893"></span> <sup>174</sup> Cf. ch. 13.

<span id="P8245_2595999"></span> <sup>175</sup> So Gelenius, reading
*rebus* for the ms. and first ed. *re a* (ms. *ab*) *se*.

<span id="P8246_2596332"></span> <sup>176</sup> Lit., "in the limits
of."

<span id="P8247_2596699"></span> <sup>177</sup> Lit., "agonizing
restraint."

<span id="P8248_2596859"></span> <sup>178</sup> Lit., "to."

<span id="P8250_2597515"></span> <sup>179</sup> Cf. p. 315, n. 2,
*supra*.

<span id="P8251_2597786"></span> <sup>180</sup> So Clemens narrates; but
Thucydides (iv. 133) says that "straightway Chrysis flees by night for
refuge to Phlious, fearing the Argives;" while Pausanius (ii. 59) says
that she fled to Tegea, taking refuge there at the altar of Minerva
Alea.

<span id="P8252_2598431"></span> <sup>181</sup> From Varro's being
mentioned, Oehler thinks that Arnobius must refer to various marauding
expeditions against the temples of Apollo on the coasts and islands of
the Aegean, made at the time of the piratical war. Clemens, however,
speaks distinctly of the destruction of the temple at Delphi, and it is
therefore probable that this is referred to, if not solely, at least
along with those which Varro mentions. Clement, vol. ii. p. 187.

<span id="P8253_2599040"></span> <sup>182</sup> Lit., "his visitors,"
*hospitis.*

<span id="P8254_2599119"></span> <sup>183</sup> *Varro Menippeus*, an
emendation of Carrio, adopted in LB. and Orelli for the ms. *se
thenipeus*.

<span id="P8255_2599537"></span> <sup>184</sup> Lit., "suspicion being
averted."

<span id="P8256_2599635"></span> <sup>185</sup> It has been generally
supposed that reference is thus made to some kind of thieves, which is
probable enough, as Arnobius (end of next chapter) classes all these
plunderers as "tyrants, kings, robbers, and nocturnal thieves;" but it
is impossible to say precisely what is meant. Heraldus would read
*Saraceni*-"Saracens."

<span id="P8257_2600011"></span> <sup>186</sup> Lit., "with obscurity of
means." The phrase may refer either to the defence or to the assault of
temples by means of magic arts.

<span id="P8258_2600487"></span> <sup>187</sup> Lit., "interior motion."

<span id="P8260_2601036"></span> <sup>188</sup> Lit., "lop away,"
*deputarent*, the reading of the ms., Hild., and Oehler; the rest
reading *deponerent*-"lay aside." \[The same plausible defences are used
to this day by professed Christians. See *Jesuits at Rome*, by Hobart
Seymour, p. 38, ed. New York, 1849.\]

<span id="P8261_2601376"></span> <sup>189</sup> Lit., "pass to human
offices."

<span id="P8262_2602411"></span> <sup>190</sup> Lit., "crimes and
wickednesses."

<span id="P8263_2602664"></span> <sup>191</sup> Lit., "go," *vadere*.

<span id="P8264_2602771"></span> <sup>192</sup> Lit., "with their golden
and to-be-feared splendours themselves."

<span id="P8266_2602913"></span> <sup>193</sup> Lit., "and without any
favour," *gratificatione.*

<span id="P8267_2602994"></span> <sup>194</sup> Lit., "what great
*thing* have these images in them."

<span id="P8268_2603253"></span> <sup>195</sup> So the ms., first four
edd., Elm., Hild., and Oehler, reading *mores et maleficia*, corrected
in the others *a maleficio*-"morals withheld from wickedness."

<span id="P8269_2603474"></span> <sup>196</sup> Cf. ch. 12, p. 511.

<span id="P8270_2603834"></span> <sup>197</sup> The reference is
probably to some statue or picture of Juno represented as girt with the
girdle of Venus. (*Il.*, xiv. 214).

<span id="P8271_2604483"></span> <sup>198</sup> Lit., "inferior."

<span id="P8273_2604606"></span> <sup>199</sup> *Formidinum.*

<span id="P8274_2604644"></span> <sup>200</sup> *Terrores.*

<span id="P8275_2605249"></span> <sup>201</sup> Or, perhaps, "relate
that images so frigid and so awkward."

<span id="P8276_2605604"></span> <sup>202</sup> The ms., and both Roman
edd. read *monstruosissima-s torvi-tate-s annis*; corrected by Gelenius
and later edd. *monstruosissimâ torvitate animos*, and by Salmasius,
Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, as above, *m. t. sannis.*

<span id="P8277_2605876"></span> <sup>203</sup> The ms., first four
edd., Elm., and Oberthür read *manus*, which, with *animos* read in most
(cf. preceding note), would run, "that they were even kept back, as to
(i.e., in) minds and hands, from wicked actions by the preternatural
savageness of masks." The other edd. read with Salmasius, as above,
*maniis*.

<span id="P8278_2606456"></span> <sup>204</sup> Lit., "cut away."

<span id="P8279_2606930"></span> <sup>205</sup> Lit., "opinion of."

<span id="P8286_2607733"></span> <sup>1</sup> Lit., "in that part of
years."

<span id="P8287_2608043"></span> <sup>2</sup> Lit., "attribute least."

<span id="P8288_2608163"></span> <sup>3</sup> Lit., "divine spurning."

<span id="P8289_2608308"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[When good old Dutch
Boyens came to the pontificate as Hadrian VI., he was accounted a
"barbarian" because he so little appreciated the art-treasures in the
Vatican, on which Leo X. had lavished so much money and so much
devotion. His pious spirit seemed oppressed to see so many heathen
images in the Vatican: *sunt idola ethnicorum* was all he could say of
them,-a most creditable anecdote of such a man in such times. See p.
504, n. 6, *supra*.\]

<span id="P8291_2608768"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[In the Edin. edition
this is the opening sentence, but the editor remarks\]: "By some
accident the introduction to the seventh book has been tacked on as a
last chapter to the sixth, where it is just as out of place as here it
is in keeping." \[I have restored it to its place accordingly.\]

<span id="P8292_2609289"></span> <sup>6</sup> Lit., "those, moreover."

<span id="P8293_2609457"></span> <sup>7</sup> Lit., "nor is any blame
contracted."

<span id="P8295_2609982"></span> <sup>8</sup> On this Heraldus \[most
ignorantly\] remarks, that it shows conclusively how slight was the
acquaintance with Christianity possessed by Arnobius, when he could not
say who were the true gods. \[The Edin. editor clears up the cases as
follows:\] This, however, is to forget that Arnobius is not declaring
his own opinions here, but meeting his adversaries on their own ground.
He knows who the true God is-the source and fountain of all being, and
framer of the universe (ii. 2), and if there are any lesser powers
called gods, what their relation to Him must be (iii. 2, 3); but he does
not know any such gods himself, and is continually reminding the heathen
that they know these gods just as little. (Cf. the very next sentence.)

<span id="P8296_2610837"></span> <sup>9</sup> Lit., "as many as
possible."

<span id="P8297_2610903"></span> <sup>10</sup> Lit., "in the series of."

<span id="P8298_2610966"></span> <sup>11</sup> Lit., "are."

<span id="P8299_2611026"></span> <sup>12</sup> i.e., M. Terentius Varro,
mentioned in the last chapter.
