<span id="P8600_2732742"></span> <sup>262</sup> Lit., "subjected to."

<span id="P8601_2732781"></span> <sup>263</sup> So Hild. and Oehler,
reading *moli* for the unintelligible ms. *more*.

<span id="P8602_2733502"></span> <sup>264</sup> Lit., "so great assaults
of war."

<span id="P8603_2733764"></span> <sup>265</sup> So Oehler, adding *-o*
to the ms. *est*. The word immediately preceding is in the ms.
*pavorem*-"panic," which is of course utterly out of place, and is
therefore corrected, as above, *f-* in all edd., except 1st, Ursinus,
and Hild.

<span id="P8604_2734190"></span> <sup>266</sup> So-*ab Italia*-Oehler
has admirably emended the ms. *habitabilia.*

<span id="P8605_2734313"></span> <sup>267</sup> Lit., "if he is."

<span id="P8607_2734450"></span> <sup>268</sup> 48 in Orelli.

<span id="P8608_2734974"></span> <sup>269</sup> All edd., except Hild.
and Oehler, begin a new sentence here, and change the construction,
seemingly following the mistake of the 1st ed.

<span id="P8609_2735383"></span> <sup>270</sup> "To do...to show;" so
the edd., dropping *-nt* from the ms. *facere-nt*...*praebere-nt.*

<span id="P8610_2735513"></span> <sup>271</sup> "To do...to show;" so
the edd., dropping *-nt* from the ms. *facere-nt*...*praebere-nt.*

<span id="P8611_2735725"></span> <sup>272</sup> Lit, "showed." Ursinus
and Heraldus supposed that some paragraphs are now wanting which were
originally found here. It should be noticed that in the ms. the usual
subscription is found denoting the end of a book. "The seventh book of
Arnovius (*sic*) ends, the eighth (i.e., *Octavius* of Minucius Felix.)
begins," so that the present arrangement is not due to the binder, nor
clearly to the copyist who wrote these words. Nothing can be more
certain than that we do not have these chapters as Arnobius intended to
leave them; but there is not the slightest reason to suppose that he
actually left them otherwise than they have come down to us. Remembering
this, we may well suppose that we have only the first draught of them.
If so, the difficulties vanish, for nothing would be more natural than
that, when Arnobius was drawing near the close of his work, the ideas of
the conclusion in which the discussion was to be fairly summed up should
force themselves upon his attention, and that he should therefore turn
aside at once to give them expression roughly, without seeking
completeness and elaboration, and should then hastily resume his
argument, of course with the intention of afterwards revising and
re-arranging the whole. We may infer that the re-arrangement was never
effected, as there are sufficient proofs that the revision was never
accomplished, whatever may have been the reason.

<span id="P8616_2737471"></span> <sup>1</sup> This section, which is
found in the ms. after the first sentence of ch. 44, was retained in the
text of both Roman editions, marked off, however, by asterisks in that
of Ursinus, but was rejected by Gelenius and later editors as the
useless addition of some copyist. Oehler alone has seen that it is not
"a collection of words gathered carelessly and thoughtlessly"
(Hildebrand), and maintained that we have in it the corrections of
Arnobius himself. If the three paragraphs are read carefully, it will be
observed that the first is a transposition and reconstruction of the
first two sentences of ch. 39; the second a revision of the
interrogations in ch. 41, but with the sentence which there precedes
placed after them here, whilst the third is made up of the same
sentences in a revised and enlarged form. Now this must be regarded as
conclusive evidence against the hypothesis that these sentences were
originally scribbled carelessly on the margin, and afterwards
accidentally incorporated in the text. Cf. p. 532, n. 10.

<span id="P8620_2739171"></span> <sup>2</sup> Lit., "motions."

<span id="P8621_2739848"></span> <sup>3</sup> Lit. "to the heights
(*apices*) of gravity and weight," i.e., of that constancy of mind which
is not moved by trifles.

<span id="P8623_2740111"></span> <sup>4</sup> Lit., "of hurting and
raging."

<span id="P8624_2740178"></span> <sup>5</sup> i. e., evil dispositions.

<span id="P8625_2740360"></span> <sup>6</sup> Lit., "motions."

<span id="P8626_2740543"></span> <sup>7</sup> So the ms., according to
Crusius, inserting *transiri,* which is omitted by Hild., either because
it is not in the ms., or because he neglected to notice that Orelli's
text was deficient. If omitted, we should translate, "that some pass,
leaning forward, and rush with their heads towards the ground."

<span id="P8627_2741424"></span> <sup>8</sup> Lit., "of something."

<span id="P8628_2741573"></span> <sup>9</sup> Lit., "far and far."

<span id="P8629_2741795"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[For *puer matrimus*
(one whose mother is yet living), see p. 486, note 11, *supra* And for
the argument, here recast, turn to cap. 41, p. 534.\]

<span id="P8642_2742823"></span> <sup>11</sup> *Words of Jesus*, vol.
viii. p. 63, trans., ed. Edinburgh, 1858.

<span id="P8643_2742906"></span> <sup>12</sup> *New-Testament
Commentary*, Kendrick's trans., vol. iii. p. 120, ed. 1858.

<span id="P8648_2743793"></span> <sup>13</sup> *Eunuch.*, iii. 5.

<span id="P8653_2744062"></span> <sup>14</sup> August., *De Civitate*,
book ii. cap. 7.

<span id="P8654_2744515"></span> <sup>15</sup> Rom. viii. 3-39.

<span id="P8661_2745058"></span> 113 note 11 The service in which these
prayers were offered was presided over by the bishop, to whom the dead
body was brought: hymns were then sung of thanksgiving to God, the giver
of victory, by whose help and grace the departed brother had been
victorious. The priest next gave thanks to God, and some chapters of the
Scriptures were read; afterwards the catechumens were dismissed; the
names of those at rest were then read in a clear voice, to remind the
survivors of the success with which others had combated the temptations
of the world. The priest again prayed for the departed, at the close
beseeching God to grant him pardon, and admission among the undying.
Thereafter the body was kissed, anointed, and buried.-Dionysius, *Eccl.
Hier.*, last chapter quoted by Heraldus. Cf. *Const. Apost.*, viii. 41.
With the Church's advance in power there was an accession of pomp to
these rites. \[Elucidation IV.\]

<span id="P8663_2746761"></span> <sup>16</sup> Quoted in *Tracts for the
Times* (p. 30), vol. iii., ed. New York, 1840.

<span id="P8673_2748064"></span> <sup>17</sup> He was royal librarian at
Versailles under Charles X. See his *Travels in Italy* (Clifton's
trans.), p. 501, ed. Paris, 1842.

<span id="P8680_2749930"></span> <sup>18</sup> It appeared in Paris
1764. A more literal translation (by the Abbé de Feller) was published,
Liege, 1779.

<span id="P8681_2750298"></span> <sup>19</sup> Published in 1794.

<span id="P8682_2750402"></span> <sup>20</sup> *Works*, vol. vi. p. 140,
ed. Paris, 1850.

<span id="P8684_2752093"></span> <sup>21</sup> De Maistre quotes,
"Potest unus ita pro alio poenam compensare vel debitum solvere ut ille
*satisfacere* merito dici possit." Bellarmin, *Opp.*, tom. iii. col.
1493, ed. Ingolstadt, 1601.

<span id="P8685_2752398"></span> <sup>22</sup> See Jenyns, p. 67 (ed.
eighth), Philadelphia, 1780.

<span id="P8687_2752958"></span> <sup>23</sup> Milton, *Paradise Lost*,
ix. 785.

<span id="P8688_2753040"></span> <sup>24</sup> Rom. viii. 19.

<span id="P8689_2753186"></span> <sup>25</sup> Plato, *Repub., Opp.,*
tom. vi. pp. 225-226, ed. Bipont.

<span id="P8694_2754809"></span>
