[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dg02)  [Next](dg04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU0PK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Dancing Gods*, by Erna Fergusson, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# I: The Pueblo People

Sun-drenched and quiet stand the pueblos of New Mexico and Arizona,
queerly withdrawn from the modern life about them. Usually built of the
soil on which they stand, they appear to have grown out of it, and their
color is the same. There are few trees in the villages, but they are
surrounded by cultivated fields, and cottonwoods and willows grow along
the watercourses. The houses huddle in solid blocks of adobe like
slightly battered apartment houses. Irregular ladder-poles rise sharply
here and there and protruding beams drop deep black shadows against the
walls. Always there is a mission church, carrying the cross aloft on
weather-worn adobe towers, and a government building whose machine-made
angularities are an insult to the softly molded contours of the adobe.
Drifting in and out are the people, brown-skinned and enigmatic, with
sloe-black eyes, sliding walk, and flashes of vivid color in blanket,
sash, or head-band.

Who are they? Where do they come from? There are two ways of arriving at
the answer to these questions. One is to ask the Indians themselves. The
other is to consult the archæologist or the ethnologist. It is
interesting how often

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indian tradition
agrees in essentials with the finds of scientific investigators. Isleta,
for instance, has a tradition that its people came from the north, that
they crossed the sea "where it is so narrow that a ten-year-old boy
could throw a stone across it," and then, finding very little sun, that
they came farther and farther south until they finally settled at
Isleta. More than one archaeologist is satisfied that the Pueblo people
did come from the north, crossing Bering Strait and drifting south.
Taos, according to their tradition, came north, following a bird and
making many villages, until they finally found the right location at the
foot of their sacred Pueblo Peak and on both sides of their ever-running
stream. This movement northward also has its scientific supporters, who
think that these Indians came from Mexico, off shoots perhaps of the
Aztec stock.

All the Indians who now live in villages in New Mexico and Arizona are
Pueblo people, which simply means town people. They were so called by
the Spanish explorers who found them in the middle of the sixteenth
century and were naturally struck by their towns and town organization.
There are now about nine thousand Indians living in pueblos in New
Mexico and Arizona. They form self-governing communities who support
themselves by farming the lands they own communally, and who live a life
of astonishing independence of thought, organization, and religious
belief in the center of a modern American state. Today they speak five
Indian languages in the New Mexico pueblos, and another in Arizona,
where the Hopis cling to their rocky heights. They also speak Spanish,
which is preached to them in their Catholic churches, and the young ones
all

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

speak English, which they learn in the government Indian schools and in
which they trade with store-keepers and make interesting and inaccurate
statements to tourists.

### THE CLIFF DWELLERS

Behind the Pueblo life as we see it was the life of the cliff dwellings
and of the great communal villages. These habitations are being studied
with meticulous care by archaeologists, who examine literally every
foot-mark and finger-print for clues as to who these mysterious folk
were and how they lived. Here, too, Indian tradition is a check and
stimulus to scientific investigation. The Hopis have a legend, for
instance, that their ancestors undertook to build a great temple, that
they were struck with a confusion of tongues and had to leave it
unfinished, and that they then moved south and established the present
Hopi villages. Archaeologists, excavating at the Mesa Verde, uncovered
there what they chose to call the Sun Temple. It was obviously a very
important effort, probably for ceremonial purposes only, and it was left
unfinished for obscure reasons. A Hopi Indian, visiting the place soon
after the discovery of the Sun Temple, identified it absolutely and with
great excitement as the very place of the legend.

Archaeologists learn a great deal about prehistoric life from the
Pueblos, all of whom have traditions connecting them with the
inhabitants of the ruins which are found all over the southwest. The
Santa Clara people, for instance, claim descent from the inhabitants of
Puye, and all the Keres of the Rio Grande valley consider the Rito de
los

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Frijoles as their
ancestral home. In these cases and in many others the medicine-men of
the modern villages make ceremonial visits to the ancient home sites;
and ancient shrines, such as that of the stone lions of Cochiti, are
visited by all Indians. Ceremonial objects from the ruins always fill a
modern Indian with reverent interest. Aniceto Suaso, working with
Jeançon at Po-Shu, recognized and arranged in order certain bases for
prayer-plumes and readily told the uses of a prehistoric spear-head,
which he said would bring prowess in the hunt to anyone who had it. Also
at Po-Shu, an Indian woman in child-birth tied into her girdle an
ancient fetish found there, and reported that it helped her very much.
This obstetrical fetish was in the shape of a large-stomached woman.
Hunting-charms are usually in the form of animals, preferably lions or
bears. In Zuñi we may still see the fetishes in ceremonial use. In other
pueblos they are used only in secret ceremonies, though every modern
Indian carries his medicine-bag, containing his personal fetish, bits of
various metals, and the corn-pollen which is always the sacred symbol of
life.

Much of the fascination of modern Indian ceremonial is due to the
antiquity of its rites and forms. Religious form is always the last
human habit to yield to change; and in the altars, sacred symbols, and
customs of the modern Indian we can trace the history of his ancestors.
The most ancient of whom we have any record were wandering tribes who
made no permanent homes, contenting themselves with slight brush
shelters--the prototype of the *kisi* in which the modern Hopis keep the
snakes during their annual Snake-dance. Later, as agriculture developed
and the people

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

needed more stable homes, they dug into the ground and made a circular
room, roofed with mud-daubed logs and entered from above by means of a
ladder. These people are called the "small house" or "pre-pueblo"
people, according to the degree of their development, and their house is
still a prominent feature of every pueblo, for it is the kiva, the
ceremonial lodge. As the people drew together into villages, they
probably maintained their blood-relationships through certain ceremonies
conducted in the kivas, thus establishing the clans which are the unit
of pueblo organization today. The modern kiva is still the center of
clan and religious life, and until very recently all young men were
required to sleep in the clan kiva until marriage. The whole history of
kiva architecture may be traced in the modern pueblos, from those
entirely underground as at Taos and in the Hopi villages, to those
entirely above ground as in most of the Rio Grande pueblos.

At Zuñi and at Acoma the kivas are square and are built into the block
of houses, probably to conceal them from Christian priests who would
abolish them.

The modern kiva has retained many features of the original home--the
ladder entrance from above through a hole which is also the smoke-vent,
the ventilator and smoke-screen, the fire in the center, the absence of
windows, and even the bole in the floor, which typifies *sipapu*, the
entrance to the underworld. Today the preliminary services for every
dance are performed in the kiva, the men meet there for all clan and
pueblo business, and some form of the old custom of youths' living in
the clan kiva is found almost everywhere.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

The pre-pueblo people left little except the type of their home and bits
of crude pottery and weaving. Their descendants of the cliff dwellings
and of the communal villages are easily studied and their life has been
reconstructed in considerable detail. These two types of building were
probably contemporaneous, as Bandelier makes clear in his novel *The
Delight Makers*, in which he pictures prehistoric life in the Rito de
los Frijoles. Bandelier thinks that at Puye the cave houses, built along
the south face of the cliff, were the winter homes of the people who in
summer occupied the communal dwelling on top of the breezy mesa. At both
Puye and the Rito de los Frijoles the homes are very simple rooms built
in terraces against the friable tufa cliffs, in which were artificial or
natural caves used for storage rooms. The communal village was
architecturally a development of this type. The cliff idea was retained
in the outer wall, built solid as a defense, and the terraced houses
stepped down from that to the central plaza. The Chaco Canyon villages
and the pueblo of Pecos are both excel. lent examples of this type.

The finest cliff dwellings are at the Mesa Verde. The first sight of the
Cliff Palace or the Balcony House is had on stepping out to the brink of
a narrow canyon, fringed with tall pines and dropping hundreds of feet
into the leafy stream bed below. Just under the canyon's brim stand
those marvelous dwellings, still in the sunlight, just as they have
stood for more than a thousand years. The walls of stone, finely worked
and fitted, are solid, rising as high as five stories and giving the
general effect of an enchanted castle held under a spell of silence and
distance. Nowadays

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

one can approach by graded government trails adapted to the tenderest of
feet, but once the active brown dwellers climbed up and down by toe and
hand holes which only a very skillful or daring modern will attempt.
Remember, also, that the cliff man not only got himself over those
trails, but also his game after the hunt, and the crops which he raised
either on the valley floor below or on the plateau above his home. It
must have been hard living, but worth it in the security from marauding
bands of nomadic Indians, once one was snugly there.

Wherever the prehistoric Indian built, he always chose sites well
defended by nature, as were the cliff dwellings, or easily defended by
man, as were the Chaco Canyon villages, which stand in a plain over
which no enemy larger than a coyote could approach unseen. Besides
security he needed water and arable land, game, and timber suitable for
building, but not too large to be cleared away with stone implements. In
some places the water-supply which served the prehistoric Indian has
disappeared, either by dropping into the sand, as at the Gran Quivira,
or because grazing animals have destroyed the grass roots and allowed
great arroyos to wash away the soil, as at Chaco Canyon.

How many of these places were inhabited at one time and why they were
abandoned cannot yet be determined with any accuracy. Recently, however,
A. E. Douglass of the University of Arizona has perfected his discovery
of the determination of prehistoric dates by tree-rings. In the
southwest rainfall varies so much from year to year that annual
tree-rings differ greatly and accordingly, wider rings indicating
heavier rainfall. By comparing series of

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

rings in living trees with identical series in beams and supports found
in ruins, Professor Douglass has finally worked out a chronology
continuous from the tenth century to the twentieth. So it is now
definitely established that the southwestern Indians were building their
finest houses when William the Conqueror was conquering the tribes of
Britain.

Between that time and the Spanish conquest the Indian had developed his
religion, his government, his art, and his architecture to its height.
Take away from the modern Pueblo what the white man has brought him, and
you will see what he used and how he lived before the white man came.
His rooms, then as now, were built of stone or adobe, roofed with piñon
or cedar beams over which were laid saplings or brush and earth. The
rooms were small because the only trees manageable with primitive tools
were small trees. Floors were of hard-packed earth finished with adobe
mixed with blood. A fire-place, built in the corner, gave light and heat
and smoke. In many ruins are found alternate layers of smoke and fresh
plaster, indicating an effort at good housekeeping against very heavy
odds. A niche in the wall held the sacred meal, poles hung on thongs
held garments or drying meat, and metates or grinding-stones were set in
the floor. Then as now meal was ground by a kneeling woman who swung her
body back and forth, bearing down on the *mano* which crushed the
kernels into finer and finer meal. No doubt the prehistoric woman sang
the very songs which still celebrate the wonder of the corn, for then as
now the corn was the sacred mother, typical of all good, on whose bounty
life depended.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Decorations were scanty, though sometimes simple frescoes are found in
ruins, especially in kivas or on cliffs outside the houses. These
pictographs may have been messages, drawings for ceremonial purposes, or
effusions of bad boys done for fun. They have not been fully deciphered,
though various symbols of sun, moon, stars, rainbow, rain, clouds,
animals, and various clan symbols used today are found among them.

Among the furnishings of the prehistoric homes were -the looms on which
the men wove cotton garments. Men were weavers then and women potters, a
distinction still found in Hopiland, where the men weave ceremonial
garments. These Hopi mantles, kirtles, and sashes were probably the
customary dress of the cliff dweller when he did not wrap himself in
skin skirts as the, snake-dancer does now. Moccasins were the same as
now with the exception that the ancient Indian did not make cow-hide
soles. He made blankets of sinew wound with rabbit-skin for warmth, or
feathers for beauty. Feathers were very important, especially the plumes
of the eagle and the turkey, which have always been used ceremonially.
Personal adornment included jewelry of colored stones, of bones, of
shells traded with seaside tribes, and of turquoise polished and strung
as beads or inlaid in stone or bone. All of these ornaments are made
today, but the work was finer in the Great Age than any which is done
now.

The women made baskets, an art which has almost disappeared from modern
pueblo life, except in the Hopi villages and in some of the Rio Grande
pueblos. None of the present-day work is as fine as that of the
prehistoric women.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They also made
pottery, developing it from the crudest uncolored coiled ware to the
height of the beautifully decorated glazed ware of the Great Age. The
art of glazing declined rapidly after the arrival of the white man,
until it was altogether lost. Painted pottery is still a fine art in
most of the pueblos. Through pottery most of the prehistoric chronicle
has been read, for pottery is at once the most perishable and the most
enduring of household goods. A broken pot is of no value. Nobody making
a move would think of taking it, but, left on the rubbish-heap, the
pieces last forever and archæologists coming along a thousand years
later can learn much from the broken bits. Besides pottery, excavations
yield a vast number of bone and stone tools and implements, everything
that was needed for working stone, skins, cotton, and clay. Thrilling
things are occasionally found, like flutes on which a few notes may
still be blown or head-dresses such as are worn in the dances of today.

Kidder places the Great Age of pueblo development at about the year
1000, a. time when the population had drawn together, because of the
pressure of outside tribes, and "when they had reached that vital moment
in their history when opportunity and necessity were evenly balanced."
The inhabited area had shrunk steadily from the time when roving small
bands spread over a territory reaching from southern Utah to the border
of Mexico. It was to shrink still further, for the peaceful pueblo
people were constantly subject to raids of wandering tribes of Apaches,
of Comanches, and later of the Navajos, who became the traditional
enemy. There was a period between 1000 and 1540,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

however, when the pueblo people had attained a height of development in
government, in religion, and in art which gave promise of even finer
things to come.

### THE WHITE MAN; POPÉ OF SAN JUAN

Then came the white man. Kidder, in writing of the Great Age, says:
"There can be little doubt that had they been allowed to work out their
own salvation, they would eventually have overcome their difficulties
and might well have built up a civilization of a sort not yet attempted
by any group of men. It is the tragedy of native American history that
so much human effort has come to nought, and that so many hopeful
experiments in life and living were cut short by the devastating blight
of the white man's arrival."

What the white man did especially, with the devastating blight of his
arrival, was to check the growth of a truly democratic state. The
prehistoric Indian was completely democratic, as is the Indian of today
in so far as we allow him to be. Everybody lived in the same sort of
house on the same sort of food, everybody worked, and the only honors
and distinctions were those won by personal merit. As there was no
personal accumulation of wealth, there was no inheritance of dignity or
position. When the Spaniards came, they found the Indians governed by
their old men in council, with the cacique, or religious leader, as
final arbiter. The cacique was the only man exempted from labor, and
that was because his time was given to prayer and meditation for the
benefit of all. That is still true today.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The cacique's
fields are tilled for him, communal hunts pro. vide his meat, wood is
chopped and hauled to his door. In return he is expected to be a
spiritual man as well as a wise one, trained by years of self-abnegation
to understand the ways of "those above" and to be the spiritual guide of
his people.

The Spaniards found the Indian friendly, but disappointingly lacking in
the gold and jewels they sought. Fray Marcos de Nizza, a Franciscan
monk, headed the first expedition which came up from Mexico, in 1539. It
was his reports of great wealth that aroused all the Spaniards in Mexico
with a desire to explore, to enrich themselves, and incidentally to save
souls. Fray Marcos got no farther than a sight of Habikuh, the first
Zuñi village on his line of march. The friar, having been ordered to
take care of himself and return with facts about the fabled cities of
wealth, prudently looked upon Habikuh from a neighboring hill and
retired, satisfied that he had seen a great city, probably paved with
gold, undoubtedly studded with turquoise, and unquestionably hiding
untold wealth in its cellars. If he happened to see Habikuh at sunset
and if it glowed in the changing light as modern Zuñi does now, he was
certainly justified in thinking of any amount of gold. But Habikuh was
an adobe town whose only stores were those of garnered crops. Fray
Marcos went no farther, because the leader of his advance, guard, the
Negro Estevan, had been killed at Habikuh, and his band frightened out
of their wits. It was reported that Estevan had made too free with the
Indian women, and that he was killed in consequence. At Santo Domingo
they still occasionally enact the coming of

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the Spaniards, with a swaggering Negro for comedy relief. He leers and
makes ribald remarks to women, and he is properly scorned by the
*conquistadores*, who grandly ride steeds which would be merely
hobby-horses were it not for the histrionic gift of the actors.

Marcos de Nizza undoubtedly reported in Mexico what he thought he had
seen, and his tales brought further expeditions seeking gold. In 1540
Francisco Vásquez de Coronado followed Fray Marcos's route. He visited
all the Zuñi villages, saw Acoma, struck the Rio Grande a few miles
south of where Albuquerque now stands, and followed that stream
northward as far as Taos. Unfortunately Coronado sent out two young
lieutenants who precipitated warfare. Tovar, visiting the Hopi villages,
fired on the peaceful people who came out to meet him; and Alvarado,
demanding gold bracelets at Pecos, imprisoned and flogged two Indian
leaders who had never seen or heard of gold. It was the beginning of the
Indian's deep-seated distrust of the white man, who was henceforth
considered never to keep his word.

While Coronado was frankly in search of wealth, he was accompanied by
monks to convert the heathen, and he left two of them when he returned
to Mexico, Juan de Padilla and Luis de Escalona, both of whom were
killed by the people they had come to save, thus attaining the
distinction of being the first of a long line of martyrs. In general,
the monks seem to have stood out against the grasping cruelty of the
military, though it was a monk who encouraged Tovar to attack the Hopis;
and much of the history of the province of New Mexico deals with the
conflict between the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Church, which
sought the souls of the Indians, and the civil government, which sought
their wealth and their bodies in slavery.

Time moved slowly in those days, and a whole generation grew up between
Coronado's expedition and the next one, when Antonio de Espejo made a
brief tour in 1581. Espejo was as notable for kindliness and fair
dealing as Coronado had been for ruthless inhumanity, with the result
that not a single life was lost on his expedition. He was hospitably
received even where Coronado had been most barbarous. Later leaders were
not always like Espejo, and the Spaniard soon forgot the original kindly
welcome of a people who might easily have exterminated the first
expeditions. So began the long course of the white man's encroachment on
the Indian's land, breaking treaties and agreements until finally it
came about that any Indian, claiming his own, was looked upon as a
treacherous savage.

The Spaniards filtered slowly into the country, spreading their gospel,
their agriculture, their domestic animals, and their government. They
sought gold always, but with less and less hope of finding it, until
their zeal for converts sup" planted their zeal for wealth. They planted
a cross on every village, as it proved to have more spiritual than
material value, and they wrote long memorials to the viceroy in Mexico,
proudly claiming so many converts for the true faith and so many new
subjects for His Most Catholic Majesty. By the end of the century Spain
had decided that the country north of the Rio Grande was worth holding,
even if it was not full of gold nuggets to be had for the

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

picking up. So expeditions were organized for permanent occupation,
never forgetting the need for recurrent baptism and conversion.
Thousands of Indians were reported baptized, but thousands apparently
needed to be baptized again and again.

In 1598 Juan de Oñate arrived with a train that must have been a
spectacle. He brought cattle and sheep, wagonloads of household goods,
artisans and priests, women and children. His wagons were of the type we
know as "*carretas*"--inadequate-looking baskets of saplings mounted on
groaning, screeching wheels of solid wood, and loaded, no doubt, with
furniture, tools, food, and seeds, and surmounted with frightened women
holding babies. Months they struggled over deserts and climbed
mountains, the wagons lurching crazily over grassy hummocks and lava
beds, while the leaders tried to renew treaties of peace and establish
confidence among the Indians.

Oñate visited all the pueblos and received submission from all except
Acoma, which had to be separately "reduced" from time to time. When he
got as far north as the pueblo of San Juan, he was so courteously
received that he gave it the honorable title "de los Caballeros" (of the
gentlemen) and made his capital in its neighborhood. The first capital
of New Mexico was San Gabriel, and the name New Mexico was then
established, though it had probably first been used by Ibarra in 1565.
By 1607 the capital had been moved to Santa Fe, but during his stay at
San Gabriel, Oñate had solidified his position as governor. He called a
conference of Pueblo leaders at Santo Domingo and formally received
their united allegiance to the Spanish

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

crown. He also got the caciques to agree to adopt the Christian religion
if, after suitable instruction, they decided that they liked it. Their
acceptance of the new faith, even conditionally, was probably made
easier by the fact that nearly all Indians had a belief that a white god
would come to save them. This god was so readily identified with the
Christ whom the monks preached that as late as 1900 an old Indian
interpreting a sermon in the pueblo of Jemez used the name of the
ancient god as a translation of "Christ." That they never allowed the
new faith to supplant the old is obvious everywhere today. For four
hundred years the Indian has pursued his ancient ways, while making
reverent, but rather distant, obeisance before the Christian altars.

Most of the records of the seventeenth century were destroyed in 1680,
and so what went on is known only in general. Civil and ecclesiastical
governments were established along the lines laid down for all Spanish
colonies. In 1630 Fray Alonzo de Benavides, then "*custodio*" for New
Mexico, reported that there were fifty friars, serving over sixty
thousand Christian Indians, living in ninety pueblos, each with its own
church. He asked for the establishment of a bishopric, which he said
could be easily supported from the tithes. The friar probably greatly
exaggerated both the number of converts and the number of churches, but
no doubt there were enough missions to bring all the Pueblos under the
domination of the Church. During the century they suffered increasing
exactions from both lay and clerical Spaniards. Occasional uprisings
were attempted and sternly put down by the governors, who imprisoned,
flogged,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

enslaved, and hanged with a ruthless hand. From being a free people
eagerly working out their own salvation, the Indians had become a slave
population, owing so much labor to the crown and the Church, and. so
bewildered, undoubtedly, by a superimposed civilization that their own
development came to a complete standstill, and deterioration set in.
Their arts declined, their democratic government was overlaid by royal
governors and tax- and tithe-gatherers, and as the subject and despised
race they faced that death of the spirit which is the worst of all. In
time all of this became too heavy to be borne, and in 1680 they made
their great effort to throw off the yoke of a people fated, by the
ownership of the heavier artillery, to dominate them.

Popé, a medicine-man of San Juan, organized the revolt. Working from
Taos as his headquarters, he went quietly from pueblo to pueblo,
arousing the people to a sense of their wrongs, choosing leaders, making
plans, and managing to keep the secret through months of organizing. The
plan was a, general uprising on August 11 in which every Spaniard--every
man, woman, and child--should be killed. The secret was so well kept
that it was only a few days before the time that an Indian convert told
his priest. Governor Otermín was at once notified and plans were made to
check the revolt. But it was too late, or Popé was too quick for them.
He moved his date a day, and on August 10 the Indians rose so unitedly
and so vigorously that every Spaniard was either killed or forced to
flee. Many stories are told of priests who tried to hold their converts
by standing bravely before the altars with sacred vessels

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

in their hands, only to be struck down. Otermín made a brave stand at
Sante Fe, but when he was informed that all the villages south of San
Felipe had been abandoned, he finally withdrew, unmolested by the
Indians. He gathered up his people as he retreated, and finally reached
El Paso, where he made the best of a bad situation, sent to Mexico for
help, and began to organize for a return. However cruel and intolerant
the Spaniards were, they never lacked courage, and Otermín made a
determined effort to regain his lost province, but unsuccessfully.

The Indians, free at last, celebrated by destroying church and
government records, by dancing around a great fire in the Santa Fe
plaza, by solemnly forswearing allegiance to the new religion, and by
washing off the taint of baptism in amole suds. Popé, swollen with pride
and full of Spanish ideas, then tried to make himself a king and so
brought about the final downfall of his people. He rode from pueblo to
pueblo accoutered and attended as he had seen Spanish governors do, and
he made enemies everywhere. The twelve years during which the Spaniards
were away were years of increasing internal dissension, until finally
pueblo was warring against pueblo, and the stage was set for an easy
reconquest by Don Diego de Vargas, who entered the province in 1692.

De Vargas tried kindly measures. He promised forgiveness to all who
would submit to Spanish rule, he appointed Indian leaders to positions
of authority, he tried in every way to efface the impression of Spanish
cruelty and to bind to him as many pueblos as possible. He succeeded
fairly well with the Keres people, and he finally conquered the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tewas who held
Santa Fe. The old palace was again purified of a false faith, and de
Vargas set out from there to complete the reconquest of his province. It
was not easy to do, for the Tewas had retreated to the Black Mesa at San
Ildefonso, where they could hold him off indefinitely. Jemez Indians
allied themselves with the Navajos, Taos called in the Utes to help, and
a natural distrust of Spanish promises caused many a "reduced" pueblo to
backslide into the arms of its intractable neighbors. In a few brisk
battles, however, and with some clever diplomacy, the Spaniards finally
succeeded in overcoming the Indians, and New Mexico was "restored."
Acoma, as usual, required more than one reduction, and the Hopi villages
never did submit. They remained, in fact, a thorn in the side of the
Spanish during their entire administration of New Mexico. At this time a
handful of Tewas emigrated to join the Hopis, settling on the First
Mesa, where a hamlet still carries their name and where certain Tewa
dances are still given.

During the years of reconquest and for the century following there was
much shifting of Pueblo population. So many villages moved that very few
of them today occupy exactly the same sites on which the Spaniards first
found them. In some places, as at Jemez, several pueblos drew together
to form one. During the years that Acoma was unconquered, friendly
Acomas joined people from Zuñi and formed the new Laguna villages. Clans
migrated from place to place, taking their ceremonies with them. A
mixture of the blood of plains Indians must have occurred, especially in
places like Jemez and Taos. The entire

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

population shrank considerably, and certain linguistic groups, like the
Piros, disappeared entirely, literally harried out of existence by their
warring neighbors.

New Mexico remained a Spanish province for a hundred and twenty years.
During that time its history was a monotonous succession of squabbles
between civil and ecclesiastical powers, petty warfare against outside
Indians, repeated "reductions" of Acoma, futile attempts to conquer the
Hopis. Meanwhile Church and State between them collected enough tithes
and taxes, required enough labor, and inflicted enough punishment to
make the Indian's life a hard one. The Indians, very naturally, drew
into a hard impenetrable shell of silence and concealment. The old forms
of worship were not abandoned; they were performed secretly in the kivas
or in hidden places, thus establishing the custom of concealing all
important ceremonies from the whites. The priests, in their efforts to
suppress these rites, adopted the custom of considering them witchcraft
and of treating the Indian caciques as wizards and sorcerers. Many of
them were whipped, branded, enslaved, even killed for practicing the old
religions. The ceremonies which were conducted openly were combined with
the observance of Catholic feast-days in the extraordinary mixture of
faiths which still prevails.

### THE PUEBLO INDIAN AND THE AMERICAN

In 1822 Mexico declared its independence of Spain and established a
republic, weak enough at its center, absolutely impotent on its distant
frontier in New Mexico. It

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

was then only a matter of time until the United States, vigorously
pushing westward, should take over so desirable a territory as New
Mexico, which then extended to the Pacific Ocean. In 1846 General
Stephen W. Kearny marched into New Mexico, and the Mexican General fled
before him. Kearny made proclamations claiming New Mexico for the United
States, granting amnesty, religious freedom, citizenship, and
undisturbed ownership of land to everybody; and then passed on to
California. He inaugurated the business of chasing Navajos, Apaches, and
Comanches, an exercise which was the preoccupation of the American Army
in the southwest for about seventy years, until the Indians were finally
exterminated or penned on reservations and more or less habituated to
staying there. The United States specifically recognized the right of
the Pueblos to their pueblos and surrounding lands, which had been
granted them by the Spanish crown in the sixteenth century and confirmed
by the Mexican government in the nineteenth. Finally, during the
presidency of Abraham Lincoln, governors of all pueblos journeyed to
Washington and were presented with silver-headed canes, inscribed:
"Pueblo of ----. A. Lincoln, President. 1863." These canes, with older
ones presented by the Spaniards, are today the honored possessions of
the pueblo governors and the badge of office.

The Pueblo Indians probably noticed very little change under the new
régime, except that the blue-coats gave them better protection from the
nomadic enemies. Spain had given them very little help during the last
years of its administration; Mexico practically none at all. The United

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> States relieved
them of the menace of their ancient foes and otherwise gave them little
attention, except to appoint Indian agents to look after them. These
agents were first military men, who looked upon Indians as a conquest,
and then political appointees, who considered them a plum. They
naturally permitted many abuses, especially in the matter of
encroachment on Indian lands and the violation of Indian water-rights.
Recent legislation promises to make fair adjustment and restitution in
both these matters.

Now the Indian agents are Civil Service employees who consider
themselves and are generally considered the guardians and advocates of
the Indians under their care. They are assisted by experts in
irrigation, agriculture, and stock-raising, by doctors, and recently by
nurses. In matters of contract, such as leasing of lands and rights of
way, the agent acts for the pueblo, which cannot make a legal agreement
without the consent of the Secretary of the Interior.

The Pueblos own their lands communally and assign plots to individual
Indians, who are granted as much as they can cultivate. As far as
possible the Indians are allowed to govern themselves, and most agents
observe that the best-governed pueblos are those in which the influence
of the white man is least felt. Pueblo life is so unified that as
outside influence breaks down old ways of living and of worshiping, old
moralities are forgotten, reverence for old people and the ancient
religion is lost, even self-respect declines.

The breaking-down of the old ways is accomplished in the schools. For
years after the American occupation of New Mexico the government made no
provision for Indian

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

education, and the Catholic missions, already established, were
permitted to continue their religious instruction. In time Protestants
realized that they were overlooking a fertile field, Protestant missions
were established, and the government allowed various religious sects,
both Catholic and Protestant, to conduct Indian schools under contract.
Abuses developed and finally government schools were established on a
non-sectarian basis. They are operated as military schools and they take
the children from the fourth grade to or through the high school. The
first four grades are usually covered in day-schools in the pueblos. The
training follows the usual course of the American public schools with
the addition that Indian girls are given training in housekeeping, and
the boys in farming and in trades. The avowed purpose is to prepare the
young Indian for citizenship and for making a living.

Actually very little attention is paid to his special needs or aptitudes
or to the revival or maintenance of his arts and crafts. The result is
to unfit him for life among his own people. In pueblo life the
adolescent years are very important for learning the clan and tribal
traditions, the songs and dances. The Indian school-child misses all
this, and when he returns to the pueblo, he is a misfit, almost a
stranger, with his American clothes and his short hair. Until recently
short hair was considered a disgrace, and in some places it still bars a
man from the dances. Sometimes they allow their hair to grow, pick up
the old ways as well as they can, take part in pueblo affairs, and make
some sort of adjustment. Sometimes they can only withdraw sullenly from
the pueblo and seek work in the white man's towns. In

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Winslow, Arizona,
there are a hundred and seventy Laguna Indians working on the railroad.
Such a group has, of course, lost the advantage of the closely knit
pueblo group with its rich social and ceremonial life, which is their
heritage. It portends the inevitable end: the dissolution of pueblo life
and the abandonment of the pueblos.

Meanwhile everything about pueblo life is in a state of flux, including
the government, which is a combination of the old and the new. The
governor, elected annually by the heads of families, is the civil
officer with whom the white man deals. He has one or two lieutenants,
elected with him or appointed by him. All of them are nominated by the
cacique, that hidden force who is the final arbiter. The governor and
his lieutenants act as judges, the disputants being permitted to choose
which man shall hear their case. The governor appoints a sheriff. There
is a war captain, probably equal in power with the governor. Wars being
rare in these days, the war captain's duties have to do with the dances:
setting the dates, calling the dancers, and being the officer in charge
on dance days. Sometimes he is in charge of the ditch to see that all
landholders secure a fair amount of water. Other officers are appointed
as needed. A few modern pueblos, such as Isleta and Laguna, have
treasurers and secretaries and own government bonds. Most pueblos have
checking-accounts in Albuquerque or Santa Fe banks.

Behind the governor stands the body of men known as the *principales*,
or council. They are selected differently in different pueblos;
sometimes they are all the men who have served as governors. The
*principales* seem to be the turning-point

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

between the open and the hidden government of the pueblo, for they are
answerable also to the cacique. The governor, bearing his cane of
office, is a dignified person with every appearance of authority, but if
he is asked something unusual or something which might run counter to
pueblo tradition, he at once becomes the mouthpiece of the
*principales*; and sooner or later the persistent inquirer finds that
the *principales* are dependent finally upon the decision of the
cacique. Naturally one who deals directly with the gods in secret rite
and receives mystic guidance through prayer and trance must be heeded.
More than one white man has found that his affair must wait until the
cacique has retired to his hidden shrine for prayer and fasting and
direction as to what to do.

All of this means that the Pueblo Indian is a person of dual nature. The
white man's Indian is trained in a government school and turned out as a
fairly good carpenter, farmer, and Christian. In so far as the education
has been a success, he apes the ways of the white man even to the extent
of living in the white man's town rather than in his own. The other face
of him, however, is turned away from the white man and everything he
typifies. Turning his back on the government school, the Catholic
mission, and the Protestant church, he is dominated by his ancient
beliefs, guided by his ancestral leaders. His real life centers in the
kiva, his real hope is in the gods of the ancients, those potent beings
who still bring him water and corn, prowess in the hunt, happiness in
his life, and a deep spiritual understanding such as the white man does
not know.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II: Dances of the Rio Grande Pueblos](dg04)
