[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dg10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU0PK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Dancing Gods*, by Erna Fergusson, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

# IX: Apache Dances

### THE MESCALERO APACHE FOURTH OF JULY

We reached the Apache camp-ground about ten o'clock at night. Driving
out from the nearest town, we had passed many cars, most of them loaded
with white people. In a few we saw Indians, dressed like whites. Our car
lights flashed on feathery mesquite and on the thick leaves of
greasewood, which filled the air with its pungency in spite of the dust.
Then we saw the rough red boles of pines, and their mountainous odor
took the place of the heavy smell of greasewood. Once we ran along a
stream which rippled coolly on that hot July night.

Twenty miles from town we reached the camp. Lights streamed up against
the tall feathery tops of pines, and even from the road we saw a few
tepees: slim, tapering cones built of saplings and covered with
tarpaulin or buckskin. Fires inside tinted them like shells. Dark
figures moved against a blare of light at the center of the encampment,
and hundreds of cars were parked around it.

As we drew up, an Apache came up to us, showing his policeman's badge.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

"That's right," he said; "you park there. You're all right. I'll watch
your car. That's all right. And if you need anything, you just ask for
Matthew. I'm Matthew."

Matthew somehow broke the illusion, for from his conversation we felt
that there was little here that was Indian. The soft flush of fires in
the tepees was lost in the flare of gasoline lamps on the frame booths
around the arena; and we had to strain our ears to catch even a hint of
the Indian chant which was murmurously pounding along under the
mechanical stridor of phonographs like a persistent though receding
tide.

They were dancing to the chant; men and women, white and red, hand in
hand, moving slowly in a large circle and kicking up the dust in a
sideways shuffle. It was like the circle dance of the Navajos. Matthew
said they call it "Friendship-dance." Among the dancers were men old
enough to have ramped and fought with Geronimo; sullen-looking Apache
boys in silk shirts; giggling girls, both white and red, in calico or
organdie; a few white couples, the men careful to place themselves
between their women and the contamination of the Indians; Mexicans
looking pale and puny beside the swarthy Apaches. Three white youths,
obvious "Easterners" and ostentatiously out to do the right thing by the
Indians, danced hand in hand with Apaches, their solemn faces uplifted.
One wore beaded headband and moccasins, bright blue against his Boy
Scout shirt and shorts; when it began to rain, he added a yellow slicker
to his ensemble and gravely went on dancing. We were disappointed to see
no Apache skin and bead costumes, no bright color, not even gay shawls,
except on an

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

occasional Mexican flapper, heavily rouged and uncomfortably
high-heeled.

At the western side of the arena towered the ceremonial tepee, no less
than forty feet tall, and feathering out at the top in uncut pine. The
lower part was banked with scrub-oak, which also made its entrance, a
narrow lane jammed with people. We worked our way through until we stood
at the lodge door. The floor was covered with broken golden straw, and
in the middle a hole had been dug for the fire, which is not allowed to
go out during the entire four-day ceremony. It threw a wavering glow on
the faces of two medicine-men who sat there chanting. Each man rested
his left hand on a long wand stuck into the ground, and in his right he
shook a rattle of animal hoofs, beating time to the low steady
recitative. It was much like a Navajo chant, but without the same
resonant quality.

These men, we knew, were conducting the ancient puberty ceremony, known
delicately by neighboring whites as the "Coming-out Party." The tepee is
built at dawn on the first day, with elaborate rites. This chanting and
the dancing of the little girls are the main ceremony, and on the last
morning the tepee is dismantled, also ceremonially. Matthew said that we
should see the maidens dance tomorrow. He, as glib and as
uncommunicative as the true white man's Indian, told us that we had
missed the Crown-dance, which would be done again tomorrow night. This
is unrelated to the puberty ceremony, and their incongruous union is due
to the fact that government officials permit only this one annual
get-together. Consequently these two ancestral tribal observances must
be given on the American

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Day of Liberty,
and so close to the highway that they are attended by more whites than
Indians.

Outside the tepee we came upon the orchestra for the dancing: four men
chanting to the notes of a tomtom made by stretching an inner tube over
a metal drum, boldly labelled: "Firestone." The circle had broken and
couples were dancing as they do in the Navajo Squaw-dance, but without
touching. They went back and forth, in a sort of impersonal and divorced
one-step, with set impassive faces. This is a pay-to-get-away affair,
but the women are less insistent than the Navajos. Matthew said that the
boy paid whatever the girl asked; it was bad manners not to.

Hamburgers and hot-dogs sizzled in the booths, Mexican venders ladled
ice-cream into cones, tops snapped off of pop-bottles, the gasoline
lamps sputtered and flared. Every now and then the hard cracking of
fire-crackers or the long zooming of a sky-rocket. White people talking
in the "Yes, ma'am, you-all" dialect. It was such a crowd as might be
seen at any Fourth of July celebration from eastern New Mexico to
Florida. We decided to go back to town, hoping for something more Indian
tomorrow.

*The Fourth of July*

As we drove out that hot Fourth of July morning, we picked up a youth
trudging along the dusty highway. He had lived all his life among the
Apaches, and when he learned that we were interested, he agreed to talk.

"I'll tell you what I know," he said, "if you won't use my name. I'd
rather keep what little friendship they have

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

for me than to have my name in a book. It's no honor for an Apache to be
a white man's friend, you know. They hate us so. I don't blame them for
hating us," said Apache Friend.

He pointed out a frame house such as the government is trying to
substitute for the old tepees. "They use the house for horses and sleep
in the tepee," he said, amused. "Those people are of Geronimo's band."

Geronimo's son hangs about a trading-post and permits tourists to
photograph him, but most of the Apaches have no more to do with whites
than they must. Even the children in the schools look sullen. Apache
Friend said that many of them run away, thirty or forty annually, and
disappear into the mountains, or are brought back for whippings and
solitary confinement. The older people carry the typical Indian reserve
to the highest degree. They show none of the amused tolerance which
greets a white visitor in a pueblo, nor any of the haughty indifference
of the People at a Navajo sing.

I asked an Indian Service man about it. "What is the matter with these
people? They look broken, crushed."

He tried to put me off with official figures as to how much fine timber
there is on the reservation, how many frame houses, how many
peach-trees. But I persisted: I did not mean material things. I wanted
to know what had happened to the spirit of this fiercest, hardiest,
nearest invincible of all the tribes. At last he told me.

"After all," he said, "these people have been prisoners of war for a
long time."

I remembered what another Indian Service man had

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

told me: that these people have rich land, and leisure, and whisky. They
have had less to struggle against, in nature, than the Navajos, or even
the Pueblos.

\*   \*  
\*

When we reached the encampment, dust had been pulverized to a powder
which never seemed to settle, but which had whitened the pines many feet
above the ground. The American flags on the booths hung limp. Flies
buzzed about sticky children. Few people were in sight. We watched an
old hag who was working about one of the tepees, her flat bare feet
plodding under a dirty calico wrapper belted with a strip of cretonne.
She hauled water, chopped wood, butchered a sheep hung under a tree; and
between times she lugged two fat babies about, one on her back, the
other tagging behind.

We had hoped to see the *débutantes*, and soon they came by, passing
from the ceremonial tepee to the family shelter. The old rule requiring
them to spend the entire four days in the ceremonial lodge has broken
down. They looked about fourteen, though Apache Friend thought they were
older, and they were pretty and shy. They wore buckskin dresses,
probably old ceremonial gowns, as most families keep these beautiful
garments, which they no longer wear. Both dresses were of soft yellow
buckskin with fringed skirts and over-blouses and deep fringed yokes
falling over the arms. Their high boots had beaded toes, and a few beads
decorated the dresses. The dignity and grace of this costume compared
with the dress of the other girls were startling.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Each girl wore two
eagle-feathers tied to her crown and falling down behind, an odd effect
over bobbed hair. All Apache women were, traditionally, daughters of
war, and the eagle brings luck in war. Pitiful survival among a people
too crushed even to fight for their own clothes, their own names, their
own religious rites.

It was a long, hot day. Most of the white people and the young Apaches
had gone down the road to a baseball game between the Apaches and a team
from El Paso. We watched an Apache girl in a spotted dress pick up a
white beau. They sat at a hot-dog booth eating, her beautiful smooth
brown legs showing above very low socks.

Matthew came by to assure us that we were all right. Then he turned to
another policeman and spoke low.

"Yeah," he said, "they got a Mexican girl and an Apache boy, over there
behind the camp. They took 'em both to the hoosegow."

Six tall Navajos stalked by, a blessed relief to the spirit, for here
was real, unashamed, unreconciled Indian. These men felt no compulsion
to imitate the white people they saw. They had the drabness of shirts
and trousers well subordinated to a barbaric lavishness of silver and
turquoise. They all wore large hats, and one had a folded blanket
hanging over his shoulder. They walked about like people of the castle
watching the doings of the peasantry.

Late in the afternoon Matthew came round to say that Kiowa visitors from
the Kiowa reservation were going to dance; so we found seats on the
wood-pile and sat teetering on a log which upheld a couple of Apache
women on the other end. They were part of a group dominated by a large

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

dame, conspicuous in a bright pink blanket and gold-rimmed spectacles.
She sat in a rocking-chair. The others, in calico, organdie, and black
satin, made the best of upturned boxes and the logs. They chatted. I
could not hear the words, but the voices were curiously like those of
white women. None of the low chuckling of Navajo women, or the lilting
murmur of Pueblos or Hopis. These Apaches sounded like the typical
small-town American women who were attending their show: the same
inflections, maybe the same ideas. It just happened that their skins
were velvety brown instead of red and shining.

Apaches gathered in the arena. Navajos condescended to show some
interest. White people made wise-cracks. Then the Kiowas appeared; four
men for the orchestra and four dancers.

Two of the dancers were in nondescript clothing, one in bright blue
underwear; and a small boy had set off his yellow union-suit with beaded
vest and moccasins and porcupine head-dress. The blue man, a lithe young
fellow, was decorated all over with mirrors, each surrounded with raying
eagle-feathers tipped with red puffs of down. He wore a porcupine roach,
also fluffy with down, and from his head to his heels flowed long
streamers of feathers and bells.

All danced together, but the blue dancer completely outshone the others.
He danced with quick sure steps, his feet lightly patting the earth to
the jingling *obbligato* of his bells. Crouching, he whirled and
pivoted, and sometimes he bent his limber body so far back that his
roach almost swept the ground. The two colorless men patiently made

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

a background for him, and the little yellow boy did his best.

Then the six Navajos danced a Yebetchai. They wore no masks or costumes,
but a medicine-man led them with scattered meal, and they were grave and
dignified. Something hard and strong came across that stifling dusty
place with their vigorous caterwauling: something of the uncompromising
desert where the spirit of the Navajo still lives, unconquered.

Hot vicious puffs of wind had been raising clouds of dust all afternoon,
but about sunset the thunderous heat suddenly precipitated itself into
rain. For half an hour hard, spattering drops came down briskly, while
the setting sun cast long, golden bars between the clouds and made vivid
the red of the pine holes and the green of the needles. It was a most
refreshing rain; it cleared the air, washed the trees, and drove most of
the white people away. Also it made us feel cold in our dampened
clothes, so we went into the cook-shelter, where a large fire was
burning. Many Apaches had gathered there, and old crones stooped and
mumbled about the embers where they were baking ceremonial bread for the
dancers: the bread of mesquite beans, which was the ancient desert fare.

The sun went down. The moon came up. Little cook-fires popped up
everywhere; and the place took on a look of enchantment, with red light
shining through canvas, and the lofty dignity of the ceremonial tepee
rising lordly above the eating-shacks. Shortly after sunset the
crown-dancers came. Apaches call them this because of the head-dress;
whites usually miscall the dance the Devil-dance. Captain

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> John G. Bourke of
the American Army, who wrote an account of the ceremony in 1887, says
that the performers represent gods, so he called it the Spirit-dance.
Bourke also says that it was given "only upon the most solemn occasions,
such as the setting out of a war party, the appearance of an epidemic,
or something else of like portent." I wondered, as I watched, whether
the present predicament of the tribe looks to the medicine-men more like
a war or an epidemic.

As the figures approached the fire, they appeared thoroughly savage,
with their blackened torsos, hidden faces, and towering crowns. Their
bodies were covered with stripes, spots, and zigzags of red, yellow, and
white, and their legs were hidden under long, fringed buckskin skirts
and high boots with upturned toes. The only modern touches were Scotch
plaid shawls around their waists and bandannas around their necks. The
personality of the man was hidden under an unwrinkled hood of black
buckskin, so smooth that it molded to the features; and the personality
of the god appeared in the skeleton-like superstructure of yucca withes
which topped it. The crowns varied in detail according to the clan of
the dancer; but every one was wider than the man's shoulders, not less
than two feet tall, and so intricate and beautiful in detail as to
suggest snow crystals. They were yellow and painted with symbols in
which sun and moon and lightning seemed to predominate. Each dancer
carried two swords of yucca, whittled thin and decorated with lightning
marks.

They first stopped before the medicine-man, who sprinkled pollen. Then
each man approached him, with a

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

straddling, hopping step, knees bent, swords held outward from flexed
elbows, body and huge delicate head-dress turning with startled
suddenness from side to side. He chasséd back and forth several times,
and finally brought his swords together behind the medicine-man's neck
and gave place to the next man. All the time they gave the weird clarion
call of the hoot-owl, a sacred bird to the Apaches, a devil to other
tribes.

When all had made this salutation, they began to dance round the fire,
silhouetted like great goblins against the blaze. The dance is as
angular as though the men were animated wooden figures on strings.
Broad, heavily muscled backs turned, swinging the head-dresses jerkily
from side to side; wooden swords moved as though attached to wooden
arms, long skirts swished softly, and the raucous calling persisted
until the air was filled with it. What it meant did not appear, but it
had an element of obscenity not usual in Indian ceremonies: they were
like ribald demons from a savage hell, devils rather than spirits, as
they danced under the crowns of the gods.

\*   \*  
\*

This dance was repeated all night, with occasional intervals for the
Friendship-dance or the Squaw-dance. Whatever went on outside, there was
a never-ceasing murmur from the tepee where the medicine-men carried on
their unrelated ceremony for the virgins. It was so dark in there that I
could scarcely see until my eyes grew accustomed to the blackness, which
was relieved only by the dull

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

reflection from the fire-hole. Opposite the entrance two deerskins had
been laid on the ground, and there the little girls knelt: quiet in
their heavy dresses, pale brown faces bent, hands upheld with the palms
outward in a gesture suggestively Japanese. At certain points in the
chanting a crooked old witch of a woman bent over to pound a
prayer-stick into the ground around the hole. Apache Friend said there
was one for each song, and that by morning the circle would be complete.
Now and then a passing car threw a beam of white light through the
leaves, and I saw clearly the tired faces of the men, the wizened old
women, the demurely drooping maidens.

The girls danced one at a time: a gentle shimmying step from one end to
the other of the buckskin on which she stood. Hands up, eyes down, the
buckskin dress softly whispering as they danced, they moved like
hypnotized victims, impersonal, without volition. At intervals one of
the old women wailed: a long-drawn, shuddering plaint, as though for all
the sorrows of all the women of the world. Were they lamenting, I
wondered, for these young things facing the sufferings of womanhood, or
for the departed savage glories of their tribe? Whatever it was, their
animal-like lamentations filled the very air with woe.

This continued all night. Men chanting. Old women marking the end of
each song with a prayer-stick. Enchanted maidens kneeling helpless, or
rising to dance within the narrow radius allowed them; still under a
spell, quietly acquiescent before a world to which they were introduced
by that mournful old-woman wail.

Apache Friend said that at dawn the girls would run a

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

race, pursued by the youths--a race which used to be the last dash of
virginity, resulting in marriage. Now, said Apache Friend, it is merely
a friendly game for boys and girls to get acquainted.

Maybe.

### THE JICARILLA APACHE FIESTA

Mid-September in New Mexico. Electric sunshine: A vivifying warmth that
stimulates and relaxes. The rainy season is over, and the sky is so
clear that one can see right through it to infinity. Large white clouds
turn silver flanks to the sun and drag lazy shadows across the mesas.
Along the streams and ditches where Mexicans and Indians have planted
little orchards, ripe fruit drops over broken adobe walls. Gathered corn
waits in multi-colored piles to be braided and hung away in store-rooms.
Every flat adobe house flames with long strings of aromatic chili. Women
have peeled melons and stuck them up like bare skulls on sticks to dry,
and laid trays of peaches and apples in the sun. On the mountain sides
aspens have turned yellow, and frost is beginning to touch the tree-tops
in the valleys.

Pueblo people are ready to trade their crops for Navajo blankets and
silver and for Apache baskets. And a good place to trade is where the
Jicarilla Apaches hold their *fiesta* at Horse Lake on September
fifteenth. White visitors find it a long journey from Santa Fe, more
than a hundred and fifty miles of mountain and desert road; but Indians
come even farther than that, arriving in time for several

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

days' barter before the feast. The feast itself seems unimportant; it is
probably an affair arranged by the government and of no tribal
significance to the Apaches. There are foot- and horse-races, baseball
games, tugs of war--all sorts of contests between the Jicarillas of the
mountains and those of the plain. But the people! The real show is the
people.

One year I watched them all day long.

I sat on the running-board of a weary car, caked with hard mud, dusty
and scratched from the bumping journey up the Chama River, past dreaming
Mexican towns which have not changed their ways in a hundred years, and
across rolling uplands covered with piñon and cedar trees. Here we were
in an amphitheater of the mountains. Pines and smaller evergreens came
tentatively down from the hills and hesitated, leaving miles of tawny
grass, speckled with gray sage. In the middle lay the lake, a low marshy
pond, unbeautiful in itself, but reflecting great beauty of shining
clouds and pointed, wavering pines against incredible blue. Everywhere
were tepees: white, ivory, and dull soft tan; hundreds of tepees, and
around them hundreds of Apaches gathered from all parts of the
reservation. Here and there Navajos and Pueblos had made brush shelters
beside their wagons.

Friends from all the Indian country stopped to greet us. Tall, slender
San Ildefonso was there with his gentle wife. Her Oriental beauty was
swathed in scarfs of cerise and magenta, flowing from her shining hair
to her small buckskin boots. They had a load of black jars to sell,
fruit to trade or to eat, a couple of babies to help enjoy the fun.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

Isleta came by. More stolid, these people. The man's heavy shoulders
were outlined in crochet lace over red flannel, and his flat-topped hat
rested on his hair in a queue. His wife was broad and comfortable. She
ducked out from under the flat basket of grapes on her head and laid
aside her fringed shawl. It was hot, and she was glad to stretch her
heavy buckskin legs in the shade of our car. They reported good trading
as we munched winy grapes. They had exchanged a wagon-load of grapes and
peaches for baskets, bracelets, and a fine war-bonnet. Feathered
war-bonnets used to be worn only by plains Indians, but Indian shows are
bringing them into more general use.

As we talked, I watched the shifting crowd: a kaleidoscope changing so
rapidly that it was hard to catch detail. Unlike the Mescaleros, these
Apaches have plenty of gorgeousness. Almost every man had a beaded band
on his hat, and many wore moccasins heavily incrusted with beads. Young
blades swaggered in red or green silk shirts and beaded vests, assessed
by a trader as worth from eighty to a hundred and fifty dollars. The old
custom of plucking the eyebrows and lashes has died out, but nearly all
had strong red or yellow lines across the cheeks.

The women also were painted, but they ran to red spots on high
cheek-bones. Their costumes reflected their lives, both past and
present. I saw many stunning wild creatures in beaded buckskin dresses,
high boots, long braids falling over their shoulders, and beaded bands
around their heads. Full calico skirts of one color banded with another
showed the influence of lady teachers of the nineties. Bright silk
handkerchiefs over the shoulders--any woman's love of

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

finery. Heavy metal-studded belts such as cowboys wear on bucking
horses--she has not lost her tribal art of horsemanship. In every belt a
huge, vicious-looking knife. Is she as subdued as we believe? We watched
those knives all day. They chopped wood, butchered sheep, dug holes for
tepee poles and trenches for drainage, cut bread; and each woman wielded
her knife with a careless adroitness fascinating to see.

In the course of the morning a Franciscan monk arrived from the nearest
town. He unhitched his horses and, assisted by a Mexican boy, made an
altar in the back of his buckboard. They spread a lace-edged
altar-cloth, placed the pyx and the chalice and the missal. The priest
adjusted the chasuble and alb over his rough Franciscan gown, and the
boy donned a white surplice. A few people gathered. Mexican women turned
up the French heels of badly fitting shoes and bent flowered hats as
they knelt. Mexican men got stiffly down on one knee and fingered
rosaries in gnarled hands. Several children followed the doings of their
elders. I watched to see the Apache congregation gather. A few stood
awkwardly near, but most of the Apaches were engaged in trading, in
racing, in multifarious Indian affairs. A dozen people, perhaps, were
aware of the mass. The acolyte served, moving the missal from side to
side of the altar, and genuflecting as he crossed behind the priest, who
stood in the dust reverently raising the Host in his hands as he
murmured the sonorous Latin phrases.

After the mass the priest came to call on us and to share our thermos of
ice-water. "It's a slow job," he said, "Christianizing these people.
They do not understand . . . ."

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

A relay race was announced, but we were too lazy to move, too
comfortable in the sun, which soaked us through and through. It was more
fun, and easier, to watch the crowd from where we sat. The runners
passed us, going to the ends of the course: nice-looking boys, slim and
brown, with bright silk tied around their heads, and their feet in
moccasins, except one modern youth in running-shoes. The crowd gathered
along the runway, shouting, and we got occasional glimpses of the race.

As the hours passed, the shouting grew wilder, and more and more Indians
came along reeling. Mescal and whisky are powerful in the Jicarilla.
Some walked two by two, heads bobbing loosely. Some could not stand up
very well in twos, so they went in threes. A couple dashed by, spurring
a small horse. The man wavered in the saddle and would have fallen a
hundred times if it had not been for his spouse sitting behind him,
almost as uncertain, but holding on to her man with all the steadiness
she could command.

An Indian Service man asks me to say that I saw these things several
years ago; the Jicarillas are much more sober now.

Navajos had brought copper bracelets to trade. Two men and a woman
stopped to talk with us and share our cigarettes. The woman would not
smoke. She sat, tucking her skirts around her feet, and refreshed
herself with a bunch of purple grapes. The men wished to sell us a
blanket or a ring, very new and white. The fine old piece one of them
wore was not for sale. They had no English, and our six Navajo words
were soon exhausted, but it was clear that only the car would be a fair
trade for that necklace. Much

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

laughter. Then they wandered on, taking their copper bracelets among the
Apaches, who still prefer it to silver.

A Hopi from Sichomovi, visiting friends in San Juan, had sold many
sashes and kirtles. He showed us the turquoise he was taking home.

A Zuñi Priest of the Bow, who had come over the old trail by way of
Acoma and Jemez, had turquoise too. He needed feathers, as Zuñis always
do.

"You come Shalako?" he asked. "You come my house, I like blue feathers."

Jemez joined us. Three young men had come with a trader. A Ford truck
was their hotel and their shop, as well as their conveyance. They rode
on the seat and slept in the body, where blankets were piled on top of
their stock in trade. A small barrel on the running-board gave tepid
water through a rubber hose in response to the most primitive method of
siphoning. Jemez was swapping canned goods and fruits for *jícaras*, the
baskets which Apache women make and which all other Indians find so
useful.

Jemez did not think much of the Apache dancing which was going on
steadily in two long facing rows. Jemez offered to dance for us,
privately. So they produced a tomtom, and one drummed and chanted while
the others danced. One dance followed another, all calling for the skill
of trained dancers; sure foot-work, swift transformations of rhythm and
tempo, gay prancing, vivid appreciation of their own masterly
performance. Taos strolled up. Taos watched the virtuosity of Jemez with
something less than full approval. Taos, wrapped in a heavy robe of red
and blue English broadcloth, was beautiful, but dissatisfied.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

"I got some Taos boys here," he said. "We could dance for you, only we
don' got a drum."

Jemez was a bit dubious about sharing the applause, but we managed to
negotiate a diplomatic loan, and Taos danced too: the Hoop-dance, which
is Taos's favorite for white people. A slim bent body slips in and out
of a hoop, never losing a step, crossing his feet as he dances, now in
and out of the hoop, which is the merest plaything and never in the way.

Then they sang. Laguna, hearing, came up. Laguna was very American, as
befitted a young man from the most modern of all the pueblos. He was
dressed like a white man, and he had come on business. A sheepman, he
had been discussing the price of wool in the Boston market with Jimmy
No-Tongue, an Apache wool-grower. Jimmy owns a thousand head of sheep,
which represents an income of three thousand dollars a year. But Jimmy
and Mrs. No-Tongue are not proud; they dress as the other Jicarillas do,
and Mrs. No-Tongue is using her wealthy leisure to make fine baskets.
They would not stay, but Laguna liked our canned peaches. When his
throat was well refreshed, we persuaded him to sing.

"Sing a Laguna love-song," I asked, "the one I heard at the First
American."

That brought the Indian out through the white man.

"That's for white people, not Indians. Indians don't sing about anything
as silly as love. When we sing, we sing about things that matter: rain
and sun and corn."

So Laguna sang his own songs about the things that are important: rain
and sun and corn.

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

The long afternoon slipped down into evening. The little lake mirrored
bright clouds, and then a whole flaming surface of color. The pines were
purple and then black. A wind brought the sharp odor of the sage. Women
wielded their knives on firewood; every tepee was illumined by a
crackling blaze, and cooking-smells tempted people away from the games.
Movement never ceased, and all around we heard the beat of tomtoms, the
rise and fall of voices, singing.

As night came on, the pines withdrew to become a part of the mountains,
and the fires made spots of light under a skyful of stars. Suddenly I
knew how alien I was in that Indian world. It is a separate world. The
white man sees it, he touches it, some even have the temerity to try to
break into it, to change it. But they cannot. For this is a world apart,
a brown world of brown people. They come out of their world sometimes to
speak to us, for they understand our [language](errata.htm#2); but when
they withdraw into their world, we cannot follow. They live close to the
earth. The mass for a pale god who died on a cross did not reach these
people. They do not understand. A religion of an idea, of an ideal, is
foreign to them. Their religion is of earth and the things of earth. I
thought of all these brown people whom I had seen dancing their prayers,
pounding them with their feet into the earth, which is their mother. Her
ways are close to them, even when they are hurt. They understand the
earth, they dance their prayers into the earth; and they pray for real
things for sun and rain and corn. For growth. For life.
