[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups15)  [Next](bups17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

**CONCERNING GENSHIN-SOZU**

204\. Genshin the Great Teacher declareth:

"In this world have I, even I, appeared as an incarnation of the Buddha,
and now, my work of Salvation being accomplished, I return unto the
Eternal Kingdom that is my home.

205\. From the teaching of our Lord hath Gen-shin, the Great Teacher,
tenderly opened unto us the gate of the Doctrine of the Holy Name, and
hath so taught mankind in this evil world that is far removed from the
Golden Day of our Lord.

206\. Genshin-Sozu, he who sat in the Assemblage on the Peak of Vultures
in the time of our Lord, hath taught us that there are two Paradises,
that which is eternal and that which is temporal, and thus setteth forth
the merit and the defect of the Right Practice and of the Mingled Deed.

207\. Acharya Genshin, the Great Teacher, considering one of the Sutra
with the commentary of Ekanzenji, hath made plain the attributes of the
Land of Outermost Places.

208\. For he said: "Not one man is there of thousands who may not be
born into the Land of

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Purity." And thus
saying, he commendeth the followers of the Right Practice.

And again:

"There is not even one among tens of thousands who may enter it." And so
saying, he condemneth the doers of the mingled deed.

209\. Further he setteth forth how few are the men who can enter into
the True Land of Purity. And very solemnly he warneth us that more are
they that are born into the Temporal Paradise.

210\. Wheresoever men or women, be they noble or lowly born, recite the
Holy Name of our Father, there is no pre-eminence of place or time.
Freely may they do this, whether walking, resting, sitting, or lying.

211\. Though our eyes are so blinded by illusion that we discern not the
light whereby He embraceth us, yet that great mercy for ever shineth
upon us and is not weary.

212\. Whatsoever may be his Visible Deed that would be born into the
Promised Land, he shall not forget day or night to hold fast unto the
name of the Divine Promise.

213\. To us that in this world are sinners most sinful, there is none
other way of Salvation save

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

that we should enter into the Land of Purity, by reciting the holy name
of Him who is our Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Honen Shonin](bups17)
