[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups16)  [Next](bups18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**CONCERNING HŌNEN SHŌNIN**

214\. Since the day when Hōnen Shōnin appeared in the world, and set
forth the single Ark of the Divine Promise, hath the Doctrine of the
Pure Land gloriously shone upon the hearts of all men in the land of
Nihon.

215\. For from the strength of the wisdom of light, Hōnen, the Great
Teacher, came into the world and hath taught the chosen doctrine of the
Divine Promise, and he hath built Jodo-Shinshu upon the rock.

216\. Though Zendo and Genshin, those great teachers, have well
instructed us, yet had Hōnen Shōnin kept silence, wherewith should we
know the holy teaching of Shin-Shu, we who dwell in remote country and
in an evil day?

217\. Throughout the long, long Kalpas of my lives that are overpast
could I never find the way of Deliverance, and if Hōnen Shōnin, the
Great Teacher, had not arisen in this world, vainly had I spent the
precious hours of my life.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

218\. When his years were but fifteen, Hōnen Shōnin entered into the Way
of Illumination, for in departing from worldly life he fulfilled his
heart's desire, and by him was clearly understanded the doctrine of the
transience of life.

219\. The excellent righteousness of Hōnen Shōnin, his deeds and the
wisdom that was in him, drew unto him for refuge many even of chief
priests of the heretics that seek Nirvana through the way of the sages.
Yea, they sought him even as their appointed teacher, radiant and stray
of soul as the diamond.

220\. Even while Hōnen Shōnin yet walked in this world, there issued
from his body rays of a golden shining, and this, so it is said, hath
Kanezane Fujiwara beheld with his own eyes.

221\. The people passed it from mouth to mouth that this Hōnen Shōnin
was the living incarnation of Doshaku Zenji, or yet again of Zendo
Daishi.

222\. Before the eyes of men Hōnen Shōnin stood as the Boddhisattva of
Wisdom, or, yet more, as the Blessed One again made flesh.

The Emperor and all his ministers did homage unto him, yea, and the men
of the chief city and of the far countries.

223\. He who had been Emperor, in the time

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of Jokyu, brought homage to Hōnen Shōnin. All the priests and scholars
of the word of Confucius had understanding of the doctrine of Shin Shu.

224\. A chosen vessel of the Blessed One that men might be saved, Hōnen
Shōnin was manifested in the world, and he opened wide the gate of
perfect wisdom, having instructed mankind in the Holy Faith.

225\. Of all rare things it is the rarest that we should ourselves meet
with the True Teacher, yet verily the chain of doubt in the Divine Mercy
is the true cause of unending birth and death.

226\. Hōnen Shōnin issued forth from the mysterious Light and his
disciples beheld it. In his eyes was there nought of disparity between
the wise and them that know not, between the noble and the lowly born.

227\. And now, his time being at hand, Hōnen Shōnin spake:

"Thrice have I taken birth in the Land of Purity, and of these three
times the last hath given unto me the fullness of peace."

228\. Once did Hōnen Shōnin speak, saying:

"In the glorious day of our Lord was I among

the holy Assemblage on the Peak of Vultures,

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

and my Spirit was rapt in self-instruction and in the doctrine of
salvation."

229\. Having taken birth in that small and remote island, Hōnen Shōnin
spread abroad the doctrine of the Holy Name for the sake of all men's
salvation. And thus had he done not only then, but many times in ages
gone by.

230\. That Buddha, whose light is infinite, was made flesh in this world
as Hōnen Shōnin, and when his merciful work was accomplished, he
returned into the Land of Purity.

231\. When his life was drawing to a close, light was manifested about
him as a cloud of glory, yea, and music of the heavenly places, sweet
and excelling in harmony, and sweet odours scattered about him.

232\. Following steadfastly after the ensample of the Nirvana of the
Lord, he laid himself upon his right side, his head inclined unto the
north, his face turned unto the west. And the crowding people attended
upon him, even the priests and men and women of the nobles and of the
lowly born.

233\. Now the time when Hōnen Shōnin departed from this life was the
twenty-fifth day of the young spring. In the second year of Kenriyaku

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

he returned in peace unto the Land of the Father.

On the ninth day of February and the second of Ko-Yen, the revelation
that here followeth was sent unto me in a dream of morning.

234\. It is necessary that men should believe the divine promise of Him
who is Infinite.

Whoso believeth shall attain unto Perfect Wisdom, by the virtue of that
Light which embraceth him and shall never forsake him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Three Periods](bups18)
