[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups20)  [Next](bups22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

**WHEREIN WITH LAMENTATION I MAKE**

**MY CONFESSION**

327\. Though I seek my refuge in the true faith of the Pure Land,

Yet hath not mine heart been truly sincere.

Deceit and untruth are in my flesh,

And in my soul is no clear shining.

328\. In their outward seeming are all men diligent and truth speaking,

But in their souls are greed and eager and unjust deceitfulness,

And in their flesh do lying and cunning triumph.

329\. Too strong for me is the evil of my heart. I cannot overcome it.

Therefore is my soul like unto the poison of serpents,

Even my righteous deeds, being mingled with this poison, must be named
the deeds of deceitfulness.

330\. Shameless though I be and having no truth in my soul,

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Yet the virtue of the Holy Name, the gift of Him that is enlightened,

Is spread throughout the world through my words being as I am.

331\. There is no mercy in my soul.

The good of my fellow-man is not dear in mine eyes. If it were not for
the Ark of Mercy, the divine promise of the Infinite Wisdom,

How should I cross the Ocean of Misery?

332\. I, whose mind is filled with cunning and deceit as the poison of
reptiles, am impotent to practise righteous deeds.

If I sought not refuge in the gift of our Father, I should die the death
of the shameless.

333\. It is a token of this evil age that in this world the priests,
together with the people,

In secret serve strange gods,

While bearing the appearance of the devout sons of Buddha.

334\. Sad and corrupt is it that the priests and people, following after
the superstitions of auspicious times and days, seek sooth-saying and
festivals

And worship the gods of heaven and earth.

335\. Though I have heard that the names of priest and monk are
honourable,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

Yet now are they held as light as the five shameless precepts of
Devadatta.

336\. Being of one accord with the many minds of the heathen,

They bow in worship before devils,

While yet wearing the robe of the Buddha.

337\. Sad and sorrowful is it that all the priests and people now in the
land of Yamato should worship the devils of heaven and earth, in the
name of the holy mysteries of the Buddha.

338\. It is a mark of the downward way of this evil age that men despise
the name of priest or monk as a mean thing, considering them like unto
slaves.

339\. May they yet bring offerings with homage unto the priests, even as
you do unto Saliputra or Mahamonugalyayana, those two great servants of
the Lord ; though they are priests but in name and without discipline,
for this is the time of degeneration and of the last days.

340\. Though sin hath no substance in itself, and is but the shadow of
our illusion, and soul is in itself pure, yet in all this world is there
no sincere man.

341\. Great sorrow is it that, in the wicked world of this age now so
near its end, the high priests

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

who are born in the palankin, and the monks who bear it now in Nara and
Mount Hiyei, desire high secular rank as the greatest honour.

342\. That they consider the monk and nun as their slaves, and mock at
the honourable title of priest and minister, even as at the mean name of
slave, gives testimony that they despise the teaching of the Buddha.

These sixteen psalms written above are written by me, Gutoku, with
lamentation, to be a record. To me even the honourable priests and monks
of the Central Temples seem now to be despised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additional Psalms](bups22)
