[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups14)  [Next](bups16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**CONCERNING ZENDO-DAISHI**

178\. Rising like unto an incarnation of the Mighty Ocean, Zendo, the
great teacher, came into the world.

And for the sake of mankind in this sinful place, he called unto all the
Buddhas of the Ten Regions to be his testimony unto his commentary on
the Sutra.

179\. Two interpreters of Zendo-Daishi were there in the age that
followed his own, and these were Hoshō and Shōkō. They, it is, who have
opened the Treasury of teaching that the inward

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

purpose of the Blessed One should be wholly made known.

180\. How should women turn their hearts unto wisdom—they who are fast
bound with the five fetters? No, not through the ages of myriads of
Kalpas, until they seek refuge in the Divine Promise of Him who is
mighty.

181\. Having thrown open the Gate of Righteousness, our Lord hath
instructed mankind in every sort of righteous deed. He hath set before
us how the five right deeds differ from the confused deeds that are
outside the Five, so that mankind may enter the way of the Sole
Practice.

182\. To mingle the right action with the action that is not akin to it
is called the confused practice. The man that erreth therein hath not
attained unto the single heart. He knoweth not thankfulness for the
grace of the Enlightened One.

183\. If he entreat in prayer the good things of this world, even though
he recite only the Blessed Name, he is condemned therein, being also a
man of the confused practice. He shall not be born into the Land of
Purity.

184\. Not one, indeed, but not far asunder are the confused deed and the
confused practice.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The teachings that
are not the teachings of the Land of Purity are to be condemned as
confused deeds.

185\. Having invoked the testimony of all the Buddhas, Zendo-Daishi hath
set before us the story of the two rivers, the one, the river of fire,
the other the river of water, that he might incline the heart to
righteous deeds, and guard the true faith of the Divine Promise.

186\. Verily a simple man may attain unto the true Illumination, if he
believe the Holy Promise that is the spirit of the teaching of Shinshu.
Because for this only was the Lord made manifest in this world, and not
according to those other teachings which shall pass away and be no more.

187\. Before the Almighty Power of the Divine teaching do all the
fetters of evil deeds fall away. Therefore is the Divine Promise of our
Father invoked as that Holy Thing which giveth unto us omnipotent
strength.

188\. Yet, to whomsoever would enter the Promised Land, created in the
power of His Divine Vow, is belief in his own strength impotent.

And because they are needless, therefore the wise who have received the
Great and Lesser

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vehicles must
trust unto the promise of the Almighty One.

189\. Whoso hath known himself the slave of illusion shall yet, relying
on the Power of the Holy Promise, enter into the immortal joy of the
Truth, and all his earthly body shall fall from him.

190\. Merciful and compassionate parents unto us are the Blessed One and
the Lord Buddha. For they have opened before us the ways of good, having
so purposed that the great Faith shall be.

191\. He who is one with the True Soul hath attained unto a heart clear
and hard as diamond. Therefore is he at one with that man who hath the
three excellent forms of Penitence. This hath the Great Teacher shown
us.

192\. By that faith alone, like unto a jewel of price, we who in this
sinful world have our being, may enter into the Eternal Kingdom, being
eternally freed from the yoke of birth and death.

193\. At that moment when faith in the Enlightened One is perfected,
pure and lasting as the diamond, then shall the Spiritual Light shine
upon us and guard us, the light which for ever guideth us from rebirth
and death.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

194\. Whoso attaineth not unto the True Faith hath not in him one of the
Trinity of Virtues, that are Sincerity, Faith, and Hope, and the man
that hath not one of these three holdeth not the perfect faith.

195\. Whoso attaineth unto the True Faith given of Him is freed from all
let and hindrance, for his heart is at one with the Divine Promise, and
he is obedient unto the true teaching that is the Very Word of the
Buddha.

196\. Whoso hath comprehended the truth of the Holy Name is at that very
moment freed from doubt. He hath possessed the Right thought, and he is
commended as excellent and rare in his attainment.

197\. He shall be let and hindered that is not at one with the Divine
Promise, and therefore he whose faith is not full of Peace is a man who
holdeth not the Divine Thought.

198\. The attainment of the Divine Wisdom shall come unto him who
reciteth the Holy Name, for his faith cometh from the Divine Promise of
Him that leadeth him into the Promised Land. He shall not fail to attain
unto the Great Nirvana.

199\. At this time when the five Signs of Degeneration are manifest,
many men are there who

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

doubt and blaspheme the Holy Doctrine. Yea, even the Priests, together
with the people, are enemies unto him who walketh in the right way.

200\. He who blasphemeth the Divine Promise is a man born blind. He
shall sink into three evil worlds for age-long myriads of Kalpas.

201\. Though the way into the Land that is in the West hath been made
plain before us, yet the age-long Kalpas have rolled away without good
fruit thereof, for we have hindered ourselves and our brethren that we
might not enter therein.

202\. Without the Almighty Strength of the Divine Promise how should we
leave this sinful world? Wherefore we should live in hearty thanksgiving
for the Grace of our Father, thinking ever upon the ocean deeps of his
love.

203\. For it is by the marvellous mercy of our Lord that we may cast
aside the anguish of birth and death, in the shining hope of our Eternal
Kingdom.

Therefore should we return unto the Lord righteous deeds in thanksgiving
for His grace and mercy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Genshin-Sozu](bups16.md)
