[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups04)  [Next](bups06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**CONCERNING THE GREAT SUTRA**

49\. The Venerable Ananda, rising from his seat, and looking upwards to
the World-Honoured Gautama Buddha, his eyes being opened, marvelled
greatly, seeing the glory of his Lord so transfigured.

50\. The Venerable Ananda asked the Cause of that glory, for the Lord,
shining in the Light that was hitherto unseen of the world, taught
openly, for the first time, that Truth for which He came into the world.

51\. In the meditation of the Great Calm the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Buddha whose countenance is glorious, commendeth the most excellent
wisdom of Ananda for that he asked the way of knowledge, desiring to be
instructed.

52\. That Buddha that was made flesh in India was in this world
manifested that he might preach the Divine Promise of Him who is
Infinite.

Hard is it to see the hidden blossom of the myriad-century-blooming
Lotus, so hard also is it for a man's understanding to receive the
message of that Blessed One.

53\. Ten Kalpas of Ages have rolled away since He who is Infinite
attained unto the Wisdom, yet before the myriads of the Kalpas He *was*.

54\. He who is of the Light Ineffable, Holiest Refuge of men, ordaining
that His saving grace should be made manifest, duly considered all the
worlds of the Ten Regions, under the guidance of the holy Buddha of
Loka-is-Vara-Raja.

55\. Purity, Rejoicing, Wisdom, these three are the Supernal Essence of
the light of the Infinite One that enlighteneth all things,
communicating good to all the worlds of the Ten Regions.

56\. Teaching all that have life in the Ten Regions, that they might,
with sincerity, faith, and hope, be born again into Paradise, He set

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

forth that promise infinite and divine—the true seed of birth within the
Kingdom of Truth.

57\. Whoso attaineth unto the True Faith is in unity with them that
return no more to birth and death, for having thus attained, they pass
onward into Nirvana, their lives being ended.

58\. In His great compassion the Blessed One accomplished His infinite
wisdom in His divine promise, ordaining that womanhood shall be raised
into manhood.

59\. Instructing all that have life in the Ten Regions how they should
through sincerity, effort, and hope be born into the Temporal Paradise,
He faithfully promiseth to manifest Himself unto the eyes of the dying,
opening wide the gate of all righteousness before them.

60\. By the divine promise to the dying of His consoling presence our
Lord instructeth men that they shall make to grow all righteousness
revealed in the Sutra of Meditation upon the Buddha of Infinite Life.

61\. All righteous deeds done of men in true obedience to the holy
Doctrine of Sincerity and right-doing, are but the seed of merit that
shall be born within the Temporal Paradise.

62\. Instructing All that have life in the Ten

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Regions how that
they may through sincerity, merit, and hope be born into the Temporal
Paradise, He promiseth that no man shall lose salvation, for He hath
opened the Gate of Truth.

63\. By the Divine Promise of the final salvation hath our Lord
instructed the men of the Single Vehicle to recite His Holy Name that is
the Essence of all the merit revealed in the Lesser Sutra of the Buddha
of Infinite Life.

64\. He that reciteth the Holy name by his own effort and in the mind of
meditation or of dispersing, being led by the virtue of the divine
promise of final salvation, turneth naturally in at the Gate of Truth.

65\. He that holds not the True Faith, even though he desire to be born
into the Pure Paradise of Joy, must go unto his own place, and it shall
be in the border of the Outermost Places, for this is the fruit of
doubting the mystery of the Supreme Wisdom.

66\. That a man should be a Buddha, made manifest in this world, is a
rare thing and difficult. So difficult is it also to hear the excellent
doctrine of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. In all the myriads of
Kalpas such a way comes seldom.

67\. Difficult is it for men to find a wise Teacher;

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

so is it also for them to be instructed and to hear the Holy Law. More
difficult still is it to receive the True Faith.

68\. More difficult is it for men to receive the Divine Promise made
unto men than to receive all other teachings.

The Lord Buddha teacheth that this is of all hard things most difficult
and yet again more difficult.

69\. The true Doctrine teacheth men that they may become Buddhas in
reciting the Holy Name, and so therefore is it that all other faiths and
moralities are but transitory doorways unto the Truth. Man comprehendeth
not that Pure Land of Peace unless he holdeth fast the true Doctrine,
casting aside that which is transitory.

70\. Seek refuge in the Sole Vehicle of His merciful promise. For the
transitory teachings have let and hindered men in the Way of
Enlightenment so that they must needs pass through the long weariness of
births and deaths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Sutra of the Meditation](bups06)
