[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups19)  [Next](bups21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

**IN PRAISE OF PRINCE SHOTOKU**

316\. Through the compassion of Shotoku the great prince we, having
accepted the Divine Promise sprung from the unsearchable wisdom of the
Illuminated One, are made equal unto Maitreya. Bodhisattva—the Buddha
that shall be—having been united unto those men who return no more to
birth and death.

317\. The mighty Bodhisattva of Compassion, he who is the Saviour, was
made manifest in this world as Shotoku the Prince, who, like a father,
hath not forsaken us, and like a mother is ever amongst us.

318\. From that past where was no beginning until the day that now is,
hath Shotoku the great prince, the Compassionate, dwelt among us like
unto a father and a mother.

319\. Shotoku the Prince, from his Compassion, hath persuaded us to
enter in at the Divine Promise of the wondrous wisdom of the
Light-Bearer. And through this are we joined unto those men who return
no more unto birth and death.

320\. Whoso attaineth unto the holy faith that is

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

the power of divinity, must, in the Ten Regions of the world, find the
twofold gift of the Enlightened One, that he may live in thankfulness
for His grace.

321\. Shotoku, he who is mercy's self, the Compassionate, he who is like
unto a father, and the Bodhisattva of Mercy, the divine tenderness, his
succour is merciful as the pity of a mother.

322\. Testimony is there that Shotoku the prince hath mercy upon us,
from the myriads of Kalpas even unto this day, because the wondrous
wisdom of Him who is Light beareth the load of his debt for the
believer.

Therefore before the eyes of His wisdom is the evil as the good, the
pure as the unclean.

323\. Shotoku, the Prince, he that is in Japan called the Lord of
Teaching, he whose great mercy overtops all spoken words of gratitude,
must we therefore praise for evermore, having with single heart sought
refuge in him.

324\. He who hath pitied the dwellers in the lands of Japan, the Prince
of Jogu, he whose ways are merciful, hath spread abroad the Divine
Promise of the Enlightened One. Therefore let us praise him with great
rejoicing. Throughout

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the many myriads of Kalpas, birth after birth fell hitherto upon us.

325\. We to whom he showed forth his compassion must be swift to praise
him, having continually sought refuge in him, and with a single mind.

326\. The high Prince Shotoku, he who hath guarded us and with great
carefulness led us upwards from remotest times, hath lovingly entreated
us to seek our refuge in the two-fold gift of the Enlightened One.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wherein with Lamentation I Make my Confession](bups21)
