[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups09)  [Next](bups11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**OF THANKSGIVING FOR NAGARJUNA, THE**

**GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA**

117\. Nagarjuna, the great teacher, setting forth in many excellent
writings the praise of the Kingdom of Purity, hath instructed us to
recite the Holy Name.

118\. For the Lord Buddha declared in prophecy that in India, in the
Southern Parts, should arise a great Teacher, trampling upon the false
teachings of affirmation and denial.

119\. Nagarjuna, the Great Teacher, he who mightily set forth the noble
doctrine of the greater Vehicle, and himself attained unto that height
whereon a man rejoiceth eternally in the Faith, hath very sweetly
persuaded men that they should receive the teaching of the Holy Name.

120\. Nagarjuna, that great priest, setting forth

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

the two ways—the way that is straight and plain, and the way of high
austerity, leadeth very gently to the Ark of the Divine Promise such as
are driven through the weariness of births and deaths.

121\. He who receiveth this teaching of Nagarjuna the Great Teacher,
should recite always the Holy Name, believing the Divine Promise of the
Buddha of Infinite Light.

122\. Whoso would quickly attain unto that resting-place where illusion
ceaseth, should recite the Holy Name holding his mind in steadfast
piety.

123\. One Ark only, that Ark of the Divine Promise of our merciful
Father, doth voyage and bear us unto the shore of the eternal peace—even
us who so long have drifted hither and thither in the ocean of birth and
death.

124\. This great priest hath in one utterance set forth that the Lord is
Ruler indeed of the sacred teaching, and that herein are the holy
Bodhisattvas His ministers. Therefore should we bring homage unto our
Lord.

125\. The mighty company of the Bodhisattvas utter these words, "When we
became wise in holiness, yea, we who have striven through Kalpas
unnumbered,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

126\. "Yet could we not root out our earthly desires which are the very
seed of birth and death. But through that only way of the meditation of
the Highest did we attain unto the final deliverance that hath destroyed
all our sin."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Thanksgiving for Vasubandh, the Great Teacher of
India](bups11.md)
