[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mog09)  [Next](mog11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0520021630/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7. NORTHERN BOEOTIA AND THESSALY

Just as Thebes is the center of Southern Boeotia, Orchomenus is the
center of the northern part of the province, together with the great and
fertile plain at the lake of Copais. Orchomenus has always been famous
for its bee-hive tomb, the so-called treasury of Minyas, which now is
ruined but rivals the best examples of these stately domes at Mycenae.
Mr. Schliemann made excavations at Orchomenus also. A Bavarian
expedition took up the work at the beginning of this century and
discovered important remains from the Mycenaean and the pre-Mycenaean
ages. <span id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_239) Most remarkable and
important are the numerous fragments of painted stucco. They once
covered the walls of a palace of which no stone is left. Nor has any
trace of other buildings

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

from the Mycenaean age been discovered, but the wall paintings suffice
to prove that a palace was once standing at Orchomenus like those in
Argolis and at Thebes, decorated by the hands of Mycenaean craftsmen.
The paintings of Orchomenus are later in date than those of Thebes. A
single specimen of a jar inscribed with Minoan characters was also
found.

The most conspicuous architectural monument which the Mycenaean age left
in Boeotia is, however, the large palace which was erected on the small
island of Gla in the lake of Copais. <span
id="fr_240"></span>[2](#fn_240) The area enclosed by the ring-wall is
more than ten times as large as the area enclosed at Tiryns, but it
shows only very slight traces of habitation. Even ceramics and other
small finds are scarce. The very name of this mighty castle was
forgotten. It is sometimes supposed to be old Arne, but this
identification has been contested and is hardly probable. Other
identifications are not more likely. <span
id="fr_241"></span>[3](#fn_241) This is a kind of riddle, but one may
suppose that something happened here like that which seems to have
happened at Midea, the Mycenaean fortress in Argolis which has the
largest area of any but plays very little part in myths; <span
id="fr_242"></span>[4](#fn_242) viz., that the palace was inhabited

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

for a short time only and abandoned so early that its memory was
obliterated. This supposition is consistent with the lack of ceramics
and other small finds.

Further, one of the most extensive undertakings which ever was carried
out in prehistoric Greece is not to be forgotten, the draining of the
lake of Copais. Modern observations prove that the system of ditches
with stone embankments which was built on the bottom of the lake in
order to conduct its water to the *katavothra*, is ancient and in all
probability belongs to Mycenaean times, as ancient tradition
implies. <span id="fr_243"></span>[5](#fn_243) The immense attempt was
also made to excavate tunnels through the mountains which separate the
lake from the Euripus, but this work is of a later date.

If we, according to our principles, ask for the cycle of myths
corresponding to the Mycenaean center of Orchomenus, the answer will be
the myth of the Minyans. Since K. O. Müller more than a hundred years
ago published his famous book on Orchomenus and the Minyans this tribe
has loomed very large in the modern conception of Greek mythology.
Criticism has, however, been directed against the mythical importance
attributed to the Minyans, <span id="fr_244"></span>[6](#fn_244) and it
is fair to acknowledge that old mythology has not very much to tell
about the Minyans. The

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

great fame of the Minyans came in later days when the Argonauts were
said to be Minyans. Hence it is inferred that the Argonauts are
pseudo-Minyans, so called because many of them and especially Iason,
were descended from Minyas' daughters.

It is frankly to be admitted that here seems to be an exception to the
rule laid down that the mythical importance of a town corresponds to its
importance in the Mycenaean age and civilization. Although our knowledge
of the Boeotian cities in this age is only too fragmentary, so that it
is difficult to discern their relative importance, according to the
remains Orchomenus seems to rival Thebes, as myths say it did; but there
is no cycle of myths connected with Orchomenus which in popularity and
fame can be at all compared with the Theban cycle.

The mythical history of Orchomenus related by Pausanias <span
id="fr_245"></span>[7](#fn_245) is a mosaic pieced together of
incoherent and disparate elements. Of the first two kings, Andreus and
Eteocles, the former is a mere name, the latter seems to be an old
figure but has in fact no myth of his own; he belongs to aetiologic
hieratic mythology as the founder of the cult of the Charites at
Orchomenus. If Dr. Forrer, who believed that he discovered the names of
these two kings in Hittite documents, is right, their historical
existence would be proved; but although I am inclined to think that Dr.
Forrer is right in the chief point, the existence of an Achaean empire
extending to the southern coast of Asia Minor in the fourteenth and
thirteenth centuries B.C., these identifications of

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

names are extremely questionable and are better left out of
account. <span id="fr_246"></span>[8](#fn_246)

This is, however, not the whole truth. Homer has two significant
references to Orchomenus. In the Nekyia it is said that Neleus, the king
of Pylos, married Chloris, the youngest daughter of the Iaside Amphion,
the king of Orchomenus; <span id="fr_247"></span>[9](#fn_247) and in
another passage <span id="fr_248"></span>[10](#fn_248) Orchomenus and
Thebes in Egypt are mentioned side by side as the richest towns of the
world. The eleventh book of the Iliad, the embassy to Achilles, in which
this passage is found, is of course a relatively late poem and many
scholars take the mention of the Egyptian capital to be a sign of its
late date, but quite recently the opposite opinion was advanced by Miss
Lorimer. <span id="fr_249"></span>[11](#fn_249) She remarks that
Echenaton transferred his capital elsewhere in the first half of the
fourteenth century B.C. and that Rameses II finally abandoned Thebes as
the royal residence. She thinks that the raiding

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

northerners after about 1200 B.C. would not have been able to penetrate
as far as Thebes and that consequently it looks as if the references to
Thebes were derived from the fifteenth century B.C. There is an
undeniable probability in this view, and it ought to be added that
during the reign of the Theban priest-kings the Greeks did not come to
Egypt--it was the dark intermediate age--and that Thebes was sacked
thoroughly by the Assyrians in 663 B.C. <span
id="fr_250"></span>[12](#fn_250) The Greek mercenaries who went to Egypt
during the reign of the Sait kings in the beginning of the Orientalizing
period <span id="fr_251"></span>[13](#fn_251) saw a ruined city. The
glory of Thebes was irrevocably past.

A clue to the answer to this delicate question is given by the Egyptian
objects found in Greece. <span id="fr_252"></span>[14](#fn_252) The
great mass belong either to the XVIIIth or to the XXVIth dynasty; a few
are more indistinctly labeled as belonging to the XXIId-XXVIth
dynasties. Objects from the intermediate period are scarce and
insignificant, the most notable exception being those found in the
so-called tomb of Isis at Eleusis, which belong to the XXth-XXIId
dynasties. That is to say, there is evidence of brisk connections with
Egypt in the fifteenth to the thirteenth centuries B.C. and then again
in the Orientalizing period from its beginning in the middle of the
seventh century

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> B.C., viz., in the
period after the sack of Thebes. This certainly gives considerable
support to Miss Lorimer's opinion.

From the Homeric verses mentioned above it appears that the fame of
Orchomenus was as great in the age of Homer as in that of K. O. Müller.
This fame derives probably from the Mycenaean age, for in the later
Geometric and in the Orientalizing periods its great glory was gone.

If we turn to the myths, we do not find any proper Orchomenian cycle of
myths; but Orchomenus and the Minyans appear very often in a great many
mythical connections, and we must try to find out what their rôle was in
the early age of Greece. The clues which we are compelled to use are the
localizations of the myths and the genealogies, but the latter must
always be regarded with a certain diffidence and the localizations
cannot be accepted without additional proofs. We must try to find out
the results of such an analysis.

Minyas himself is nothing but the eponymous hero of the tribe and has no
myths of his own. The myth of his daughters who resisted the cult of
Dionysus and went mad is well known, but belongs to the late type of
Dionysiac myths, which are of no importance for our subject.

The myth of Athamas is on the contrary very important. Athamas is
believed to be the eponymous hero of the tribe of the Athamanes. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[15](#fn_253) This tribe had never any importance in
Greek history; it lived on Mount Pindus and sometime belonged

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

in historical times to the Molossian kingdom. If this view concerning
Athamas is right, the Athamanes must have been a relict, driven up into
the mountains, of a tribe which once dominated a much larger district
toward the southeast, but this seems at least doubtful. For our inquiry
this idea may be put aside.

I need not relate the well-known myth of Athamas, his children by
Nephele, Phrixus and Helle, their stepmother Ino, and their escape from
the sacrifice, riding on the ram. Happily the elements from which this
myth was derived are discernible, and what I observed many years
ago <span id="fr_254"></span>[16](#fn_254) still holds good. The kernel
of the myth is the sacrifice of a member of the house of Athamas; such a
rite was practiced at Halus in Thessaly even in historical times. This
kernel was enlarged and developed in various manners. According to
another and simpler version, <span id="fr_255"></span>[17](#fn_255)
Athamas himself, not Phrixus was the sacrifice. Drought, failing of the
crops, and hunger are always given as the causes of this sacrifice, and
this is consistent with old cult customs which required human sacrifices
to avert such calamities.

From this point of view it is possible to explain the outstanding rôle
of the fleece in the myth. On the top of Mount Pelion there was a
sanctuary of Zeus Acraeus to which a procession went in the severest
heat of the summer, about the time of the rising of Sirius; the men were
girt with sheep fleeces. This Zeus is the cloud-gatherer and rain-giver,
and the procession is in accord with quite a number of

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

similar customs the aim of which was rain-magic. That the fleece served
as a means for weather-magic is proved by various known facts. <span
id="fr_256"></span>[18](#fn_256) Hence we are able to understand the
curious fact that the Cloud, Nephele, is said to be the wife of Athamas.
She is the longed for rain-cloud which in another instance of
weather-magic, people saw rising from the well of Hagno on Mount
Lykaion. <span id="fr_257"></span>[19](#fn_257)

The historical sacrifice of the Athamantidae took place at Halus in
southern Thessaly in the cult of Zeus Laphystius; consequently Athamas
is said to be at home in Thessaly. Around Halus was the field of
Athamas, <span id="fr_258"></span>[20](#fn_258) but there is no Mount
Laphystion. The mountain with this name is situated in Boeotia, between
Coronea and Orchomenus. We do not know the source of Pausanias'
statement <span id="fr_259"></span>[21](#fn_259) that the sacrifice of
Phrixus took place on this mountain--it may be an inference, but such an
inference is right, for since there is no other mountain with this name,
it is evident that this Boeotian mountain was the original

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

home of the cult of Zeus Laphystius. <span
id="fr_260"></span>[22](#fn_260) It follows of course that Athamas
himself and the cult originally belonged to the Boeotian Mount
Laphystius and, like many other cults, was transferred to another place.

This localization, depending on the cult, is corroborated by the
numerous traces of Athamas, preserved in myths around the lake of
Copais. Athamas is said to have founded the town of Acraephia at the
east side of the lake, <span id="fr_261"></span>[23](#fn_261) and here,
says Pausanias, there was also a field of Athamas as one proceeded on
the direct road to the lake. <span id="fr_262"></span>[24](#fn_262)
Quite a number of his sons are mentioned as eponymous heroes and
founders of various Boeotian towns and localities, Ptous as early as the
time of the epic poet Asius. <span id="fr_263"></span>[25](#fn_263)

Consequently the statements that Athamas was a son of Minyas, <span
id="fr_264"></span>[26](#fn_264) that he was king of Orchomenus, and
lived there, <span id="fr_265"></span>[27](#fn_265) are not unfounded.
He is of old connected with the plain around the lake of Copais and with
Mount Laphystion; that is, with the district of Orchomenus.

With the myth of Athamas is connected that of the Argonauts. The
Argonauts set out to fetch the golden fleece from Colchis. The harbor
from which they sailed was Iolcus near ancient Pagasae and

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

modern Volo in Thessaly, and here the famous cycle of myths corresponds
to the Mycenaean remains, for Iolcus was the northernmost Mycenaean
town.

Mycenaean sherds and minor finds are reported from all Thessaly, just as
they are from other provinces of Greece, <span
id="fr_266"></span>[28](#fn_266) but only scattered minor and
unimportant finds have come from parts of the province other than from
the neighborhood of Iolcus. <span id="fr_267"></span>[29](#fn_267) There
the remains are so numerous and important as to prove that Iolcus was an
important center in the Mycenaean age. It is now generally acknowledged
that Professor Tsoundas discovered the site of old Iolcus on a hill in
the plain of Volo, called Old Volo or the Kastro of Volo. <span
id="fr_268"></span>[30](#fn_268) This hill consists of remains of old
habitations. Many late Mycenaean sherds and some vases were
discovered. <span id="fr_269"></span>[31](#fn_269) Recently it has been
reported that trial excavations were undertaken on this hill, and that
remains of a Mycenaean palace built upon neolithic layers were
unearthed. It appears to have been extensive and well built; the floor
was covered with cement and the walls with painted stucco. <span
id="fr_270"></span>[32](#fn_270) It is to be regretted that no more
detailed report is forthcoming of this apparently interesting discovery.
The really convincing facts are the rich finds from the Mycenaean age in
the neighborhood of Iolcus. At Kapakli

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

quite near Iolcus Dr. Kuruniotes excavated a tholos tomb which was
almost untouched and yielded rich finds, especially gold objects; this
has been one of the richest and most important discoveries of remains
from the Mycenaean age. The vases are referred to the second Mycenaean
period. <span id="fr_271"></span>[33](#fn_271) To the same period are
ascribed vases found in tombs on a small peninsula just south of Volo
within the area of what formerly was called old Pagasae but more justly
is called Demetrias. <span id="fr_272"></span>[34](#fn_272)

Less than an hour to the west Professor Tsoundas excavated the mound of
Dimini, where two tholos tombs were discovered, and another neighboring
mound, Sesklo, <span id="fr_273"></span>[35](#fn_273) with a small
tholos tomb which yielded late Mycenaean vases. Proceeding toward the
west we come to the Phthiotic Thebes, with a ring-wall of uncertain
date. Mycenaean terracottas, sherds, and painted stucco were found here.
Halus, farther toward the south, near the sea, is not yet explored, but
the old town is surrounded by Cyclopean walls which may be Mycenaean. In
the village of Goura in the interior on the northern slope of Mount
Othrys another tholos tomb was discovered by peasants, but the contents
were dispersed so that nothing can be said of it with certainty.

It appears that the Mycenaean civilization had an important center in
Iolcus and, as we observed above, this corresponds to the localization
of the famous cycle of the Argonauts in that place. After this

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

survey of the Mycenaean remains in Thessaly we come back to the fact
that the Argonauts are said to be Minyans. We find this statement in
Pindarus; <span id="fr_274"></span>[36](#fn_274) Herodotus has much to
tell about the Minyans; <span id="fr_275"></span>[37](#fn_275) and
Apollonius Rhodius still more. Modern scholars generally embrace the
view that they are pseudo-Minyans, accepting the opinion professed by
Apollonius Rhodius and his scholiast that they were so called because
they and especially Iason were descended from the daughters of Minyas.
But Buttmann, whose paper on the Minyans <span
id="fr_276"></span>[38](#fn_276) is forgotten but is more solid than
Müller's book, remarked justly that the myth gives us no reason whatever
why the inhabitants of Iolcus were called Minyans; <span
id="fr_277"></span>[39](#fn_277) the name is one of these ever recurring
old stock expressions which the poets use by tradition without knowing
their sense. The statement of Apollonius Rhodius and his scholiast <span
id="fr_278"></span>[40](#fn_278) is no real explanation but merely an
attempt to explain the old stock expression: in order to give a reason
why the Argonauts were called Minyans they made them sons of Minyas'
daughters, for they could not be made sons of Minyas himself. Buttmann's
conclusion that the real reason was that the Minyans inhabited not only
northern Boeotia but also southern Thessaly seems to be well founded.
The Argonauts were not called Minyans because they were descended

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

from Minyas' daughters: these genealogies were invented in order to give
a reason for the traditional phrase describing the Argonauts as Minyans.

The myth itself corroborates this connection, for the goal of the
expedition is the fetching of the golden fleece, the fleece is
inseparable from the cult of Zeus Laphystius, and the original home of
this cult is Mount Laphystion, south of Orchomenus. It follows that the
cycle, that of the Athamantidae and the Argonauts, is connected with
both northern Boeotia and southern Thessaly, and this is comprehensible
if we accept Buttmann's conclusion that the Minyans inhabited not only
northern Boeotia but also the seaboard toward the north, including
southern Thessaly. <span id="fr_279"></span>[41](#fn_279)

This conclusion is corroborated by cults and place names common to
Boeotia and southern Thessaly. In addition to the cult of Zeus
Laphystius, which was our starting point, that of Athena Itonia may be
especially mentioned. Among place names the Phthiotic Thebes was
mentioned above. There is a Coronea not only in Boeotia but in Thessaly
also, situated on the northern slopes of Mount Othrys. Another
Orchomenus in Thessaly is mentioned by several authors, <span
id="fr_280"></span>[42](#fn_280) and lastly, a Thessalian town Minya is
known by an inscription. <span id="fr_281"></span>[43](#fn_281) This is
too much to be accidental and testifies to ethnical interrelations
between the districts.

In this light the varying genealogies must be considered. Athamas is by
Hellanicus said to be

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

the son of Minyas; in the common genealogy he is the son of Aeolus.
Aeolus is clearly a late creation, the eponymous hero of the Aeolian
tribe. In this genealogy Athamas is the brother of Cretheus, Salmoneus,
Sisyphus, and Perieres, king of Messenia. The two latter are undoubtedly
late creations. Even Cretheus is not much more than a genealogical
connecting link, the father of Aison, Pheres, and Amythaon, who in turn
are nothing but eponymous heroes, Aison and Pheres of two Thessalian
towns, but curiously enough Amythaon of the district of Amythaonia near
the Triphylian Pylos. <span id="fr_282"></span>[44](#fn_282) The source
of this genealogy is, however, late and here we merely state the fact of
its existence.

With Tyro, the daughter of Salmoneus and wife of Cretheus, we strike old
ground. She is mentioned in the Odyssey, together with Alcmene and
Mycene, as one of the most famous heroines. <span
id="fr_283"></span>[45](#fn_283) Her story is fully told in the
Nekyia <span id="fr_284"></span>[46](#fn_284) but without certain
features which are conspicuous later. But here a bewildering state of
things appears. Where is Tyro at home and where is the scene of her love
affair with Poseidon from which sprang the twins. Pelias and Neleus? She
is said to be the daughter of Salmoneus, and Salmoneus is the eponymous
hero of the town of Salmone in the Alpheus Valley. Her wedding takes
place in the river of Enipeus. There is a large river with this name in
Thessaly but also another of the same name, a small tributary to Alpheus
in Pisatis. She is the wife of the Thessalian

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

hero Cretheus and by him mother of the Thessalian heroes Aison and
Pheres, but she is also mother of the Triphylian hero Amythaon. Of the
twins whom she bore to Poseidon one, Pelias, is closely related to
Thessaly; the other, Neleus, as closely to Pylos.

Attempts have been made to find out whether Tyro is at home in Thessaly
or in Pisatis. <span id="fr_285"></span>[47](#fn_285) I think this is
lost labor. We are unable to come to any decision and have plainly and
solely to admit that Tyro from of old was connected both with Thessaly
and with Pisatis-Pylos. Two heroes may be made brothers without being
originally related, e.g., Cretheus and Sisyphus; but if they are said to
be twins, obviously their relation cannot be fortuitous. The mythical
connections between Thessaly and Pylos, including the neighboring
Pisatis, which belonged to the dominion of Pylos, are recognized facts.
The genealogy is closely interwoven with these interrelations, which
must be founded on some reality.

In this connection the passage in the Nekyia quoted above <span
id="fr_286"></span>[48](#fn_286) deserves attention. Here it is said
that Neleus married Chloris, the youngest daughter of the Iaside
Amphion, who was king of Orchomenus. This links the genealogy of the
house ruling at Pylos with Minyan Orchomenus. The passage involves a
heresy and even modern mythographers are not fond of heresies. But it is
highly improbable that such a passing mention of a famous hero contains
a chance invention: the passage is certainly derived

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

from old tradition which was abandoned later because it could not be
fitted into the prevailing quasi-historical scheme. Amphion is said to
be king of Orchomenus and an Iasides. Greek mythographers have deduced
from this passage a King Iasius or Iasus, the husband of Persephone, a
daughter of Minyas, <span id="fr_287"></span>[49](#fn_287) of course an
invention without any value. We have only to admit that the story that a
Pylian queen was a daughter of the king of Orchomenus reflects the
connections of the Minyans with the dominion of Pylos; moreover these
connections are corroborated in other ways, especially by the mention in
Homer of a river Minyeios near Pylos, <span
id="fr_288"></span>[50](#fn_288) evidence the value of which is
generally recognized even by scholars who are skeptical in regard to the
myths of the Minyans.

There is nothing new in what has been set forth here. It is recognized
that the interrelations between the Thessalian and the Pylian heroes are
too close and manifold not to be of ancient and genuine origin;
furthermore, the connections between the Minyans and the Pylians are
acknowledged even by those whose opinions are opposed to the wide
distribution attributed to the Minyans. The inevitable conclusion from
these two facts should receive only its due emphasis, viz., that as
Pylos was closely connected on one hand with Thessaly and on the other
with the Minyans, the connections of

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

the Minyans with Thessaly cannot have been late inventions.

The interrelations between northern Boeotia and southern Thessaly on one
hand and the west coast of the Peloponnese on the other cannot be
arbitrary inventions. There is some reason for even such mythological
connections, but we ought to realize that they are a most embarrassing
fact. As far as we know Greek history there is no trace of relations
between these two very distant districts. These relations are, however,
proved to have existed and to have been very lively. It follows that
they existed in prehistoric times. For nobody will be inclined to
ascribe their origin and development to the dark intermediate age
between the downfall of the Mycenaean civilization and the rise of
culture in the Geometric period. They belong consequently to the
Mycenaean age. This view is supported and stressed by the fact that both
districts were centers of Mycenaean civilization.

In order to understand this embarrassing fact, it is useful to consider
another case, the amphictyony of Calaureia, <span
id="fr_289"></span>[51](#fn_289) which comprised the towns of Prasiai,
Nauplia, Hermione, Epidaurus, Aegina, Athens, and the Minyan
Orchomenus; <span id="fr_290"></span>[52](#fn_290) i.e., seaside towns
on the Argive peninsula and in Attica, and the inland town of Orchomenus
in Boeotia. Two German scholars observed that Mycenaean sherds are found

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

in all these towns and therefore they ascribed this amphictyony to the
Mycenaean age. <span id="fr_291"></span>[53](#fn_291) That opinion was
contested <span id="fr_292"></span>[54](#fn_292) and is of course not
established beyond doubt, but the really important question is why the
Minyan Orchomenus which was situated in the interior of Boeotia was a
member of this league of seaboard towns. <span
id="fr_293"></span>[55](#fn_293) The league must needs belong to an age
in which Orchomenus had interests on the sea, and this was not the
historical age so far as we know it. But this position of Orchomenus
agrees with the wealth ascribed to it in the Iliad.

Furthermore, another observation drawn from mythology may be added. The
fleet gathered in a Boeotian harbor, Aulis, and set out thence for Troy.
This rallying place has aroused wonder for, it has been said, the king
of Mycenae being the commander-in-chief, one would expect the fleet to
gather in some harbor of Argolis. Dr. Leaf has tried to show that Aulis
was most unsuitable as the rallying place of a fleet. He demonstrates,
however, a little too much; for it would follow from his arguments that
Chalkis never can have been a trading place from which colonists and
merchants sailed. We have to admit that Aulis was the harbor of Boeotia
on its western coast, no other being

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

available. <span id="fr_294"></span>[56](#fn_294) A myth is not
consistent; it connects facts from different ages in an arbitrary
manner: though the two facts mentioned are not consistent we have to
admit both, only realizing that they originally belonged to different
contexts. The other great sea expedition of the Greek myths, that of the
Argonauts, started from a harbor also said to have been Minyan, Iolcus.
Both Aulis and Iolcus are situated on the seaboard, covered by the
Minyan name. <span id="fr_295"></span>[57](#fn_295)

If we put these traces of a sea power concentrated in the tracts
inhabited by the Minyans together with the great wealth ascribed in
Homer to Orchomenus, the solution is at hand. The Minyans were a trading
people. That trade was considerable in the late Mycenaean age is
certain; vases of this period are found in many foreign countries,
especially in Sicily and southern Italy. The harbors of the Minyans, of
Which Iolcus was one, were on the coast; but their chief city was inland
Orchomenus, the wealth of which depended also on the fertile

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

plains recovered by the draining of the lake of Copais. There is nothing
improbable in the fact that the chief town of this trading people was an
inland town. Perhaps its inhabitants tilled the ground in autumn and
spring and went to sea during the summer, as Hesiod describes the
Boeotian peasants of his time as doing and as did the peasants of
Gotland, the great trading center of the Baltic sea in the Middle Ages,

This trade and sea power lead to an understanding of the connections of
the Minyans with the western coast of the Peloponnese. We have seen
above <span id="fr_296"></span>[58](#fn_296) that the dominion of Pylos
is a typical seaside state founded by people who came oversea. I should
not venture to say that it was founded by the Minyans, for the finds in
both the towns which are said to be the Homeric Pylos are earlier than
anything found in the Minyan area, even if some of the finds in Thessaly
are ascribed to the second Mycenaean period, <span
id="fr_297"></span>[59](#fn_297) but I think it to be a fair inference
that Pylos served as an intermediate station for the Minyan trade. This
will give a satisfactory explanation of the connections discussed above.

I cannot end this reasoning without giving a hint as to the possible
trade routes, in spite of the great uncertainty of the matter. The
Minyans may have sailed round the Peloponnese in order to reach Pylos,
but it is also possible that they took a shorter route. Orchomenus is
not much more distant from the Corinthian gulf than from the Euripus.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Minyans may
have taken the road past Delphi and Crisa to the harbor of Cirrha. <span
id="fr_298"></span>[60](#fn_298) Not only the oracle of Delphi but also
the wealth of the temple are mentioned in Homer, <span
id="fr_299"></span>[61](#fn_299) and Delphi was already a cult place in
the Mycenaean age. Remains of this cult have been found on the very spot
where the temple and the great altar were built and in another place, in
the suburb called Marmaria. West of the temple precinct is a Mycenaean
cemetery with a small tholos tomb. <span
id="fr_300"></span>[62](#fn_300) It may be guessed that Delphi in this
age was not only a cult place but also a trading station. Thus its rise
to wealth and importance may be better understood.

Finally, it may be asked what bearing this view has on our scanty and
hypothetical knowledge of the history of the Mycenaean age. The greatest
center of Mycenaean power is found in Argolis, where the remains are
both the richest and the earliest. History and mythology point to
connections toward the south and the southeast, with Crete and the
Orient, especially with Egypt. The power of Mycenae and Argolis must be
related in our minds with the destruction of Cnossus, the down-fall of
Minoan civilization, and the raids which reached the Delta of the Nile.
The inhabitants of Argolis were Vikings in the usual sense of the word.
But the Vikings known to history were not only pirates but tradesmen
also, and the same may be

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

supposed in regard to the Mycenaeans, even in regard to the inhabitants
of Argolis.

It has been supposed that Mycenae owed its wealth to its control of
trade. Its situation is favorable for trading not only to the southward
on the Argive gulf but also to the northward on the Corinthian gulf. To
corroborate this opinion the roads radiating from Mycenae toward the
south and the north are referred to. <span
id="fr_301"></span>[63](#fn_301) There may be a certain truth in this
view but I cannot help thinking that the rulers of Mycenae were more
warring than trading kings.

It has been remarked that the overwhelming power of Mycenae covers only
a part of the Mycenaean age and that we have to suppose several changes
and vicissitudes in the political status and power of the various towns
during this age. The northerly connections of Mycenae and Argolis
explain, as was observed above, the unlucky attempt to conquer Thebes,
an episode the memory of which was preserved in myths.

It is comprehensible that when the great expedition toward the east came
to an end, the people turned more and more to trading, not, however,
without incidental piracy. The Phoenicians acted similarly, for trade
and piracy were closely bound up even in the Homeric age. It seems as if
this late period of the Mycenaean age was represented

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

especially by the Minyans. Their sea power seems to be a fact as well as
their connection with the distant dominion of Pylos. They were more a
trading than a warring people. Epical poetry prefers to chant great and
valorous deeds in war and has a certain disesteem for trade. Thus it has
little to say about the Minyan Orchomenus, but the recollection of the
wealth of the city and the importance of its people loomed in the
background of tradition.

There were great sea expeditions starting from Minyan harbors, which
were the most lively in Greece in the late Mycenaean age. For this
reason the myth told that the expedition which set out for Troy gathered
in the harbor of Aulis, but according to a still older tradition the
king of Mycenae was made its commander-in-chief. Another expedition,
bound up with Minyan myths, acquired a fame of its own, the expedition
which fetched the golden fleece from Colchis. It started from Iolcus,
the Minyan center on the Gulf of Volo.

I cannot leave this subject without adding another observation. When
treating the other provinces of Greece we have generally had to speak of
cities, not of tribes; in this chapter almost the reverse takes place.
We have spoken of a tribe which had two great centers, many minor ones,
and several harbors. This falls in with the conditions of old Boeotia as
described by tradition; <span id="fr_302"></span>[64](#fn_302) various
tribes never play so great a part in old tradition in any province as in
that of Boeotia. In addition to the Minyans, we have first the Phlegyans
who are mentioned as early as in the Homeric poems and by later authors

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

are described as a reckless and impious people. It is notable that they,
like the Minyans, belong both to Thessaly and to Boeotia. Probably they
were a tribe to the rear of the Minyans who tried to push forward and
invade the neighboring civilized country. Other tribes are the Temmikes,
the Aones, the Graikoi, the Gephyraioi, and the Hyantes, but we know too
little of them to say what their importance was and to which ages they
belonged.

Perhaps we have here a picture of the continual attempted invasions by
Greek tribes coming down from the north and striving to invade Greece.
One of these tribes, the Minyans, took over the Mycenaean civilization
during its late period when the warring enterprises toward the east
already belonged to the past. They were cut off from the routes toward
the south and the southeast by the inhabitants of Argolis. Consequently
they turned toward the northeast, or, perhaps going overland and across
the Corinthian gulf, they went toward the west. According to the
conditions of the time they turned to trading or to cultivation of their
land, but these peaceful occupations diminished their importance in
mythology.

The Minyan power declined; things were changing rapidly in this age. The
Minyans were exposed to the pressure of the tribes in their rear coming
down from the mountains in the north and northwest, but they seem to
have had foes in the south too. For the myths telling of their war with
Thebes probably have a historical background. Our sources are late.
Euripides is the first who mentions Heracles as the vanquisher of the
Minyans and the liberator of

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

Thebes. <span id="fr_303"></span>[65](#fn_303) Diodorus has an extensive
and picturesque tale of how Heracles overcame the Minyans and their king
Erginus, who had conquered Thebes and made it tributary to
Orchomenus. <span id="fr_304"></span>[66](#fn_304) Another version is
that Heracles blocked the *katavothra* through which the lake of Copais
was drained, so that the district of Orchomenus was inundated. <span
id="fr_305"></span>[67](#fn_305) It is the same fact, the catastrophe
which overtook the power of Orchomenus, in various mythological
settings. In the latter version it is combined with the fact that the
plain made dry by the draining of the lake of Copais was again flooded,
but the blocking of the *katavothra* may have come about through
negligence. That the Minyans of Orchomenus lost their power through a
disastrous war with Thebes is a generally received opinion.

It is hardly possible to proffer any well founded opinion as to the time
at which this war took place. Dr. Fimmen's opinion <span
id="fr_306"></span>[68](#fn_306) that the inhabitants of Thebes were the
Boeotians who immigrated into the province to which they gave their name
seems unlikely to be correct. Our information concerning their
immigration is given by Thucydides, <span
id="fr_307"></span>[69](#fn_307) who says that they came from Thessaly;
and it seems a priori probable that they came from the north or
northwest, not from the south or southeast. The war with Thebes is
probably earlier. What was left of the Minyan power was destroyed when
the Dorians invaded both Boeotia and Thessaly and overturned

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the old conditions. One of the components of the historical Boeotian
dialect is Doric or more justly West Greek. Some of the Minyans seem to
have emigrated. There are traces showing that they took part in the
colonization of the western coast of Asia Minor at the very end of the
Mycenaean age. Herodotus enumerates many peoples of whom the Asiatic
Ionians were composed and among these are the Minyans of
Orchomenus. <span id="fr_308"></span>[70](#fn_308) Further, Pherecydes
says that the Minyan king Athamas founded Teos, <span
id="fr_309"></span>[71](#fn_309) and Anacreon therefore calls this town,
in which he was born, an Athamantian town. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[72](#fn_310)

In Ionia we encounter the Pylians again. According to Strabo, the
colonization of Ionia was begun by Androclus, a son of Codrus, the last
king of Athens. <span id="fr_311"></span>[73](#fn_311) According to
Pausanias, Codrus' father, Melanthus, was a descendant of Neleus who,
together with many Pylians, had been expelled by the Heracleidae. <span
id="fr_312"></span>[74](#fn_312) Neleus, a son of Codrus, founded
Miletus and other sons founded other towns. Priene was founded by
Neleus' son Aepytus, who has the same name as an Arcadian hero, and
Colophon was, according to Mimnermus, founded by the Pylian Andraimon.
Teos, which first was founded by Athamas, is said to have been founded
for a second time by Nauclus, Codrus' son.

These foundation legends are reshaped by the logographers, and the
tendency to make Athens the mother city of the Ionian towns in Asia
Minor

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

appears clearly. Pausanias says that the Pylians expelled by the
Heracleidae emigrated to Athens, where Melanthus, a descendant of
Neleus, became king instead of Thymoites, a descendant of Theseus.
Hellanicus says that Erythrae was one of the Ionian towns founded by
Codrus' son Neleus. <span id="fr_313"></span>[75](#fn_313)

There cannot be any doubt that the participation of the Pylians in
founding the Ionian towns on the western coast of Asia Minor is the
fundamental fact, and this fact the logographers tried to harmonize with
the claims of Athens to be their mother city. Therefore a double of
Neleus was invented and made a son of Codrus; therefore, also, the
expelled Pylians are said to have emigrated first to Attica and from
Attica to Ionia; and therefore the last kings of Athens are said to be
descendants of Neleus. For it was natural to connect the colonization of
Ionia, if it was due to the Athenians, with the end of the kingdom at
Athens and the emigration of the kingly family. Attica may have
contributed to the colonization of Ionia, but the fact ought not to be
overlooked that in the old form of the legends the Pylians play the
foremost part.

This is probably a historical fact. For the Mycenaean dominion of Pylos
was conquered by the immigrating Dorians, and it is only natural that
the old ruling classes and part of the people should have emigrated.
That they took the way eastward to Ionia is to be explained by their
connections with the Minyans, of whom a part took the same way when they
were ousted by other tribes. There is every chance that old, good
tradition is preserved in

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

these foundation legends, which go back into the sixth century B.C.;
they give us a valuable outlook on the migrations of the peoples in the
stormy age which put a definite end to the Mycenaean civilization and
led to the colonization of the western coast of Asia Minor, a movement
which archaeological evidence proves to belong to this time. This gives
the finishing touch to the picture of the sea-faring Minyan people,
whose connections were so wide and who evidently played a very important
part in the late Mycenaean age.

The question may be put to which of the great Greek tribes the Minyans
belonged. That they are connected genealogically with the Aeolians,
Aeolus being put at the head of their genealogy, does not prove
anything, for this genealogy was invented at a time when Boeotia and
Orchomenus were considered to be Aeolian. Nor is it good evidence that
the Orchomenians of the historical age spoke the common Boeotian
dialect. For the areas of the various dialects have changed thoroughly
because of the migrations. There seems to me to be a certain probability
that the Minyans were Ionians--in the first place because they
contributed so largely to the colonization of Ionia. The Greek colonists
of Ionia were very mixed, but its language proves of course the
predominance of the Ionian element. Secondly, Euboea was Ionian and it
is only natural to suppose that the Minyans inhabited this island also
and when expelled from the mainland retired to it. The existence of not
a few Mycenaean remains in Euboea, among which are small bee-hive tombs,
proves that the island shared in the Mycenaean

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

civilization; moreover, there is a town called Eretria in Euboea as well
as in Thessaly, just as Boeotian place names recur in Thessaly.

These considerations are of a certain importance in connection with the
few words which I have to add concerning other Thessalian myths,
primarily the myth of Achilles. Like Boeotia, Thessaly is a country of
many tribes, Achaeans, Myrmidons, Hellens, Magnetes, Dolopes,
Perrhaiboi, etc., thus reproducing the conditions that we find in
historical times in the mountain countries to the west, where a great
number of small tribes were living. It will be well to keep in mind the
steady push of tribes referred to above.

Achilles <span id="fr_314"></span>[76](#fn_314) owes his fame and his
glory to the great poet who made him the chief personage of the Iliad.
His mythical importance ought not to be measured accordingly, but he
belongs certainly to old mythology. For we have seen that folk-tale
motifs were attached especially to old mythical heroes, and such motifs
are conspicuous in the myth of Achilles. He was born of Thetis, a sea
nymph, to a mortal, Peleus, who wrestled with her and won her in spite
of her metamorphoses. Here we have a widely spread motif of fairy tales,
which shows that Thetis originally was no goddess but a nymph.

The myth of Achilles is, however, to be tested in order to see if it,
like others, has any historical background. The Iliad includes, in the
dominion of Peleus, Phthia and Hellas, both populated by the tribe of
the Myrmidons. The name of Phthia is preserved in historical times in
Achaia Phthiotis in

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

which the Phthiotic Thebes was situated; it is the tract north of Mount
Othrys and west of the Pagasaean gulf. It is to be supposed that in an
earlier time it included the northern coast of the gulf and Mount Pelion
also, because of the relation of the name of Peleus and his myth to
Mount Pelion whose eponymous hero he is.

In regard to Hellas, I think that Dr. Leaf is eminently right in taking
it to be the Spercheus Valley, <span id="fr_315"></span>[77](#fn_315)
for as Spercheus is the river near which Achilles is brought up, every
other view will involve unsolvable difficulties. The myth which makes
the man of Mount Pelion the father of the votary of Spercheus supposes
that these two districts were united, viz., that they were inhabited by
the same tribe, the Myrmidons. This is the northern part of the region
covered by the Minyans.

There is no direct proof showing that the myth of Achilles goes back
into the Mycenaean age, in fact he has no cycle; nor is there any proof
to the contrary. But supposing that it does so by reason of its apparent
antiquity and connections with the folk-tale, we must tentatively try to
see how the above statements fall in with what has been set forth
concerning the Minyans.

We have supposed that there was a steady push of tribes coming down from
the north and northwest and that the Minyans were expelled, first of
course from Thessaly, and retired in the other direction, to Boeotia, to
Euboea, and finally to Asia Minor. If they were Ionians, as we surmised,
the newcomers were Achaeans, after whom the country was called

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Achaea with the
distinguishing epithet the Phthiotic. The dialect of this region is
Doric but with Aeolic traces. <span id="fr_316"></span>[78](#fn_316)
That is to say, the Achaeans possessed themselves of Thessaly, and after
them the Dorians, but the Dorian element was much stronger in the
southern part of the province. Thus it seems that the Achaean tribe of
the Myrmidons represents an intermediate stage between the domination of
the Minyans and the final Dorian invasion.

The rest of Thessaly, where Mycenaean remains are unimportant, has no
important myths. Most known because of many works of art, is the battle
of the Centaurs and the Lapiths. This battle appears in art, however,
much later than their battle with an archer, who perhaps may be called
Heracles. Centaurs without any adversary appear in the earliest art of
the archaic period and as early as the Late Mycenaean age. <span
id="fr_317"></span>[79](#fn_317) It is to be observed that they are

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

met with in other provinces too, in Aetolia in the story of Nessus and
in Arcadia in the story of Pholus. They appear consequently to be a
mythical conception common to the Greeks, <span
id="fr_318"></span>[80](#fn_318) but according to the prevailing Greek
ideas their myths were localized in definite but various places, of
which Thessaly was only one. The real riddle is the connections of their
foes, the Lapiths. I return to this question in the chapter on the Attic
myths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_239"></span>[127:1](mog10.htm#fr_239) H. Bulle,
"Orchomenos," I, "Die älteren Ansiedelungsschichten," *Abhandlungen der
bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften*, I. Kl., XXIV: 2 (1907); II, E.
Kunze, *Die neolithische Keramik*, *ibid*. N. F. III (1931).

<span id="fn_240"></span>[128:2](mog10.htm#fr_240) *Bulletin de
correspondence hellénique*, XVIII (1894), p. 271 *et seq*.;
Tsoundas-Manatt, *The Mycenaean Age* (1897), p. 375 *et seq*. Cp. F.
Noack, *Homerische Paläste* (1903), p. 19.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[128:3](mog10.htm#fr_241) Phlegya: A. W. Gomme,
"The ancient name of Gla," in Essays and Studies to W. Ridgeway (1913),
p. 116 *et seq*. Glechon: T. W. Allen, *Classical Review*, XVII (1903),
p. 239 *et seq*. This equation is contested by A. W. Persson, *Schrift
and Sprache in Alt-Kreta* (Uppsala, 1930), p. 29, n. 2, who points to
the fact that the name of Gla is of Turkish origin.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[128:4](mog10.htm#fr_242) See above [p.
182](mog12.htm#page_182).

<span id="fn_243"></span>[129:5](mog10.htm#fr_243) *Bulletin de
correspondance hellénique*, XVI (1892), p. 121 *et seq*.; Frazer in his
commentary on Pausanias, vol. V, p. 110 *et seq*.; survey by Geiger in
Pauly-Wissowa's *Realenzyklopädie der klass Altertumswissenschaft*,
*s.v.* Kopais, XI, p. 1351 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[129:6](mog10.htm#fr_244) By Fimmen, "Die
Besiedelung Böotiens bis in frühgriechische Zeit," *Neue Jahrbücher für
das klass. Altertum*, XXIX (1912), p. 536 *et seq*., and by Robert, *Die
griechische Heldensage*, p. 56.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[130:7](mog10.htm#fr_245) Paus. ix. 34, 6-37.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[131:8](mog10.htm#fr_246) E. Forrer,
*Mitteilungen der deutschen Orientgesellschaft*, No. 63 (1924); recent
survey in the *Reallexikon der Assyriologie* *s.v.* Ahhijava, and in his
article, "La découverte de la Grèce mycénienne dans les textes
cunéiformes de l’ empire Hittite," *Revue des études grecques*, XLIII
(1930), p. 279 *et seq*. His assertions gave rise to lively polemics.
They were contested by J. Friedrich, "Werden in den hettitischen
Keilinschriften Griechen erwähnt?" *Kleinasiatische Forschungen*, I
(1927), p. 87 *et seq*.; Forrer's reply: "Für die Griechen in den
Boghaz-köi Inschriften," *ibid*., p. 273 *et seq*. P. Kretschmer, "Zur
Frage der griechischen Namen in den hethitischen Texten," *Glotta*,
XVIII (1930), p. 161 *et seq*., is inclined to support Forrer.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[131:9](mog10.htm#fr_247) *Od*. xi. v. 281 *et
seq*.; v. 459 is of no importance.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[131:10](mog10.htm#fr_248) *Il*. ix. v. 379 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[131:11](mog10.htm#fr_249) In the *Journal of
Hellenic Studies*, XLIX (1929), p. 153 *et seq*. A late date is advanced
by Wilamowitz, *Die Heimkehr des Odysseus* (1927), p. 173.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[132:12](mog10.htm#fr_250) For the thoroughness
of the sack see *Cambridge Ancient History* III, p. 285.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[132:13](mog10.htm#fr_251) The date of the
mercenaries' inscriptions from Abu Simbel is now fixed with certainty in
the reign of Psammetich II. (593--588 B.C.): G. Lefebure, "Ποτασιμπτώ,"
*Bulletin de la société archéologique d’Alexandrie*, No. 21 (1925), p.
48 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[132:14](mog10.htm#fr_252) They are now very
easy to survey in the useful compilation of J. D. S. Pendlebury,
*Aegyptiaca, A Catalogue of Egyptian objects in the Aegean area* (1930).

<span id="fn_253"></span>[133:15](mog10.htm#fr_253) This suggestion
seems doubtful; there is a difference in the forms, Ἀθαμᾶνες but gen.
Ἀθάμαντος.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[134:16](mog10.htm#fr_254) In my *Griechische
Feste* (1906), p. 10 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[134:17](mog10.htm#fr_255) Herodotus, vii. 197.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[135:18](mog10.htm#fr_256) See my *Griechische
Feste*, p. 8.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[135:19](mog10.htm#fr_257) Paus. viii. 38, 3.
It is interesting that the Cloud appears in another Thessalian myth
also, that of Ixion. (Concerning the Phlegyans see below pp.
[150](#page_150) *et seq*.) A cloud instead of Hera was given him for a
wife. He was punished by being attached to a fiery wheel whirling around
in the air; this can hardly be anything but the lightning. We find in
this myth the same elements. Cp. also the myth of Salmoneus who nowadays
is considered to be a kingly sorcerer and rain-magician and who is
attached to the same genealogy. The story that Ixion cunningly
precipitated his father-in-law into a pit of burning charcoal refers
perhaps to the custom of fire-festivals in Central Greece; cp. my
article "Fire-festivals in Ancient Greece," *Journal of Hellenic
Studies*, XLIII (1923), p. 144 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[135:20](mog10.htm#fr_258) According to
Apollonius Rhodius, ii. v. 154.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[135:21](mog10.htm#fr_259) Paus. ix. 34, 5.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[136:22](mog10.htm#fr_260) The scene of the
madness of the Minyades was laid on the same mountain, *Schol. Lycophr.
Alex.* v. 1237, and it is given as an *aition* of the festival of
Agrionia in Orchomenus; see my *Griechische Feste*, p. 273 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[136:23](mog10.htm#fr_261) Steph. Byz. *s.v*.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[136:24](mog10.htm#fr_262) Paus. ix. 24, 1.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[136:25](mog10.htm#fr_263) See Robert,
*Griechische Heldensage*, p. 44.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[136:26](mog10.htm#fr_264) *Schol. Apoll.
Rhod.*, i. v. 230.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[136:27](mog10.htm#fr_265) Hellanicus, *ibid*.,
III. v. 265, cp. i. v. 763.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[137:28](mog10.htm#fr_266) See the lists in
Fimmen, *Die kretisch-mykenische Kultur*, p. 2 *et seq*., and in Wace
and Thompson, *Prehistoric Thessaly* (1912), p. 8 *et seq*. and p. 206
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[137:29](mog10.htm#fr_267) Cp. the article
"Iolkos" by Stählin in Pauly-Wissowa's *Realenzyklopädie der klass.
Altertumswissenschaft*.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[137:30](mog10.htm#fr_268) Chr. Tsoundas, Αἱ
προϊστορικαὶ ἀκροπόλεις Διμηνίου καὶ Σέσκλου, (1908), p. 16.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[137:31](mog10.htm#fr_269) Wace and Thompson,
*loc. cit.*, p. 207; cp. p. 2.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[137:32](mog10.htm#fr_270) *Bulletin de
corespondence hellénique*, xlv (1921), p. 530.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[138:33](mog10.htm#fr_271) Wace and Thompson,
*loc. cit.*, p. 206.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[138:34](mog10.htm#fr_272) Beloch in *Klio*, xi
(1911), p. 442 *et seq*.; cp. his *Griechische Geschichte*, iv:1 (ed.
2), p. 224, n. 1.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[138:35](mog10.htm#fr_273) Sesklo is identified
with the ancient town of Aison or Aisonia by Robert, *Griechische
Heldensage*, p. 34 and n. 4.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[139:36](mog10.htm#fr_274) Pindarus, Pyth., iv.
v. 69.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[139:37](mog10.htm#fr_275) Herodotus, iv.
145-150.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[139:38](mog10.htm#fr_276) Ph. Buttmann,
Mythologus (1829), ii. p. 203.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[139:39](mog10.htm#fr_277) This is first
mentioned by Simonides ἐν τοῖς Συμμίκτοις according to *Schol. Apollon.
Rhod.*, i. v. 763. Whether this Simonides is from Ceos or the younger
Simonides from Amorgus is doubtful.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[139:40](mog10.htm#fr_278) Apollon. Rhod. i. v.
230 and the scholion ad 1.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[140:41](mog10.htm#fr_279) Buttmann, *loc.
cit.*, II, p. 207.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[140:42](mog10.htm#fr_280) See Robert,
*Griechische Heldensage*, p. 57.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[140:43](mog10.htm#fr_281) *Inscr. graecae*,
IX:2, No. 521 from Larissa; Steph. Byz. *s.v.*

<span id="fn_282"></span>[141:44](mog10.htm#fr_282) According to Rhianos
in Steph. Byz. *s.v.*

<span id="fn_283"></span>[141:45](mog10.htm#fr_283) *Od*. ii. v. 120.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[141:46](mog10.htm#fr_284) *Od*. xi. v. 235 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[142:47](mog10.htm#fr_285) Robert, "Tyro,"
*Hermes*, li (1916), p. 290 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[142:48](mog10.htm#fr_286) Above [p.
86](mog06.htm#page_86).

<span id="fn_287"></span>[143:49](mog10.htm#fr_287) Paus. ix. 36, 8, and
Pherecydes frag. 117 Jacoby. It is, of course, amazing to find
Persephone as his wife. I think that the explanation may be found in the
Homeric passage *Od*. v. v. 125 *et seq*. concerning Demeter's wedding
with Iasion; the daughter was substituted for her mother.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[143:50](mog10.htm#fr_288) *Il*. xi. v. 722.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[144:51](mog10.htm#fr_289) Wilamowitz, "Die
Amphiktyonie von Kalaurea," *Nachrichten der Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, phil.-hist. Kl.*, 1896, p. 158 *et seq*.,
esp. p. 169 *et seq*. contested K. O. Müller's hypothesis of the
prehistoric origin of the league of Calaureia. I hope that it will seem
more probable in the light of the new evidence adduced.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[144:52](mog10.htm#fr_290) According to
Strabon, viii. p. 374.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[145:53](mog10.htm#fr_291) A. Frickenhaus and
W. Müller in the *Athenische Mitteilungen*, XXXVI (1911), p. 37.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[145:54](mog10.htm#fr_292) By Fimmen in the
*Neue Jahrbücher für das klass. Altertum*, XXIX (1912), p. 537.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[145:55](mog10.htm#fr_293) E. Curtius in
*Hermes*, X (1876), p. 388, solved this difficulty violently by
cancelling the words "the Minyan." Arbitrarily he supposed Orchomenus to
be the Arcadian town with this name and consequently wondered why Argos
was omitted. The underlying presumption is that the league was one of
Argive inland states, contrary to the evident fact that the league
centers around the Saronian gulf.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[146:56](mog10.htm#fr_294) W. Leaf, *Homer and
History* (1916), p. 99 *et seq*., relies upon geography and the
"Mediterranean Pilot" according to which Aulis is said to be a most
impossible harbor for the gathering of a fleet. He concludes that the
assembly at Aulis did not belong to the old myth but was added by a
Boeotian poet. I do not, of course, take the gathering of the fleet at
Aulis to be a historical fact, but I want only to point out that the
story is not so silly as it appears in Leaf. Boeotia had no other harbor
on its eastern coast, it must for good or for bad rely on Aulis for its
trade. This fact would be sufficient reason to a poet for representing
Aulis as the rallying place of the fleet. In the archaic age Chalcis
certainly took over part of the Boeotian trade.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[146:57](mog10.htm#fr_295) Near Aulis is Hyria,
where Amphion and Zethus are said to have lived (cp. above [p.
125](mog09.htm#page_125)), and where the Rhampsinites legend was
localized and applied to King Hyrieus. One is inclined to suppose that
there was a bee-hive tomb at Hyria which gave cause for the localizing
of the story there.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[147:58](mog10.htm#fr_296) Cp. above [p.
85](mog06.htm#page_85).

<span id="fn_297"></span>[147:59](mog10.htm#fr_297) Above [p.
138](#page_138). Wace and Thompson, *Prehistoric Thessaly*, p. 8 *et
seq*., and p. 206.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[148:60](mog10.htm#fr_298) An unimportant
Mycenaean tomb was found accidentally near Itea, the modern harbor town
of Delphi, *Deltion archaiologikon*, VI (1920-21), p. 147.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[148:61](mog10.htm#fr_299) *Il*. ix. v. 405;
the oracle *Od*. viii. v. 80 and xi. v. 581.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[148:62](mog10.htm#fr_300) See my
*Minoan-Mycenaean Religion*, p. 400 *et seq*.; cp. Evans, *The Palace of
Minos*, II, p. 832 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[149:63](mog10.htm#fr_301) This view was put
forth by V. Bérard, *Les Phéniciens et l’Odyssée*, I (1902-03), p. 11
and p. 78, according to whom Mycenae was a fortress built at a junction
of the mountain passes for the purpose of levying taxes on all traffic
going through. It was modified by G. Murray, *The Rise of the Greek
Epic* (ed. 3; 1923), p. 57, who thought that Mycenae kept open a safe
trade route between the northern and the southern sea. For a sound
criticism see W. Leaf, *Homer and History*, p. 220 *et seq*. For the
roads see R. Steffen, *Karten von Mykenai* (1884), Text, p. 8 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[150:64](mog10.htm#fr_302) See Fimmen's article
mentioned [p. 129](#page_129), n. [6](#fn_244).

<span id="fn_303"></span>[152:65](mog10.htm#fr_303) Euripides,
*Heracles*, v. 48 and v. 220.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[152:66](mog10.htm#fr_304) Diodorus, iv. 10;
cp. Apollodorus, ii. 4, 11.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[152:67](mog10.htm#fr_305) Diodorus, iv. 18;
Paus. ix. 38, 7.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[152:68](mog10.htm#fr_306) Fimmen, *loc. cit.*,
p. 538.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[152:69](mog10.htm#fr_307) Thucydides, i. 12.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[153:70](mog10.htm#fr_308) Herodotus, i. 146.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[153:71](mog10.htm#fr_309) In *Schol. Plat.
Hipparch.*, p. 229 D; Frag. 102 Jacoby.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[153:72](mog10.htm#fr_310) In Strabo, xii. p.
633.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[153:73](mog10.htm#fr_311) Strabo, xiv. p. 632.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[153:74](mog10.htm#fr_312) Paus. ii. 18, 8.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[154:75](mog10.htm#fr_313) Hellanicus in his
*Atthis* quoted by Harpocration *s.v.* Ἐρυθραϊοι.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[156:76](mog10.htm#fr_314) Cp. Wilamowitz, "Die
griechische Heldensage," II, *Sitzungsberichte der preuss. Akademie der
Wissenschaften* (1925), p. 239 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[157:77](mog10.htm#fr_315) W. Leaf, *Homer and
History*, p. 110 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[158:78](mog10.htm#fr_316) O. Kern, *Neue
Jahrbücher für das klass. Altertum*, XIII (1904) p. 16 *et seq*. The
inscriptions show, however, the northwest κοινή. Chadwick's
identification of the Achaeans and Achilles with the north-western Greek
tribes in his *Heroic Age* (1912) p. 280, *et seq*., is unfortunate.
These arrived in Greece latest, even after the Dorians whom Homer
neglects.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[158:79](mog10.htm#fr_317) See above [p.
34](mog02.htm#page_34) and n. [31](mog02.htm#fn_30). The representation
on the M. M. gem in Baur's list (= Evans, *Scripta Minoa*, I, p. 11,
fig. 5b) does not show a centaur. Terracottas and bronzes representing
centaurs appear as early as the Geometric period; e.g., at Olympia,
where some of them are from the deepest layers, a winged centaur is
represented on a Dipylon cup. The representations of the centaurs'
combat with an archer goes back perhaps into the eighth century B.C.;
whilst those of their combat with the Lapiths begin with the sixth
century. This combat is, however, mentioned Od. xxi. v. 295 *et seq*.,
and Il. i. v. 263 *et seq*. P. V. C. Baur, *The Centaurs in Ancient Art*
(1912). The subject was treated recently by P. Demargne, *Bulletin de
correspondance hellénique*, LIII (1929), p. 117 *et seq*.; but his
assumption that the centaur was borrowed from Oriental art seems
questionable in view of the fact that there are no good Oriental
prototypes.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[159:80](mog10.htm#fr_318)I am, however, unable
to believe in the recent attempt by G. Dumézil, *Le problème des
Centaures* (1929), to make them an old Aryan heritage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Attica](mog11)
