[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nblng22)  [Next](nblng24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ADVENTURE XXI

## How Kriemhild Journeyed To The Huns.

Let now the messengers ride. We will do you to wit, how the queen
journeyed through the lands and where Giselher and Gernot parted from
her. They had served her as their fealty bade them. Down to Vergen \[1\]
on the Danube they rode; here they gan crave leave of the queen, for
they would ride again to the Rhine. Without tears these faithful kinsmen
might not part. Doughty Giselher spake then to his sister: "Whenever,
lady, thou shouldst need me, when aught doth trouble thee, let me but
know, and I will ride in thy service to Etzel's land."

Those who were her kin she kissed upon the mouth. Lovingly they took
their leave of Margrave Rudeger's men. The queen had with her many a
fair-fashioned maid, full a hundred and four, that wore costly robes of
rich, gay-colored silks. Many broad shields were borne close by the
ladies on the road, but many a lordly warrior turned then from her.

They journeyed soon from thence down through Bavarian land. Here the
tale was told that many unknown strangers had gathered there, where
still a cloister standeth and where the Inn floweth into the Danube. In
the town of Passau, where lived a bishop, lodgings were soon emptied and
the prince's court as well, as they hurried forth to meet the strangers
in the Bavarian land, where the Bishop Pilgrim \[2\] found fair
Kriemhild. The knights of the land were little loth, when in her train
they saw so many comely maids; with their eyes they courted the
daughters of noble knights. Later good lodgings were given the noble
guests.

With his niece the bishop rode toward Passau. When it was told the
burghers of the town that Kriemhild was come, their prince's sister's
child, well was she greeted by the merchants. The bishop had the hope
that they would stay. Then spake Sir Eckewart: "That may not be. We must
fare further down to Rudeger's land. Many knights await us, for all wot
well the news."

Well wist fair Gotelind the tale. She tired her and her noble child with
care. Rudeger had sent her word that it thought him good that she should
cheer the mind of the queen by riding forth, with his vassals to the
Enns \[3\] for to meet her. When this message had been given, one saw on
every side the roads alive; on foot and horse they hastened to meet
their guests. Now was the queen come to Efferding. \[4\] Enow there were
from the Bavarian land who might perchance have done the guests much
harm, had they robbed upon the roads, as was their wont. That had been
forestalled by the lordly margrave: he led a thousand knights or more.

Now Gotelind, the wife of Rudeger, was come; with her there rode many a
noble knight in lordly ;vise. When they were come across the Traun,
\[5\] upon the plain by Enns, one saw erected huts and tents, where the
guests should have their lodgings for the night. Rudeger gave the
vitaille to his guests. Fair Gotelind left her lodgings far behind her;
along the road there trotted many a shapely palfrey with jingling
bridle. Fair was the welcome; right well was Rudeger pleased. Among
those who rode to meet them on the way, on either side, in praiseworthy
wise, was many a knight. They practised chivalry, the which full many a
maiden saw. Nor did the service of the knights mislike the queen. When
that Rudeger's liegemen met the guests, many truncheons \[6\] were seen
to fly on high from the warriors' hands in knightly custom. As though
for a prize they rode before the ladies there. This they soon gave over
and many warriors greeted each other in friendly wise. Then they
escorted fair Gotelind from thence to where she saw Kriemhild. Scant
leisure had they who wot how to serve the ladies.

The lord of Bechelaren rode now to his wife. Little it irked the noble
margravine that he was come so well and sound from the Rhine. In part
her cares had given way to .joy. When she had welcomed him, he bade her
dismount with the ladies of her train upon the sward. Many a noble
knight bestirred him and served the ladies with eager zeal. Then
Kriemhild spied the margravine standing with her meiny. No nearer she
drew, but checked the palfrey with the bridle and bade them lift her
quickly from the saddle. Men saw the bishop with Eckewart lead his
sister's child to Gotelind. All stood aside at once. Then the exiled
queen kissed Gotelind upon the mouth. Full lovingly spake Rudeger's
wife: "Now well is me, dear lady, that I have ever seen with mine own
eyes your charming self in these our lands. Naught liefer might hap to
me in all these times."

"Now God requite you," quoth Kriemhild, "most noble Gotelind. Shall I
and Botelung's \[7\] son remain alive and well, it may be lief to you
that ye have seen me here."

Neither knew what must needs later hap. Many maidens went to meet each
other in courtly wise. The warriors, too, were full ready with their
service. After the greeting they sat them down upon the clover. With
many they became acquaint, who were full strange to them aforetime. As
it was now high noon, men bade pour out wine for the ladies. The noble
meiny no longer tarried, but rode to where they found many broad
pavilions; there ample service stood ready for the guests.

That night they had repose till early on the morn. Those from Bechelaren
made ready for to lodge the worthy guests. So well had Rudeger planned,
that little enow they lacked. The embrasures in the walls stood open,
the castle at Bechelaren was opened wide. In rode the guests whom men
were fain to see; the noble host bade purvey them proper easement. Most
lovingly Rudeger's daughter with her meiny went to welcome the queen.
There, too, stood her mother, the margrave's wife; many a high-born maid
was greeted with delight. They took each other by the hand and hied them
hence to a broad hall, fashioned full fair, under which the Danube
flowed along. Towards the breeze they sate and held great pastime. What
more they did I cannot tell, save that Kriemhild's men-at-arms were
heard to grumble that they fared so slowly on their way, for much it
irked them. Ho, what good knights rode with them hence from Bechelaren!

Rudeger offered them much loving service. The queen gave Gotelind's
daughter twelve ruddy armlets, and raiment too, as good as any that she
brought to Etzel's land. Although the Nibelung gold was taken from her,
yet she did win the hearts of all that saw her with the little she still
might have. Great gifts were given to the courtiers of the host. In turn
the Lady Gotelind offered the guests from the Rhine worship in such
friendly wise, that men found passing few of the strangers that did not
wear her jewels or her lordly robes.

When they had eaten and should depart, faithful service was proffered by
the lady of the house to Etzel's bride. The fair young margravine, too,
was much caressed. To the queen she spake: "Whenso it thinketh you good,
I know well that my dear father will gladly send me to you to the
Hunnish land." How well Kriemhild marked that the maiden loved her
truly.

The steeds were harnessed and led before the castle of Bechelaren and
the noble queen took leave of Rudeger's wife and daughter. With a
greeting many a fair maid parted too. Full seldom did they see each
other since these days. From Medelick \[8\] the folk bare in their hands
many a rich cup of gold, in which they offered wine to the strangers on
the highway. Thus they made them welcome. A host dwelt there, hight
Astolt, \[9\] who showed them the road to the Austrian land, towards
Mautern \[10\] down the Danube. There the noble queen was later served
full well. From his niece the bishop parted lovingly. How he counseled
her that she should bear her well and that she should purchase honor for
herself, as Helca, too, had done! Ho, what great worship she later
gained among the Huns!

To the Traisem \[11\] they escorted hence the guests. Rudeger's men
purveyed them zealously, until the Huns came riding across the land.
Then the queen became acquaint with mickle honor. Near the Traisem the
king of the Hunnish land did have a mighty castle, hight Zeisenmauer,
\[12\] known far and wide. Lady Helca dwelt there aforetime and used
such great virtues that it might not lightly ever hap again, unless it
be through Kriemhild. She wist so how to give, that after all her sorrow
she had the joy that Etzel's liegemen gave her great worship, of which
she later won great store among the heroes. Etzel's rule was known far
and wide, so that all time one found at his court the boldest warriors
of whom men ever heard, among Christian or among paynim. They were all
come with him. All time there were at his court, what may not so lightly
hap again, Christian customs and also heathen faith. In whatsoever wise
each lived, the bounty of the king bestowed on all enow.

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] "Vergen" is the modern Pforing, below Ingolstadt. A ferry across
the river existed here from ancient times.

\[2\] "Pilgrim", or "Pilgerin", as he is variously called, is an
historical personage. He was bishop of Passau from 971 to 991. Without
doubt he is a late introduction, according to Boer between 1181 and
1185. See Boer, ii, 204, and E.L. Dummler, "Pilgrim von Passau",
Leipzig, 1854.

\[3\] "Enns" (M.H.G. "Ens") is one of the tributaries of the Danube,
flowing into it about eleven miles southeast of Linz.

\[4\] "Efferding" (M.H.G. "Everdingen") is a town on the Danube, about
thirteen miles west of Linz.

\[5\] "Traun" (M.H.G. "Trune") is a river of Upper Austria, forty-four
miles southeast of Linz.

\[6\] "Truncheons", see Adventure II, note 8.

\[7\] "Botelung's son" is Attila, who is so called in our poem, in the
"Klage", and in "Biterolf". In the earlier Norse version "Atli" is the
son of "Budli". (On this point see Mullenhoff, "Zur Geschichte der
Nibelungensage", p. 106, and Zsfd A., x, 161, and Bleyer, PB. Beit.
xxxi, 459, where the names are shown to be identical.

\[8\] "Medelick" is the modern Molk, or Melk, a town on the Danube near
the influx of the Bilach. It lies at the foot of a granite cliff on
which stands a famous Benedictine abbey.

\[9\] "Astolt" appears only in this passage; nothing else is known of
him.

\[10\] "Mantern" is situated at the influx of the Flanitz, opposite
Stein in Lower Austria.

\[11\] "Traisem", Traisen, is a tributary of the Danube in Lower
Austria, emptying near Traismauer.

\[12\] "Zeisenmauer" (M.H.G. "Zeizenmure"). All the MSS. but C and D
have this reading. The latter have "Treysenmoure" and "treisem moure",
which corresponds better to the modern name, as Zeiselmauer lies between
Tulln and Vienna. It is possible, however, that the town on the Traisem
was originally called Zeiselmauer, as the road leading from Traismauer
to Tulln still bears the name of Zeiselstrasse. See Laehmann,
"Anmerkungen", 1272, 3, and Piper, ii, 289, note to str. 1333.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adventure XXII: How Etzel Made Kriemhild His Bride.](nblng24)
