[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nblng38)  [Next](nblng40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ADVENTURE XXXVII

## How Margrave Rudeger Was Slain.

The strangers had done full well at dawn. Meanwhile Gotelind's husband
came to court. Bitterly faithful Rudeger wept when he saw the grievous
wounds on either side. "Woe is me," quoth the champion, "that I was ever
born, sith none may stay this mickle grief! However fain I would make
for peace, the king will not consent, for he seeth ever more and more
the sufferings of his men."

Then the good Knight Rudeger sent to Dietrich, if perchance they might
turn the fate of the high-born kings. The king of Berne sent answer:
"Who might now forfend? King Etzel will let none part the strife."

Then a Hunnish warrior, that saw Rudeger stand with weeping eyes, and
many tears had he shed, spake to the queen: "Now behold how he doth
stand, that hath the greatest power at Etzel's court and whom both lands
and people serve. Why have so many castles been given to Rudeger, of
which he doth hold such store from the king in fief? Not one sturdy
stroke hath he dealt in all this strife. Methinks, he recketh not how it
fare here at court, sith he hath his will in full. Men say of him, he be
bolder than any other wight. Little hath that been seen in these parlous
\[1\] days."

Sad in heart the faithful vassal gazed at him whom he heard thus speak.
Him-thought: "Thou shalt pay for this. Thou sayest, I be a craven, and
hast told thy tale too loud at court."

His fist he clenched, then ran he at him and smote the Hunnish man so
mightily that he lay dead at his feet full soon. Through this King
Etzel's woe grew greater.

"Away, thou arrant coward," cried Rudeger, "forsooth I have enow of
grief and pain, How dost thou taunt me, that I fight not here? Certes, I
have good cause to hate the strangers, and would have done all in my
power against them, had I not led the warriors hither. Of a truth I was
their safeguard to my master's land. Therefore the hand of me, wretched
man, may not strive against them."

Then spake Etzel, the noble king, to the margrave: "How have ye helped
us, most noble Rudeger! We have so many fey \[2\] in the land, that we
have no need of more. Full evil have ye done."

At this the noble knight made answer: "Forsooth he grieved my mood and
twitted me with the honors and the goods, such store of which I have
received from thy hand. This hath cost the liar dear."

The queen, too, was come and had seen what fortuned to the Huns through
the hero's wrath. Passing sore she bewailed it; her eyes grew moist as
she spake to Rudeger: "How have we deserved that ye should increase the
sorrows of the king and me? Hitherto ye have told us, that for our sake
ye would risk both life and honor. I heard full many warriors accord to
you the palm. Let me mind you of your fealty and that ye swore, when
that ye counseled me to Etzel, good knight and true, that ye would serve
me till one of us should die. Never have I, poor woman, had such great
need of this."

"There's no denying that I swore to you, my lady, for your sake I'd risk
both life and honor, but I did not swear that I would lose my soul.
'Twas I that bade the high-born lordings to this feast."

Quoth she: "Bethink thee, Rudeger, of thy great fealty, of thy
constancy, and of thine oaths, that thou wouldst ever avenge mine
injuries and all my woes."

Said the margrave: "Seldom have I denied you aught."

Mighty Etzel, too, began implore; upon their knees they sank before the
knight. Men saw the noble margrave stand full sad. Pitifully the
faithful warrior spake: "Woe is me, most wretched man, that I have lived
to see this day. I must give over all my honors, my fealty, and my
courtesie, that God did bid me use. Alas, great God of heaven, that
death will not turn this from me!

I shall act basely and full evil, whatever I do or leave undone. But if
I give over both, then will all people blame me. Now may he advise me,
who hath given me life."

Still the king and the queen, too, begged unceasingly. Through this
warriors must needs thereafter lose their lives at Rudeger's hands, when
the hero also died. Ye may well hear it now, that he deported him full
pitifully. He wist that it would bring him scathe and monstrous woe.
Gladly would he have refused the king and queen. He feared full sore
that if he slew but one of the strangers, the world would bear him hate.

Then the brave man addressed him to the king: "Sir King, take back again
all that I have from you, my land with its castles, let not a whit
remain to me. On foot will I wander into other lands."

At this King Etzel spake: "Who else should help me then? I'll give thee
the land and all its castles, as thine own, that thou mayst avenge me on
my foes. Thou shalt be a mighty king at Etzel's side."

Then answered Rudeger: "How shall I do this deed? I bade them to my
house and home; in friendly wise I offered them both food and drink and
gave them gifts. How may I counsel their death? People will lightly
ween, that I be craven. No service of mine have I refused these noble
lordings and their men. Now I rue the kinship I have gained with them. I
gave my daughter to Giselher, the knight; to none in all the world could
she have been better given, for courtesie and honor, for fealty and
wealth. Never have I seen so young a prince of such right courteous
mind."

Then Kriemhild spake again: "Most noble Rudeger, take pity on our
griefs, on mine and on the king's. Bethink thee well, that king did
never gain such baneful guests."

To the noble dame the margrave spake: "Rudeger's life must pay to-day
for whatsoever favors ye and my lord have shown me. Therefore must I
die; no longer may it be deferred. I know full well, that my castles and
my lands will be voided for you to-day through the hand of one of these
men. To your mercy I commend my wife and children and the strangers
\[3\] who be at Bechelaren."

"Now God requite thee, Rudeger," spake the king, and both he and the
queen grew glad. "Thy people shall be well commended to our care. For
mine own weal I trust thou too shalt go unscathed."

Etzel's bride began to weep. Then body and soul he staked upon the
venture. He spake: "I must perform what I have vowed. Alas for my
friends, whom I am loth to fight."

Men saw him go sadly from the presence of the king. Close at hand he
found his warriors standing. He spake: "Ye must arm you all, my men,
for, alas, I must needs encounter the bold Burgundians."

They bade the squires run nimbly to where lay their arms. Whether it
were helm or buckler, 'twas all brought forth to them by their meiny.
Later the proud strangers heard told baleful tales. Rudeger was now
armed, and with him five hundred men; thereto he gained twelve
champions, who would fain win renown in the stress of battle. They wist
not that death drew nigh them. Then Rudeger was seen to march with
helmet donned. The margrave's men bare keen-edged swords, and their
bright shields and broad upon their arms. This the fiddler saw; greatly
he rued the sight. When young Giselher beheld his lady's father walk
with his helm upon his head, how might he know what he meant thereby,
save that it portended good? Therefore the noble prince waxed passing
merry of mood.

"Now well is me of such kinsmen," spake Knight Giselher, "whom we have
won upon this journey; from my wife we shall reap much profit here. Lief
it is to me, that this betrothal hath taken place."

"I know not whence ye take your comfort," spake then the minstrel; "when
have ye seen so many heroes walk with helmets donned and swords in hand,
for the sake of peace? Rudeger doth think to win his castles and his
lands in fight with us."

Or ever the fiddler had ended his speech, men saw the noble Rudeger
before the house. At his feet he placed his trusty shield, and now both
service and greeting he must needs refuse his friends. Into the hall the
noble margrave called: "Ye doughty Nibelungs, now guard you well on
every side. Ye were to profit by me, now I shall bring you scathe.
Aforetime we were friends, but of this troth I now would fain be rid."

The hard-pressed men were startled at this tale, for none gained aught
of joy, that he whom they did love would now fain fight them. From their
foes they had already suffered mickle stress of war. "Now God of heaven
forbid," spake Gunther, the knight, "that ye should give over your love
of us and your great fealty, on which we counted of a truth. Better
things I trow of you, than that ye should ever do this deed."

"Alas, I cannot give it over, but must fight you, for I have vowed it.
Now ward you, brave heroes, and ye love your life. King Etzel's wife
would not release me from mine oath."

"Ye declare this feud too late," spake the highborn king. "Now may God
requite you, most noble Rudeger, for all the love and fealty that ye
have shown us, if ye would only act more kindly at the end. I and my
kinsmen, we ought ever to serve you for the noble gifts ye gave us, when
ye brought us hither faithfully to Etzel's land. Now, noble Rudeger,
think on this."

"How gladly would I grant you," spake Knight Rudeger, "that I might
weigh out my gifts for you with full measure, as willingly as I had
hoped, if I never should be blamed on that account."

"Turn back, noble Rudeger," spake then Gernot, "for host did never give
his guests such loving cheer as ye did us. This shall profit you well,
and we remain alive."

"Would to God," spake Rudeger, "most noble Gernot, that ye were on the
Rhine and I were dead with passing honor, sith I must now encounter you!
Never did friends act worse to heroes."

"Now God requite you, Sir Rudeger," answered Gernot, "for your passing
rich gifts. Your death doth rue me, if such knightly virtues shall be
lost with you. Here I bear your sword that ye gave me, good knight and
true. It hath never failed me in all this need. Many a knight fell dead
beneath its edges. It is bright and steady, glorious and good;
nevermore, I ween, will warrior give so rich a gift. And will ye not
turn back, but come to meet us, and slay aught of the friends I still
have here, with your own sword will I take your life. Then will ye rue
me, Rudeger, ye and your high-born wife."

"Would to God, Sir Gernot, that this might come to pass, that all your
will might here be done, and that your kinsmen escaped unscathed! Then
both my daughter and my wife may trust you well, forsooth."

Then of the Burgundians there spake fair Uta's son: "Why do ye so, Sir
Rudeger? Those that be come with us, do all like you well. Ye encounter
us in evil wise; ye wish to make your fair daughter a widow far too
soon. If ye and your warriors match me now with strife, how right
unkindly do ye let it appear, that I trust you well above all other men
and therefore won me your daughter to wife."

"Think on your fealty, most noble and high-born king. And God let you
escape," so spake Rudeger, "let the maiden suffer not for me. For your
own virtue's sake, vouchsafe her mercy."

"That I should do by right," spake the youthful Giselher, "but if my
noble kinsmen here within must die through you, then my steadfast
friendship for you and for your daughter must be parted."

"Now may God have mercy on us," answered the valiant man. Then they
raised their shields, as though they would hence to fight the guests in
Kriemhild's hall, but Hagen cried full loud adown the steps. "Pray tarry
awhile, most noble Rudeger," so spake Hagen; "I and my lords would fain
have further parley, as doth befit our need. What can the death of us
wanderers avail King Etzel? I stand here in a fearful plight; the shield
that Lady Gotelind gave me to bear hath been cut to pieces by the Huns.
I brought it with friendly purpose into Etzel's land. O that God in
heaven would grant, that I might bear so good a shield as that thou hast
in thy hand, most noble Rudeger! Then I should no longer need a hauberk
in the fray."

"Gladly would I serve thee with my shield, durst I offer it before
Kriemhild. Yet take it, Hagen, and bear it on thine arm. Ho, if thou
couldst only wield it in the Burgundian land!"

When he so willingly offered to give the shield, enow of eyes grew red
with scalding tears. 'T was the last gift that ever Rudeger of
Bechelaren gave to any knight. However fierce Hagen, and however stern
of mood, the gift did touch him, which the good hero, so near to death,
had given. Many a noble knight gan mourn with him.

"Now God in heaven requite you, most noble Rudeger. Your like will
nevermore be found, who giveth homeless warriors such lordly gifts. God
grant that your courtesie may ever live." Again Hagen spake: "Woe is me
of these tales, we had so many other griefs to bear. Let complaint be
made to heaven, if we must fight with friends."

Quoth the margrave: "Inly doth this grieve me."

"Now God requite you, for the gift, most noble Rudeger. Howso these
high-born warriors deport them toward you, my hand shall never touch you
in the fight, and ye slew them all from the Burgundian land."

Courteously the good Sir Rudeger bowed him low. On every side they wept,
that none might soothe this pain of heart. That was a mighty grief. In
Rudeger would die the father of all knightly virtues.

Then Folker, the minstrel, spake from out the hall: "Sith my comrade
Hagen hath made his peace with you, ye shall have it just as steadfastly
from my hand, for well ye earned it, when we came into this land. Most
noble margrave, ye shall be mine envoy, too. The margravine gave me
these ruddy arm rings, that I should wear them here at the feasting.
These ye may yourself behold, that ye may later be my witness."

"Now God of heaven grant," spake Rudeger, "that the margravine may give
you more! I'll gladly tell these tales to my dear love, if I see her in
health again. Of this ye shall not doubt."

When he had vowed him this, Rudeger raised high his shield. No longer he
bided, but with raging mood, like a berserker, he rushed upon the
guests. Many a furious blow the noble margrave struck. The twain, Folker
and Hagen, stepped further back, as they had vowed to him afore. Still
he found standing by the tower such valiant men, that Rudeger began the
fight with anxious doubts. With murderous intent Gunther and Gernot let
him in, good heroes they! Giselher stood further back, which irked him
sore, in truth. He voided Rudeger, for still he had hope of life. Then
the margrave's men rushed at their foes; in knightly wise one saw them
follow their lord. In their hands they bare their keen-edged swords, the
which cleft there many a helm and lordly shield. The tired warriors
dealt the men of Bechelaren many a mighty blow, that cut smooth and deep
through the shining mail, down to the very quick.

Rudeger's noble fellowship was now come quite within. Into the fight
Folker and Hagen sprang anon. They gave no quarter, save to one man
alone. Through the hands of the twain the blood streamed down from the
helmets. How grimly rang the many swords within! The shield plates
sprang from their fastenings, and the precious stones, cut from the
shields, fell down into the gore. So grimly they fought, that men will
never do the like again. The lord of Bechelaren raged to and fro, as one
who wotteth how to use great prowess in the fray. Passing like to a
worshipful champion and a bold did Rudeger bear him on that day. Here
stood the warriors, Gunther and Gernot, and smote many a hero dead in
the fray. Giselher and Dankwart, the twain, recked so little, that they
brought full many a knight to his last day of life. Full well did
Rudeger make appear that he was strong enow, brave and well-armed. Ho,
what knights he slew! This a Burgundian espied; perforce it angered him,
and thus Sir Rudeger's death drew near.

The stalwart Gernot accosted the hero; to the margrave he spake:

"It appeareth, ye will not leave my men alive, most noble Rudeger. That
irketh me beyond all measure, no longer can I bear the sight. So may
your present work you harm, sith ye have taken from me such store of
friends. Pray address you unto me, most noble man and brave, your gift
shall be paid for as best I can."

Or ever the margrave could reach his foe, bright armor rings must needs
grow dull with blood. Then at each other sprang these honor-seeking men.
Either gan guard him against mighty wounds. So sharp were their swords,
that naught might avail against them. Then Rudeger, the knight, smote
Gernot a buffet through his helmet, the which was as hard as flint, so
that the blood gushed forth. But this the bold knight and good repaid
eftsoon. High in his hand he now poised Rudeger's gift, and though
wounded unto death, he smote him a stroke through his good and trusty
shield down to his helmet band. And so fair Gotelind's husband was done
to death. Certes, so rich a gift was never worse repaid. So fell alike
both Gernot and Rudeger, slain in the fray, through each other's hand.

Then first waxed Hagen wroth, when he saw the monstrous scathe. Quoth
the hero of Troneg: "Evil hath it fared with us. In these two men we
have taken a loss so great that neither their land nor people will e'er
recover from the blow. Rudeger's champions must answer to us homeless
men."

"Alas for my brother, who hath here been done to death. What evil tales
I hear all time! Noble Rudeger, too, must ever rue me. The loss and the
grievous wounds are felt on either side."

When Lord Giselher saw his betrothed's father dead, those within the
hall were forced to suffer need. Fiercely death sought his fellowship;
not one of those of Bechelaren escaped with life. Gunther and Giselher
and Hagen, too, Dankwart and Folker, the right good knights, went to
where they found the two men lying. Then by these heroes tears of grief
were shed.

"Death doth sorely rob us," spake Giselher, the youth. "Now give over
your weeping and go we bite the breeze, that the mailed armor of us
storm-weary men may cool. Certes, I ween, that God in heaven vouchsafeth
us no more to live."

This champion was seen to sit and that to lean against the wall, but all
again were idle. Rudeger's heroes lay still in death. The din had died
away; the hush endured so long, it vexed King Etzel.

"Alack for such services," spake the queen. "They be not so true, that
our foes must pay with their life at Rudeger's hands. I trow, he doth
wish to lead them back to the Burgundian land. What booteth it, King
Etzel, that we have given him whatso he would? The knight hath done
amiss, he who should avenge us, doth make his peace."

To this Folker, the full dapper knight, made answer: "This is not true,
alas, most noble queen. Durst I give the lie to such a high-born dame,
then had ye most foully lied against Rudeger. He and his champions be
cozened in this peace. So eagerly he did what the king commanded, that
he and all his fellowship lie here in death. Now look around you,
Kriemhild, to see whom ye may now command. The good Knight Rudeger hath
served you to his end. And ye will not believe the tale, we'll let you
see."

To their great grief 'twas done; they bare the slain hero to where the
king might see him. Never had there happed to Etzel's men a grief so
great. When they saw the margrave borne forth dead, no scribe might
write or tell the frantic grief of men and women, which there gan show
itself from dole of heart. King Etzel's sorrow waxed so great that the
mighty king did voice his woe of heart, as with a lion's roar. Likewise
did his queen. Beyond all measure they bewailed the good Knight
Rudeger's death.

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] "Parlous", older English for 'perilous'.

\[2\] "Fey", 'doomed to death', here in the sense of 'already slain'.
See Adventure V, note 2.

\[3\] "Strangers", i.e., those who are sojourning there far from home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adventure XXXVIII: How All Sir Dietrich's Warriors Were
Slain.](nblng40.md)
