[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nblng15)  [Next](nblng17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ADVENTURE XIV

## How The Queens Reviled Each Other.

On a day before the vesper tide a great turmoil arose, which many
knights made in the court, where they plied their knightly sports for
pastime's sake, and a great throng of men and women hasted there to
gaze. The royal queens had sat them down together and talked of two
worshipful knights.

Then spake the fair Kriemhild: "I have a husband who by right should
rule over all these kingdoms."

Quoth Lady Brunhild: "How might that be? If none other lived but he and
thou, then might these kingdoms own his sway, but the while Gunther
liveth, this may never hap."

Kriemhild replied: "Now dost thou see, how he standeth, how right
royally he walketh before the knights, as the moon doth before the
stars? Therefore must I needs be merry of mood."

Said Lady Brunhild: "However stately be thy husband, howso worthy and
fair, yet must thou grant the palm to Knight Gunther, the noble brother
of thine. Know of a truth, he must be placed above all kings."

Then Kriemhild spake again: "So doughty is my husband, that I have not
lauded him without good cause. His worship is great in many things. Dost
thou believe it, Brunhild, he is easily Gunther's peer."

"Forsooth thou must not take it amiss of me, Kriemhild, for I have not
spoken thus without good reason. I heard them both aver, when I saw them
first of all, and the king was victor against me in the games, and when
he won my love in such knightly wise, that he was liegeman to the king,
and Siegfried himself declared the same. I hold him therefore as my
vassal, sith I heard him speak thus himself."

Then spake fair Kriemhild: "Ill had I then sped. How could my noble
brothers have so wrought, that I should be a mere vassal's bride?
Therefore I do beseech thee, Brunhild, in friendly wise, that for my
sake thou kindly leave off this speech."

"I'll not leave it off," quoth the king's wife. "Why should I give up so
many a knight, who with the warrior doth owe us service?"

Kriemhild, the passing fair, waxed wroth out of wit. "Thou must forego
that ho ever do you a vassal's service; he is worthier than my brother
Gunther, the full noble man. Thou must retract what I have heard thee
say. Certes, it wondereth me, sith he be thy vassal and thou hast so
much power over us twain, why he hath rendered thee no tribute so long a
time. By right I should be spared thy overweening pride."

"Thou bedrest thee too high," spake the king's wife. "I would fain see
whether men will hold thee in such high honor as they do me."

The ladies both grew wonderly wroth of mood. Then spake the Lady
Kriemhild: "This must now hap. Sith thou hast declared my husband for
thy liegeman, now must the men of the two kings perceive to-day whether
I durst walk before the queen to church. Thou must see to-day that I am
noble and free and that my husband is worthier than thine; nor will I
myself be taxed therewith. Thou shalt mark to-day how thy liegewoman
goeth to court before the knights of the Burgundian land. I myself shall
be more worshipful than any queen was known to be, who ever wore a
crown." Great hate enow rose then betwixt the ladies.

Then Brunhild answered: "Wilt thou not be a liegewoman of mine, so must
thou sunder thee with thy ladies from my train when that we go to
church."

To this Kriemhild replied: "In faith that shall be done."

"Now array you, my maids," spake Siegfried's wife. "I must be here
without reproach. Let this be seen to-day, and ye do have rich weeds.
Brunhild shall fain deny what she hath here averted."

They needed not much bidding, but sought rich robes and many a dame and
maid attired her well. Then the wife of the noble king went forth with
her train. Fair Kriemhild, too, was well arrayed and three and forty
maidens with her, whom she had brought hither to the Rhine. They wore
bright vesture wrought in Araby, and thus the fair-fashioned maids
betook them to the minster. All Siegfried's men awaited them before the
house. The folk had marvel whence it chanced that the queens were seen
thus sundered, so that they did not walk together as afore. From this
did many a warrior later suffer dire distress. Here before the minster
stood Gunther's wife, while many a good knight had pastime with the
comely dames whom they there espied.

Then came the Lady Kriemhild with a large and noble train. Whatever kind
of clothes the daughters of noble knights have ever worn, these were but
the wind against her retinue. She was so rich in goods, that what the
wives of thirty kings could not purvey, that Kriemhild did. An' one
would wish to, yet he could not aver that men had ever seen such costly
dresses as at this time her fair-fashioned maidens wore. Kriemhild had
not done it, save to anger Brunhild. They met before the spacious
minster. Through her great hate the mistress of the house in evil wise
bade Kriemhild stand: "Forsooth no vassaless should ever walk before the
queen."

Then spake fair Kriemhild (angry was her mood): "Couldst thou have held
thy peace, 'twere well for thee. Thou hast disgraced thee and the fair
body of thine. How might a vassal's leman \[1\] ever be the wife of any
king?"

"Whom callest thou here leman?" spake the queen.

"That call I thee," quoth Kriemhild. "Thy fair person was first caressed
by Siegfried, my dear husband. Certes, it was not my brother who won thy
maidhood. Whither could thy wits have wandered? It was an evil trick.
Wherefore didst thou let him love thee, sith he be thy vassal? I hear
thee make plaint without good cause," quoth Kriemhild.

"I' faith," spake then Brunhild, "Gunther shall hear of this."

"What is that to me?" said Kriemhild. "Thy pride hath bewrayed thee.
With words thou hast claimed me for thy service. Know, by my troth, it
will ever grieve me, for I shall be no more thy faithful friend."

Then Brunhild wept. Kriemhild delayed no longer, but entered the minster
with her train before the queen. Thus there rose great hatred, from
which bright eyes grew dim and moist.

Whatso men did or sang to God's service there, the time seemed far too
long for Brunhild, for she was sad of heart and mood. Many a brave
knight and a good must later rue this day. Brunhild with her ladies now
went forth and stopped before the minster. Her-thought: "Kriemhild must
tell me more of what this word-shrewd woman hath so loudly charged me.
Hath Siegfried made boast of this, 'twill cost his life."

Now the noble Kriemhild came with many a valiant liegeman. Lady Brunhild
spake: "Stand still a while. Ye have declared me for a leman, that must
ye let be seen. Know, that through thy speech, I have fared full ill."

Then spake the Lady Kriemhild: "Ye should have let me pass. I'll prove
it by the ring of gold I have upon my hand, and which my lover brought
me when he first lay at your side."

Brunhild had never seen so ill a day. She spake: "This costly hoop of
gold was stolen from me, and hath been hid full long a time from me in
evil wise. I'll find out yet who hath ta'en it from me."

Both ladies now had fallen into grievous wrath.

Kriemhild replied: "I'll not be called a thief. Thou hadst done better
to have held thy peace, an' thou hold thine honor dear. I'll prove it by
the girdle which I wear about my waist, that I lie not. Certes, my
Siegfried became thy lord."

She wore the cord of silk of Nineveh, set with precious stones; in sooth
'twas fair enow. When Brunhild spied it, she began to weep. Gunther and
all the Burgundian men must needs now learn of this.

Then spake the queen: "Bid the prince of the Rhineland come hither. I
will let him hear how his sister hath mocked me. She saith here openly
that I be Siegfried's wife."

The king came with knights, and when he saw his love a-weeping, how
gently he spake: "Pray tell me, dear lady, who hath done you aught?"

She answered to the king: "I must stand unhappy; thy sister would fain
part me from all mine honors. I make here plaint to thee she doth aver
that Siegfried, her husband hath had me as his leman."

Quoth King Gunther: "Then hath she done ill."

"She weareth here my girdle, which I have lost, and my ring of ruddy
gold. It doth repent me sore that I was ever born, unless be thou
clearest me of this passing great shame, for that I'll serve thee ever."

King Gunther spake: "Have him come hither. He must let us hear if he
hath made boast of this, or he must make denial, the hero of
Netherland." One bade fetch at once Kriemhild's love.

When Siegfried saw the angry dames (he wist not of the tale), how
quickly then he spake: "I fain would know why these ladies weep, or for
what cause the king hath had me fetched."

Then King Gunther spake: "It doth rue me sore, forsooth. My Lady
Brunhild hath told me here a tale, that thou hast boasted thou wast the
first to clasp her lovely body in thine arms; this Lady Kriemhild, thy
wife, doth say."

Then spake Lord Siegfried: "And she hath told this tale, she shall rue
it sore, or ever I turn back, and I'll clear me with solemn oaths in
front of all thy men, that I have not told her this."

Quoth the king of the Rhineland: "Let that be seen. The oath thou dost
offer, and let it now be given, shall free thee of all false charges."

They bade the proud Burgundians form a ring. Siegfried, the bold,
stretched out his hand for the oath; then spake the mighty king: "Thy
great innocence is so well known to me, that I will free thee of that of
which my sister doth accuse thee and say, thou hast never done this
thing."

Siegfried replied: "If it boot my lady aught to have thus saddened
Brunhild, that will surely cause me boundless grief."

Then the lusty knights and good gazed one upon the other. "One should so
train women," spake again Siegfried, the knight, "that they leave
haughty words unsaid. Forbid it to thy wife, and I'll do the same to
mine. In truth, I do shame me of her great discourtesie."

Many fair ladies were parted by the speech. Brunhild mourned so sore,
that it moved King Gunther's men to pity. Then came Hagen of Troneg to
his sovran lady. He found her weeping, and asked what grief she had. She
told him then the tale. On the spot he vowed that Kriemhild's lord
should rue it sore, or he would nevermore be glad. Ortwin and Gernot
joined their parley and these heroes counseled Siegfried's death.
Giselher, the son of the noble Uta, came hither too. When he heard the
talk, he spake full true: "Ye trusty knights, wherefore do ye this?
Siegfried hath not merited forsooth such hate, that he should therefore
lose his life. Certes, women oft grow angry over little things."

"Shall we then raise cuckolds?" answered Hagen; "such good knights would
gain from that but little honor. Because he hath boasted of my liege
lady, I will rather die, an' it cost him not his life."

Then spake the king himself: "He hath shown us naught but love and
honor, so let him live. What booteth it, if I now should hate the
knight? He was ever faithful to us and that right willingly."

Knight Ortwin of Metz then spake: "His great prowess shall not in sooth
avail him aught. If my lord permit, I'll do him every evil."

So without cause the heroes had declared a feud against him. In this
none followed, save that Hagen counselled all time Knight Gunther the
that if Siegfried no longer lived, then many kingly lands would own his
sway. At this the king grew sad, so they let it rest.

Jousting was seen once more. Ho, what stout shafts they splintered
before the minster in the presence of Siegfried's wife, even down to the
hall! Enow of Gunther's men were now in wrath. The king spake: "Let be
this murderous rage, he is born to our honor and to our joy. Then, too,
the wonderly bold man is so fierce of strength, that none durst match
him, if he marked it."

"No, not he," spake Hagen then, "Ye may well keep still; I trow to bring
it to pass in secret, that he rue Brunhild's tears. Certes, Hagen hath
broken with him for all time."

Then spake King Gunther: "How might that chance?"

To this Hagen made answer: "I'll let you hear. We'll bid messengers,
that be not known to any here, ride into our land, to declare war upon
us openly. Then do ye say before your guests that ye and your men will
take the field. When that is done, he will vow to serve you then and
from this he shall lose his life, an' I learn the tale from the bold
knight's wife."

The king followed his liegeman Hagen in evil wise. These chosen knights
gan plan great faithlessness, or ever any one was ware. From two women's
quarreling full many a hero lost his life.

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] "Leman" (M.E. "lemman", O.E. "leof mann", 'lief man', i.e., 'dear
one'), 'mistress' in a bad sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adventure XV: How Siegfried Was Betrayed.](nblng17.md)
