[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nblng12)  [Next](nblng14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ADVENTURE XI

## How Siegfried Journeyed Homeward With His Wife.

When now the strangers had all ridden hence, Siegmund's son spake to his
fellowship: "We must make us ready, too, to journey to my lands."

Lief was it to his wife, when the lady heard the tale aright. She spake
to her husband: "When shall we ride? I pray thee, make me not haste too
sore. First must my brothers share their lands with me."

It was loth to Siegfried, when he heard this from Kriemhild. The
lordings hied them to him and all three spake: "Now may ye know, Sir
Siegfried, that our true service be ever at your bidding till our
death."

Then he made obeisance to the knights, as it was proffered him in such
kindly wise. "We shall share with you," spake Giselher, the youth, "both
land and castles which we do own and whatever broad realms be subject to
our power. Of these ye and Kriemhild shall have a goodly share."

The son of Siegmund spake to the princes, as he heard and saw the
lordings' will: "God grant that ye be ever happy with your heritage and
the folk therein. My dear bride can well forego in truth the share which
ye would give. There where she shall wear a crown, she shall be mightier
than any one alive, and live to see the day. For whatsoever else ye do
command, I stand ready to your bidding."

Then spake the Lady Kriemhild: "Though ye forego my heritage, yet is it
not so light a matter with the Burgundian men-at-arms. A king might
gladly lead them to his land. Forsooth my brothers' hands must share
them with me."

Then spake the Lord Gernot: "Now take whomsoever thou dost wish.

Thou wilt find here really a one who'll gladly ride with thee. We will
give thee a thousand of our thirty hundred warriors; be they thy court
retainers."

Kriemhild then gan send for Hagen of Troneg and also for Ortwin, to ask
if they and their kinsfolk would be Kriemhild's men.

At this Hagen waxed wonderly wroth. He spake: "Certes, Gunther may not
give us to any in the world. Let others follow as your train. Ye know
full well the custom of the men of Troneg: we must in duty bound remain
here with the kings at court. We must serve them longer, whom we till
now have followed."

They gave that over and made them ready to ride away. Lady Kriemhild
gained for herself two and thirty maids and five hundred men, a noble
train. The Margrave Eckewart \[1\] followed Kriemhild hence. They all
took leave, both knights and squires and maids and ladies, as was mickle
right. Anon they parted with a kiss and voided merrily King Gunther's
land. Their kinsmen bare them company far upon the way and bade them
pitch their quarters for the night, whereso they listed, throughout the
princes' land.

Then messengers were sent eftsoon to Siegmund, that he might know, and
Siegelind, too, that his son would come with Lady Uta's child,
Kriemhild, the fair, from Worms beyond the Rhine. Liefer tidings might
they never have. "Well for me," spake then Siegmund, "that I have lived
to see fair Kriemhild here as queen. My heritage will be thereby
enhanced. My son, the noble Siegfried, shall himself be king."

Then the Lady Siegelind gave much red velvet, silver, and heavy gold;
this was the envoy's meed. The tale well liked her, which then she
heard. She clad her and her handmaids with care, as did beseem them. Men
told who was to come with Siegfried to the land. Anon they bade seats be
raised, where he should walk crowned before his friends. King Siegmund's
liegemen then rode forth to meet him. Hath any been ever better greeted
than the famous hero in Siegmund's land, I know not. Siegelind, the
fair, rode forth to meet Kriemhild with many a comely dame (lusty
knights did follow on behind), a full day's journey, till one espied the
guests. Home-folk and the strangers had little easement till they were
come to a spacious castle, hight Xanten, \[2\] where they later reigned.

Smilingly Siegelind and Siegmund kissed Kriemhild many times for joy and
Siegfried, too; their sorrow was taken from them. All their fellowship
received great welcome. One bade now bring the guests to Siegmund's
hall, and lifted the fair young maids down from the palfreys. Many a
knight gan serve the comely dames with zeal. However great the feasting
at the Rhine was known to be, here one gave the heroes much better robes
than they had worn in all their days. Of their splender great marvels
might be told. When now they sate in lofty honors and had enow of all,
what gold-hued clothes their courtiers wore with precious stones well
worked thereon! Thus did Siegelind, the noble queen, purvey them well.

Then to his friends Lord Siegmund spake: "I do all Siegfried's kin to
wit, that he shall wear my crown before these knights." Those of
Netherland heard full fain the tale. He gave his son the crown, the
cognizance, \[3\] and lands, so that he then was master of them all.
When that men went to law and Siegfried uttered judgment, that was done
in such a wise that men feared sore fair Kriemhild's husband.

In these high honors Siegfried lived, of a truth, and judged as king,
till the tenth year was come, when his fair lady bare a son. This was
come to pass after the wish of the kinsmen of the king. They hastened to
baptize and name him Gunther for his uncle; nor had he need to be
ashamed of this. Should he grow like to his kinsman, he would fare full
well. They brought him up with care, as was but due. In these same times
the Lady Siegelind died, and men enow made wail when death bereft them
of her. Then the child of the noble Uta held withal the power over the
lands, which well beseemed such high-born dames. \[4\]

Now also by the Rhine, as we hear tell, at mighty Gunther's court, in
the Burgundian land, Brunhild, the fair, had born a son. For the hero's
sake they named him Siegfried. With what great care they bade attend
him! The noble Gunther gave him masters who well wot how to bring him up
to be a doughty man. Alas, what great loss of kin he later suffered
through misfortune!

Many tales were told all time, of how right worshipfully the lusty
knights dwelt alway in Siegmund's land. Gunther dealt the same with his
distinguished kin. The Nibelung land and Schilbung's knights and the
goods of both served Siegfried here (none of his kinsmen ever waxed
mightier than he). So much the higher rose the mood of the valiant man.
The very greatest heard that any hero ever gained, save those who owned
it aforetime, the bold man had, the which he had won by his own hand
hard by a hill, and for which he did many a lusty knight to death. He
had honors to his heart's desire, and had this not been so, yet one must
rightly aver of the noble champion, that he was one of the best that
ever mounted horse. Men feared his might and justly, too.

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] "Eckewart", see Adventure I, note 15.

\[2\] "Xanten", see Adventure II, note 3.

\[3\] "Cognizance", 'jurisdiction.'

\[4\] "Dames", i.e., Siegelind and Kriemhild.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adventure XII: How Gunther Bade Siegfried To The
Feasting.](nblng14)
