[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nblng18)  [Next](nblng20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ADVENTURE XVII

## How Kriemhild Mourned Her Husband And How He Was Buried.

Then they waited for the night and crossed the Rhine. Never had heroes
hunted worse. Noble maids bewept the game they slew. Forsooth many good
warriors must needs atone for this in after days. Now ye may hear a tale
of great overweening and dire revenge. Hagen bade carry Siegfried of the
Nibelung land, thus dead, before the bower where Kriemhild lodged. He
bade place him stealthily against the door, that she might find him when
she went forth before the break of day to matins, which Lady Kriemhild
full seldom missed through sleep.

Men rang the minster bells according to their custom. Lady Kriemhild,
the fair, now waked her many maids and bade them bring a light and her
vesture, too. Then came a chamberlain and found Siegfried there. He saw
him red with blood, his clothes all wet. He wist not it was his lord,
but with the light in his hand he hasted to the bower and through this
Lady Kriemhild learned the baneful tale. As she would set out with her
ladies for the minster, the chamberlain spake: "Pray stay your feet,
there doth lie before the chamber a knight, slain unto death."

Kriemhild gan make passing sore wail, or ever she heard aright that it
was her husband. She began to think of Hagen's question, of how he might
protect him. Then first she suffered dole; she renounced all pleasure at
his death. To the earth she sank, not a word she spake, and here they
found lying the hapless fair. Passing great grew Kriemhild's woe. After
her faint, she shrieked, that all the chamber rang. Then her meiny said:

"Perchance it is a stranger knight."

The blood gushed from her mouth, from dole of heart; she spake:

"'Tis Siegfried, mine own dear husband. Brunhild hath counseled this and
Hagen hath done the deed."

The lady bade them lead her to where the hero lay. With her white hand
she raised his head, and though it was red with blood, she knew him
soon. There lay the hero of the Nibelung land in piteous guise. The
gracious queen cried sadly: "Oh, woe is me of my sorrow! Thy shield is
not carved with swords, thou liest murdered here. Wist I who hath done
the deed, I'd ever plot his death."

All her maids made mourn and wailed with their dear lady, for they
grieved full sore for their noble lord whom they had lost. Hagen had
cruelly avenged the wrath of Brunhild.

Then spake the grief-stricken dame: "Go now and wake with haste all
Siegfried's men. Tell Siegmund also of my grief, mayhap he'll help me
bewail brave Siegfried."

A messenger ran quickly to where lay Siegfried's warriors from the
Nibelung land, and with his baleful tidings stole their joy. They could
scarce believe it, till they heard the weeping. Right soon the messenger
came to where the king did lie. Siegmund, the lord, was not asleep. I
trow his heart did tell him what had happed. Never again might he see
his dear son alive.

"Awake, Sir Siegmund; Kriemhild, my lady, bade me go to fetch you. A
wrong hath been done her that doth cut her to the heart, more than all
other ills. Ye must help her mourn, for much it doth concern you."

Siegmund sat up; he spake: "What are fair Kriemhild's ills, of which
thou tellest me?"

Weeping the messenger spake: "I cannot hide them from you; alas, bold
Siegfried of Netherland is slain."

Quoth Siegmund: "For my sake let be this jesting and such evil tales,
that thou shouldst tell any that he be dead, for I might never bewail
him fully before my death."

"If ye will believe naught of what ye hear me say, then you may hear
yourself Kriemhild and all her maids bewailing Siegfried's death."

Siegmund then was sore affrighted, as indeed he had great need, He and a
hundred of his men sprang from their beds and grasped with their hands
their long sharp swords. In sorrow they ran toward the sound of wail.
Then came a thousand men-at-arms, bold Siegfried's men. When they heard
the ladies wail so pitifully, some first grew ware that they should
dress them. Forsooth they lost their wits for very sorrow. Great
heaviness was buried in their hearts.

Then King Siegmund came to where he found Kriemhild. He spake:

"Alas for the journey hither to this land! Who hath so foully bereft me
of my child and you of your husband among such good friends?"

"Oh, if I knew him," spake the noble wife, "neither my heart nor soul
would ever wish him well. I would plan such ill against him that his kin
must ever weep because of me."

Around the prince Lord Siegmund threw his arms. So great grew the sorrow
of his kin, that the palace, the hall, and the town of Worms resounded
from the mighty wail and weeping. None might now comfort Siegfried's
wife. They stripped off the clothes from his fair body; they washed his
wounds and laid him on the bier. Woe were his people from their mighty
grief. Then spake his warriors from the Nibelung land: "Our hands be
ever ready to avenge him; he liveth in this castle who hath done the
deed."

All of Siegfried's men hasted then to arms. These chosen knights came
with their shields, eleven hundred men-at-arms, whom Lord Siegmund had
in his troop. He would fain avenge the death of his son, as indeed he
had great need. They wist not to whom they should address their strife,
unless it be to Gunther and his men, with whom Lord Siegfried had ridden
to the hunt.

Kriemhild saw them armed, which rued her sore. However great her grief
and how dire her need, yet she did so mightily fear the death of the
Nibelungs at the hands of her brothers' liegemen, that she tried to
hinder it. In kindly wise she warned them, as kinsmen do to loving kin.
The grief-stricken woman spake: "My Lord Siegmund, what will ye do? Ye
wot naught aright; forsooth King Gunther hath so many valiant men, ye
will all be lost, and ye would encounter these knights."

With their shields uncovered, the men stood eager for the fight. The
noble queen both begged and bade that the lusty knights avoid it. When
they would not give it over, sorely it grieved her. She spake: "Lord
Siegmund, ye must let it be until more fitting time, then I'll avenge my
husband with you. An' I receive proof who hath bereft me of him, I'll do
him scathe. There be too many haughty warriors by the Rhine, wherefore I
will not counsel you to fight. They have full well thirty men to each of
ours. Now God speed them, as they deserve of us. Stay ye here and bear
with me my dole. When it beginneth to dawn, help me, ye lusty knights,
to coffin the dear husband of mine."

Quoth the knights: "That shall be done."

None might tell you all the marvel of knights and ladies, how they were
heard to wail, so that even in the town men marked the sound of weeping.
The noble burghers hasted hither. With the guests they wept, for they,
too, were sore aggrieved. None had told them of any guilt of Siegfried,
or for what cause the noble warrior lost his life. The wives of the
worthy burghers wept with the ladies of the court. Men bade smiths haste
to work a coffin of silver and of gold, mickle and strong, and make it
firm with strips of good hard steel. Sad of heart were all the folk.

The night was gone, men said the day was dawning. Then the noble lady
bade them bear Lord Siegfried, her loved husband, to the minster.
Whatever friends he had there were seen weeping as they went. Many bells
were ringing as they brought him to the church. On every side one heard
the chant of many priests. Then came King Gunther with his men and grim
Hagen also toward the sound of wail. He spake: "Alas for thy wrongs,
clear sister, that we may not be free from this great scathe. We must
ever lament for Siegfried's death."

"That ye do without cause," spake the sorrow-laden wife. "Were this loth
to you, it never would have happed. I may well aver, ye thought not on
me, when I thus was parted from my dear husband. Would to God," quoth
Kriemhild, "that it had happed to me."

Firmly they made denial. Kriemhild gan speak: "Whoso declareth him
guiltless, let him show that now. He must walk to the bier before all
the folk; thereby one may know the truth eftsoon."

This is a great marvel, which oft doth hap; whenever the blood-stained
murderer is seen to stand by the dead, the latter's wounds do bleed,
\[1\] as indeed happed here, whereby one saw the guilt was Hagen's. The
wounds bled sore, as they had done at first. Much greater grew the
weeping of those who wailed afore.

Then spake King Gunther: "I'd have you know that robbers slew him; Hagen
did not do the deed."

"I know these robbers well," quoth she. "Now may God yet let his friends
avenge it. Certes, Gunther and Hagen, 'twas done by you."

Siegfried's knights were now bent on strife. Then Kriemhild spake again:
"Now share with me this grief."

Gernot, her brother, and young Giselher, these twain now came to where
they found him dead. They mourned him truly with the others; Kriemhild's
men wept inly. Now should mass be sung, so on every side, men, wives,
and children did hie them to the minster. Even those who might lightly
bear his loss, wept then for Siegfried. Gernot and Giselher spake:
"Sister mine, now comfort thee after this death, as needs must be. We'll
try to make it up to thee, the while we live."

Yet none in the world might give her comfort. His coffin was ready well
towards midday. From the bier whereon he lay they raised him. The lady
would not have that he be buried, so that all the folk had mickle
trouble. In a rich cloth of silk they wound the dead. I ween, men found
none there that did not weep. Uta, the noble dame, and all her meiny
mourned bitterly the stately man. When it was noised abroad that men
sang in the minster and had encoffined him, then rose a great press of
folk. What offerings they made for his soul's sake! He had good friends
enow among these foes. Poor Kriemhild spake to her chamberlains: "Ye
must now be put to trouble for my sake, ye who wished him well and be my
friends. For Siegfried's soul shall ye deal out his gold."

No child, however small, that had its wits, but must go to service, or
ever he was buried. Better than a hundred masses were sung that day.
Great throng was there of Siegfried's friends.

When that mass was sung, the folk went hence. Then Lady Kriemhild spake:
"Pray let me not hold vigil over the chosen knight this night alone.
With him all my joys have come to fall. I will let him lie in state
three days and nights, until I sate me with my dear lord. What if God
doth bid that death should take me too. Then had ended well the grief of
me, poor Kriemhild."

The people of the town returned now to their lodgeings. She begged the
priests and monks and all his retinue, that served the knight, to stay.
They spent full evil nights and toilsome days; many a man remained
without all food and drink. For those who would partake, it was made
known that men would give them to the full. This Sir Siegmund purveyed.
Then were the Nibelungs made acquaint with mickle toil. During the three
days, as we hear tell, those who knew how to sing, were made to bear a
deal of work. What offerings men brought them! Those who were very poor,
grew rich enow. Whatever of poor men there were, the which had naught,
these were bid go to mass with gold from Siegfried's treasure chamber.
Since he might not live, many thousand marks of gold were given for his
soul. She dealt out well-tilled lands, wherever cloisters and pious folk
were found. Enow of gold and silver was given to the poor. By her deeds
she showed that she did love him fondly.

Upon the third morning at time of mass, the broad churchyard by the
minster was full of weeping country folk. They served him after death,
as one should do to loving kin. In the four days, as hath been told,
full thirty thousand marks or better still were given to the poor for
his soul's sake. Yet his great beauty and his life lay low. When God had
been served and the chants were ended, much people fought 'gainst
monstrous grief. Men bade bear him from the minster to the grave. Those
were seen to weep and wail who missed him most. With loud laments the
people followed hence; none was merry, neither wife nor man. They sang
and read a service before they buried him. Ho, what good priests were
present at his burial! Ere Siegfried's wife was come to the grave, her
faithful heart was rung with grief, so that they must needs oft sprinkle
her with water from the spring. Her pain was passing great; a mickle
wonder it was that she ever lived. Many a lady helped her in her plaint.

Then spake the queen: "Ye men of Siegfried, by your loyalty must ye
prove your love to me. Let me receive this little favor after all my
woe, that I may see once more his comely head."

She begged so long, with griefs strong will, that they must needs break
open the lordly casket. Then men brought the lady to where he lay. With
her white hand she raised his fair head and kissed the noble knight and
good, thus dead. Tears of blood her bright eyes wept from grief. Then
there happed a piteous parting. Men bare her hence, she could not walk,
and soon they found the high-born lady lying senseless. Fain would the
lovely fair have died of grief.

When they had now buried the noble lord, those who were come with him
from the Nibelung land were seen to suffer from unmeasured grief. Men
found Siegmund full seldom merry then. There were those that for three
days would neither eat nor drink for passing grief. Yet might they not
so waste away their bodies, but that they recovered from their sorrows,
as still happeneth oft enow.

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] "Bleed". This was not only a popular superstition, but also a
legal practice in case of a murder when the criminal had not been
discovered, or if any one was suspected. The suspected person was
requested to approach the bier and touch the body, in the belief that
the blood would flow afresh if the one touching the body were guilty.
Our passage is the first instance of its mention in German literature. A
similar one occurs in "Iwein", 1355-1364. The usage was also known in
France and England. See the instances quoted by Jacob Grimm in his
"Rechtsaltertumer", 930.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adventure XVIII: How Siegmund Journeyed Home Again.](nblng20)
