[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110230)  [Next](2110232) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xlii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlii-p1.1"></span>In</span> the meantime in the East, after
the example of the West, the emperor ordered almost all the bishops to
assemble at Seleucia, a town of Isauria. At that time, Hilarius, who was
now spending the fourth year of his exile in Phrygia, is compelled to be
present among the other bishops, the means of a public conveyance being
furnished to him by the lieutenant <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) and governor. As, however, the emperor
had given no special orders regarding him, the judges, simply following
the general order by which they were commanded to gather all bishops to
the council, sent him also among the rest who were willing to go. This
was done, as I imagine, by the special ordination of God, in order that
a man who was most deeply instructed in divine things, might be present
when a discussion was to be carried on respecting the faith. He, on
arriving at Seleucia, was received with great favor, and drew the minds
and affections of all towards himself. His first inquiry was as to the
real faith of the Gauls, because at that time the Arians had spread evil
reports regarding us, and we were held suspected by the Easterns as
having embraced the belief of Sabellius, to the effect that the unity of
the one God was simply distinguished <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) by a threefold name. But after he had
set forth his faith in harmony with those conclusions which had been
reached by the fathers at Nicæa, he bore his testimony in favor of the
Westerns. Thus the minds of all having been satisfied, he was admitted
to communion, and being also received into alliance, was added to the
council. They then proceeded to actual work, and the originators of the
wicked heresy being discovered, were separated from the body of the
Church. In that number were Georgius of Alexandria, Acacius, Eudoxius,
Vranius, Leontius, Theodosius, Evagrius, Theodulus. But when the Synod
was over, an embassy was appointed to go to the emperor and make him
acquainted with what had been done. Those who had been condemned also
went to the prince, relying upon the power of their confederates, and a
common cause with the monarch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_378"></span>[117:379](2110231.htm#fr_378) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlii-p2"></span> “per vicarium ac præsidem”: as
Vorstius remarks, these were the two magistrates of Phrygia.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[117:380](2110231.htm#fr_379) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlii-p3"></span> “trionymam solitarii Dei unionem”:
Hornius here remarks that “Sabellius believed that the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit were the same, and differed among themselves only in
name.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII.](2110232)
