[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110322)  [Next](2110324) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p1"></span>How one who does not come to the
daily prayer before the end of the first Psalm is not allowed to enter
the Oratory; but at Nocturnes a late arrival up to the end of the second
Psalm can be overlooked.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>But</span> one who at Tierce, Sext, or
None has not come to prayer before the Psalm is begun and finished does
not venture further to enter the Oratory nor to join himself to those
singing the Psalms; but, standing outside, he awaits the breaking-up of
the congregation, <span id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742) and while they
are all coming out does penance lying on the ground, and obtains
absolution for his carelessness and lateness, knowing that he can in no
other way expiate the fault of his sloth, nor can ever be admitted to
the service which will follow three hours later, unless he has been
quick to make satisfaction at once for his present negligence by the
help of true humility. But in the nocturnal assemblies a late arrival up
to the *second* Psalm is allowed, provided that before the Psalm is
finished and the brethren bow down in prayer he makes haste to take his
place in the congregation and join them; but he will most certainly be
subjected to the same blame and penance which we mentioned before if he
has delayed ever so little beyond the hour permitted for a late
arrival. <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_742"></span>[216:743](2110323.htm#fr_742) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p3"></span> *Congregationis missam*.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[216:744](2110323.htm#fr_743) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p4"></span> The Rule of S. Benedict has similar
provisions, allowing a late arrival at Mattins till the Gloria after the
Venite (the second Psalm, as it is preceded by [Ps.
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>), and at the other services till the
Gloria after the first Psalm. “If any come later than this, he is not to
take his usual place in the choir, but stand last of all, or take
whatever place the Abbot may have appointed for those who are guilty of
a similar neglect, so that he may be seen of all; and in this place he
is to remain until he shall have made public satisfaction, at the end of
the office. We deem it necessary,” the Rule proceeds, “to place such
offenders thus apart, that, being thus exposed to the view of all their
brethren, they may be shamed into a sense of duty. Moreover, if such
were allowed to remain outside the church, they might either sit down at
their ease, or while away their time in chatting, or perhaps return to
the dormitory and compose themselves to sleep and thus expose themselves
to the temptations of the enemy.” Rule of S. Benedict, c. xliii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of the Vigil service which is celebrated on the
evening preceding the Sabbath; of its length, and the manner in which it
is observed.](2110324)
