[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110003)  [Next](2110005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.i"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.i-p0.1"></span>Preface to Desiderius.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Severus</span> to his dearest brother
Desiderius sendeth greeting. I had determined, my like-minded brother,
to keep private, and confine within the walls of my own house, the
little treatise which I had written concerning the life of St. Martin. I
did so, as I am not gifted with much talent, and shrank from the
criticisms of the world, lest (as I think will be the case) my somewhat
unpolished style should displease my readers, and I should be deemed
highly worthy of general reprehension for having too boldly laid hold of
a subject which ought to have been reserved for truly eloquent writers.
But I have not been able to refuse your request again and again
presented. For what could there be which I would not grant in deference
to your love, even at the expense of my own modesty? However, I have
submitted the work to you on the sure understanding that you will reveal
it to no other, having received your promise to that effect.
Nevertheless, I have my fears that you will become the means of its
publication to the world; and I well know that, once issued, it can
never <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) be recalled. If this shall
happen, and you come to know that it is read by some others, you will, I
trust, kindly ask the readers to attend to the facts related, rather
than the language in which they are set forth. You will beg them not to
be offended if the style chances unpleasantly to affect their ears,
because the kingdom of God consists not of eloquence, but faith. Let
them also bear in mind that salvation was preached to the world, not by
orators, but by fishermen, although God could certainly have adopted the
other course, had it been advantageous. For my part, indeed, when I
first applied my mind to writing what follows, because I thought it
disgraceful that the excellences of so great a man should remain
concealed, I resolved with myself not to feel ashamed on account of
solecisms of language. This I did because I had never attained to any
great knowledge of such things; or, if I had formerly some taste of
studies of the kind, I had lost the whole of that, through having
neglected these matters for so long a course of time. But, after all,
that I may not have in future to adopt such an irksome mode of
self-defense, the best way will be that the book should be published, if
you think right, with the author’s name suppressed. In order that this
may be done, kindly erase the title which the book bears on its front,
so that the page may be silent; and (what is quite enough) let the book
proclaim its subject-matter, while it tells nothing of the author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](2110004.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p2"></span>                                           
“Delere licebit

<span id="ii.ii.i-p3"></span>Quod non edideris: nescit vox missa
reverti.”

<span id="ii.ii.i-p4"></span>                                       
—Hor. *Art Poet*. 389–90.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Reasons for writing the Life of St. Martin.](2110005)
