[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110257)  [Next](2110259) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iii.xvii-p1"></span>Recapitulation of what was said of the
Catholic Faith and of divers Heresies, Chapters xi–xv.

<span id="iii.xvii-p2"></span>\[41.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xvii-p2.1"></span>But</span> now that we may refresh our
remembrance of what has been briefly said concerning either the
afore-mentioned heresies or the Catholic Faith, let us go over it again
more briefly and concisely, that being repeated it may be more
thoroughly understood, and being pressed home more firmly held.

<span id="iii.xvii-p3"></span>Accursed then be Photinus, who does not
receive the Trinity complete, but asserts that Christ is mere man.

<span id="iii.xvii-p4"></span>Accursed be Apollinaris, who affirms that
the Godhead of Christ is marred by conversion, and defrauds Him of the
property of perfect humanity.

<span id="iii.xvii-p5"></span>Accursed be Nestorius, who denies that God
was born of the Virgin, affirms two Christs, and rejecting the belief of
the Trinity, brings in a Quaternity.

<span id="iii.xvii-p6"></span>But blessed be the Catholic Church, which
worships one God in the completeness of the Trinity, and at the same
time adores the equality of the Trinity in the unity of the Godhead, so
that neither the singularity of substance confounds the propriety of the
Persons, not the distinction of the Persons in the Trinity separates the
unity of the Godhead.

<span id="iii.xvii-p7"></span>Blessed, I say, be the Church, which
believes that in Christ there are two true and perfect substances but
one Person, so that neither doth the distinction of natures divide the
unity of Person, nor the unity of Person confound the distinction of
substances.

<span id="iii.xvii-p8"></span>Blessed, I say, be the Church, which
understands God to have become Man, not by conversion of nature, but by
reason of a Person, but of a Person not feigned and transient, but
substantial and permanent.

<span id="iii.xvii-p9"></span>Blessed, I say, be the Church, which
declares this unity of Person to be so real and effectual, that because
of it, in a marvellous and ineffable mystery, she ascribes divine
attributes to man, and human to God; because of it, on the one hand, she
does not deny that Man, as God, came down from heaven, on the other, she
believes that God, as Man, was created, suffered, and was crucified on
earth; because of it, finally, she confesses Man the Son of God, and God
the Son of the Virgin.

<span id="iii.xvii-p10"></span>Blessed, then, and venerable, blessed and
most sacred, and altogether worthy to be compared with those celestial
praises of the Angelic Host, be the confession which ascribes glory to
the one Lord God with a threefold ascription of holiness. For this
reason moreover she insists emphatically upon the oneness of the Person
of Christ, that she may not go beyond the mystery of the Trinity (that
is by making in effect a Quaternity.)

<span id="iii.xvii-p11"></span>Thus much by way of digression. On
another occasion, please God, we will deal with the subject and unfold
it more fully. <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) Now let us return
to the matter in hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_479"></span>[143:480](2110258.htm#fr_479) <span
id="iii.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p12"></span> Anrtelmi, who ascribed the Athanasian
Creed to Vincentius, thought that document a fulfilment of the promise
here made. *Nova de Symbolo Athanasiano Disquisitio*.—See Appendix I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. The Error of Origen a great Trial to the
Church.](2110259)
