[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110410)  [Next](2110412) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxviii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.v.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxviii-p1"></span>The same Archebius paid a debt of
his mother’s by the labour of his own hands.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.v.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>It</span> seems to me worth while to
hand down another charitable act of the same man, that the monks of our
land may be taught by the example of one and the same man to maintain
not only a rigorous continence, but also the most unfeigned affection of
love. For he, sprung from no ignoble family, while yet a child, scorning
the love of this world and of his kinsfolk, fled to the monastery which
is nearly four miles distant from the aforementioned town, where he so
passed all his life, that never once throughout the whole of fifty years
did he enter or see the village from which he had come, nor even look
upon the face of any woman, not even his own mother. In the mean while
his father was overtaken by death, and left a debt of a hundred solidi.
And though he himself was entirely free from all annoyances, since he
had been disinherited of all his father’s property, yet he found that
his mother was excessively annoyed by the creditors. Then he through
consideration of duty somewhat moderated that gospel severity through
which formerly, while his parents were prosperous, he did not recognize
that he possessed a father or mother on earth; and acknowledged that he
had a mother, and hastened to relieve her in her distress, without
relaxing anything of the austerity he had set <span id="page_247">p.
247</span> <span id="iv.iii.v.xxxviii-Page_247"></span>himself. For
remaining within the cloister of the monastery he asked that the task of
his usual work might be trebled. And there for a whole year toiling
night and day alike he paid to the creditors the due measure of the debt
secured by his toil and labour, and relieved his mother from all
annoyance and anxiety; ridding her of the burden of the debt in such a
way as not to suffer aught of the severity he had set himself to be
diminished on plea of duteous necessity. Thus did he preserve his wonted
austerities, without ever denying to his mother’s heart the work which
duty demanded, as, though he had formerly disregarded her for the love
of Christ, he now acknowledged her again out of consideration of duty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX. Of the device of a certain old man by which some
work was found for Abbot Simeon when he had nothing to do.](2110412)
