[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110299)  [Next](2110301) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p1"></span>Of the observance of one uniform rule
throughout the whole of Egypt, and of the election of those who are set
over the brethren.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so throughout the whole of
Egypt and the Thebaid, where monasteries are not founded at the fancy of
every man who renounces <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-Page_206"></span>the world, but through a succession
of fathers and their traditions last even to the present day, or are
founded so to last, in these we have noticed that a prescribed system of
prayers is observed in their evening assemblies and nocturnal vigils.
For no one is allowed to preside over the assembly of the brethren, or
even over himself, before he has not only deprived himself of all his
property but has also learnt the fact that he is not his own maker and
has no authority over his own actions. For one who renounces the world,
whatever property or riches he may possess, must seek the common
dwelling of a Cœnobium, that he may not flatter himself in any way with
what he has forsaken or what he has brought into the monastery. He must
also be obedient to all, so as to learn that he must, as the Lord
says, <span id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678) become again a little
child, arrogating nothing to himself on the score of his age and the
number of the years which he now counts as lost while they were spent to
no purpose in the world and, as he is only a beginner, and because of
the novelty of the apprenticeship, which he knows he is serving in
Christ’s service, he should not hesitate to submit himself even to his
juniors. Further, he is obliged to habituate himself to work and toil,
so as to prepare with his own hands, in accordance with the Apostle’s
command, <span id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679) daily supply of food,
either for his own use or for the wants of strangers; and that he may
also forget the pride and luxury of his past life, and gain by grinding
toil humility of heart. And so no one is chosen to be set over a
congregation of brethren before that he who is to be placed in authority
has learnt by obedience what he ought to enjoin on those who are to
submit to him, and has discovered from the rules of the Elders what he
ought to teach to his juniors. For they say that to rule or to be ruled
well needs a wise man, and they call it the greatest gift and grace of
the Holy Spirit, since no one can enjoin salutary precepts on those who
submit to him but one who has previously been trained in all the rules
of virtue; nor can any one obey an Elder but one who has been filled
with the love of God and perfected in the virtue of humility. And so we
see that there is a variety of rules and regulations in use throughout
other districts, because we often have the audacity to preside over a
monastery without even having learnt the system of the Elders, and
appoint ourselves Abbots before we have, as we ought, professed
ourselves disciples, and are readier to require the observance of our
own inventions than to preserve the well-tried teaching of our
predecessors. But, while we meant to explain the best system of prayers
to be observed, we have in our eagerness for the institutions of the
fathers anticipated by a hasty digression the account which we were
keeping back for its proper place. And so let us now return to the
subject before us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_678"></span>[206:679](2110300.htm#fr_678) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p3"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[206:680](2110300.htm#fr_679) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p4"></span> Cf. [1 Thess. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. How throughout the whole of Egypt and the Thebaid the
number of Psalms is fixed at twelve.](2110301)
