[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110347)  [Next](2110349) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iv.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xix-p1"></span>How throughout Palestine and
Mesopotamia a daily service is undertaken by the brethren.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>In</span> order that we may not appear to
omit any of the Institutes of the Cœnobia I think that it should be
briefly mentioned that in other countries as well there is a daily
service undertaken by the brethren. For throughout the whole of
Mesopotamia, Palestine, and Cappadocia and all the East the brethren
succeed one another in turn every week for the performance of certain
duties, so that the number serving is told off according to the whole
number of monks in the Cœnobium. And they hasten to fulfil these duties
with a zeal and humility such as no slave bestows on his service even to
a most harsh and powerful master; so that not satisfied only with these
services which are rendered by canonical rule, they actually rise by
night in their zeal and relieve those whose special duty this is; and
secretly anticipating them try to finish those duties which these others
would have to do. But each one who undertakes these weeks is on duty and
has to serve until supper on <span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xix-Page_225"></span>Sunday, and when this is done, his
duty for the whole week is finished, so that, when all the brethren come
together to chant the Psalms (which according to custom they sing before
going to bed) those whose turn is over wash the feet of all in turn,
seeking faithfully from them the reward of this blessing for their work
during the whole week, that the prayers offered up by all the brethren
together may accompany them as they fulfil the command of Christ, the
prayer, to wit, that intercedes for their ignorances and for their sins
committed through human frailty, and may commend to God the complete
service of their devotion like some rich offering. And so on Monday
after the Mattin hymns they hand over to others who take their place the
vessels and utensils with which they have ministered, which these
receive and keep with the utmost care and anxiety, that none of them may
be injured or destroyed, as they believe that even for the smallest
vessels they must give an account, as sacred things, not only to a
present steward, but to the Lord, if by chance any of them is injured
through their carelessness. And what limit there is to this discipline,
and what fidelity and care there is in keeping it up, you may see from
one instance which I will give as an example.  For while we are anxious
to satisfy that fervour of yours through which you ask for a full
account of everything, and want even what you know perfectly well to be
repeated to you in this treatise, we are also afraid of exceeding the
limits of brevity. <span id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_775"></span>[225:776](2110348.htm#fr_775) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xix-p3"></span> The weekly officers here spoken of
were termed “Hebdomadarii” (see the next chapter). According to most
rules their duties included cooking, serving, and reading at meals. They
are mentioned in S. Jerome’s preface to the Rule of Pachomius (cf. also
Ep. xxii.<span id="iv.iii.iv.xix-p3.1"></span> ad Eustochium), but it
would appear from what Cassian says below in c. xxii. that in Egypt the
office of cook was assigned to some one brother and not undertaken by
all in turn. According to Cassian they entered upon office on Monday
morning but the Benedictine (c. xxxv.) and other rules speak of them as
beginning their duties on Sunday morning. The custom of washing the feet
of the brethren, which Cassian here describes, is also mentioned by S.
Benedict. l. c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Of the three lentil beans which the Steward
found.](2110349)
