[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110228)  [Next](2110230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xl"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xl-p0.1"></span>Chapter XL.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xl-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xl-p1.1"></span>In</span> the meantime, the Arians, not
secretly, as before, but openly and publicly proclaimed their monstrous
heretical doctrines. Moreover, they interpreted after their own views
the Synod of Nicæa, and by the addition of one letter to its finding,
threw a sort of obscurity over the truth. For where the expression
*Homoousion* had been written, which denotes “of one substance,” they
maintained that it was written *Homoiousion*, which simply means “of
like substance.” They thus granted a likeness, but took away unity; for
likeness is very different from unity; just as, for illustration’s sake,
a picture of a human body might be like a man, and yet possess nothing
of the reality of a man. But some of them went even farther, and
maintained *Anomoiousia*, that is, an unlike substance. And to such a
pitch did these controversies extend, that the wide world was involved
in these monstrous errors. For Valens and Ursatius, with their
supporters, whose names we have stated, infected Italy, Illyria, and the
East with these opinions. Saturninus, bishop of Arles, a violent and
factious man, harassed our country of Gaul in like manner. There was
also a prevalent belief that Osius from Spain had gone over to the same
unfaithful party, which appears all the more wonderful and incredible on
this account, that he had been, almost during his whole life, the most
determined upholder of our views, and the Synod of Nice was regarded as
having been held at his instigation. If he did go over, the reason may
have been that in his extreme old age (for he was then more than a
centenarian, as St. Hilarius relates in his epistles) he had fallen into
dotage. While the world was disturbed by these things, and the churches
were languishing as if from a sort of disease, an anxiety, less exciting
indeed, but no less serious, pressed upon the emperor, that although the
Arians, whom he favored, appeared the stronger, yet there was still no
agreement among the bishops concerning the faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI.](2110230)
