[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110676)  [Next](2110678) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p1"></span>Of the struggle into which we must
enter against our faults, when they attack us.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> we must enter the lists
against these faults in such a way that every one should discover his
besetting sin, and direct his main attack against it, directing all his
care and watchfulness of mind to guard against its assault, directing
against it daily the weapons of fasting, and at all times hurling
against it the constant darts of sighs and groanings from the heart, and
employing against it the labours of vigils and the meditation of the
heart, and further pouring forth to God constant tears and prayers and
continually and expressly praying to be delivered from its attack. For
it is impossible for a man to win a triumph over any kind of passion,
unless he has first clearly understood that he cannot possibly gain the
victory in the struggle with it by his own strength and efforts,
although in order that he may be rendered pure he must night and day
persist in the utmost care and watchfulness. And even when he feels that
he has got rid of this fault, he should still search the inmost recesses
of his heart with the same purpose, and single out the worst fault which
he can see among those still there, and bring all the forces of the
Spirit to bear against it in particular, and <span id="page_346">p.
346</span> <span id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-Page_346"></span>so by always
overcoming the stronger passions, he will gain a quick and easy victory
over the rest, because by a course of triumphs the soul is made more
vigorous, and the fact that the next conflict is with weaker passion
insures him a readier success in the struggle: as is generally the case
with those who are wont to face all kinds of wild beasts in the presence
of the kings of this world, out of consideration for the rewards—a kind
of spectacle which is generally called “pancarpus.” <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337) Such men, I say, direct their first
assault against whatever beasts they see to be the strongest and
fiercest, and when they have despatched these, then they can more easily
lay low the remaining ones, which are not so terrible and powerful. So
too, by always overcoming the stronger passions, as weaker ones take
their place, a perfect victory will be secured for us without any risk.
Nor need we imagine that if any one grapples with *one* fault in
particular, and seems too careless about guarding against the attacks of
others, he will be easily wounded by a sudden assault, for this cannot
possibly happen. For where a man is anxious to cleanse his heart, and
has steeled his heart’s purpose against the attack of any one fault, it
is impossible for him not to have a general dread of all other faults as
well, and take similar care of them. For if a man renders himself
unworthy of the prize of purity by contaminating himself with other
faults, how can he possibly succeed in gaining the victory over that one
passion from which he is longing to be freed? But when the main purpose
of our heart has singled out one passion as the special object of its
attack, we shall pray about it more earnestly, and with special anxiety
and fervour shall entreat that we may be more especially on our guard
against it and so succeed in gaining a speedy victory. For the giver of
the law himself teaches us that we ought to follow this plan in our
conflicts and not to trust in our own power; as he says: “Thou shalt not
fear them because the Lord thy God is in the midst of thee, a God mighty
and terrible: He will consume these nations in thy sight by little and
little and by degrees. Thou wilt not be able to destroy them altogether:
lest perhaps the beasts of the earth should increase upon thee. But the
Lord thy God shall deliver them in thy sight; and shall slay them until
they be utterly destroyed.” <span id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[346:1338](2110677.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p3"></span> *Pancarpus* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p3.1"></span>πάγκαρπος</span>). The
word originally applied to an offering of all kinds of fruit. Cf.
Tertullian ad Valent. xii. It is also used in the general sense “of all
sorts” by Augustine, Adv. Secund. xxiii. Cassian here speaks as if it
had become the popular name for the conflicts of the gladiators with all
kinds of beasts, though there is apparently no other authority for this.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[346:1339](2110677.htm#fr_1338) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p4"></span> [Deut. vii.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. How we can do nothing against our faults without the
help of God, and how we should not be puffed up by victories over
them.](2110678)
