[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110545)  [Next](2110547) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xv-p1"></span>From whom we can learn the way of
perfection.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xii.xv-p2.1"></span>And</span> so, if we wish in very deed
and truth to attain to the crown of virtues, we ought to listen to those
teachers and guides who, not dreaming with pompous declamations, but
learning by act and experience, are able to teach us as well, and direct
us likewise, and show us the road by which we may arrive at it by a most
sure pathway; and who also testify that they have themselves reached it
by faith rather than by any merits of their efforts. And further, the
purity of heart that they have acquired has taught them this above all;
viz., to recognize more and more that they are burdened with sin (for
their compunction for their faults increases day by day in proportion as
their purity of soul advances), and to sigh continually from the bottom
of their heart because they see that they cannot possibly avoid the
spots and blemishes of those faults which are ingrained in them through
the countless triflings of the thoughts. And therefore they declared
that they looked for the reward of the future life, not from the merits
of their works, but from the mercy of the Lord, taking no credit to
themselves for their great circumspection of heart in comparison with
others, since they ascribed this not to their own exertions, but to
divine grace; and without flattering themselves on account of the
carelessness of those who are cold, and worse than they themselves are,
they rather aimed at a lasting humility by fixing their gaze on those
whom they knew to be really free from sin and already in the enjoyment
of eternal bliss in the kingdom of heaven, and so by this consideration
they avoided the downfall of pride, and at the same time always saw both
what they were aiming at and what they had to grieve over: as they knew
that they could not attain that purity of heart for which they yearned
while weighed down by the burden of the flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. That we cannot even make the effort to obtain
perfection without the mercy and inspiration of God.](2110547)
