[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110027)  [Next](2110029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xxv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p1"></span>Martin is tempted by the Wiles of the
Devil.

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xxv-p2.1"></span>It</span> was found, again, that about the
same time there was a young man in Spain, who, having by many signs
obtained for himself authority among the people, was puffed up to such a
pitch that he gave himself out as being Elias. And when multitudes had
too readily believed this, he went on to say that he was actually
Christ; and he succeeded so well even in this delusion that a certain
bishop named Rufus worshiped him as being the Lord. For so doing, we
have seen this bishop at a later date deprived of his office. Many of
the brethren have also informed me that at the same time one arose in
the East, who boasted that he was John. We may infer from this, since
false prophets of such a kind have appeared, that the coming of
Antichrist is at hand; for he is already practicing in these persons the
mystery of iniquity. And truly I think this point should not be passed
over, with what arts the devil about this very time tempted Martin. For,
on a certain day, prayer <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) having
been previously offered, and the fiend himself being surrounded by a
purple light, in order that he might the more easily deceive people by
the brilliance of the splendor assumed, clothed also <span
id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="ii.ii.xxv-Page_16"></span>in a royal
robe, and with a crown of precious stones and gold encircling his head,
his shoes too being inlaid with gold, while he presented a tranquil
countenance, and a generally rejoicing aspect, so that no such thought
as that he was the devil might be entertained—he stood by the side of
Martin as he was praying in his cell. The saint being dazzled by his
first appearance, both preserved a long and deep silence. This was first
broken by the devil, who said: “Acknowledge, Martin, who it is that you
behold. I am Christ; and being just about to descend to earth, I wished
first to manifest myself to thee.” When Martin kept silence on hearing
these words, and gave no answer whatever, the devil dared to repeat his
audacious declaration: “Martin, why do you hesitate to believe, when you
see? I am Christ.” Then Martin, the Spirit revealing the truth to him,
that he might understand it was the devil, and not God, replied as
follows: “The Lord Jesus did not predict that he would come clothed in
purple, and with a glittering crown upon his head. I will not believe
that Christ has come, unless he appears with that appearance and form in
which he suffered, and openly displaying the marks of his wounds upon
the cross.” On hearing these words, the devil vanished like smoke, and
filled the cell with such a disgusting smell, that he left unmistakable
evidences of his real character. This event, as I have just related,
took place in the way which I have stated, and my information regarding
it was derived from the lips of Martin himself; therefore let no one
regard it as fabulous. <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[15:39](2110028.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.ii.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p3"></span> “Prece” for the usual reading “prae se.”

<span id="fn_39"></span>[16:40](2110028.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.ii.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p4"></span> In spite of the combined testimony of
Martin and Sulpitius here referred to, few will have any doubts as to
the real character of the narrative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Intercourse of Sulpitius with Martin.](2110029)
