[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110997)  [Next](2110999) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xi"></span> <span id="page_502">p. 502</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iv.xi-Page_502"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iv.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xi-p1"></span>Of the marks of satisfaction, and the
removal of past sins.

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>But</span> we know, as we have often said,
that then only have we made satisfaction for past sins, when the very
motions and feelings, through which we were guilty of what we have to
sorrow for, have been eradicated from our hearts. But no one should
fancy that he can secure this, unless he has first with all the fervour
of his spirit cut off the opportunities and occasions, owing to which he
fell into those sins; as for instance, if through dangerous familiarity
with a woman he has fallen into fornication or adultery, he must take
the utmost pains to avoid even looking on one; or if he has been
overcome by too much wine and over-eating, he should chastise with the
utmost severity his craving for immoderate food. And again if he has
been led astray by the desire for and love of money, and has fallen into
perjury or theft or murder or blasphemy, he should cut off the occasion
for avarice, which has allured and deceived him. If he is driven by the
passion of pride into the sin of anger, he should with all the virtue of
humility, remove the incentive to arrogance. And so, in order that each
single sin may be destroyed, the occasion and opportunity by which or
for which it was committed should be first got rid of. For by this
curative treatment we can certainly attain to forgetfulness of the sins
we have committed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Wherein we must do penance for a time only; and
wherein it can have no end.](2110999)
