[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110111)  [Next](2110113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Now</span>, therefore, since we have set
forth, although in few words, both the difficulty and the merit of
purity, great care must be taken lest a matter which in itself implies
great virtue, and is also destined to a vast reward, should fail to
produce its proper fruits. For the more precious every sort of thing is,
the more it is guarded with anxious solicitude. And since there are many
things which fail to secure their proper excellence, unless they are
assisted by the aid of other things, as is, for instance, the case with
honey, which, unless it is preserved by the protection of wax, and by
the cells of the honeycombs, and is indeed, to state the matter more
truly, sustained by these, loses its deliciousness and cannot exist
apart by itself; and again as it is with wine, which, unless it be kept
in vessels of a pleasant odor, and with the pitch frequently renewed,
loses the power of its natural sweetness; so great care must be taken
lest perchance some things may be necessary also to virginity, without
which it can by no means produce its proper fruits, and thus a matter of
so great difficulty may be of no advantage (while all the time it is
believed to be of advantage), because it is possessed without the other
necessary adjuncts. For unless I am mistaken, chastity is preserved in
its entirety, for the sake of the reward to be obtained in the kingdom
of heaven, which it is perfectly certain no one can obtain who
does <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) not deserve eternal life.
But that eternal life cannot be merited except by the keeping of all the
divine commandments, the Scripture testifies, saying, “If thou wilt
enter into life, keep the commandments.” <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) Therefore no one has that life, except
the man who has kept all the precepts of the law, and he who has not
such life cannot be a possessor of the kingdom of heaven, in which it is
not the dead, but the living who shall reign. Therefore virginity, which
hopes for the glory of the kingdom of heaven, will profit nothing by
itself, unless it also possess that to which eternal life is promised,
by means of which the reward of the kingdom of heaven is possessed.
Above all things, therefore, the commandments which have been enjoined
upon us must be kept by those who preserve chastity in its entireness,
and who are hoping for its reward from the justice of God, lest
otherwise the pains taken to maintain a glorious chastity and continence
come to nothing. No one acquainted with the law does not know that
virginity is above <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) the
commandment or precept, as the Apostle says, “Now, as to virgins, I have
no precept of the Lord, but I give my advice.” <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) When, therefore, he simply gives
advice about maintaining virginity, and lays down no precept, he
acknowledges that it is above the commandment. Those, therefore, who
preserve virginity, do more than the commandment requires. But it will
then only profit you to have done more than was commanded, if you also
do that which is commanded. For how can you boast that you have done
more, if, in respect to some point, you do less? Desiring to fulfill the
Divine counsel, see that, above all things, you keep the commandment:
wishing to attain to the reward of virginity, see that you keep fast
hold of what is necessary to merit life, that your chastity may be such
as can receive a recompense. For as the observance of the commandments
ensures life, so, on the other hand, does the violation give rise to
death. And he who through disobedience has been doomed to death cannot
hope for the crown pertaining to virginity; nor, when really handed over
to punishment, can he expect the reward promised to chastity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[59:171](2110112.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p2"></span> “quod sine æternæ vitæ merito neminem
consequi posse satis certum est.”

<span id="fn_171"></span>[59:172](2110112.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p3"></span> [Matt. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[59:173](2110112.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p4"></span> “supra mandatum”: Clericus remarks on
this, “Non *supra*, sed *præter*, nam ea de re nihil præcepit Christus.”

<span id="fn_173"></span>[59:174](2110112.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ii.v.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p5"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="ii.v.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](2110113)
