[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110574)  [Next](2110576) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p1"></span>Of the main effort towards the
contemplation of things and an illustration from the case of Martha and
Mary.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>This</span> then should be our main
effort: and this steadfast purpose of heart we should constantly aspire
after; viz., that the soul may ever cleave to God and to heavenly
things. Whatever is alien to this, however great it may be, should be
given the second place, or even treated as of no consequence, or perhaps
as hurtful. We have an excellent illustration of this state of mind and
condition in the gospel in the case of Martha and Mary: for when Martha
was performing a service that was certainly a sacred one, since she was
ministering to the Lord and His disciples, and Mary being intent only on
spiritual instruction was clinging close to the feet of Jesus which she
kissed and anointed with the ointment of a good confession, she is shown
by the Lord to have chosen the better part, and one which should not be
taken away from her: for when Martha was toiling with pious care, and
was cumbered about her service, seeing that of herself alone she was
insufficient for such service she asks for the help of her sister from
the Lord, saying: “Carest Thou not that my sister has left me to serve
alone: bid her therefore that she help me”—certainly it was to no
unworthy work, but to a praiseworthy service that she summoned her: and
yet what does she hear from the Lord? “Martha, Martha, thou art anxious
and troubled about many things: but few things are needful, or only one.
Mary hath chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from
her.” <span id="fr_1090"></span>[1091](#fn_1090) You see then that the
Lord makes the chief good consist in meditation; i.e., in divine
contemplation: whence we see that all other virtues should be put in the
second place, even though we admit that they are necessary, and useful,
and excellent, because they are all performed for the sake of this one
thing. For when the Lord says: “Thou art careful and troubled about many
things, but few things are needful or only one,” He makes the chief good
consist not in practical work however praiseworthy and rich in fruits it
may be, but in contemplation of Him, which indeed is simple and “but
one”; declaring that “few things” are needful for perfect bliss, i.e.,
that contemplation which is first secured by reflecting on a few saints:
from the contemplation of whom, he who has made some progress rises and
attains by God’s help to that which is termed “one thing,” i.e., the
consideration of God alone, so as to get beyond those actions and
services of Saints, and feed on the beauty and knowledge of God alone.
“Mary” therefore “chose the good part, which shall not be taken away
from her.” And this must be more carefully considered. For when He says
that Mary chose the good part, although He says nothing of Martha, and
certainly does not appear to blame her, yet in praising the one, He
implies that the other is inferior. Again when He says “which shall not
be taken away from her,” He shows that from the other her portion can be
taken away (for a bodily ministry cannot last forever with a man), but
teaches that this one’s desire can never have an end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[298:1091](2110575.htm#fr_1090) <span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p3"></span> S. [Luke x.
40-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040)<span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>. The reading which Cassian here follows
is found in <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p3.2"></span>א</span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p3.3"></span>BC,</span>2 but has not much Latin
authority. It is however followed by Jerome Ep: ad Eustochium, xxii. 24,
though the Vulgate has simply Porro unum est necessarium. For Mary as
the type of the contemplative life, and Martha of the practical, compare
S. Gregory the Great. Moralia VI. c. xxviii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. A question how it is that the practice of virtue
cannot remain with a man.](2110576)
