[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110013)  [Next](2110015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p1"></span>Martin as Bishop of Tours.

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>And</span> now having entered on the episcopal
office, it is beyond my power fully to set forth how Martin
distinguished himself in the discharge of its duties. For he remained
with the utmost constancy, the same as he had been <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> <span id="ii.ii.xi-Page_9"></span>before. There was the same
humility in his heart, and the same homeliness in his garments. Full
alike of dignity and courtesy, he kept up the position of a bishop
properly, yet in such a way as not to lay aside the objects and virtues
of a monk. Accordingly he made use, for some time, of the cell connected
with the church; but afterwards, when he felt it impossible to tolerate
the disturbance caused by the numbers of those visiting it, he
established a monastery for himself about two miles outside the city.
This spot was so secret and retired that he enjoyed in it the solitude
of a hermit. For, on one side, it was surrounded by a precipitous rock
of a lofty mountain, while the river Loire had shut in the rest of the
plain by a bay extending back for a little distance; and the place could
be approached only by one, and that a very narrow passage. Here, then,
he possessed a cell constructed of wood. Many also of the brethren had,
in the same manner, fashioned retreats for themselves, but most of them
had formed these out of the rock of the overhanging mountain, hollowed
into caves. There were altogether eighty disciples, who were being
disciplined after the example of the saintly master. No one there had
anything which was called his own; all things were possessed in common.
It was not allowed either to buy or to sell anything, as is the custom
among most monks. No art was practiced there, except that of
transcribers, and even this was assigned to the brethren of younger
years, while the elders spent their time in prayer. Rarely did any one
of them go beyond the cell, unless when they assembled at the place of
prayer. They all took their food together, after the hour of fasting was
past. No one used wine, except when illness compelled them to do so.
Most of them were clothed in garments of camels’ hair. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) Any dress approaching to softness <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) was there deemed criminal, and this must
be thought the more remarkable, because many among them were such as are
deemed of noble rank. These, though far differently brought up, had
forced themselves down to this degree of humility and patient endurance,
and we have seen numbers of these afterwards made bishops. For what city
or church would there be that would not desire to have its priests from
among those in the monastery of Martin?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[9:26](2110014.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.ii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p3"></span> Cf. St. [Matt. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004)<span id="ii.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[9:27](2110014.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p4"></span> In St. [Matt. xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008)<span id="ii.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>,
there is a reference to those “that wear soft clothing,”—<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.ii.xi-p4.2"></span>οἱ τὰ μαλακὰ
φοροῦντες</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Martin demolishes an Altar consecrated to a
Robber.](2110015)
