[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110967)  [Next](2110969) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p1"></span>Of the example of patience given by
Abbot Paphnutius.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p2.1"></span>Now</span> let us give the other instance
of Abbot Paphnutius, who always remained so zealously in the recesses of
that renowned and far-famed desert of Scete, in which he is now
Presbyter, so that the rest of the anchorites gave him the name of
Bubalis, <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) because he always
delighted in dwelling in the desert as if with a sort of innate liking.
And so as even in boyhood he was so good and full of grace that even the
renowned and great men of that time admired his gravity and steadfast
constancy, and although he was younger in age, yet put him on a level
with the Elders out of regard for his virtues, and thought fit to admit
him to their order, the same envy, which formerly excited the minds of
his brethren against the patriarch Joseph, inflamed one out of the
number of his brethren with a burning and consuming jealousy. And this
man wanting to mar his beauty by some blemish or spot, hit on this kind
of devilry, so as to seize an opportunity when Paphnutius had left his
cell to go to Church on Sunday: and secretly entering his cell he slyly
hid his own book among the boughs which he used to weave of palm
branches, and, secure of his well-planned trick, himself went off as if
with a pure and clean conscience to Church. And when the whole service
was ended as usual, in the presence of all the brethren he brought his
complaint to S. Isidore <span id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090) who
was Presbyter of this desert before this same Paphnutius, and declared
that his book had been stolen from his cell. And when his complaint had
so disturbed the minds of all the brethren, and more especially of the
Presbyter, so that they knew not what first to suspect or think, as all
were overcome with the utmost astonishment at so new and unheard of a
crime, such as no one remembered ever to have been committed in that
desert before that time, and which has never happened since, he who had
brought forward the matter as the accuser urged that they should all be
kept in Church and certain selected men be sent to search the cells of
the brethren one by one. And when this had been entrusted to three of
the Elders by the Presbyter, they turned over the bed-chambers of them
all, and at last found the book hidden in the cell of Paphnutius among
the boughs of the palms which they call <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p4.1"></span>σειρά</span>, just as the plotter had
hidden it. And when the inquisitors at once brought it back to the
Church and produced it before all, Paphnutius, although he was perfectly
clear in the sincerity of his conscience, yet like one who acknowledged
the guilt of thieving, gave himself up entirely to make amends and
humbly asked for a plan of repentance, as he was so careful of his shame
and modesty (and feared) lest if he tried to remove the stain of the
theft by words, he might further be branded as a liar, as no one would
believe anything but what had been found out. And when he had
immediately left the Church not cast down in mind but rather trusting to
the judgment of God, he continually shed tears at his prayers, and
fasted thrice as often as before, and prostrated himself in the sight of
men with all humility of mind. But when he had thus submitted himself
with all contrition of flesh and spirit for almost a fortnight, so that
he came early on the morning of Saturday and Sunday not to receive the
Holy Communion <span id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091) but to
prostrate himself on the threshold of the Church and humbly ask for
pardon, He, Who is the witness of all secret things and knows them,
suffered him to be no <span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-Page_487"></span>longer tried by Himself or defamed by
others. For what the author of the crime, the wicked thief of his own
property, the cunning defamer of another’s credit, had done with no man
there as a witness, that He made known by means of the devil who was
himself the instigator of the sin. For possessed by a most fierce demon,
he made known all the craft of his secret plot, and the same man who had
conceived the accusation and the cheat betrayed it. But he was so long
and grievously vexed by that unclean spirit that he could not even be
restored by the prayers of the saints living there, who by means of
divine gifts can command the devils, nor could the special grace of the
Presbyter Isidore himself cast out from him his cruel tormentor, though
by the Lord’s bounty such power was given him that no one who was
possessed was ever brought to his doors without being at once healed;
for Christ was reserving this glory for the young Paphnutius, that the
man should be cleansed only by the prayers of him against whom he had
plotted, and that the jealous enemy should receive pardon for his
offence and an end of his present punishment, only by proclaiming his
name, from whose credit he had thought that he could detract. He then in
his early youth already gave these signs of his future character, and
even in his boyish years sketched the lines of that perfection which was
to grow up in mature age. If then we want to attain to his height of
virtue, we must lay the same foundation to begin with.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[486:2090](2110968.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p3"></span> i.e., the Buffalo. On Paphnutius see
the note on Conf. III.

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[486:2091](2110968.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p4"></span> Gazet thinks that this Isidore is the
same person as the one mentioned in the Lausiac History c. i.; and
Sozomen VI. xxviii., but doubts whether he is identical with the person
of the same name mentioned in Rufinus: History of the Monks c. xvii.,
Sozomen VIII. xii., and Socrates VI. ix.

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[486:2092](2110968.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p5"></span> On the Saturday and Sunday celebration
of the Holy Communion in Egypt compare the Institutes III. ii. In Gaul
it was apparently received daily: Institutes VI. viii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. On the perfection of patience.](2110969)
