[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110174)  [Next](2110176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xli"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xli-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLI.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xli-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xli-p1.1"></span>For</span>, on the death of Solomon in the
fortieth year of his reign, Roboam his son having succeeded to the
throne of his father in the sixteenth year of his age, a portion of the
people, taking offense, revolted from him. For, having asked that the
very heavy tribute which Solomon had imposed upon them might be
lessened, he rejected the entreaties of these suppliants, and thus
alienated from him the favor of the whole people. Accordingly, by
universal consent, the government was bestowed on Jeroboam. He, sprung
from a family of middle rank, had for some time been in the service of
Solomon. But when the king found that the sovereignty of the Hebrews had
been promised to him by a response of the prophet Achia, he had resolved
privately to cut him off. Jeroboam, under the influence of this fear,
fled into Egypt, and there married a wife of the royal family. But, when
at length he heard of the death of Solomon, he <span id="page_91">p.
91</span> <span id="ii.vi.i.xli-Page_91"></span>returned to his native
land, and, by the wish of the people, as we have said above, he assumed
the government. Two tribes, however, Judah and Benjamin, had remained
under the sway of Roboam; and from these he got ready an army of thirty
thousand men. But when the two hosts advanced, the people were
instructed by the words of God to abstain from fighting, for that
Jeroboam had received the kingdom by divine appointment. Thus the army
disdained the command of the king, and dispersed, while the power of
Jeroboam was increased. But, since Roboam held Jerusalem, where the
people had been accustomed to offer sacrifice to God in the temple built
by Solomon, Jeroboam, fearing lest their religious feelings might
alienate the people from him, resolved to fill their minds with
superstition. Accordingly, he set up one golden calf at Bethel, and
another at Dan, to which the people might offer sacrifice; and, passing
by the tribe of Levi, he appointed priests from among the people. But
censure followed this guilt so hateful to God. Frequent battles then
took place between the kings, and so they retained their respective
kingdoms on doubtful conditions. Roboam died at the close of the
seventeenth year of his reign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII.](2110176)
