[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110015)  [Next](2110017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p1"></span>Martin causes the Bearers of a Dead Body
to stop.

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Now</span>, it came to pass some time after
the above, that while Martin was going a journey, he met the body of a
certain heathen, which was being carried to the tomb with superstitious
funeral rites. Perceiving from a distance the crowd that was
approaching, and being ignorant as to what was going on, he stood still
for a little while. For there was a distance of nearly half a mile
between him and the crowd, so that it <span id="page_10">p. 10</span>
<span id="ii.ii.xiii-Page_10"></span>was difficult to discover what the
spectacle he beheld really was. Nevertheless, because he saw it was a
rustic gathering, and when the linen clothes spread over the body were
blown about by the action of the wind, he believed that some profane
rites of sacrifice were being performed. This thought occurred to him,
because it was the custom of the Gallic rustics in their wretched folly
to carry about through the fields the images of demons veiled with a
white covering. Lifting up, therefore, the sign of the cross opposite to
them, he commanded the crowd not to move from the place in which they
were, and to set down the burden. Upon this, the miserable creatures
might have been seen at first to become stiff like rocks. Next, as they
endeavored, with every possible effort, to move forward, but were not
able to take a step farther, they began to whirl themselves about in the
most ridiculous fashion, until, not able any longer to sustain the
weight, they set down the dead body. Thunderstruck, and gazing in
bewilderment at each other as not knowing what had happened to them they
remained sunk in silent thought. But when the saintly man discovered
that they were simply a band of peasants celebrating funeral rites, and
not sacrifices to the gods, again raising his hand, he gave them the
power of going away, and of lifting up the body. Thus he both compelled
them to stand when he pleased, and permitted them to depart when he
thought good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Martin escapes from a Falling Pine-tree.](2110017)
