[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110048)  [Next](2110050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xii-p1.1"></span>In</span> this monastery I saw two old men
who were said to have already lived there for forty years, and in fact
never to have departed from it. I do not think that I should pass by all
mention of these men, since, indeed, I heard the following statement
made regarding their virtues on the testimony of the Abbot himself, and
all the brethren, that in the case of one of them, the sun never beheld
him feasting, and in the case of the other, the sun never saw him
angry.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p2"></span>Upon this, the Gaul looking at me
exclaims: “Would that a friend of yours—I do not wish to mention his
name—were now present; I should greatly like him to hear of that
example, since we have had too much experience of his bitter anger in
the persons of a great many people. Nevertheless, as I hear, he has
lately forgiven his enemies; and, in these circumstances, were he to
hear of the conduct of that man, he would be more and more strengthened
in his forgiving course by the example thus set before him, and would
feel that it is an admirable virtue not to fall under the influence of
anger. I will not indeed deny that he had just reasons for his wrath;
but where the battle is hard, the crown of victory is all the more
glorious. For this reason, I think, if you will allow me to say so, that
a certain man was justly to be praised, because when an ungrateful
freedman abandoned him he rather pitied than inveighed against the
fugitive. And, indeed, he was not even angry with the man by whom he
seems to have been carried off.” <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p4"></span>Upon this I remarked: “Unless
Postumianus had given us that example of overcoming anger, I would have
been very angry on account of the departure of the fugitive; but since
it is not lawful to be angry, all remembrance of such things, as it
annoys us, ought to be blotted from our minds. Let us rather,
Postumianus, listen to what you have got to say.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p5"></span>“I will do,” says he, “Sulpitius, what
you request, as I see you are all so desirous of hearing me. But
remember that I do not address my speech to you without hope of a larger
recompense; I shall gladly perform what you require, provided that, when
ere long my turn comes, you do not refuse what I ask.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p6"></span>“We indeed,” said I, “have nothing by
<span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="ii.iv.i.xii-Page_30"></span>means of which we can return the
obligation we shall lie under to you even without a larger return. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) However, command us as to anything you
have thought about, provided you satisfy our desires, as you have
already begun to do, for your speech conveys to us true delight.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p8"></span>“I will stint nothing,” said
Postumianus, “of your desires; and inasmuch as you have recognized the
virtue of one recluse, I shall go on to relate to you some few things
about more such persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[29:99](2110049.htm#fr_98) <span
id="ii.iv.i.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p3"></span> It appears impossible to give a
certain rendering of these words—“a quo videtur abductus.”

<span id="fn_99"></span>[30:100](2110049.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ii.iv.i.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.xii-p7"></span> “vel sine fænore.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.](2110050)
