[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110845)  [Next](2110847) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.iv.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.iv.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.v.iv.v-p1"></span>The answer on the imaginary chastity of
the philosophers.

<span id="iv.v.iv.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.iv.v-p2.1"></span>Chæremon</span>: I am pleased that, though
you are fired with the greatest longing to know the truth, yet you bring
forward some foolish points, as by your raising these objections the
value of the Catholic faith may seem better established, and if I may
use the expression, more thoroughly explored. For what wise man would
make such contradictory statements as yesterday to maintain that the
heavenly purity of chastity could not possibly even by God’s grace be
bestowed on any mortals, and now to hold that it was obtained even by
the heathen by their own strength? But as you have certainly, as I said,
made these objections from the desire of getting at the truth, consider
what we hold on these points. First we certainly must not think that the
philosophers attained such chastity of soul, as is required of us, on
whom it is enjoined that not fornication only, but uncleanness be not so
much as named among us. But they had a sort of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.v.iv.v-p2.2"></span>μερική</span>, i.e., some particle of
chastity; viz. continence of the flesh, by which they could restrain
their lust from carnal intercourse: but this internal purity of mind and
continual purity of body they could not attain, I will not say, in act,
but even in thought. Finally Socrates, the most famous of them all, as
they themselves esteem him, was not ashamed to profess this of himself.
For when one who judged a man’s character by his looks (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.v.iv.v-p2.3"></span>ψυσιογνώμοιν</span>)
looked at him, and said <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.v.iv.v-p2.4"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.v.iv.v-p2.5"></span>μματα παιδ εραστοῦ</span>, i.e., “the eyes of
a corrupter of boys,” and his scholars rushed at him, and brought him to
their master and wanted to avenge the insult, it is said that he checked
their indignation with these words: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.v.iv.v-p2.6"></span>παύσαοθε, ἐταῖροι · εἰμὶ γάρ, ἐπέκω
δέ</span>, i.e., Stop, my friends, for I am, but I restrain myself. It
is then quite clearly shown not only by our assertions but actually by
their own admissions that it was only the performance of indecent acts,
i.e., the disgrace of intercourse, that was by force of necessity
checked by them, and that the desire and delight in this passion was not
shut out from their hearts. But with what horror must one bring forward
this saying of Diogenes? For a thing which the philosophers of this
world were not ashamed to bring forward as something remarkable, cannot
be spoken or heard by us without shame: for to one to be punished for
the crime of adultery they relate that he said <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.v.iv.v-p2.7"></span>τὸ δωρεὰν πωλούμενον θανάτω μὴ
ἀγόραζε</span>, i.e., you should not buy with your death what is sold
for nothing. <span id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751) It is clear then
that they did not recognize the virtue of the true chastity which we
seek for, and so it is quite certain that our circumcision which is in
the spirit cannot be acquired save only by the gift of God, and that it
belongs only to those who serve God with full contrition of their
spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[424:1752](2110846.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="iv.v.iv.v-p2.8"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv.v-p3"></span> The source of these stories of Socrates
and Diogenes has not been traced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. That without the grace of God we cannot make any
diligent efforts.](2110847)
