[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110975)  [Next](2110977) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p1"></span>Of the conveniences of the Cœnobium.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> I will briefly explain
what advantages I now enjoy in this manner of life. *You* must consider
my words and judge whether those advantages of the desert outweigh these
comforts, and by this you will also be able to prove whether I chose to
be cramped within the narrow limits of the Cœnobium from dislike or from
desire of that purity of the solitary life. In this life then there is
no providing for the day’s work, no distractions of buying and selling,
no unavoidable care for the year’s food, no anxiety about bodily things,
by which one has to get ready what is necessary not only for one’s own
wants but also for those of any number of visitors, finally no conceit
from the praise of men, which is worse than all these things and
sometimes in the sight of God does away with the good of even great
efforts in the desert. But, to pass over those waves of spiritual pride
and the deadly peril of vainglory in the life of the anchorite, let us
return to this general burden which affects everybody, i.e., the
ordinary anxiety in providing food, which has so far exceeded I say not
the measure of that ancient strictness which altogether did without oil,
but is beginning not to be content even with the relaxation of our own
time according to which the requirements of all the supply of food for a
year were satisfied by the preparation of a single pint of oil and a
modius of lentils prepared for the use of visitors; but now the needful
supply of food is scarcely met by two or three times that amount. And to
such an extent has the force of this dangerous relaxation grown among
some that, when they mix vinegar and sauce, they do not add that single
drop of oil, which our predecessors who followed the rules of the desert
with greater powers of abstinence, were accustomed to pour in simply for
the sake of avoiding vainglory, <span
id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) but they <span id="page_492">p.
492</span> <span id="iv.vi.iii.vi-Page_492"></span>break an Egyptian
cheese for luxury and pour over it more oil than is required, and so
take, under a single pleasant relish, two sorts of food which differ in
their special flavour, each of which ought singly to be a pleasant
refreshment at different times for a monk. To such a pitch however has
this <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p3.2"></span>λικὴ κτῆσις</span>, i.e., acquisition of
material things grown, that actually under pretence of hospitality and
welcoming guests anchorites have begun to keep a blanket in their
cells—a thing which I cannot mention without shame—to omit those things
by which the mind that is awed by and intent on spiritual meditation is
more especially hampered; viz., the concourse of brethren, the duties of
receiving the coming and speeding the parting guest, visits to each
other and the endless worry of various confabulations and occupations,
the expectation of which owing to the continuous character of these
customary interruptions keeps the mind on the stretch even during the
time when these bothers seem to cease. And so the result is that the
freedom of the anchorite’s life is so hindered by these ties that it can
never rise to that ineffable keenness of heart, and thus loses the
fruits of its hermit life. And if this is now denied to me while I am
living in the congregation and among others, at least there is no lack
of peace of mind and tranquillity of heart that is freed from all
business. And unless this is ready at hand for those also who live in
the desert, they will indeed have to undergo the labours of the
anchorite’s life, but will lose its fruits which can only be gained in
peaceful stability of mind. Finally even if there is any diminution of
my purity of heart while I am living in the Cœnobium, I shall be
satisfied by keeping in exchange that one precept of the Gospel, which
certainly cannot be less esteemed than all those fruits of the desert; I
mean that I should take no thought for the morrow, and submitting myself
completely to the Abbot seem in some degree to emulate

<span id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p4"></span>Him of whom it is said: “He humbled
Himself, and became obedient unto death; and so be able humbly to make
use of His words: “For I came not to do mine own will, but the will of
the Father which sent me.” <span id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[491:2110](2110976.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p3"></span> Cf. Conference VIII.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[492:2111](2110976.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p5"></span> [Phil.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008), [John
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. A question on the fruits of the Cœnobium and the
desert.](2110977)
