[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110070)  [Next](2110072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>And</span> as we have, once for all,
entered the palace, I shall string together events which there took
place, although they happened at different times. And, indeed, it does
not seem to me right that I should pass unmentioned the example of
admiration for Martin which was shown by a faithful queen. Maximus then
ruled the state, a man worthy of being extolled in <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) his whole life, if only he had been
permitted to reject a crown thrust upon him by the soldiery in an
illegal tumult, or had been able to keep out of civil war. But the fact
is, that a great empire can neither be refused without danger, nor can
be preserved without war. He frequently sent for Martin, received him
into the palace, and treated him with honor; his whole speech with him
was concerning things present, things to come, the glory of the
faithful, and the immortality of the saints; while, in the meantime, the
queen hung upon the lips of Martin, and not inferior to her mentioned in
the Gospel, washed the feet of the holy man with tears and wiped them
with the hairs of her head. Martin, though no woman had hitherto touched
him, could not escape her assiduity, or rather her servile attentions.
She did not think of the wealth of the kingdom, the dignity of the
empire, the crown, or the purple; only stretched upon the ground, she
could not be torn away from the feet of Martin. At last she begs of her
husband (saying that both of them should constrain Martin to agree) that
all other attendants should be removed from the holy man, and that she
alone should wait upon him at meals. Nor could the blessed man refuse
too obstinately. His modest entertainment is got up by the hands of the
queen; she herself arranges his seat for him; places his table;
furnishes him with water for his hands; and serves up the food which she
had herself cooked. While he was eating, she, with her eyes fixed on the
ground, stood motionless at a distance, after the fashion of servants,
displaying in all points the modesty and humility of a ministering
servant. She herself mixed for him his drink and presented it. When the
meal was over, she collected the fragments and crumbs of the bread that
had been used, preferring with true faithfulness these remains to
imperial banquets. Blessed woman! worthy, by the display of so great
piety, of being compared to her who came from the ends of the earth to
hear Solomon, if we merely regard the plain letter of the history. But
the faith of the two queens is to be compared (and let it be granted me
to say this, setting aside the majesty of the secret <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) truth implied): the one obtained her
desire to hear a wise man; the other was thought worthy not only to hear
a wise man, but to wait upon him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[41:119](2110071.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p2"></span> Halm’s text is here followed. The
older texts which read “vir omni vitæ merito prædicandus,” seem hardly
intelligible.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[41:120](2110071.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p3"></span> “Quod mihi liceat separata mysterii
majestate dixisse.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.](2110072)
