[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110603)  [Next](2110605) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p1"></span>The answer concerning the trampling
down of shame, and the danger of one without contrition.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Moses</span>: Just as all young men are
not alike in fervour of spirit nor equally instructed in learning and
good morals, so too we cannot find that all old men are equally perfect
and excellent. For the true riches of old men are not to be measured by
grey hairs but by their diligence in youth and the rewards of their past
labours. “For,” says one, “the things that thou hast not gathered in thy
youth, how shalt thou find them in thy old age?” “For venerable old age
is not that of long time, nor counted by the number of years: but the
understanding of a man is grey hairs, and a spotless life is old
age.” <span id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185) And therefore we are
not to follow in the steps or embrace the traditions and advice of every
old man whose head is covered with grey hairs, and whose age is his sole
claim to respect, but only of those whom we find to have distinguished
themselves in youth in an approved and praiseworthy manner, and to have
been trained up not on self-assurance but on the traditions of the
Elders. For there are some, <span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-Page_314"></span>and unhappily they form the
majority, who pass their old age in a lukewarmness which they contracted
in youth, and in sloth, and so obtain authority not from the ripeness of
their character but simply from the number of their years. Against whom
that reproof of the Lord is specially aimed by the prophet: “Strangers
have devoured his strength and he knew it not: yea, grey hairs also are
spread about upon him, and he is ignorant of it.” <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186) These men, I say, are not pointed
out as examples to youth from the uprightness of their lives, nor from
the strictness of their profession, which would be worthy of praise and
imitation, but simply from the number of their years; and so the subtle
enemy uses their grey hairs to deceive the younger men, by a wrongful
appeal to their authority, and endeavours in his cunning craftiness to
upset and deceive by their example those who might have been urged into
the way of perfection by their advice or that of others; and drags them
down by means of their teaching and practice either into a baneful
indifference, or into deadly despair. And as I want to give you an
instance of this, I will tell you a fact which may supply us with some
wholesome teaching, without giving the name of the actor, lest we might
be guilty of something of the same kind as the man who published abroad
the sins of the brother which had been disclosed to him. When this one,
who was not the laziest of young men, had gone to an old man, whom we
know very well, for the sake of the profit and health of his soul, and
had candidly confessed that he was troubled by carnal appetites and the
spirit of fornication, fancying that he would receive from the old man’s
words consolation for his efforts, and a cure for the wounds inflicted
on him, the old man attacked him with the bitterest reproaches, and
called him a miserable and disgraceful creature, and unworthy of the
name of monk, while he could be affected by a sin and lust of this
character, and instead of helping him so injured him by his reproaches
that he dismissed him from his cell in a state of hopeless despair and
deadly despondency. And when he, oppressed with such a sorrow, was
plunged in deep thought, no longer how to cure his passion, but how to
gratify his lust, the Abbot Apollos, <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187) the most skilful of the Elders, met
him, and seeing by his looks and gloominess his trouble and the violence
of the assault which he was secretly revolving in his heart, asked him
the reason of this upset; and when he could not possibly answer the old
man’s gentle inquiry, the latter perceived more and more clearly that it
was not without reason that he wanted to hide in silence the cause of a
gloom so deep that he could not conceal it by his looks, and so began to
ask him still more earnestly the reasons for his hidden grief. And by
this he was forced to confess that he was on his way to a village to
take a wife, and leave the monastery and return to the world, since, as
the old man had told him, he could not be a monk, if he was unable to
control the desires of the flesh and to cure his passion. And then the
old man smoothed him down with kindly consolation, and told him that he
himself was daily tried by the same pricks of desire and lust, and that
therefore he ought not to give way to despair, nor be surprised at the
violence of the attack of which he would get the better not so much by
zealous efforts, as by the mercy and grace of the Lord; and he begged
him to put off his intention just for one day, and having implored him
to return to his cell, went as fast as he could to the monastery of the
above mentioned old man—and when he had drawn near to him he stretched
forth his hands and prayed with tears, and said “O Lord, who alone art
the righteous judge and unseen Physician of secret strength and human
weakness, turn the assault from the young man upon the old one, that he
may learn to condescend to the weakness of sufferers, and to sympathize
even in old age with the frailties of youth.” And when he had ended his
prayer with tears, he sees a filthy Ethiopian standing over against his
cell and aiming fiery darts at him, with which he was straightway
wounded, and came out of his cell and ran about hither and thither like
a lunatic or a drunken man, and going in and out could no longer
restrain himself in it, but began to hurry off in the same direction in
which the young man had gone. And when Abbot Apollos saw him like a
madman driven wild by the furies, he knew that the fiery dart of the
devil which he had seen, had been fixed in his heart, and had by its
intolerable heat wrought in him this mental aberration and confusion of
the understanding; and so he came up to him and asked “Whither are you
hurrying, or what has made you forget the gravity of years and disturbed
you in this childish way, and made you hurry about so rapidly”?

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p6"></span>And when he owing to his guilty
conscience and confused by this disgraceful excitement fancied that the
lust of his heart was discovered, and, as <span id="page_315">p.
315</span> <span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-Page_315"></span>the secrets of his
heart were known to the old man, did not venture to return any answer to
his inquiries, “Return,” said he, “to your cell, and at last recognize
the fact that till now you have been ignored or despised by the devil,
and not counted in the number of those with whom he is daily roused to
fight and struggle against their efforts and earnestness,—you who could
not—I will not say ward off, but not even postpone for one day, a single
dart of his aimed at you after so many years spent in this profession of
yours. And with this the Lord has suffered you to be wounded that you
may at least learn in your old age to sympathize with infirmities to
which you are a stranger, and may know from your own case and experience
how to condescend to the frailties of the young, though when you
received a young man troubled by an attack from the devil, you did not
encourage him with any consolation, but gave him up in dejection and
destructive despair into the hands of the enemy, to be, as far as you
were concerned, miserably destroyed by him. But the enemy would
certainly never have attacked him with so fierce an onslaught, with
which he has up till now scorned to attack you, unless in his jealousy
at the progress he was to make, he had endeavoured to get the better of
that virtue which he saw lay in his disposition, and to destroy it with
his fiery darts, as he knew without the shadow of a doubt that he was
the stronger, since he deemed it worth his while to attack him with such
vehemence. And so learn from your own experience to sympathize with
those in trouble, and never to terrify with destructive despair those
who are in danger, nor harden them with severe speeches, but rather
restore them with gentle and kindly consolations, and as the wise
Solomon says, “Spare not to deliver those who are led forth to death,
and to redeem those who are to be slain,” <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188) and after the example of our
Saviour, break not the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189) and ask of the Lord that grace, by
means of which you yourself may faithfully learn both in deed and power
to sing: “the Lord hath given me a learned tongue that I should know how
to uphold by word him that is weary:” <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190) for no one could bear the devices
of the enemy, or extinguish or repress those carnal fires which burn
with a sort of natural flame, unless God’s grace assisted our weakness,
or protected and supported it. And therefore, as the reason for this
salutary incident is over, by which the Lord meant to set that young man
free from dangerous desires and to teach you something of the violence
of their attack, and of the feeling of compassion, let us together
implore Him in prayer, that He may be pleased to remove that scourge,
which the Lord thought good to lay upon you for your good (for “He
maketh sorry and cureth: he striketh and his hands heal. He humbleth and
exalteth, he killeth and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave and
bringeth up”) <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191) , and may
extinguish with the abundant dew of His Spirit the fiery darts of the
devil, which at my desire He allowed to wound you. And although the Lord
removed this temptation at a single prayer of the old man with the same
speed with which He had suffered it to come upon him, yet He showed by a
clear proof that a man’s faults when laid bare were not merely not to be
scolded, but that the grief of one in trouble ought not to be lightly
despised. And therefore never let the clumsiness or shallowness of one
old man or of a few deter you and keep you back from that life-giving
way, of which we spoke earlier, or from the tradition of the Elders, if
our crafty enemy makes a wrongful use of their grey hairs in order to
deceive younger men: but without any cloak of shame everything should be
disclosed to the Elders, and remedies for wounds be faithfully received
from them together with examples of life and conversation: from which we
shall find like help and the same sort of result, if we try to do
nothing at all on our own responsibility and judgment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[313:1186](2110604.htm#fr_1185) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p3"></span> [Sir.
25:5](../../../bib/apo/sir025.htm#005), [Wis.
4:8](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[314:1187](2110604.htm#fr_1186) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p4"></span> [Hos. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[314:1188](2110604.htm#fr_1187) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p5"></span> Apollos or Apollonius was a most
celebrated hermit of the fourth century, who finally became the head of
a monastery of five hundred brethren in the Thebaid. Some account of him
is given by Palladius (Hist. Laus. c. lii.) and Rufinus (Hist. Monach.
c. vii.). Cf. also Sozomen III. xiv.; and VI. xx., whence we learn that
his life was written by Timothy, Bishop of Alexandria. Cassian relates
another story of him in XXIV. ix.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[315:1189](2110604.htm#fr_1188) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p7"></span> [Prov. xxiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[315:1190](2110604.htm#fr_1189) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p8"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[315:1191](2110604.htm#fr_1190) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p9"></span> [Is. l.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[315:1192](2110604.htm#fr_1191) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p10"></span> [Job
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#018), [1 Sam.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Of the call of Samuel.](2110605)
