[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110037)  [Next](2110039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.i"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="ii.iv.i.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.i-p1.1"></span>When</span> I and a Gallic friend had
assembled in one place, this Gaul being a man very dear to me, both on
account of his remembrance of Martin (for he had been one of his
disciples), and on account of his own merits, my friend Postumianus
joined us. He had just, on my account, returned from the East, to which,
leaving his native country, he had gone three years before. Having
embraced this most affectionate friend, and kissed both his knees and
his feet, we were for a moment or two, as it were, astounded; and,
shedding mutual tears of joy, we walked about a good deal. But by and by
we sat down on our garments of sackcloth laid upon the ground. Then
Postumianus, directing his looks towards me is the first to speak, and
says,—

<span id="ii.iv.i.i-p2"></span>“When I was in the remote parts of Egypt,
I felt a desire to go on as far as the sea. I there met with a merchant
vessel, which was ready to set sail with the view of making for
Narbonne. <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) The same night you seemed
in a dream to stand beside me, and laying hold of me with your hand, to
lead me away that I should go on board that ship. Ere long, when the
dawn dispersed the darkness, and when I rose up in the place in which I
had been resting, as I revolved my dream in my mind, I was suddenly
seized with such a longing after you, that without delay I went on board
the ship. Landing on the thirtieth day at Marseilles, I came on from
that and arrived here on the tenth day—so prosperous a voyage was
granted to my dutiful desire of seeing you. Do thou only, for whose sake
I have sailed over so many seas, and have traversed such an extent of
land, yield yourself over to me to be embraced and enjoyed apart from
all others.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.i-p4"></span>“I truly,” said I, “while you were still
staying in Egypt, was ever holding fellowship with you in my mind and
thoughts, and affection for you had full possession of me as I meditated
upon you day and night. Surely then, you cannot imagine that I will now
fail for a single moment to gaze with delight upon you, as I hang upon
your lips. I will listen to you, I will converse with you, while no one
at all is admitted to our retirement, which this remote cell of mine
furnishes to us. For, as I suppose, you will not take amiss the presence
of this friend of ours, the Gaul, who, as you perceive, rejoices with
his whole heart over this arrival of yours, even as I do myself.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.i-p5"></span>“Quite right,” said Postumianus, “that
Gaul will certainly be retained in our company; who, although I am but
little acquainted with him, yet for this very reason that he is greatly
beloved by you, cannot fail also to be dear to me. This must especially
be the case, since he is of the school of Martin; nor will I grudge, as
you desire, to talk with you in connected discourse, since I came hither
for this very purpose, that I should, even at the risk of being tedious,
respond to the desire of my dear Sulpitius ”—and in so speaking he
affectionately took hold of me with both his hands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[24:83](2110038.htm#fr_82) <span
id="ii.iv.i.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.i-p3"></span> Narbona, more commonly called Narbo
Martius; the modern Narbonne.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](2110039)
