[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110614)  [Next](2110616) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xxiv-p1"></span>Of the difficulty of uniformity in
eating; and of the gluttony of brother Benjamin.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>And</span> so far is this not done
without difficulty, that those who know nothing of perfect <span
id="page_318">p. 318</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xxiv-Page_318"></span>discretion would rather prolong
their fasts for two days, and reserve for tomorrow what they should have
eaten today, so that when they come to partake of food they may enjoy as
much as they can desire.  And you know that lastly your fellow citizen
Benjamin most obstinately stuck to this: as he would not every day
partake of his two biscuits, nor, continually take his meagre fare with
uniform self-discipline, but preferred always to continue his fasts for
two days that when he came to eat he might fill his greedy stomach with
a double portion, and by eating four biscuits enjoy a comfortable sense
of repletion, and manage to fill his belly by means of a two days’ fast.
And you doubtless remember what sort of an end there was to the life of
this man who obstinately and pertinaciously relied on his own judgment
rather than on the traditions of the Elders, for he forsook the desert
and returned back to the vain philosophy of this world and earthly
vanities, and so confirmed the above mentioned opinion of the Elders by
the example of his downfall, and by his destruction teaches a lesson
that no one who trusts in his own opinion and judgment can possibly
climb the heights of perfection, nor fail to be deceived by the
dangerous wiles of the devil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. A question how is it possible always to observe one
and the same measure.](2110616)
