[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110660)  [Next](2110662) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.xx"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XX.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xx-p1"></span>Of those who renounce the world but ill.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.xx-p2.1"></span>In</span> the last place I am ashamed to say
how we find that a large number have made their renunciation in such a
way that we find that they have altered nothing of their former sins and
habits, but only their state of life and worldly garb. For they are
eager in amassing wealth which they never had before, or else do not
give up that which they had, or which is still sadder, they actually
strive to augment it under this excuse; viz., that they assert that it
is right that they should always support with it their relations or the
brethren, or they hoard it under pretence of starting congregations
which they imagine that they can preside over as Abbots. But if only
they would sincerely seek after the way of perfection, they would rather
endeavour with all their might and main to attain to this: viz., that
they might strip themselves not only of their wealth but of all their
former likings and occupations, and place themselves unreservedly and
entirely under the guidance of the Elders so as to have no anxiety not
merely about others, but even about themselves. But on the contrary we
find that while they are eager to be set over their brethren, they are
never subject to their Elders themselves, and, with pride for their
starting point, while they are quite ready to teach others they take no
trouble to learn themselves or to practise what they are to teach: and
so it is sure to end in their becoming, as the Saviour said, “blind
leaders of the blind” so that “both fall into the ditch.” <span
id="fr_1310"></span>[1311](#fn_1310) And this pride though there is only
one kind of it, yet takes a twofold form. One form continually puts on
the appearance of seriousness and gravity, the other breaks out with
unbridled freedom into silly giggling and laughing. The former delights
in not talking: the latter thinks it hard to be kept to the restraint of
silence, and has no scruples about talking freely on matters that are
unsuitable and foolish, while it is ashamed to be thought inferior to or
less well informed than others. The one on account of pride seeks
clerical office, the other looks down upon it, since it fancies that it
is unsuitable or beneath its former dignity and life and the deserts of
its birth. And which of these two should be accounted the worse each man
must consider and decide for himself. At any rate the kind of
disobedience is one and the same, if a man breaks the Elder’s commands
whether it be owing to zeal in work, or to love of ease: and it is as
hurtful to upset the rules of the monastery for the sake of sleep, as it
is for the sake of vigilance, and it is just the same to transgress the
Abbot’s orders in order to read, as it is to slight them in order to
sleep: nor is there any difference in the incentive to pride if you
neglect a brother, whether it is because of your fast or because of your
breakfast: except that those faults which seem to show themselves under
the guise of virtues and in the form of spirituality are worse and less
likely to be cured than those which arise openly and from carnal
pleasures. For these latter, like sicknesses which are perfectly plain
and visible, are grappled with and cured, while the former, since they
are covered under the cloak of virtue, remain uncured, and cause their
victims to fall into a more dangerous and deadly state of ill health.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[338:1311](2110661.htm#fr_1310) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xx-p3"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. xv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.v.xx-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. Of those who having made light of great things busy
themselves about trifles.](2110662)
