[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110092)  [Next](2110094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>When</span> this became known to Martin,
he rushed to the palace, though it was now night. He pledges himself
that, if these people were spared, he would communicate; only let the
tribunes, who had already been sent to the Spains for the destruction of
the churches, be <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-Page_52"></span>recalled. There is no delay: Maximus
grants all his requests. On the following day, the ordination of Felix
as bishop was being arranged, a man undoubtedly of great sanctity, and
truly worthy of being made a priest in happier times. Martin took part
in the communion of that day, judging it better to yield for the moment,
than to disregard the safety of those over whose heads a sword was
hanging. Nevertheless, although the bishops strove to the uttermost to
get him to confirm the fact of his communicating by signing his name, he
could not be induced to do so. On the following day, hurrying away from
that place, as he was on the way returning, he was filled with mourning
and lamentation that he had even for an hour been mixed up with the evil
communion, and, not far from a village named Andethanna, where remote
woods stretch <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) far and wide with
profound solitude, he sat down while his companions went on a little
before him. There he became involved in deep thought, alternately
accusing and defending the cause of his grief and conduct. Suddenly, an
angel stood by him and said, ‘Justly, O Martin, do you feel compunction,
but you could not otherwise get out of your difficulty. Renew your
virtue, resume your courage, lest you not only now expose your fame, but
your very salvation, to danger.’ Therefore, from that time forward, he
carefully guarded against being mixed up in communion with the party of
Ithacius. But when it happened that he cured some of the possessed more
slowly and with less grace than usual, he at once confessed to us with
tears that he felt a diminution of his power on account of the evil of
that communion in which he had taken part for a moment through
necessity, and not with a cordial spirit. He lived sixteen years after
this, but never again did he attend a synod, and kept carefully aloof
from all assemblies of bishops.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[52:137](2110093.htm#fr_136) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p2"></span> The text here is very corrupt: we
have followed a conjecture of Halm’s.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.](2110094)
