[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110166)  [Next](2110168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Accordingly</span>, Saul, having been
first anointed by Samuel with the sacerdotal oil, was appointed king. He
was of the tribe of Benjamin, and his father’s name was Kish. He was
modest in mind, and of a singularly handsome figure, so that the dignity
of his person worthily corresponded to the royal dignity. But in the
beginning of his reign, some portion of the people had revolted from
him, refusing to acknowledge his authority, and had joined themselves to
the Ammonites. Saul, however, energetically wreaked his vengeance on
these people; the enemy were conquered, and pardon was granted to the
Hebrews. Then Saul is said to have been anointed by Samuel a second
time. Next, a bloody war arose by an invasion of the Philistines; and
Saul had appointed Gilgal as the place where his army was to assemble.
As they waited there seven days for Samuel, that he might offer
sacrifice to God, the people gradually dropped away owing to his delay,
and the king, with unlawful presumption, presented a burnt-offering,
thus taking upon him the duty of a priest. For this he was severely
rebuked by Samuel, and acknowledged his sin with a penitence that was
too late. For, as a result of the king’s sin, fear had pervaded the
whole army. The camp of the enemy lying at no great distance showed them
how actual the danger was, and no one had the courage to think of going
forth to battle: most had be-taken themselves to the marshes. <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) For besides the want of courage on the
part of those who <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-Page_87"></span>felt that God was alienated from them
on account of the king’s sin, the army was in the greatest want of iron
weapons; so much so that nobody, except Saul and Jonathan his son, is
said to have possessed either sword or spear. For the Philistines, as
conquerors in the former wars, had deprived the Hebrews of the use of
arms, <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) and no one had had the
power of forging any weapon of war, or even making any implement for
rural purposes. In these circumstances, Jonathan, with an audacious
design, and with his armor-bearer as his only companion, entered the
camp of the enemy, and having slain about twenty of them, spread a
terror throughout the whole army. And then, through the appointment of
God, betaking themselves to flight, they neither carried out orders nor
kept their ranks, but placed all the hope of safety in flight. Saul,
perceiving this, hastily drew forth his men, and pursuing the fugitives,
obtained a victory. The king is said on that day to have issued a
proclamation that no one should help himself to food until the enemy
were destroyed. But Jonathan, knowing nothing of this prohibition, found
a honey-comb, and, dipping the point of his weapon in it, ate up the
honey. When that became known to the king through the anger of God which
followed, he ordered his son to be put to death. But by the help of the
people, he was saved from destruction. At that time, Samuel, being
instructed by God, went to the king, and told him in the words of God to
make war on the nation of the Amalekites, who had of old hindered the
Hebrews when they were coming out of Egypt; and the prohibition was
added that they should not covet any of the spoils of the conquered.
Accordingly, an army was led into the territory of the enemy, the king
was taken, and the nation subdued. But Saul, unable to resist the
magnitude of the spoil, and unmindful of the divine injunctions, ordered
the booty to be saved and gathered together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[86:301](2110167.htm#fr_300) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-p2"></span> The text here is very uncertain; we
have followed the reading of Halm, “lamas,” but others have “lacrimas”
or “latebras.”

<span id="fn_301"></span>[87:302](2110167.htm#fr_301) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-p3"></span> “Armorum” is here supplied, but
some prefer “cotis,” according to [1 Sam. xiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#020)<span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV.](2110168)
