[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110466)  [Next](2110468) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.viii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xix-p1"></span>An illustration to help in forming
an opinion on those who are only patient when they are not tried by any
one.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.viii.xix-p2.1"></span>But</span> it is like all poisonous
kinds of serpents or of wild beasts, which, while they remain in
solitude and their own lairs, are still not harmless; <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944) for they cannot really be said to be
harmless, because they are not actually hurting anybody. For this
results in their case, not from any feeling of goodness, but from the
exigencies of solitude, and when they have secured an opportunity of
hurting some one, at once they produce the poison stored up in them, and
show the ferocity of their nature. And so in the case of men who are
aiming at perfection, it is not enough not to be angry with *men*. For
we recollect that when we were living in solitude a feeling of
irritation would creep over us against our pen because it was too large
or too small; against our penknife when it cut badly and with a blunt
edge what we wanted cut; and against a flint if by chance when we were
rather late and hurrying to the reading, a spark of fire flashed out, so
that we could not remove <span id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span
id="iv.iii.viii.xix-Page_263"></span>and get rid of our perturbation of
mind except by cursing the senseless matter, or at least the devil.
Wherefore for a method of perfection it will not be of any use for there
to be a dearth of men against whom our anger might be roused: since, if
patience has not already been acquired, the feelings of passion which
still dwell in our hearts can equally well spend themselves on dumb
things and paltry objects, and not allow us to gain a continuous state
of peacefulness, or to be free from our remaining faults: unless perhaps
we think that some advantage and a sort of cure may be gained for our
passion from the fact that inanimate and speechless things cannot
possibly reply to our curses and rage, nor provoke our ungovernable
temper to break out into a worse madness of passion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_944"></span>[262:945](2110467.htm#fr_944) <span
id="iv.iii.viii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xix-p3"></span> Reading *non innoxia*
(Petschenig).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Of the way in which auger should be banished
according to the gospel.](2110468)
