[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110636)  [Next](2110638) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p1"></span>That the beginning of our good will
and its completion comes from God.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>And</span> this plainly teaches us that
the beginning of our good will is given to us by the inspiration of the
Lord, when He draws us towards the way of salvation either by His own
act, or by the exhortations of some man, or by compulsion; and that the
consummation of our good deeds is granted by Him in the same way: but
that it is in our own power to follow up the encouragement and
assistance of God with more or less zeal, and that accordingly we are
rightly visited either with reward or with punishment, because we have
been either careless or careful to correspond to His design and
providential arrangement made for us with such kindly regard. And this
is clearly and plainly described in Deuteronomy. “When,” says he, “the
Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land which thou art going
to possess, and shall have destroyed many nations before thee, the
Hittite, and the Gergeshite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, and the
Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, seven nations much more
numerous than thou art and stronger than thou, and the Lord thy God
shall have delivered them to thee, thou shalt utterly destroy them.
<span id="page_329">p. 329</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iv.xix-Page_329"></span>Thou shalt make no league with them.
Neither shalt thou make marriage with them.” <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) So then Scripture declares that it
is the free gift of God that they are brought into the land of promise,
that many nations are destroyed before them, that nations more numerous
and mightier than the people of Israel are given up into their hands.
But whether Israel utterly destroys them, or whether it preserves them
alive and spares them, and whether or no it makes a league with them,
and makes marriages with them or not, it declares lies in their own
power. And by this testimony we can clearly see what we ought to ascribe
to free will, and what to the design and daily assistance of the Lord,
and that it belongs to divine grace to give us opportunities of
salvation and prosperous undertakings and victory: but that it is ours
to follow up the blessings which God gives us with earnestness or
indifference. And this same fact we see is plainly taught in the healing
of the blind men. For the fact that Jesus passed by them, was a free
gift of Divine providence and condescension. But the fact that they
cried out and said “Have mercy on us, Lord, thou son of David,” <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279) was an act of their own faith and
belief. That they received the sight of their eyes was a gift of Divine
pity. But that after the reception of any blessing, the grace of God,
and the use of free will both remain, the case of the ten lepers, who
were all healed alike, shows us. For when one of them through goodness
of will returned thanks, the Lord looking for the nine, and praising the
one, showed that He was ever anxious to help even those who were
unmindful of His kindness. For even this is a gift of His visitation;
viz., that he receives and commends the grateful one, and looks for and
censures those who are thankless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[329:1279](2110637.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p3"></span> [Deut. vii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[329:1280](2110637.htm#fr_1279) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p4"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.xix-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. That nothing can be done in this world without
God.](2110638)
