[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110268)  [Next](2110270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxviii"></span> <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span
id="iii.xxviii-Page_152"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.

<span id="iii.xxviii-p1"></span>What Rule is to be observed in the
Interpretation of Scripture.

<span id="iii.xxviii-p2"></span>\[70.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>But</span> it will be said, If the words,
the sentiments, the promises of Scripture, are appealed to by the Devil
and his disciples, of whom some are false apostles, some false prophets
and false teachers, and all without exception heretics, what are
Catholics and the sons of Mother Church to do? How are they to
distinguish truth from falsehood in the sacred Scriptures? They must be
very careful to pursue that course which, in the beginning of this
Commonitory, we said that holy and learned men had commended to us, that
is to say, they must interpret the sacred Canon according to the
traditions of the Universal Church and in keeping with the rules of
Catholic doctrine, in which Catholic and Universal Church, moreover,
they must follow universality, antiquity, consent. And if at any time a
part opposes itself to the whole, novelty to antiquity, the dissent of
one or a few who are in error to the consent of all or at all events of
the great majority of Catholics, then they must prefer the soundness of
the whole to the corruption of a part; in which same whole they must
prefer the religion of antiquity to the profaneness of novelty; and in
antiquity itself in like manner, to the temerity of one or of a very few
they must prefer, first of all, the general decrees, if such there be,
of a Universal Council, or if there be no such, then, what is next best,
they must follow the consentient belief of many and great masters. Which
rule having been faithfully, soberly, and scrupulously observed, we
shall with little difficulty detect the noxious errors of heretics as
they arise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. In what Way, on collating the consentient
opinions of the Ancient Masters, the Novelties of Heretics may be
detected and condemned.](2110270)
