[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110565)  [Next](2110567) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span> <span id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span
id="iv.iv.i-Page_293"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.i-p0.1"></span>Preface.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>The</span> obligation, which was promised to
the blessed Pope Castor in the preface to those volumes which with God’s
help I composed in twelve books on the Institutes of the Cœnobia, and
the remedies for the eight principal faults, has now been, as far as my
feeble ability permitted, satisfied. I should certainly like to see what
was the opinion fairly arrived at on this work both by his judgment and
yours, whether, on a matter so profound and so lofty, and one which has
never yet been made the subject of a treatise, we have produced anything
worthy of your notice, and of the eager desire of all the holy brethren.
But now as the aforesaid Bishop has left us and departed to Christ,
meanwhile these ten Conferences of the grandest of the fathers, viz.,
the Anchorites who dwelt in the desert of Scete, which he, fired with an
incomparable desire for saintliness, had bidden me write for him in the
same style (not considering in the greatness of his affection, what a
burden he placed on shoulders too weak to bear it)—these Conferences I
have thought good to dedicate to you in particular, O blessed
Pope, <span id="fr_1082"></span>[1083](#fn_1082) Leontius, <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[1084](#fn_1083) and holy brother Helladius. <span
id="fr_1084"></span>[1085](#fn_1084) For one of you was united to him
whom I have mentioned, by the ties of brotherhood, and the rank of the
priesthood, and (what is more to the point) by fervour in sacred study,
and so has an hereditary right to demand the debt due to his brother:
while the other has ventured to follow the sublime customs of the
Anchorites, not like some others, presumptuously on his own account, but
seizing, at the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, on the right path of
doctrine almost before he had been taught and choosing to learn not so
much from his own ideas as from their traditions. Wherein just as I had
anchored in the harbour of Silence, a wide sea opens out before me, so
that I must venture to hand down for posterity some of the Institutes
and teaching of these great men. For the bark of my slender abilities
will be exposed to the dangers of a longer voyage on the deep, in
proportion as the Anchorite’s life is grander than that of the Cœnobium,
and the contemplation of God, to which those inestimable men ever
devoted themselves, more sublime than ordinary practical life. It is
yours therefore to assist our efforts by your pious prayers for fear
lest so sacred a subject that is to be treated in an untried but
faithful manner, should be imperilled by us, or lest our simplicity
should lose itself in the depths of the subject matter. Let us therefore
pass from what is visible to the eye and the external mode of life of
the monks, of which we treated in the former books, to the life of the
inner man, which is hidden from view; and from the system of the
canonical prayers, let our discourse mount to that continuance in
unceasing prayer, which the Apostle enjoins, that whoever has through
reading our former work already spiritually gained the name of Jacob by
ousting his carnal faults, may now by the reception of the Institutes
which are not mine but the fathers’, mount by a pure insight to the
merits and (so to speak) the dignity of Israel, and in the <span
id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span id="iv.iv.i-Page_294"></span>same way
be taught what it is that he should observe on these lofty heights of
perfection. <span id="fr_1085"></span>[1086](#fn_1085) And so may your
prayers gain from Him, Who has deemed us worthy both to see them and to
learn from them and to dwell with them, that He will vouchsafe to grant
us a perfect recollection of their teaching, and a ready tongue to tell
it, that we may explain them as beautifully and as exactly as we
received them from them and may succeed in setting before you the men
themselves incorporated, as it were, in their own Institutes, and what
is more to the point, speaking in the Latin tongue. Of this however we
wish above all to advertise the reader of these conferences as well as
of our earlier works, that if there chances to be anything herein which
by reason of his condition and the character of his profession, or owing
to custom and the common mode of life seems to him either impossible or
very difficult, he should measure it not by the limits of his own powers
but by the worth and perfection of the speakers, whose zeal and purpose
he should first consider, as they were truly dead to this worldly life,
and so hampered by no feelings for their kinsmen according to the flesh,
and by no ties of worldly occupations. Next let him bear in mind the
character of the country in which they dwelt, how they lived in a vast
desert, and were cut off from intercourse with all their fellow-men, and
thus were able to have their minds enlightened, and to contemplate, and
utter those things which perhaps will seem impossibilities to the
uninitiated and uninstructed, because of their way of life and the
commonplace character of their habits. But if any one wants to give a
true opinion on this matter, and is anxious to try whether such
perfection can be attained, let him first endeavour to make their
purpose his own, with the same zeal and the same mode of life, and then
in the end he will find that those things which used to seem beyond the
powers of men, are not only possible, but really delightful. But now let
us proceed at once to their Conferences and Institutes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[293:1083](2110566.htm#fr_1082) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span> *Papa*. See note on the Preface to the
Institutes.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[293:1084](2110566.htm#fr_1083) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span> The see of which Leontius was Bishop is
uncertain, possibly Fréjus.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[293:1085](2110566.htm#fr_1084) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span> Helladius was afterwards raised to the
Episcopate, but of what see is unknown. See the Preface to Conf. XVIII.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[294:1086](2110566.htm#fr_1085) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span> The allusion is rather forced and
strained. But Cassian means to say that those who have got the better of
their carnal sins by perusing his former work, are already fit to be
named Jacob (the supplanter), who got the better of his brother: and he
hopes that this new work of his will give them such a view of God and
insight into His dealings that they may be worthy to have their name
changed, as Jacob’s was, to Israel, which he takes to mean the man
seeing God. Cf. the note on Against Nestorius, VII. ix. (intelligibilis
here = spiritualis, cf. intellectualis. Conf. XII. xi., and elsewhere).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference I. First Conference of Abbot Moses.](2110567)
