[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110500)  [Next](2110502) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.x.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.x.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.iii.x.xvi-p1"></span>How we ought to admonish those who go
wrong, not out of hatred, but out of love.

<span id="iv.iii.x.xvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.x.xvi-p2.1"></span>But</span> again in case some might be
encouraged by this gentleness, and scorn to obey his commands, he
proceeds with the severity of an apostle: “But if any man obey not our
word by this Epistle, note that man and do not keep company with him
that he may be ashamed.” And in warning them of what they ought to
observe out of regard for him and for the good of all, and of the care
with which they should keep the apostolic commands, at once he joins to
the warning the kindness of a most indulgent father; and teaches them as
well, as if they were his children, what a brotherly disposition they
should cultivate towards those mentioned above, out of love. “Yet do not
esteem him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.” With the
severity of a judge he combines the affection of a father, and tempers
with kindness and gentleness the sentence delivered with apostolic
sternness. For he commands them to note that man who scorns to obey his
commands, and not to keep company with him; and yet he does not bid them
do this from a wrong feeling of dislike, but from brotherly affection
and out of consideration for their amendment. “Do not keep company,” he
says, “with him that he may be ashamed;” so that, even if he is not made
better by my mild charges, he may at last be brought to shame by being
publicly separated from all of you, and so may some day begin to be
restored to the way of salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Different passages in which the Apostle declares
that we ought to work, or in which it is shown that he himself
worked.](2110502)
