[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110171)  [Next](2110173) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxviii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>At</span> this time, he knew in a
guilty way Bersabe, a woman of remarkable beauty. She is said to have
been the wife of a certain man called Uriah, who was then in the camp.
David caused him to be slain by exposing him to the enemy at a dangerous
place in the battle. In this way, he added to the number of his wives
the woman who was now free from the bond of marriage, but who was
already pregnant through adultery. Then David, after being severely
reproved by Nathan the prophet, although he confessed his sin, did not
escape the punishment of God. For he lost in a few days the son who was
born from the clandestine connection, and many terrible things happened
in respect to his house and family. At last his son Absalom lifted
impious arms against his father, with the desire of driving him from the
throne. Joab encountered him in the field of battle, and the king
entreated him to spare the young man when conquered; but he,
disregarding this command, avenged with the sword his parricidal
attempts. That victory is said to have been a mournful one to the king:
so great was his natural affection that he wished even his parricidal
son to be forgiven. This war seemed hardly finished when another arose,
under a certain general called Sabæa, who had stirred up all the wicked
to arms. But the whole commotion was speedily checked by the death of
the leader. David then engaged in several battles against the
Philistines with favorable results; and all being subdued by war, both
foreign and home disturbances having been brought to accord, he
possessed in peace a most flourishing kingdom. Then a sudden desire
seized him of numbering the people, in order to ascertain the strength
of his empire; and accordingly they were numbered by Joab, the master of
the host, and were found to amount to one million three hundred
thousand <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) citizens. David soon
regretted and repented of this proceeding, and implored pardon of God
for having lifted up his thoughts to this, that he should reckon the
power of his kingdom rather by the multitude of his subjects than by the
divine favor. Accordingly, an angel was sent to him to reveal to him a
threefold punishment, and to give him the power of choosing either one
or another. Well, when a famine for three years was set before him, and
flight before his enemies for three months, and a pestilence for three
days, shunning both flight and famine, he made choice of pestilence,
and, almost in a moment of time, seventy thousand men perished. Then
David, beholding the angel by whose right hand the people were
overthrown, implored pardon, and offered himself singly to punishment
instead of all, saying that he deserved destruction inasmuch as it was
he who had sinned. Thus, the punishment of the people was turned aside;
and David built an altar to God on the spot where he had beheld the
angel. After this, having become infirm through years and illness, he
appointed Solomon, who had been born to him by Bersabe, the wife of
Uriah, his successor in the kingdom. He, having been anointed with the
royal oil by <span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxviii-Page_90"></span>Sadoc the priest, received the title
of king, while his father was still alive. David died, after he had
reigned forty years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_310"></span>[89:311](2110172.htm#fr_310) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxviii-p2"></span> As is often the case with respect
to numbers, there are discrepancies in the various accounts given of
this census.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX.](2110173)
