[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110866)  [Next](2110868) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.v.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.v.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.v.v.vii-p1"></span>An instance of chastity which teaches us
that all men should not be emulous of all things.

<span id="iv.v.v.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.v.vii-p2.1"></span>For</span> apart from that loss, which we
have said that a monk incurs who wants in light-mindedness to pass from
one pursuit to another, there is a risk of death that is hence incurred,
because at times things which are rightly done by some are wrongly taken
by others as an example, and things which turned out well for some, are
found to be injurious to others. For, to give an instance, it is as if
one wished to imitate the good deed of that man, which Abbot John is
wont to bring forward, not for the sake of imitating him but simply out
of admiration for him; for one came to the aforesaid old man in a
secular dress and when he had brought him some of the first fruits of
his crops, he found some one there possessed by a most fierce devil. And
this one though he scorned the adjurations and commands of Abbot John,
and vowed that he would never at his bidding leave the body which he had
occupied, yet was terrified at the coming of this other, and departed
with a most humble utterance of his name. And the old man marvelled not
a little at his so evident grace and was the more astonished at him
because he saw that he had on a secular dress; and so began carefully to
ask of him the manner of his life and pursuit. And when he said that he
was living in the world and bound by the ties of marriage, the blessed
John, considering in his mind the greatness of his virtue and grace,
searched out still more carefully what his manner of life might be. He
declared that he was a countryman, and that he sought his food by the
daily toil of his hands, and was not conscious of anything good about
him except that he never went forth to his work in the fields in the
morning nor came home in the evening without having returned thanks in
Church for the food of his daily life, to God Who gave it; and that he
had never used any of his crops without having first offered to God
their first fruits and tithes; and that he had never driven his oxen
over the bounds of another’s harvest without having first muzzled them
that his neighbour might not sustain the slightest loss through his
carelessness. And when these things did not seem to Abbot John
sufficient to procure such grace as that with which he saw that he was
endowed, and he inquired of him and investigated what it was which could
be connected with the merits of such grace, he was induced by respect
for such anxious inquiries to confess that, when he wanted to be
professed as a monk, he had been compelled by force and his parents’
command, twelve years before to take a wife, who, without any body to
that day being aware of it, was kept by him as a virgin in the place of
a sister. And when the old man heard this, he was so overcome with
admiration that he announced publicly in his presence that it was not
without good reason that the devil who had scorned him himself, could
not endure the presence of this man, whose virtue he himself, not only
in the ardour of youth, but even now, would not dare to aim at without
risk of his chastity. And though Abbot John would tell this story with
the utmost admiration, yet he never advised any monk to try this plan as
he knew that many things which are rightly done by some involved others
who imitate them in great danger, and that that cannot be tried by all,
which the Lord bestowed upon a few by a special gift.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of spiritual knowledge.](2110868)
