[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110008)  [Next](2110010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p1"></span>Martin converts a Robber to the Faith.

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>From</span> that time quitting military
service, Martin earnestly sought after the society of Hilarius, bishop
of the city Pictava, <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) whose faith in
the things of God was then regarded as of high renown, and in universal
esteem. For some time Martin made his abode with him. Now, this same
Hilarius, having instituted him in the office of the diaconate,
endeavored still more closely to attach him to himself, and to bind him
by leading him to take part in Divine service. But when he constantly
refused, crying out that he was unworthy, Hilarius, as being a man of
deep penetration, perceived that he could only be constrained in this
way, if he should lay that sort of office upon him, in discharging which
there should seem to be a kind of injury done him. He therefore
appointed him to be an exorcist. Martin did not refuse this appointment,
from the fear that he might seem to have looked down upon it as somewhat
humble. Not long after this, he was warned in a dream that he should
visit his native land, and more particularly his parents, who were still
involved in heathenism, with a regard for their religious interests. He
set forth in accordance with the expressed wish of the holy Hilarius,
and, after being adjured by him with many prayers and tears, that he
would in due time return. According to report Martin entered on that
journey in a melancholy frame of mind, after calling the brethren to
witness that many sufferings lay before him. The result fully justified
this prediction. For, first of all, having followed some devious paths
among the Alps, he fell into the hands of robbers. And when one of them
lifted up his axe and poised it above Martin’s head, another of them met
with his right hand the blow as it fell; nevertheless, having had his
hands bound behind his back, he was handed over to one of them to be
guarded and stripped. The robber, having led him to a private place
apart from the rest, began to enquire of him who he was. Upon this,
Martin replied that he was a Christian. The robber next asked him
whether he was afraid. Then indeed Martin most courageously replied that
he never before had felt so safe, because he knew that the mercy of the
Lord would be especially present with him in the midst of trials. He
added that he grieved rather for the man in whose hands he was, because,
by living a life of robbery, he was showing himself unworthy of the
mercy of Christ. And then entering on a discourse concerning Evangelical
truth, he preached the word of God to the robber. Why should I delay
stating the result? The robber believed; and, after expressing his
respect for Martin, he restored him to the way, entreating him to pray
the Lord for him. That same robber was afterwards <span id="page_7">p.
7</span> <span id="ii.ii.vi-Page_7"></span>seen leading a religious
life; so that, in fact, the narrative I have given above is based upon
an account furnished by himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[6:14](2110009.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p3"></span> This city of the Pictones (or Pictavi)
who are mentioned by Cæsar, *Bell Gall*. iii. 11. Their territory
corresponded to the modern diocese of Poitiers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Devil throws himself in the Way of
Martin.](2110010)
