[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110215)  [Next](2110217) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Then</span> Herod, a foreigner, the son
of Antipater of Askelon, asked and received the sovereignty of Judæa
from the senate and people of Rome. Under him, the Jews began for the
first time to have a foreigner as king. For as now the advent of Christ
was at hand, it was necessary, according to the predictions of the
prophets, that they should be deprived of their own rulers, that they
might not look for anything beyond Christ. Under this Herod, in the
thirty-third year of his reign, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxvii-p1.2"></span>Christ</span> was born on the
twenty-fifth of December in the consulship of Sabinus and Rufinus. But
we do not venture to touch on these things which are contained in the
Gospels, and subsequently in the Acts of the Apostles, lest the
character of our condensed work should, in any measure, detract from the
dignity of the events; and I shall proceed to what remains. Herod
reigned four years after the birth of the Lord; for the whole period of
his reign comprised thirty-seven years. After him, came Archelaus the
tetrarch, for eight years, and Herod for twenty-four years. Under him,
in the eighteenth year of his reign, the Lord was crucified, Fufius
Geminus and Rubellius Geminus being consuls; from which date up to the
consulship of Stilico, there have elapsed three hundred and seventy-two
years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII.](2110217)
