[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110979)  [Next](2110981) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.x-p1"></span>Of those who while still imperfect
retire into the desert.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.x-p2.1"></span>But</span> some are sometimes so tantalized
by the silence of the desert lasting all through the day that they
altogether dread intercourse with men, and, when they have even for a
little while broken through their habit of retirement owing to the
accident of a visit from some of the brethren, boil over with marked
vexation of mind, and show clear signs of annoyance. And this especially
happens in the case of those who have betaken themselves to the solitary
life without a well-matured purpose and without being thoroughly trained
in the Cœnobium, as these men are always imperfect and easily upset, and
incline to one side or the other, as the gales of trouble may drive
them. For as they boil over impatiently at intercourse or conversation
with the brethren, so while they are living in solitude they cannot
stand the vastness of that silence which they themselves have courted,
inasmuch as they themselves do not even know the reason why solitude
ought to be wanted and sought for, but imagine that the value and the
main part of this life consist in this; viz., in avoiding intercourse
with the brethren and simply shunning and loathing the sight of a man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. A question how to cure those who have hastily left
the congregation of the Cœnobium.](2110981)
