[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110209)  [Next](2110211) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxi-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>In</span> the meantime, Matthathias dies,
having appointed in his own place his son Judah, as general of the army
which he had brought together. Under his leadership, several successful
battles took place against the royal forces. For first of all, he
destroyed, along with his whole army, Apollonius, the enemy’s general,
who had entered on the conflict with a large number of troops. When a
certain man, named Seron, who was then the ruler of Syria, heard of
this, he increased his forces, and attacked Judah with much spirit as
being superior in numbers, but when a battle took place, he was routed
and put to flight; and with the loss of nearly eight hundred men, he
returned to Syria. On this becoming known to Antiochus, he was filled
with rage and regret, inasmuch as it vexed him that his generals had
been conquered, notwithstanding their large armies. He therefore gathers
aid from his whole empire, and bestows a donative on the soldiers,
almost to the exhaustion of his treasury. For he was then suffering in a
very special manner from the want of money. The reason of this was, on
the one side, that the Jews, who had been accustomed to pay him an
annual tribute of more than three hundred talents of silver, were now in
a state of rebellion against him; and on the other side, that many of
the Greek cities and countries were unsettled by the evil of
persecution. For Antiochus had not spared even the Gentiles, whom he had
sought to persuade to abandon their long-established superstitions, and
to draw over to one kind of religious observance. And no doubt, those of
them who regarded nothing as sacred, easily were induced to give up
their ancient forms of worship, but at the same time all were in a state
of alarm and disaster. For these reasons, then, the taxes had ceased to
be paid. Boiling with wrath on these grounds (for he who had of old been
the richest of kings now deeply felt the poverty due to his own
wickedness), he divided his forces with Lysias, and committed to him
Syria and the war against the Jews, while he himself set out <span
id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxi-Page_108"></span>against the Persians, to collect the
taxes among them. Lysias, then, selected Ptolemy, Gorgias, Doro, and
Nicanor, as generals in the war; and to these he gave forty thousand
infantry, and seven thousand cavalry. At the first onset these caused
great alarm among the Jews. Then Judah, when all were in despair,
exhorted his men to go with courageous hearts to battle—that, if they
put their trust in God, everything would give way before them; for that
often before then the victory had been won by a few fighting against
many. A fast was proclaimed, and sacrifice was offered, after which they
went down to battle. The result was that the forces of the enemy were
scattered, and Judah, taking possession of their camp, found in it both
much gold and Tyrian treasures. For merchants from Syria, having no
doubt as to victory, had followed the king’s army with the hope of
purchasing prisoners, and now were themselves spoiled. When these things
were reported to Lysias by messengers, he got together troops with still
greater efforts, and in a year after again attacked the Jews with an
enormous army; but being defeated, he retreated to Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII.](2110211)
