[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110091)  [Next](2110093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>In</span> the meantime, those bishops
with whom Martin would not hold communion went in terror to the king,
complaining that they had been condemned beforehand; that it was all
over with them as respected the *status* of every one of them, if the
authority of Martin was now to uphold the pertinacity of Theognitus, who
alone had as yet condemned them by a sentence publicly pronounced; that
the man ought not to have been received within the walls; that he was
now not merely the defender of heretics, but their vindicator; and that
nothing had really been accomplished by the death of Priscillian, if
Martin were to act the part of his avenger. Finally, prostrating
themselves with weeping and lamentation, they implored the emperor <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) to put forth his power against this
one man. And the emperor was not far from being compelled to assign to
Martin, too, the doom of heretics. But after all, although he was
disposed to look upon the bishops with too great favor, he was not
ignorant that Martin excelled all other mortals in faith, sanctity, and
excellence: he therefore tries another way of getting the better of the
holy man. And first he sends for him privately, and addresses him in the
kindest fashion, assuring him that the heretics were condemned in the
regular course of public trials, rather than by the persecutions of the
priests; and that there was no reason why he should think that communion
with Ithacius and the rest of that party was a thing to be condemned. He
added that Theognitus had created disunion, rather by personal hatred,
than by the cause he supported; and that, in fact, he was the only
person who, in the meantime, had separated himself from communion: while
no innovation had been made by the rest. He remarked further that a
synod, held a few days previously, had decreed that Ithacius was not
chargeable with any fault. When Martin was but little impressed by these
statements, the king then became inflamed with anger, and hurried out of
his presence; while, without delay, executioners are appointed for those
in whose behalf Martin had made supplication.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[51:136](2110092.htm#fr_135) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p2"></span> “potestatem regiam.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.](2110093)
