[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110074)  [Next](2110076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p1.1"></span>Moreover</span>, it will be worth while to
relate also some of his familiar sayings, since they were all salted
with spiritual instruction. He happened to see a sheep <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) that had recently been sheared; and,
‘See,’ says he, ‘she has fulfilled the precept of the Gospel: she had
two coats, and one of them she has given to him who had none: thus,
therefore, ye ought also to do.’ Also, when he perceived a swineherd in
a garment of skin, cold and, in fact, all but naked, he exclaimed: ‘Look
at Adam, cast out of Paradise, how he feeds his swine in a garment of
skin; but let us, laying aside that old Adam, who still remains in that
man, rather put on the new Adam.’ Oxen had, in one part, eaten up the
grass of the meadows; pigs also had dug up some portions of them with
their snouts; while the remaining portion, which continued uninjured,
flourished, as if painted with variously tinted flowers. ‘That part,’
said he, ‘which has been eaten down by cattle, although it has not
altogether lost the beauty of grass, yet retains no grandeur of flowers,
conveys to us a representation of marriage; that part, again, which the
pigs, unclean animals, had dug up, presents a loathsome picture of
fornication; while the remaining portion, which had sustained no injury,
sets forth the glory of virginity;—it flourishes with abundance of
grass; the fruits of the field abound in it; and, decked with flowers to
the very extreme of beauty, it shines as if adorned with glittering
gems. Blessed is such beauty and worthy of God; for nothing is to be
compared with virginity. Thus, then, those who set marriage side by side
with fornication grievously err; and those who think that marriage is to
be placed on an equal footing with virginity are utterly wretched and
foolish. But this distinction must be maintained by wise people, that
marriage belongs to those things which may be excused, while virginity
points to glory, and fornication must incur punishment unless its guilt
is purged away through atonement.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[43:122](2110075.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p2"></span> Halm has here an unintelligible
reading, probably a misprint—“quem recens tonsam forte conspexerat.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI.](2110076)
