[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110641)  [Next](2110643) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.iv.v.i-p1"></span>Of the life of Abbot Daniel.

<span id="iv.iv.v.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.i-p2.1"></span>Among</span> the other heroes of Christian
philosophy we also knew Abbot Daniel, who was not only the equal of
those who dwelt in the desert of Scete in every sort of virtue, but was
specially marked by the grace of humility. This man on account of his
purity and gentleness, though in age the junior of most, was preferred
to the office of the diaconate by the blessed Paphnutius, presbyter in
the same desert: for the blessed Paphnutius was so delighted with his
excellent qualities, that, as he knew that he was his equal in virtue
and grace of life, he was anxious also to make him his equal in the
order of the priesthood. And since he could not bear that he should
remain any longer in an inferior office, and was also anxious to provide
a worthy successor to himself in his lifetime, he promoted him to the
dignity of the priesthood. <span id="fr_1285"></span>[1286](#fn_1285) He
however relinquished nothing of his former customary humility, and when
the other was present, never took upon himself anything from his advance
to a higher order, but when Abbot Paphnutius was offering spiritual
sacrifices, ever continued to act as a deacon in the office of his
former ministry. However, the blessed Paphnutius though so great a saint
as to possess the grace of foreknowledge in many matters, yet in this
case was disappointed of his hope of the succession and the choice he
had made, for he himself passed to God no long time after him whom he
had prepared as his successor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[330:1286](2110642.htm#fr_1285) <span
id="iv.iv.v.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.i-p3"></span> Nothing further appears to be known of
Daniel than what is here told us by Cassian. There has been some
discussion as to the action of Paphnutius in having him raised to the
priesthood, as Cassian here narrates. Was Paphnutius really a bishop, or
is it a case of presbyterian orders, or do Cassian’s expressions merely
mean that Paphnutius procured his ordination first to the Diaconate and
then to the Priesthood? Probably the latter, for (1) all the evidence
goes to show that presbyters had not the power of ordination; and (2)
there are many instances, in which it is said even of the laity that
they “ordained” men to the ministry when all that can possibly be meant
is that they “procured their ordination;” further (3) it will be noticed
that it is not even said that Paphnutius ordained Daniel but merely that
he “promoted” him to the priesthood; an expression which might equally
well be used of nomination as of actual ordination. See the subject
discussed in Bingham’s Antiquities, Book II. c. iii. § 7, and C. Gore’s
“Church and the Ministry,” p. 374.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. An investigation of the origin of a sudden change of
feeling from inexpressible joy to extreme dejection of mind.](2110643)
