[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110429)  [Next](2110431) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.vii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xiv-p1"></span>Instances to show that the disease
of covetousness is threefold.

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>And</span> so this disease and unhealthy
state is threefold, and is condemned with equal abhorrence by all the
fathers. One feature is this, of which we described the taint above,
which by deceiving wretched folk persuades them to hoard though they
never had anything of their own when they lived in the world. Another,
which forces men afterwards to resume and once more desire those things
which in the early days of their renunciation of the world they gave up.
A third, which springing from a faulty and hurtful beginning and making
a bad start, does not suffer those whom it has once infected with this
lukewarmness of mind to strip themselves of all their worldly goods,
through fear of poverty and want of faith; and those who keep back money
and property which they certainly ought to have renounced and forsaken,
it never allows to arrive at the perfection of the gospel. And we find
in Holy Scripture instances of these three catastrophes which were
visited with no light punishment. For when Gehazi wished to acquire what
he had never had before, not only did he fail to obtain the gift of
prophecy which it would have been his to receive from his master by
hereditary succession, but on the contrary he was covered by the curse
of the holy Elisha with a perpetual leprosy: while Judas, wanting to
resume the possession of the wealth which he had formerly cast away when
he followed Christ, not only fell into betraying the Lord, and lost his
apostolic rank, but also was not allowed to close his life with the
common lot of all but ended it by a violent death. But Ananias and
Sapphira, keeping back a part of that which was formerly their own, were
at the Apostle’s word punished with death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Of the difference between one who renounces the world
badly and one who does not renounce it at all.](2110431)
