[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110232)  [Next](2110234) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xliv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xliv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLIV.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xliv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xliv-p1.1"></span>But</span> these, the fewer they became,
showed themselves all the more powerful; as the most steadfast among
them was to be reckoned our friend Fœgadius, and Servatio, bishop of the
Tungri. As these had not yielded to threats and terrors, Taurus assails
them with entreaties, and beseeches them with tears to adopt milder
counsels. He argued that the bishops were now in the seventh month since
they had been shut up within one city—that no hope of returning home
presented itself to them, worn out by the inclemency of winter and
positive want; and what then would be the end? He urged them to follow
the example of the majority, and to derive authority for so doing at
least from the numbers who had preceded them. For Fœgadius openly
declared that he was prepared for banishment, and for every kind of
punishment that might be assigned him, but would not accept that
confession of faith which had been drawn up by the Arians. Thus several
days passed in this sort of discussion. And when they made little
progress towards a pacification, by degrees Fœgadius began to yield, and
at the last was overcome by a proposal which was made to him. For Valens
and Ursatius affirmed that the present confession of faith was drawn up
on the lines of Catholic doctrine, and having been brought forward by
the Easterns at the instigation of the emperor, could not be rejected
without impiety; and what possible end of strife could there be if a
confession which satisfied the Easterns was rejected by those of the
West? Finally, if there appeared anything less fully stated in the
present confession than was desirable, they themselves should add what
they thought ought to be added, and that they, for their part, would
acquiesce in those things which might be added. This friendly profession
was received with favorable minds by all. Nor did our people venture any
longer to make opposition, desiring as they did in some way or other now
to put an end to the business. Then confessions drawn up by Fœgadius and
Servatio began to be published; and in these first Arius and his whole
unfaithful scheme was condemned, while the Son of God also was <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) pronounced equal to the Father, and
without beginning, \[that is\] without any commencement <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) in time. Then Valens, as if assisting
our friends, subjoined the statement (in which there lurked a secret
guile) that the Son of God was not a creature like the other creatures;
and the deceit involved in this declaration escaped the notice of the
hearers. For in these words, in which the Son was denied to be like the
other creatures, he was nevertheless pronounced a creature, only
superior to the rest. Thus neither party could hold that it had wholly
conquered or had wholly been conquered, since the confession itself was
in favor of the Arians, but the declarations afterwards added were in
favor of our friends. That one, however, must be excepted which Valens
had subjoined, and which, not being at the time understood, was at
length comprehended when it was too late. In this way, at any rate, the
council was brought to an end, a council which had a good beginning but
a disgraceful conclusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_380"></span>[118:381](2110233.htm#fr_380) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xliv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xliv-p2"></span> The text is very uncertain; we have
followed that of Halm, but the common text inserts a “non,” and reads
thus: “but the Son of God is not pronounced equal to the Father, and
without beginning,” etc.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[118:382](2110233.htm#fr_381) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xliv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xliv-p3"></span> “sine tempore.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV.](2110234)
