[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110038)  [Next](2110040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.ii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="ii.iv.i.ii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.ii-p1.1"></span>Truly</span>” said I, “you have clearly
proved how much a sincere love can accomplish, inasmuch as, for my sake,
you have traveled over so many seas, and such an extent of land,
journeying, so to speak, from the rising of the sun in the East to where
he sets in the West. Come, then, because we are here in a retired spot
by ourselves, and not being otherwise occupied, feel it our duty to
attend to your discourse, come, I pray thee, relate to us the whole
history of your wanderings. Tell us, if you please, how the faith of
Christ is flourishing in the East; what peace the saints enjoy; what are
the customs of the monks; and with what signs and miracles Christ is
working in his servants. For assuredly, because in this region of ours
and amid the circumstances in which we are placed, <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> <span id="ii.iv.i.ii-Page_25"></span>life itself has become a
weariness to us, we shall gladly hear from you, if life is permitted to
Christians even in the desert.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.ii-p2"></span>In reply to these words, Postumianus
declares, “I shall do as I see you desire. But I beg you first to tell
me, whether all those persons whom I left here as priests, continue the
same as I knew them before taking my departure.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.ii-p3"></span>Then I exclaim, “Forbear, I beseech
thee, to make any enquiry on such points, which you either, I think,
know as well as I do, or if you are ignorant of them, it is better that
you should hear nothing regarding them. I cannot, however, help saying,
that not only are those, of whom you enquire, no better than they were
when you knew them, but even that one man, who was formerly a great
friend of mine, and in whose affection I was wont to find some
consolation from the persecutions of the rest, has shown himself more
unkind towards me than he ought to have been. However, I shall not say
anything harsher regarding him, both because I once esteemed him as a
friend, and loved him even when he was deemed my enemy. I shall only add
that while I was silently meditating on these things in my thoughts,
this source of grief deeply afflicted me, that I had almost lost the
friendship of one who was both a wise and a religious man. But let us
turn away from these topics which are full of sorrow, and let us rather
listen to you, according to the promise which you gave some time ago.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.ii-p4"></span>“Let it be so,” exclaimed Postumianus.
And on his saying this, we all kept silence, while, moving his robe of
sackcloth, on which he had sat down, a little nearer me, he thus began.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](2110040)
