[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110951)  [Next](2110953) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.i"></span> <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="iv.vi.i-Page_477"></span>

### <span id="iv.vi.i-p0.1"></span>Preface.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>When</span> by the help of the grace of Christ
I had published ten Conferences of the Fathers, which were composed at
the urgent request of the most blessed Helladius and Leontius, I
dedicated seven others to Honoratus, a Bishop blessed in name as well as
merits, and also to that holy servant of Christ, Eucherius. The same
number also I have thought good to dedicate now to you, O holy brothers,
Jovinianus, Minervius, Leontius, and Theodore. <span
id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069) Since the last named of you founded
that holy and splendid monastic rule in the province of Gaul, with the
strictness of ancient virtue, while the rest of you by your instructions
have stirred up monks not only before all to seek the common life of the
Cœnobia, but even to thirst eagerly for the sublime life of the
anchorite.  For those Conferences of the best of the fathers are
arranged with such care, and so carefully considered in all respects,
that they are suited to both modes of life whereby you have made not
only the countries of the West, but even the isles to flourish with
great crowds of brethren; i.e., I mean that not only those who still
remain in congregations with praiseworthy subjection to rule, but those
also who retire to no great distance from your monasteries, and try to
carry out the rule of anchorites, may be more fully instructed,
according as the nature of the place and the character of their
condition may require. And to this your previous efforts and labours
have especially contributed this, that, as they are already prepared and
practiced in these exercises, they can more readily receive the precepts
and institutes of the Elders, and receiving into their cells the authors
of the Conferences together with the actual volumes of the Conferences
and talking with them after a fashion by daily questions and answers,
they may not be left to their own resources to find that way which is
difficult and almost unknown in this country, but full of danger even
there where well-worn paths and numberless instances of those who have
gone before are not wanting, but may rather learn to follow the rule of
the anchorite’s life taught by their examples, whom ancient tradition
and industry and long experience have thoroughly instructed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[477:2070](2110952.htm#fr_2069) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p2"></span> See the introduction p. 189.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference XVIII. Conference of Abbot Piamun. On the Three Sorts
of Monks.](2110953)
