[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110081)  [Next](2110083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>You</span> have assembled, my pious and
eloquent friends, to hear me; but, as I presume, you have brought to the
task religious rather than learned ears; for you are to listen to me
simply as a witness to the faith, and not as speaking with the fluency
of an orator. Now, I shall not repeat the things which were spoken
yesterday: those who did not hear them can become acquainted with them
by means of the written records. Postumianus expects something new,
intending to make known what he hears to the East, that it may not, when
Martin is brought into comparison, esteem itself above the West. And
first, my mind inclines to set forth an incident respecting which
Refrigerius has just whispered in my ear: the affair took place in the
city of Carnutes. A certain father of a family ventured to bring to
Martin his daughter of twelve years old, who had been dumb from her
birth, begging that the blessed man would loose, by his pious merits,
her tongue, which was thus tied. He, giving way to the bishops
Valentinus and Victricius, who then happened to be by his <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-Page_47"></span>side,
declared that he was unequal to so great an undertaking, but that
nothing was impossible to them, as if holier than himself. But they,
adding their pious entreaties, with suppliant voices, to those of the
father, begged Martin to accomplish what was hoped for. He made no
further delay,—being admirable in both respects, in the display, first
of all, of humility, and then in not putting off a pious duty,—but
orders the crowd of people standing round to be removed; and while the
bishops only, and the father of the girl, were present, he prostrates
himself in prayer, after his usual fashion. He then blesses a little
oil, while he utters the formula of exorcism; and holding the tongue of
the girl with his fingers, he thus pours the consecrated liquid into her
mouth. Nor did the result of the power thus exerted disappoint the holy
man. He asks her the name of her father, and she instantly replied. The
father cries out, embracing the knees of Martin, with a mixture of joy
and tears; and while all around are amazed, he confesses that then for
the first time he listened to the voice of his daughter. And that this
may not appear incredible to any one, let Evagrius, who is here, furnish
you with a testimony of its truth; for the thing took place in his very
presence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](2110083)
