[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110957)  [Next](2110959) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p1"></span>Of the founders who originated the order
of Cœnobites.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p2.1"></span>And</span> so the system of Cœnobites took
its rise in the days of the preaching of the Apostles. For such was all
that multitude of believers in Jerusalem, which is thus described in the
Acts of the Apostles: “But the multitude of believers was of one heart
and one soul, neither said any of them that any of the things which he
possessed was his own, but they had all things common. They sold their
possessions and property and divided them to all, as any man had need.”
And again: “For neither was there any among them that lacked; for as
many as possessed fields or houses, sold them and brought the price of
the things that they sold and laid them before the feet of the Apostles:
and distribution was made to every man as he had need.” <span
id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074) The whole Church, I say, was then
such as now are those few who can be found with difficulty in Cœnobia.
But when at the death of the Apostles the multitude of believers began
to wax cold, and especially that multitude which had come to the faith
of Christ from diverse foreign nations, from whom the Apostles out of
consideration for the infancy of their faith and their ingrained heathen
habits, required nothing more than that they should “abstain <span
id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span id="iv.vi.ii.v-Page_481"></span>from
things sacrificed to idols and from fornication, and from things
strangled, and from blood,” <span id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075)
and so that liberty which was conceded to the Gentiles because of the
weakness of their newly-born faith, had by degrees begun to mar the
perfection of that Church which existed at Jerusalem, and the fervour of
that early faith cooled down owing to the daily increasing number both
of natives and foreigners, and not only those who had accepted the faith
of Christ, but even those who were the leaders of the Church relaxed
somewhat of that strictness. For some fancying that what they saw
permitted to the Gentiles because of their weakness, was also allowable
for themselves, thought that they would suffer no loss if they followed
the faith and confession of Christ keeping their property and
possessions. But those who still maintained the fervour of the apostles,
mindful of that former perfection left their cities and intercourse with
those who thought that carelessness and a laxer life was permissible to
themselves and the Church of God, and began to live in rural and more
sequestered spots, and there, in private and on their own account, to
practise those things which they had learnt to have been ordered by the
apostles throughout the whole body of the Church in general: and so that
whole system of which we have spoken grew up from those disciples who
had separated themselves from the evil that was spreading. And these, as
by degrees time went on, were separated from the great mass of believers
and because they abstained from marriage and cut themselves off from
intercourse with their kinsmen and the life of this world, were termed
monks or solitaries from the strictness of their lonely and solitary
life. Whence it followed that from their common life they were called
Cœnobites and their cells and lodgings Cœnobia. That then alone was the
earliest kind of monks, which is first not only in time but also in
grace, and which continued unbroken for a very long period up to the
time of Abbot Paul and Antony; and even to this day we see its traces
remaining in strict cœnobia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[480:2075](2110958.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p3"></span> [Acts
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032), [Acts
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#045), [Acts
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[481:2076](2110958.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p4"></span> [Acts xv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029)<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of the system of the Anchorites and its
beginning.](2110959)
