[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110383)  [Next](2110385) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.v.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xi-p1"></span>That bodily lusts are not extinguished
except by the entire rooting out of vice.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.v.xi-p2.1"></span>For</span> it is an impossibility that the
fiery motions of the body can be extinguished, before the incentives of
the other chief vices are utterly rooted out: concerning which we will
speak in their proper place, if God permits, separately, in different
books.  But now we have to deal with Gluttony, that is the desire of the
palate, against which our first battle is. He then will never be able to
check the motions of a burning lust, who cannot restrain the desires of
the appetite. The chastity of the inner man is shown by the perfection
of this virtue. For you will never feel sure that he can strive against
the opposition of a stronger enemy, whom you have seen overcome by
weaker ones in a higher conflict. For of all virtues the nature is but
one and the same, although they appear to be divided into many different
kinds and names: just as there is but one substance of gold, although it
may seem to be distributed through many different kinds of jewelry
according to the skill of the goldsmith. And so he is proved to possess
no virtue perfectly, who is known to have broken down in some part of
them. For how can we believe that that man has extinguished the burning
heats of concupiscence (which are kindled not only by bodily incitement
but by vice of the mind), who could not assuage the sharp stings of
anger which break out from intemperance of heart alone? Or how can we
think that he has repressed the wanton desires of the flesh and spirit,
who has not been able to conquer the simple fault of pride? Or how can
we believe that one has trampled under foot a wantonness which is
ingrained in the flesh, who has not been able to disown the love of
money, which is something external and outside our own substance? In
what way will he triumph in the war of flesh and spirit, who has not
been man enough to cure the disease of dejection? However great a city
may be protected by the height of its walls and the strength of its
closed gates, yet it is laid waste by the giving up of one postern
however small. For what difference does it make whether a dangerous foe
makes his way into the heart of the city over high walls, and through
the wide spaces of the gate, or through secret and narrow passages?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. That in our spiritual contest we ought to draw an
example from the carnal contests.](2110385)
