[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110157)  [Next](2110159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxiv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxiv-p1.1"></span>After</span> the death of Joshua, the
people acted without a leader. But a necessity of making war with the
Canaanites having arisen, Judah was appointed as general in the war.
Under his guidance, matters were successfully conducted: there was the
greatest tranquillity both at home and abroad: the people ruled over the
nations which had either been subdued or received under terms of
surrender. Then, as almost always happens in a time of prosperity,
becoming unmindful of morals and discipline, they began to contract
marriages from among the conquered, and by and by to adopt foreign
customs, yea, even in a sacrilegious manner to offer sacrifice to idols:
 so pernicious is all alliance with foreigners. God, foreseeing these
things long before, had, by a wholesome precept enjoined upon the
Hebrews to give over the conquered nations to utter destruction. But the
people, through lust for power, preferred (to their own ruin) to rule
over those who were conquered. Accordingly, when, forsaking God, they
worshiped idols, they were deprived of the divine assistance, and, being
vanquished and subdued by the king of Mesopotamia, they paid the penalty
of eight years’ captivity, until, with Gothoniel as their leader, they
were restored to liberty, and enjoyed independence for fifty years. Then
again, corrupted by the evil effect of a lengthened peace, they began to
sacrifice to idols. And speedily did retribution fall upon them thus
sinning. Conquered by Eglon, king of the Moabites, they served him
eighteen years, until, by a divine impulse, Aod slew the enemies’ king
by a stratagem, and, gathering together a hasty army, restored them to
liberty by force of arms. The same man ruled the Hebrews in peace for
forty years. To him Semigar succeeded, and he, engaging in battle with
the Philistines, <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) secured a
decisive victory. But again, the king of the Canaanites, Jabin by name,
subdued the Hebrews who were once more serving idols, and exercised over
them a grievous tyranny for twenty years, until Deborah, a woman,
restored them to their former condition. They had to such a degree lost
confidence in their generals, that they were now protected by means of a
woman. But it is worthy of notice, that this form of deliverance was
arranged beforehand, as a type of the Church, by whose aid captivity to
the devil is escaped. The Hebrews were forty years under this leader or
judge. And being again delivered over to the Midianites for their sins,
they were kept under hard rule; and, being afflicted by the evils of
slavery, they implored the divine help. Thus always when in prosperity
they were unmindful of the kindnesses of heaven, and prayed to idols;
but in adversity they cried to God. Wherefore, as often as I reflect
that those people who lay under so many obligations to the goodness of
God, being chastised with so many disasters when they sinned, and
experiencing both the mercy and the severity of God, yet were by no
means rendered better, and that, though they always obtained pardon for
their transgressions, yet they as constantly sinned again after being
pardoned, it can appear nothing wonderful that Christ when he came was
not received by them, since already, from the beginning, they were found
so often rebelling against the Lord. It is, in fact, far more wonderful
that the clemency of God never failed them when they sinned, if only
they called upon his name. <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_288"></span>[82:289](2110158.htm#fr_288) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxiv-p2"></span> “Allophylos”: lit. strangers.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[82:290](2110158.htm#fr_289) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxiv-p3"></span> Many of the proper names occurring in
this and other chapters are very different in form from those with which
we are familiar in the O.T. But they have generally been given as they
stand in the text of our author, and they can easily be identified by
any readers who think it worth while to do so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV.](2110159)
