[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110205)  [Next](2110207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xvii"></span> <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xvii-Page_106"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Against</span> him Alexander of Macedon
engaged in war. And on his being conquered, the sovereign power was
taken from the Persians, after having lasted, from the time of its
establishment by Cyrus, two hundred and fifty years. Alexander, the
conqueror of almost all nations, is said to have visited the temple at
Jerusalem, and to have conveyed gifts into it; and he proclaimed
throughout the whole territory which he had reduced under his sway that
it should be free to the Jews living in it to return to their own
country. At the end of the twelfth year of his reign, and seven years
after he had conquered Darius, he died at Babylon. His friends who,
along with him, had carried on those very important wars, divided his
empire among themselves. For some time they administered the charges
they had undertaken without making use of the name of king, while a
certain Arridæus Philippus, the brother of Alexander, reigned, to whom,
being of a very weak character, the sovereignty was nominally and in
appearance given, but the real power was in the hands of those who had
divided among themselves the army and the provinces. And indeed this
state of things did not long continue, but all preferred that they
should be called by the name of kings. In Syria Seleucus was the first
king after Alexander, Persia and Babylon being also subject to his sway.
At that time the Jews paid an annual tribute of three hundred talents of
silver to the king; but they were governed not by foreign magistrates
but by their own priests. And they lived according to the fashions of
their ancestors until very many of them again corrupted by a long peace,
began to mingle all things with seditions, and to create disturbances,
while they aimed at the high-priesthood under the influence of lust,
avarice, and the desire of power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.](2110207)
