[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110226)  [Next](2110228) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxviii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>But</span> then the Arians, seeing
that stratagem did not succeed, determined to proceed by force. For it
was easy for those to attempt and carry out anything who were supported
by the favor of the monarch, whom they had thoroughly won over to
themselves by wicked flatteries. Moreover, they were by the consent of
all unconquerable; for almost all the bishops of the two Pannonias, and
many of the Eastern bishops, and those throughout all Asia, had joined
in their unfaithfulness. But the chief men in that evil company were
Ursatius of Singidunum, Valens of Mursa, Theodorus of Heraclia,
Stephanus of Antioch, Acatius of Cæsarea, Menofantus of Ephesus,
Georgius of Laodicia, and Narcissus of Neronopolis. These had got
possession of the palace to such an extent that the emperor did nothing
without their concurrence. He was indeed at the beck of all of them, but
was especially under the influence of Valens. For at that time, when a
battle was fought at Mursa against Magnentius, Constantius had not the
courage to go down to witness for himself the conflict, but took up his
abode in a church of the martyrs which stood outside the town, Valens
who was then the bishop of the place being with him to keep up his
courage. But Valens had cunningly arranged, through means of his agents,
that he should be the first to be made acquainted with the result of the
battle. He did this either to gain the favor of the king, if he should
be the first to convey to him good news, or with a view to saving his
own life, since he would obtain time for flight, should the issue prove
unfortunate. Accordingly, the few persons who were with the king being
in a state of alarm, and the emperor himself being a prey to anxiety,
Valens was the first to announce to them the flight of the enemy. When
Constantius requested that the person who had brought the news should be
introduced to his presence, Valens, to increase the reverence felt for
himself, said that an angel was the messenger who had come to him. The
emperor, who was easy of belief, was accustomed afterwards openly to
declare that he had won the victory through the merits of Valens, and
not by the valor of his army.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX.](2110228)
