[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110043)  [Next](2110045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.vii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="ii.iv.i.vii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.vii-p1.1"></span>For</span> while many things in his books
which were extracted from them by the bishops were read to show that
they were written in opposition to the Catholic faith, that passage
especially excited bad feeling against him, in which we read in his
published works that the Lord Jesus, as he had come in the flesh for the
redemption of mankind, and suffering upon the cross for the salvation of
man, had tasted death to procure eternal life for the human race, so he
was, by the same course of suffering, even to render the devil a
partaker of redemption. He maintained this on the ground that such a
thing would be in harmony with his goodness and beneficence, inasmuch as
he who had restored fallen and ruined man, would thus also set free an
angel who had previously fallen. When these and other things of a like
nature were brought forward by the bishops, a tumult arose owing to the
zeal of the different parties; and when this could not be quelled by the
authority of the priests, the governor of the city was called upon to
regulate the discipline of the church by a perverse precedent; and
through the terror which he inspired, the brethren were dispersed, while
the monks took to flight in different directions; so that, on the
decrees being published, they were not permitted to find lasting
acceptance <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) in any place. This fact
influenced me greatly, that Hieronymus, a man truly Catholic and most
skillful in the holy law, was thought at first to have been a follower
of Origen, yet now, above most others, went the length of condemning the
whole of his writings. Assuredly, I am not inclined to judge rashly in
regard to any one; but even the most learned men were said to hold
different opinions in this controversy. However, whether that opinion of
Origen was simply an error, as I think, or whether it was a heresy, as
is generally supposed, it not only could not be suppressed by multitudes
of censures on the part of the priests, but it never could have spread
itself so far and wide, had it not gathered strength from their
contentions. Accordingly, when I came to Alexandria, I found that city
in a ferment from disturbances connected with the matter in question.
The Bishop, indeed, of that place received me very kindly, and in a
better spirit than I expected, and even endeavored to retain me with
him. But I was not at all inclined to settle there, where a recent
outbreak of ill-will had resulted in a destruction of the brethren. For,
although perhaps it may seem that they ought to have obeyed the bishops,
yet such a multitude of persons, all living in an open confession of
Christ, ought not for that reason to have been persecuted, especially by
bishops.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_93"></span>[27:94](2110044.htm#fr_93) <span
id="ii.iv.i.vii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.vii-p2"></span> “in nulla consistere sede sinerentur.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](2110045)
