[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110980)  [Next](2110982) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xi-p1"></span>A question how to cure those who have
hastily left the congregation of the Cœnobium.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>Germanus</span>: By what treatment can any
help be given to us or to others who are thus weak and only up to this;
who had received but little instruction in the system of the Cœnobium
when we began to aspire to dwell in solitude before we had got rid of
our faults; or by what means shall we be able to acquire the constancy
of an imperturbable mind, and immovable steadfastness of patience; we
who all too soon gave up the common life in the Cœnobium, and forsook
the schools and training ground for these exercises, in which our
principles ought first to have been thoroughly schooled and perfected?
How then can we now while we are living alone gain perfection in
long-suffering and patience; or how can conscience, that searcher out of
inward motives, discover whether these virtues exist in us or are
wanting, so that because we are severed from intercourse with men, and
not irritated by any of their provocations, we may not be deceived by
false notions, and fancy that we have gained that imperturbable peace of
mind?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. The answer telling how a solitary can discover his
faults.](2110982)
