[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110384)  [Next](2110386) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.v.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xii-p1"></span>That in our spiritual contest we ought
to draw an example from the carnal contests.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xii-p2"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.v.xii-p2.1"></span>One</span> who strives in the games is not
crowned unless he has contended lawfully.” <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) One who wants to extinguish the
natural desires of the flesh, should first hasten to overcome those
vices whose seat is outside our nature. For if we desire to make trial
of the force of the Apostle’s saying, we ought first to learn what are
the laws and what the discipline of the world’s contest, so that finally
by a comparison with these, we may be able to know what the blessed
Apostle meant to teach to us who are striving in a spiritual contest by
this illustration. For in these conflicts, which, as the same Apostle
says, hold out “a corruptible crown” <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) to the victors, this rule is kept,
that he who aims at preparing himself for the crown of glory, which is
embellished with the privilege of exemption, and who is anxious to enter
the highest struggle in the <span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span
id="iv.iii.v.xii-Page_238"></span>contest, should first in the Olympic
and Pythian games give evidence of his abilities as a youth, and his
strength in its first beginnings; since in these the younger men who
want to practise this training are tested as to whether they deserve or
ought to be admitted to it, by the judgment both of the president of the
games and of the whole multitude. And when any one has been carefully
tested, and has first been proved to be stained by no infamy of life,
and then has been adjudged not ignoble through the yoke of slavery, and
for this reason unworthy to be admitted to this training and to the
company of those who practise it, and when thirdly he produces
sufficient evidence of his ability and prowess and by striving with the
younger men and his own compeers has shown both his skill and valour as
a youth, and going forward from the contests of boys has been by the
scrutiny of the president permitted to mix with full-grown men and those
of approved experience, and has not only shown himself their equal in
valour by constant striving with them, but has also many a time carried
off the prize of victory among them, then at last he is allowed to
approach the most illustrious conflict of the games, permission to
contend in which is granted to none but victors and those who are decked
with many crowns and prizes. If we understand this illustration from a
carnal contest, we ought by a comparison with it to know what is the
system and method of our spiritual conflict as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_833"></span>[237:834](2110385.htm#fr_833) <span
id="iv.iii.v.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v.xii-p3"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.v.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[237:835](2110385.htm#fr_834) <span
id="iv.iii.v.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v.xii-p4"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.v.xii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. That we cannot enter the battle of the inner man
unless we have been set free from the vice of gluttony.](2110386)
