[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110422)  [Next](2110424) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p1"></span>Of the source from which
covetousness springs, and of the evils of which it is itself the mother.

<span id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p2.1"></span>When</span> then this vice has got hold
of the slack and lukewarm soul of some monk, it begins by tempting him
in regard of a small sum of money, giving him excellent and almost
reasonable excuses why he ought to retain some money for himself. For he
complains that what is provided in the monastery is not sufficient, and
can scarcely be endured by a sound and sturdy body. What is he to do if
ill health comes on, and he has no special store of his own to support
him in his weakness? He says that the allowance of the monastery is but
meagre, and that there is the greatest carelessness about the sick: and
if he has not something of his own so that he can look after the wants
of his body, he will perish miserably. The dress which is allowed him is
insufficient, unless he has provided something with which to procure
another. Lastly, he says that he cannot possibly remain for long in the
same place and monastery, and that unless he has secured the money for
his journey, and the cost of his removal over the sea, he cannot move
when he wants to, and, detained by the compulsion of want, will
henceforth drag out a wretched and wearisome existence without making
the slightest advance: that he cannot without indignity be supported by
another’s substance, as a pauper and one in want. And so when he has
bamboozled himself with such thoughts as these, he racks his brains to
think how he can acquire at least one penny. Then he anxiously searches
for some special work which he can do without the Abbot knowing anything
about it. And selling it secretly, and so securing the coveted coin, he
torments himself worse and worse in thinking how he can double it:
puzzled as to where to deposit it, or to whom to intrust it. Then he is
oppressed with a still weightier care as to what to buy with it, or by
what transaction he can double it. And when this has turned out as he
wished, a still more greedy craving for gold springs up, and is more and
more keenly excited, as his store of money grows larger and larger. For
with the increase of wealth the mania of covetousness increases. Then
next he has forebodings of a long life, and an enfeebled old age, and
infirmities of all sorts, and long drawn out, which will be
insupportable in old age, unless a large store of money has been laid by
in youth. And so the wretched soul is agitated, and held fast, as it
were, in a serpent’s toils, while it endeavours to add to that heap
which it has unlawfully secured, by still more unlawful care, and itself
gives birth to plagues which inflame it more sorely, and being entirely
absorbed in the quest of gain, pays attention to nothing but how to get
money with which to fly <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) as
quickly as possible from the discipline of the monastery, never keeping
faith where there is a gleam of hope of money to be got. For this it
shrinks not from the crime of lying, perjury, and theft, of breaking a
promise, of giving way to injurious bursts of passion. If the man has
dropped away at all from the hope of gain, he has no scruples about
transgressing the bounds of humility, and through it all gold and the
love of gain become to him his god, as the belly does to others.
Wherefore the blessed Apostle, looking out on the deadly poison of this
pest, not only says that it is a root of all kinds of evil, but also
calls it the worship of idols, saying “And covetousness (which in Greek
is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p3.1"></span>φιλαργυρία</span> ) which is the worship
of idols.” <span id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) You see then to what
a downfall this madness step by step leads, so that by the voice of the
Apostle it is actually declared to be the worship of idols and false
gods, because passing over the image and likeness of God (which one who
serves God with devotion ought to preserve undefiled in himself), it
chooses to love and care for images stamped on gold instead of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_879"></span>[250:880](2110423.htm#fr_879) <span
id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p3"></span> The same danger is strongly spoken
of by S. Basil in the “Monastic Constitutions” c. xxxiv., a passage
which should be compared with the one above.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[250:881](2110423.htm#fr_880) <span
id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p4"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.vii.vii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. How covetousness is a hindrance to all
virtues.](2110424)
