[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110280)  [Next](2110282) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.i.i-p1"></span>The Life of Cassian.

<span id="iv.i.i-p2"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.i-p2.1"></span>Cassianus</span> natione Scytha” is the
description given by Gennadius <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529)
of the writer whose works are now for the first time translated into
English. In spite, however, of the precision of this statement,
considerable doubt hangs over Cassian’s nationality, and it is hard to
believe that he was in reality a Scythian. Not only is his language and
style free from all trace of barbarism, but as a boy he certainly
received a liberal education; for in his Conferences he laments that the
exertions of his tutor and his own attention to continual study had so
weakened him that his mind was so filled with songs of the poets that
even at the hour of prayer it was thinking of those trifling fables and
stories of battles with which it had from earliest infancy been stored;
“and,” he adds, “when singing Psalms or asking forgiveness of sins, some
wanton recollection of the poems intrudes itself or the image of heroes
fighting presents itself before the eyes; and an imagination of such
phantoms is always haunting me.” <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530)
Further evidence of the character of his education is also supplied by
the fact that in his work on the Incarnation against Nestorius he
manifests an acquaintance not only with the works of earlier Christian
Fathers, but also with those of such writers as Cicero and
Persius. <span id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531)

<span id="iv.i.i-p6"></span>These considerations are sufficient to make
us hesitate before accepting the statement of Gennadius in what would at
first sight be its natural meaning; although from the fact of his
connection with Marseilles, where so much of Cassian’s life was spent,
as well as the early date at which he wrote (<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.i-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 495), it is dangerous to reject his
authority altogether. It is, however, possible that the term “Scytha” is
not really intended to denote a Scythian, but to refer to the desert of
Scete, or Scitis, <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532) in Egypt,
where Cassian passed many years of his life, and with which his fame was
closely associated; and, therefore, without going to the length of
rejecting the authority of Gennadius altogether, we are free to look for
some other country as the birthplace of our author. But little light is
thrown on this subject by the statements of other writers. Photius <span
id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) (<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.i-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 800) calls him <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p8.2"></span>῾</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p8.3"></span>Ρωμαῖος</span>, which need
mean no more than born within the Roman Empire; while Honorius of Autun
(<span class="sc"><span id="iv.i.i-p8.4"></span>a.d.</span> 1130) speaks
of him as Afer. The last-mentioned writer is, however, of too late a
date to be of any authority; and it is just possible that the term
“Afer,” like the “Scytha” of Gennadius, may be owing to his lengthy
residence in Egypt.  <span id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) In the
writings of Cassian himself there is nothing to enable us to identify
the country of his birth with certainty; but, in describing the
situation of his ancestral home, he speaks of the delightful
pleasantness of the neighbourhood, and the recesses of the woods, which
would not only delight the heart of a monk but would also furnish him
with a plentiful supply of food; <span id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535)
while in a later passage he says that in his own country it was
impossible to find any one who had adopted the monastic life. <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) From these notices, compared with a
passage in the Preface to the Institutes, where <span id="page_184">p.
184</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_184"></span>the diocese of Apta Julia
in Gallia Narbonensis is spoken of as still without monasteries, some
ground is given for the conjecture that Cassian was really a native of
Gaul, whither he returned in mature age after his wanderings were ended,
and where most of his friends of whom we have any knowledge were
settled. On the whole, then, it appears to the present writer to be the
most probable view that Cassian was of Western origin, and, perhaps, a
native of Provence, although it must be freely acknowledged that it is
impossible to speak with certainty on this subject. <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537)

<span id="iv.i.i-p13"></span>Once more: not only is there this doubt
about his nationality, but questions have also been raised concerning
his original name. Gennadius and Cassiodorus <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) speak of him simply as Cassianus. In
his own writings he represents himself as addressed by the monks in
Egypt more than once by the name of John. <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) Prosper of Aquitaine (his contemporary
and antagonist) combines both names, and speaks of him as “Joannes
cognomento Cassianus.” <span id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540) In the
titles of the majority of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.i-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> of his own writing he is merely
“Cassianus,” though in one case the work is entitled “Beatissimi Joannis
qui et Cassiani.” <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541) Are we, then,
with the writer of the last-mentioned <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.i-p17.1"></span>ms.</span>, to suppose that the names John and
Cassian are alternatives; or, with Prosper, that John was his nomen and
Cassianus his cognomen, or, more strictly, agnomen? The former view is,
perhaps, the more probable, as he may well have taken the name of John
at his baptism or at his admission to the monastic life. The theory
which has sometimes been advocated—that he received it at his ordination
by S. John Chrysostom—falls to the ground when we notice that he
represents himself as called John during his residence in Egypt, several
years before his ordination and intercourse with S. Chrysostom.

<span id="iv.i.i-p18"></span>To pass now from the question of his name
and nationality to the narrative of Cassian’s life. Various
considerations point to the date of his birth as about the year 360. Of
his family we know nothing, except that in one passage of his writings
he incidentally makes mention of a sister; <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) while the language which he uses of
his parents would imply that they were well-to-do and pious. <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) As we have already seen, he received a
liberal education as a boy, but while still young forsook the world, and
was received, together with his friend Germanus, into a monastery at
Bethlehem, <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) where he spent
several years and became thoroughly familiar with the customs and
traditions of the monasteries of Syria. Eager, however, to make further
progress in the perfect life, the two friends finally determined to
visit Egypt, <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) where, as it was
the country in which the monastic life originated, the most famous
monasteries existed, and the most illustrious Anchorites were to be
found. Permission to undertake the journey was sought and obtained from
their superiors, a pledge being required of a speedy return when the
object of their visit was gained. <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) Sailing from some port of Syria,
perhaps Joppa, the friends arrived at Thennesus, a town at the mouth of
the Tanitic branch of the Nile, near Lake Menzaleh. Here they fell in
with a celebrated Anchorite named Archebius, bishop of the neighbouring
town of Panephysis, who had come to Thennesus on business connected with
the election of a bishop. He, on hearing the object of their visit to
Egypt, at once offered them an introduction to some celebrated
Anchorites in his own neighbourhood. The offer was gladly accepted, and
under his guidance they made their way through a dreary district of salt
marshes, many of the villages being in ruins and deserted by their
inhabitants owing to the floods which had inundated the country and
turned the rising grounds into islands, “and thus afforded the desired
solitudes to the holy Anchorites, among whom three old men—Chæremon,
Nesteros, and Joseph—were famed as the Anchorites of the longest
standing.” <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) Archebius brought
them first to Chæremon, who had already passed his hundredth year, and
was so far bent with age and constant prayer that he could no longer
walk upright, but crawled upon his hands and knees. The saint’s
hesitation at allowing himself to be thus interviewed by strangers was
soon overcome, and he finally <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_185"></span>gratified their curiosity by delivering
three discourses, on the subjects of Perfection, Chastity, and the
Protection of God. <span id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) From the cell
of Chæremon Cassian and his companion proceeded to that of Abbot
Nesteros, who honoured them with two discourses, on Spiritual Knowledge,
and Divine Gifts; <span id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) and from him
they repaired to Joseph, who belonged to a noble family, and before his
renunciation of the world had been “primarius” of his native city,
Thmuis. He was naturally better educated than the others, and was able
to converse with them in Greek instead of being obliged to have recourse
to the help of an interpreter, as had been the case with Chæremon and
Nesteros. <span id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) His first question
referred to the relationship between Cassian and Germanus: were they
brothers? And their reply—that the brotherhood was spiritual and not
carnal—furnished the old man with a text for his first discourse, which
was on Friendship, and which was followed up on the next day by one on
the Obligation of Promises, <span id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551)
called forth by the perplexity in which the travellers found themselves
owing to their promise to return to Bethlehem,—a promise which they were
loth to break, and which yet they could not fulfil without losing a
grand opportunity of making progress in the spiritual life. In their
difficulty they consulted Joseph; and, fortified by his authority and
advice, they determined to break the letter of their promise and make a
longer stay in Egypt, where they accordingly remained for seven years in
spite of their brethren at Bethlehem, whose displeasure at their
conduct, Cassian tells us, was not removed by their frequent letters
home. <span id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552)

<span id="iv.i.i-p30"></span>It was while Cassian and his
fellow-traveller were still in the neighbourhood of Panephysis that
these energetic precursors of the modern “interviewers” paid a visit to
Abbot Pinufius, a priest who presided over a large monastery. This man
was an old friend of theirs, whose acquaintance they had previously made
at Bethlehem, whither (after an ineffectual attempt to conceal himself
in a monastery in the island of Tabenna) he had fled in order to escape
the responsibilities of his office. There he had been received as a
novice, and had been assigned by the abbot as an inmate of Cassian’s
cell, until he was recognized by a visitor from Egypt and brought back
in triumph to his own monastery. <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553)
To him, therefore, Cassian and Germanus made their way; and by him they
were warmly welcomed; the old man repaying their former hospitality by
giving them quarters in his own cell. While staying in this monastery
they were so fortunate as to be present at the admission of a novice,
and heard the charge which Pinufius made to the new-comer on the
occasion; <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554) and afterwards the
abbot favoured them with a discourse “on the end of penitence and the
marks of satisfaction.” <span id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) After
this, resisting his pressing invitation to remain with him in the
monastery, they proceeded once more on their travels, and, crossing the
river, came to Diolcos, a town hard by the Sebennytic mouth of the Nile.
Here was a barren tract of land between the river and the sea, rendered
unfit for cultivation by the saltness of the soil and the dryness of the
sand. It was, therefore, eagerly seized upon by the monks, who
congregated here in great numbers in spite of the absence of water; the
river from which it had to be fetched being some three miles
distant. <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) In this neighbourhood
they made the acquaintance of Abbot Piamun, a most celebrated Anchorite,
who explained to them with great care the characteristics of the three
kinds of monks; viz., the Cœnobites, the Anchorites, and the
Sarabaites. <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) This discourse had
the effect of exciting their desire more keenly than ever for the
Anchorites’ life in preference to that of the Cœnobite,—a desire which
was afterwards confirmed by what they saw and heard in the desert of
Scete. They next visited a large monastery in the same neighbourhood,
which was governed by the Abbot Paul, and which ordinarily accommodated
two hundred monks, but was at that moment filled with a much larger
number, who had come from the surrounding monasteries to celebrate the
“depositio” of the late abbot. <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558)
Here they met a certain Abbot John, whose humility had led him to give
up the life of an Anchorite for that of a Cœnobite, in order that he
might have the opportunity of practising the virtues of obedience and
subjection, which seemed out of the reach of the solitary. He was
accordingly well qualified to speak of the subject which he selected for
his discourse; viz., the aims of the Anchorite and Cœnobite life. <span
id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) Another well-known abbot, whose
acquaintance they now made, was Theonas, who, when quite a young man,
had been married by his parents, and later on, on failing to obtain the
consent of his wife to a separation, in <span id="page_186">p.
186</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_186"></span>order that they might
devote themselves to the monastic life, had deserted her and fled away
into a monastery, where after a time he had been promoted to the office
of almoner. From him they heard a discourse on the relaxation of the
fast during Eastertide and Pentecost, <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) and, later on, one concerning
Nocturnal Illusions, <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) and another
on Sinlessness. <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) By these various
discourses the two friends were rendered more desirous than ever of
adopting the Anchorite life, and less inclined than before to return to
the subjection of the monastery at Bethlehem. A far better course seemed
to them to return to their own home, probably (as we have seen) in Gaul,
where they would be free to practice what austerities they pleased
without let or hindrance. <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563)  In
their perplexity they consulted Abbot Abraham, who threw cold water on
their plan in a discourse on Mortification, <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) which was entirely successful in
persuading them to relinquish their half-formed intention. They,
therefore, remained in Egypt for some years longer; and it is to the
time of their stay in the neighbourhood of Diolcos that their
acquaintance with Abbot Archebius must be assigned. This man, so Cassian
tells us, <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) having discovered
their desire to make some stay in the place, offered them the use of his
cell, pretending that he was about to go off on a journey. They gladly
accepted his offer. He went away for a few days, collected materials,
and then returned and proceeded to build a new cell for himself. Shortly
afterwards some more brethren came. He at once gave up to them his newly
built cell, and once more set to work to build another for himself.

<span id="iv.i.i-p44"></span>It is difficult to determine whether a stay
in the desert of Scete was comprised in the seven years which the two
friends now spent in Egypt, or whether they visited it for the first
time during their second tour, after their return from Bethlehem. On the
one hand, the language used in Conference XVIII. cc. i. and xvi. would
almost suggest that they made their way into this remote district during
their first sojourn in Egypt; and, on the other hand, that employed in
Conference I. c. i. might imply a distinct journey to Egypt for the sake
of visiting this region: and in XVII. xxx. Cassian distinctly asserts
that they *did* visit Scete after their return to Bethlehem in
fulfilment of their promise. On the whole, it appears the more natural
view to suppose that their first tour was not extended beyond the Delta,
more distant expeditions being reserved for a future occasion. Adopting,
then, this view, we follow the travellers, after a seven years’ absence,
back to the monastery at Bethlehem, where they managed to pacify the
irate brethren, and, strange to say, obtained leave to return to Egypt a
second time. <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) On this occasion
they penetrated farther into the country than they had previously done.
The region which they now visited was the desert of Scete, or Scitis;
that is, the southern part of the famous Nitrian Valley, a name which is
well known to all students from the rich treasure of Syrian <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i.i-p45.1"></span>mss.</span> brought home from
thence by the Hon. Robert Curzon and Archdeacon Tattam now more than
forty years ago. The district lies “to the northwest of Cairo, three
days’ journey in the Libyan desert,” <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) and gains its name of Nitria from the
salt lakes which still furnish abundance of nitre, which has been worked
for fully two thousand years. The valley has some claims to be
considered the original home of monasticism. Some have thought that a
colony of Therapeutæ was settled here in the earliest days; and hither
S. Frontonius is said to have retired with seventy brethren, to lead the
life of ascetics, about the middle of the second century. <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) Less doubtful is the fact that S.
Ammon, a contemporary and friend of S. Antony, organized the monastic
system here in the fourth century, and “filled the same place in lower
Egypt as Antony in the Thebaid.” <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569)
Towards the close of the fourth century the valley was crowded with
cells and monasteries. Rufinus, who visited it about 372, mentions fifty
monasteries; <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) and the same number
is given by Sozomen, who says that “some were inhabited by monks who
live together in society, others by monks who have adopted a solitary
mode of existence.” <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) About twenty
years later Palladius passed a considerable time here, and reckons the
total number of monks and ascetics at five thousand. <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) They were also visited by S. Jerome
about the same time, and various details of the life of the monks are
given by him in his Epistles. <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573)
Some few monks still linger on to the present day to keep up the
traditions of nearly eighteen centuries. They were visited (among
others) by the Hon. Robert Curzon in 1833; and an interesting account of
them is given by him in his volume on “the monasteries of the
Levant:” <span id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) but the latest and best
account of them is that given by Mr. A. J. Butler, who <span
id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_187"></span>succeeded
in gaining permission to visit them in 1883, and has described his
journey in his excellent work on “the ancient Coptic Churches of
Egypt.” <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) Four monasteries alone
remain; known as Dair Abu Makâr, Dair Anba Bishôi, Dair es Sûrianî, and
Dair al Baramûs; but the ruins of many others may still be traced in the
desert tracts on the west side of the Natron lakes, and the valley of
the waterless river which at some very remote period is supposed to have
formed the bed of one of the branches of the Nile.” <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) The monasteries are all built on the
same general plan, so that, as Mr. Butler tells us, a description of one
will more or less accurately describe the others. Dair Abu Makâr (the
monastery of S. Macarius), the first which he visited, which lies
strictly within the desert of Scete, is spoken of as “a veritable
fortress, standing about one-hundred and fifty yards square, with blind,
lofty walls rising sheer out of the sand.” “Each monastery has also,
either detached or not, a large keep, or tower, standing four-square,
and approached only by a draw-bridge. The tower contains the library,
store-rooms for the vestments and sacred vessels, cellars for oil and
corn, and many strange holes and hiding-places of the monks in the last
resort, if their citadel should be taken by the enemy. Within the
monastery is enclosed one principal and one or two smaller court-yards,
around which stand the cells of the monks, domestic buildings, such as
the mill-room, the oven, the refectory, and the like, and the
churches.” <span id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) The outward aspect
can have changed but little since the fourth century. The buildings are
perhaps stronger and more adapted to resist hostile attacks, but the
general plan is probably identical with that adopted in the earliest
monasteries erected in this remote region. Such, then, was the district
to which Cassian and Germanus now made their way. Here they first sought
and obtained an interview with Abbot Moses, who had formerly dwelt in
the Thebaid near S. Antony, and was now living at a spot in the desert
of Scete known as Calamus, <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) and
was famous not only for practical goodness but also for contemplative
excellence. After much persuasion he yielded to their entreaties and
discoursed to them “on the goal or aim of a monk,” <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) and, on the following day, on
Discretion. <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) They next visited
Abbot Paphnutius, or “the Buffalo,” as he was named, from his love of
solitude. He was an aged priest who had lived for years the life of an
Anchorite, only leaving his cell for the purpose of going to the church,
which was five miles off, on Saturday and Sunday, and returning with a
large bucket of water on his shoulders to last him for the week. From
him they heard of the “three kinds of renunciation” necessary for a
monk. <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) They also visited his
disciple Daniel, who had been ordained priest through the
instrumentality of Paphnutius, but was so humble that he would never
perform priestly functions in the presence of his master. The subject of
his discourse in answer to the inquiry of the two friends was “the lust
of the flesh and the spirit.” <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582)
The next ascetic interviewed was Serapion, who spoke of the “eight
principal faults” to which a monk was exposed; viz., gluttony,
fornication, covetousness, anger, dejection, “accidie,” vain glory, and
pride. <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) After this they proceeded
on a journey of some eighty miles to Cellæ, a place that lay between the
desert of Scete (properly so called) and the Nitrian Valley, in order to
consult Abbot Theodore on a difficulty which the recent massacre of a
number of monks in Palestine by the Saracens had brought forcibly before
them; viz., why was it that men of such illustrious merits and so great
virtues should be slain by robbers, and why should God permit so great a
crime to be committed? The difficulty was solved by Abbot Theodore in a
discourse on “the death of the saints;” <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) and thus the journey was not taken in
vain. Two other celebrated monks were also visited by the friends, whose
discourses are recorded by Cassian: viz., Abbot Serenus, who spoke of
“Inconstancy of mind, and Spiritual wickedness,” <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) as well as of the nature of evil
spirits, in a Conference on “Principalities;” <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) and Abbot Isaac, who delivered two
discourses on the subject of Prayer. <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) A few days after the first of these
was delivered there arrived in the desert the “festal letters” of
Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, in which he denounced the heresy of
the Anthropomorphites. This caused a great commotion among the monks of
Scete; and Abbot Paphnutius, who presided over the monastery where
Cassian was staying, was the only one who would allow the letters to be
publicly read in the congregation. Finally, however, owing to the
conciliatory firmness of Paphnutius, the great body of the monks was won
over to a sounder and less materialistic view of the nature of the
Godhead than had hitherto been prevalent among them. <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588)

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_188"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p68"></span>These are all the details that can be
gathered from Cassian’s writings of his stay in Scete, further than
which he does not appear to have penetrated, as, when he speaks of the
Thebaid and the monasteries there, it is only from hearsay and not from
personal knowledge, although his original intention had certainly been
to visit this district among others. <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589)

<span id="iv.i.i-p70"></span>In considering the date of Cassian’s visit
to Egypt there are various indications to guide us. In Conference XVIII.
c. xiv., S. Athanasius is spoken of by Abbot Piamun as “of blessed
memory;” and the language used of the Emperor Valens in c. vii. is such
as to imply that he was already dead. The former died in 373, and the
latter in 378. Again, in Conference XXIV. c. xxvi. Abbot Abraham is made
to speak of John of Lycopolis as so famous that he was consulted by the
very lords of creation, who sought his advice, and entrusted to his
prayers and merits the crown of their empire and the fortunes of war.
These expressions evidently allude to John’s announcement to Theodosius
of his victory over Maxentius in 388, and his success against Eugenius
in 395. <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) If they stood alone, we
could scarcely rely on these indications of date with any great
confidence because the Conferences were not written till many years
later, and it is impossible to determine with certainty how far they
really represent the discourses actually spoken by the Egyptian Fathers,
or how far they are the ideal compositions of Cassian himself. But, as
we have seen, it is certain that Cassian was actually in Egypt at the
time of the Anthropomorphite controversy raised by the letters of
Theophilus in 399; and, as the other notices of events previously
mentioned coincide very fairly with this, we cannot be far wrong in
placing the two visits to Egypt between 380 and 400. About the
last-named date Cassian must have finally left the country; and we next
hear of him in Constantinople, where he was ordained deacon by S.
Chrysostom, <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) and, together with
his friend Germanus, put in charge of the treasury, the only part of the
Cathedral which escaped the flames in the terrible conflagration of 404.
Thus Cassian was a witness of all the troublous scenes which attended
the persecution of S. Chrysostom, whose side he warmly espoused in the
controversy which rent the East asunder. And when the Saint was
violently deposed and removed from Constantinople, the two
friends—Germanus, who was by this time raised to the priesthood, and
Cassian, who was still in deacon’s orders—were chosen as the bearers of
a letter to Pope Innocent I. from the clergy who adhered to Chrysostom,
detailing the scandalous scenes that had taken place, and the trials to
which they had been exposed. <span id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) Of
the length of Cassian’s stay in Rome we have no information, but it is
likely that it was of some considerable duration; and it may have been
at this time that he was ordained priest by Innocent. Possibly, also, it
was now that he made the acquaintance of one who was then quite young,
but was destined afterwards to become famous as Pope Leo the Great; for
some years afterwards (<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.i-p73.1"></span>a.d.</span> 430) it was at the request of Leo,
then Archdeacon of Rome, that Cassian wrote his work on the Incarnation
against Nestorius. Leaving Rome, Cassian is next found in Gaul, <span
id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) which (if we are right in the
supposition that it was his birthplace) he must have quitted when
scarcely more than a child. When he left it monasticism was a thing
almost if not quite unknown there, but during his absence in the East a
few monasteries had been founded in the district of the Loire by S.
Martin and S. Hilary of Poictiers. Ligugé was founded shortly after 360,
and Marmoutier rather later, after 371; and about the time of his return
similar institutions were beginning to spring up in Provence. In 410 S.
Honoratus founded the monastery which will ever be associated with his
name, in the island of Lérins, and, in the eloquent words of the
historian of the monks of the West, “opened the arms of his love to the
sons of all countries who desired to love Christ. A multitude of
disciples of all nations joined him. The West could no longer envy the
East; and shortly that retreat, destined in the intentions of its
founder to renew upon the coasts of Provence the austerities of the
Thebaid, became a celebrated school of theology and Christian
philosophy, a citadel inaccessible to the waves of barbarian invasion,
an asylum for literature and science, which had fled from Italy invaded
by the Goths;—in short, a nursery of bishops and saints, who were
destined to spread over the whole of Gaul the knowledge of the gospel
and the glory of Lérins.” <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594)

<span id="iv.i.i-p76"></span>It must have been about the same time—a
little earlier or a little later—that Cassian settled at Marseilles; and
there, “in the midst of those great forests which had supplied the <span
id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_189"></span>Phœnician
navy, which in the time of Cæsar reached as far as the sea-coast, and
the mysterious obscurity of which had so terrified the Roman soldiers
that the conqueror, to embolden them, had himself taken an axe and
struck down an old oak,” <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) two
monasteries were now established,—one for men, built it is said over the
tomb of S. Victor, a martyr in the persecution of Diocletian, <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) and the other for women. Cassian’s
long residence in the East and his intimate knowledge of the monastic
system in vogue in Egypt made him at once looked up to as an authority,
and practically as the head of the movement which was so rapidly taking
root in Provence; and, although his fame has been overshadowed by that
of the greatest of Western monks, S. Benedict of Nursia, yet his is
really the credit of being, not indeed the actual founder, but the first
organizer and systematizer, of Western monachism: and it is hoped that
the copious illustrations from the Benedictine rule given in the notes
to the first four books of the Institutes will serve to show how much
the founder of the greatest order in the West was really indebted to his
less-known predecessor. “He brought to bear upon the organization of
Gallic monasteries lessons learnt in the East. Although S. Martin and
others were before him, yet his life must be regarded as a new departure
for monasticism in the land. The religious communities of S. Martin and
S. Victricius in the centre of France were doubtless rudimentary and
half-developed in discipline when compared with that established by
Cassian at Marseilles, and with the many others which speedily arose
modelled upon his elaborate rules.” <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) The high estimation in which his work
was held throughout the Middle Ages is shown not only by the immense
number of <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i.i-p79.1"></span>mss.</span> of
the Institutes and Conferences which still remain scattered throughout
the libraries of Europe, but also by the recommendation of them by
Cassiodorus, and by S. Benedict himself, who enjoins that the
Conferences should be read daily by the monks of his order.

<span id="iv.i.i-p80"></span>At Marseilles, then, Cassian settled; and
here it was that he wrote his three great works,—the Institutes, the
Conferences, and On the Incarnation against Nestorius; the two former
being written for the express purpose of encouraging and developing the
monastic life. Of these the Institutes was the earliest, being composed
in “twelve books on the institutes of the monasteries and the remedies
for the eight principal faults,” <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598)
at the request of Castor, Bishop of Apta Julia, some forty miles due
north of Marseilles, who was desirous of introducing the monastic life
into his diocese, where it was still a thing unknown. <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) As Castor died in 426, <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) and the work is dedicated to him, it
must have been written some time between the years 419 and 426. When it
was first undertaken Cassian’s design already was to follow it up by a
second treatise containing the Conferences of the Fathers, to which he
several times alludes in the Institutes as a forthcoming work, <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) and which, like the companion volume,
was undertaken at Castor’s instigation. But, before even the first part
of it was ready for publication, the Bishop of Apta was dead; and thus,
to Cassian’s sorrow, he was unable to dedicate it to him, as he had
hoped to do. He therefore dedicated Conferences I.–X. (the first portion
of the work) to Leontius, Bishop (probably) of Fréjus, and Helladius,
who is termed “frater” in the Preface to this work, though, as we see
from the Preface to Conference XVIII., he was afterwards raised to the
episcopate. <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602)

<span id="iv.i.i-p86"></span>This portion of Cassian’s work must have
been completed shortly after the death of Castor in 426. It was speedily
followed by Part II., containing Conferences XI. to XVII. This is
dedicated to Honoratus and Eucherius, who are styled “fratres.”
Eucherius did not become Bishop of Lyons till 434; but, as Honoratus was
raised to the see of Arles in 426, the volume must have been published
not later than that year, or he would have been termed “Episcopus,” as
he is in the Preface to Conference XVIII., instead of “frater.”

<span id="iv.i.i-p87"></span>The third and last part of the work,
containing Conferences XVIII. to XXIV., is dedicated to Jovinian,
Minervius, Leontius, and Theodore, who are collectively styled
“fratres.” Leontius must, therefore, be a different person from the
bishop to whom Conferences I.–X. were dedicated; and nothing further is
known of him, or of Minervius and Jovinian. Theodore was afterwards
raised to the Episcopate, and succeeded Leontius in the see of Fréjus in
432. This third part of Cassian’s work was ready before the death of
Honoratus, Bishop of <span id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_190"></span>Arles, who is spoken of in the Preface as if
still living; and, therefore, its publication cannot be later than 428,
as Honoratus died in January, 429.

<span id="iv.i.i-p88"></span>Thus the whole work was completed between
the years 426 and 428; and now Cassian, who was growing old, was
desirous of rest, feeling as if his life’s work was nearly over. <span
id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) But the repose which he sought was not
to be granted to him, for the remaining years of his life were troubled
by two controversies,—the Nestorian, and the Pelagian,—or, rather, its
offshoot, the Semi-Pelagian. Into the history of the former of these
there is no need to enter here in detail. It broke out at
Constantinople, where Nestorius had become bishop in succession to
Sisinnius, in 428. The immediate occasion which gave rise to the
controversy was a sermon by Anastasius, the Bishop’s chaplain, in which
he inveighed against the title Theotocos, as given to the Blessed Virgin
Mary. This at once created a great sensation, as Nestorius warmly
supported his chaplain, and proceeded to develop the heresy connected
with his name, in a course of sermons. News of the controversy was
brought to Egypt, and Cyril of Alexandria at once entered into the fray.
After some correspondence between the two bishops, both parties
endeavoured to gain the adherence of the Church of Rome early in the
year 430; and now it was that Cassian became mixed up with the dispute.
Greek learning was evidently at a low ebb in the Roman Church at this
time; <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) and it was, perhaps,
partly owing to Cassian’s familiar acquaintance with this language, as
well as owing to his connexion with Constantinople, where the trouble
had now arisen, that Celestine’s Archdeacon Leo turned to him at this
crisis for help. Anyhow, whatever was the reason, an earnest appeal from
Rome reached him, begging him to write a refutation of the new heresy.
After some hesitation he consented, and the result of his labours is
seen in the seven books on the Incarnation against Nestorius. The work
was evidently done in haste, and published in 430, before the Council of
Ephesus (for Cassian speaks of Nestorius throughout as still Bishop of
Constantinople), and, judging from the way in which Augustine is spoken
of in VII. xxvii., before the death of that Father, which took place in
August, 430. A great part of the work is occupied with Scripture proof
of our Lord’s Divinity and unity of Person; but, taken as a whole, the
treatise is distinctly of less value than Cassian’s earlier writings,
and betrays the haste in which it was composed by the occasional use of
inaccurate language on the subject of the Incarnation, and of terms and
phrases which the mature judgment of the Church has rejected. But the
writer’s keen penetration is seen by the quickness with which he
connects the new heresy with the teaching of Pelagius, the connecting
link between the two being found in the errors of Leporius of Trêves,
who, in propagating Pelagian views of man’s sufficiency and strength,
had applied them to the case of our Lord, not shrinking from the
conclusion that He was a mere man who had used his free will so well as
to have lived without sin, and had only been made Christ in virtue of
His baptism, whereby the Divine and human were associated in such manner
that virtually there were *two* Christs. <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) The connexion between Nestorianism and
Pelagianism has often been noticed by later writers, but to Cassian
belongs the credit of having been the first to point it out. Of the
impression produced by his book we have no record. He appears to have
taken no further part in the controversy, which, indeed, must have been
to him an episode, coming in the midst of that other controversy with
which his name is inseparably associated; viz., that on
Semi-Pelagianism, on which something must now be said.

<span id="iv.i.i-p92"></span>The controversy arose in the following way.
During the struggle with Pelagianism between the years 410 and 420,
Augustine’s views on the absolute need of grace were gradually hardening
into a theory that grace was irresistible and therefore indefectible.
“Intent above all things on magnifying the Divine Sovereignty, he
practically forgot the complexity of the problem in hand and failed to
do justice to the human element in the mysterious process of man’s
salvation.” <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) The view of an
absolute predestination irrespective of foreseen character, and of the
irresistible and indefectible character of grace, was put forward by
him, in a letter to a Roman priest, Sixtus, in the year 418. <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) Some years afterwards this letter fell
into the hands of the monks of Adrumetum, some of whom were puzzled by
its teaching; and, in order to allay the disputes among them, the matter
was referred to Augustine himself. Thinking that the monks had
misunderstood his teaching, he not only explained the letter but also
wrote a fresh treatise,—“De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio” (426); and, when
that failed <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_191"></span>to satisfy the malcontents, he followed it
up with his work “De Correptione et Gratia” (426), which, so far as the
monks of Adrumetum were concerned, seems to have ended the controversy.
Elsewhere, however, hesitation was felt in going the full length of
Augustine’s teaching; and, in the South of Gaul especially, many were
seriously disturbed at the turn which the controversy had lately taken,
and were prepared to reject Augustine’s teaching, as not merely novel,
but also practically dangerous. “They said, in effect,” to quote Canon
Bright’s lucid summary of their position, “to treat predestination as
irrespective of foreseen conduct, and to limit the Divine good-will to a
fixed number of persons thus selected, who, as such, are assured of
perseverance, is not only to depart from the older theology, and from
the earlier teaching of the Bishop of Hippo himself, but to cut at the
root of religious effort, and to encourage either negligence or despair.
They insisted that whatever theories might be devised concerning this
mystery, which was not a fit subject for popular discussion, the door of
salvation should be regarded as open to all, because the Saviour ‘died
for all.’ To explain away the Scriptural assurance was, they maintained,
to falsify the Divine promise and to nullify human responsibility. They
believed in the doctrine of the Fall; they acknowledged the necessity of
real grace in order to man’s restoration; they even admitted that this
grace must be ‘prevenient’ to such acts of will as resulted in Christian
good works: but some of them thought—and herein consisted the error
called Semi-Pelagian—that nature, unaided, could take the first step
towards its recovery, by desiring to be healed through faith in Christ.
If it could not,—if the very beginning of all good were strictly a
Divine act,—exhortations seemed to them to be idle, and censure unjust,
in regard to those on whom no such act had been wrought, and who,
therefore, until it should be wrought, were helpless, and so far
guiltless, in the matter.” <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) Of
the party which took up this position Cassian was the recognized head.
True, he did not directly enter into the controversy himself, nor is he
the author of any polemical works upon the subject; but it is impossible
to doubt that the thirteenth Conference, containing the teaching of
Abbot Chæremon on the Protection of God, was intended to meet what he
evidently regarded as a serious error; viz., the implicit denial by the
Augustinians of the need of *effort* on man’s part.

<span id="iv.i.i-p96"></span>Augustine was informed of the teaching of
the School of Marseilles, as it was called, by one Hilary (a layman, not
to be confounded with his namesake, the Bishop of Arles), who wrote to
him two letters, of which the former is lost. The latter is still
existing, and contains a careful account of what was maintained at
Marseilles. Towards the close of it Hilary says that, as he was pressed
for time, he had prevailed upon a friend to write as well, and would
attach his letter to his own. This friend was Prosper of Aquitaine, also
a layman and an ardent Augustinian, whose epistle has been preserved as
well as Hilary’s. <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) From these
letters, and from the works which Augustine wrote in reply, we learn
that the “Massilians” had been first disturbed by some of Augustine’s
earlier writings, as the Epistle to Paulinus; and that their distrust of
his teaching on the subjects of Grace, Predestination, and Freewill had
been increased by the receipt of his work “De Correptione et Gratia,”
although in other matters they agreed with him entirely, and were great
admirers of his. <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) Personally,
they are spoken of with great respect as men of no common virtue, and of
wide influence; and, though Cassian’s name is never mentioned in the
correspondence, yet it is easy to read between the lines and see that he
is referred to. <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611)

<span id="iv.i.i-p100"></span>Augustine replied to his correspondents by
writing what proved to be almost his latest works,—the treatises “De
Prædestinatione Sanctorum” and “De dono Perseverantiæ.” In these volumes
Augustine, while freely acknowledging the great difference between his
opponents and the Pelagians, yet maintained as strongly as ever his own
position, and “did not abate an iota of the contention that election and
rejection were arbitrary, and that salvation was not really within the
reach of all Christians.” <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) Thus
the books naturally failed to satisfy the recalcitrant party, or to
convince those who thought that the denial of the freedom of the will
tended to destroy man’s responsibility. Prosper, however, was delighted
with the treatises, and proceeded to follow them up with a work of his
own, a poem of a thousand lines, <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iv.i.i-Page_192"></span>“De Ingratis,” by which he designates the
Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians, whose opinions he speaks of as spreading
with alarming rapidity. The date of this publication was probably the
early part of 430. It was certainly written before the death of
Augustine, which took place on August 28 of the same year. The removal
from this life of the great champion of Grace did not bring to an end
the controversy to which his writings had given birth. The school of
Marseilles continued to propagate its views with unabated vigour, in
spite of the protests of Prosper and Hilary, who finally took the
important step of appealing to Pope Celestine, from whom they succeeded
in obtaining a letter addressed to the Gallican Bishops, Venerius of
Marseilles, Leontius of Fréjus, Marinus, Auxonius, Arcadius, Filtanius,
and the rest. <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) Celestine speaks
strongly of their negligence in not having suppressed what he regarded
as a public scandal, and says that “priests ought not to teach so as to
invade the episcopal prerogative,” an expression in which we may well
see an allusion to Cassian, the leading presbyter, of the diocese of
Marseilles, whose Bishop is named first in the opening salutation; and
the letter concludes with some words of eulogium on Augustine “of holy
memory.” Never, perhaps, was Gallican independence shown in a more
striking manner than in the sturdy way in which the Massilians clung to
their views in spite of the authority of the Pope now brought to bear
upon them. Prosper and Hilary on their return found the obnoxious
teaching daily spreading, so that the former of them finally determined
to put down, if possible, the upholders of the objectionable tenets by a
direct criticism of Cassian’s Conferences. This was the origin of
Prosper’s work “Contra Collatorem,” against the author of the
Conferences, a treatise of considerable power and force, although not
scrupulously fair. <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) The respect
in which Cassian was held is strikingly shown by the fact that his
antagonist never once names him directly, but merely speaks of him as a
man of priestly rank who surpassed all his companions in power of
arguing. The work consists of an examination of the thirteenth
Conference, that of Abbot Chæremon, on the Protection of God, from which
Prosper extracts twelve propositions, the first of which he says is
orthodox while all the others are erroneous. <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) He concludes <span id="page_193">p.
193</span> <span id="iv.i.i-Page_193"></span>by warning his antagonist
of the danger of Pelagianism, and expresses a hope that his doctrine may
be condemned by Pope Sixtus as it had been by Celestine and his
predecessors. The last statement fixes the date of the book as not
earlier than 432; for Celestine only died in April in that year.

<span id="iv.i.i-p118"></span>Cassian was evidently still living when
this attack upon him was made; but, so far as we know, he made no reply
to it. Its publication is the last event in his life of which we have
any knowledge. He probably died shortly afterwards, as the expression
used by Gennadius in speaking of his work against Nestorius would seem
to imply that it preceded his death by no long interval; for he says
that with this he brought to a close his literary labours and his life
in the reign of Theodosius and Valentinian. <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616)

<span id="iv.i.i-p120"></span>The controversy on Grace and Freewill
lingered on for nearly a century longer, and was only finally disposed
of by the wise moderation shown by Cæsarius of Arles and those who acted
with him at the Council of Orange (Arausio), in the year 529. <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617)

<span id="iv.i.i-p122"></span>While it cannot be denied that the
teaching of Cassian and his school in denying the *necessity* of initial
and prevenient grace is erroneous and opens a door at which Pelagianism
may easily creep in, yet it was an honest attempt to vindicate human
responsibility; and it must be frankly admitted that the teaching of
Augustine was one-sided and required to be balanced: nor would the
question have ever been brought into prominence had it not been for the
hard and rigorous way in which the doctrine of Predestination was
taught, and the denial that the possibility of salvation lay within the
reach of all men. While, then, it is granted that a verdict of guilty
must be returned on the charge of Semi-Pelagianism in Cassian’s case, we
are surely justified in claiming that a recommendation to mercy be
attached to it on the plea of extenuating circumstances. Since his death
Cassian has ever occupied a somewhat ambiguous position in the mind of
the Church. Never formally canonized, his name is not found in the
Calendars of the West; nor is he honoured with the title of “Saint.” He
is, however, generally spoken of as “the blessed Cassian,” holding in
this respect the same position as Theodoret, of whom Dr. Newman says
that, though he “has the responsibility of acts which have forfeited to
him that œcumenical dignity,” yet he is “not without honorary title in
the Church’s hagiology; for he has ever been known as the ‘blessed
Theodoret.’” <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) In the East
Cassian’s position is somewhat better. He is there regarded as a saint,
and may possibly be intended by the Cassian who is commemorated on
February 29. <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) It is only natural
that this difference should be made, for the Eastern Church has always
held a milder view of the effect of the Fall than that which has been
current in the West since the days of Augustine; and, indeed, Cassian,
in making his protest against the rising tide of Augustinianism, was in
the main only handing on the teaching which he had received from his
Eastern instructors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_529"></span>[183:530](2110281.htm#fr_529) <span
id="iv.i.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p3"></span> Gennadius Catalogus, c. lxii.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[183:531](2110281.htm#fr_530) <span
id="iv.i.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p4"></span> Conference XIV. xii.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[183:532](2110281.htm#fr_531) <span
id="iv.i.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p5"></span> On the Incarnation, VI. ix., x.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[183:533](2110281.htm#fr_532) <span
id="iv.i.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.i-p7.1"></span>Σκιαθίς</span>, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.i-p7.2"></span>Σκιαθική</span> (v. l. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.i-p7.3"></span>Σκιθιακή</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.i-p7.4"></span>χώρα</span> are the forms of the name given by
Ptolemy. The Greek Fathers speak of the district as <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p7.5"></span>Σκήτις</span>, while in
Latin writers the name appears as Scythia, or Scythis; and, though the
printed texts of Cassian give the form as Scitium, heremus Scitii, and
heremus Scitiotica, yet we learn from Petschenig that in the <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i.i-p7.6"></span>mss</span>. of his works it is
not seldom written as Scythium. It should be added that in the text of
Gennadius the reading is not absolutely free from doubt, as there is
some slight authority for reading “natus Serta.”

<span id="fn_533"></span>[183:534](2110281.htm#fr_533) <span
id="iv.i.i-p7.7"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p8"></span> Bibliotheca, cod. cxcvii.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[183:535](2110281.htm#fr_534) <span
id="iv.i.i-p8.5"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p9"></span> Dr. Gregory Smith (*Dictionary of Christian
Biography*, art. Cassian) thinks that ‘Cassianus’ possibly points to
Casius, a small town in Syria; but, apart from the fact that the name
was not uncommon in the West as well as in the East, the description of
his home as being in a country where there were no monasteries is quite
fatal to this idea.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[183:536](2110281.htm#fr_535) <span
id="iv.i.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p10"></span> Conference XXIV. i.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[183:537](2110281.htm#fr_536) <span
id="iv.i.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p11"></span> c. xviii.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[184:538](2110281.htm#fr_537) <span
id="iv.i.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p12"></span> No difficulty need be felt on the score of
his thorough knowledge of Greek, for this could easily be accounted for
by his education at Bethlehem, and prolonged residence in the East.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[184:539](2110281.htm#fr_538) <span
id="iv.i.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p14"></span> De Div. Lect. Pref., and c. xxix.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[184:540](2110281.htm#fr_539) <span
id="iv.i.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p15"></span> Conference XIV. ix.; Institute V. xxxv.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[184:541](2110281.htm#fr_540) <span
id="iv.i.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p16"></span> Chronicle.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[184:542](2110281.htm#fr_541) <span
id="iv.i.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p17"></span> Parisinus. *Nouv. acquis. Lat*. 260, of
the eighth or ninth century.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[184:543](2110281.htm#fr_542) <span
id="iv.i.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p19"></span> Institutes XI. xviii.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[184:544](2110281.htm#fr_543) <span
id="iv.i.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p20"></span> Conference XXIV. i.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[184:545](2110281.htm#fr_544) <span
id="iv.i.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p21"></span> See the Institutes III. iv.; IV.
xix.–xxi., xxxi. Conferences I. i.; XI. i. v.; XIX. i.; XX. i. The date
is too early for this to have been S. Jerome’s famous monastery, as that
father only settled at Bethlehem towards the close of 386, by which time
Cassian himself must have been already in Egypt; nor does he anywhere in
his writings make any allusion to Jerome as his teacher, although he
mentions him with great respect in his work on the Incarnation, Book
VII. c. xxvi.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[184:546](2110281.htm#fr_545) <span
id="iv.i.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p22"></span> Conference XI. i. A good account of
Cassian’s visits to Egypt is given in Fleury’s *Ecclesiastical History*,
Book XX., c. iii.–vii.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[184:547](2110281.htm#fr_546) <span
id="iv.i.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p23"></span> Conference XVII. ii.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[184:548](2110281.htm#fr_547) <span
id="iv.i.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p24"></span> Conference XI. i.–iii., and compare VII.
xxvi. for another description of the same district.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[185:549](2110281.htm#fr_548) <span
id="iv.i.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p25"></span> Conferences XI., XII., XIII.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[185:550](2110281.htm#fr_549) <span
id="iv.i.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p26"></span> Conferences XIV., XV.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[185:551](2110281.htm#fr_550) <span
id="iv.i.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p27"></span> Conference XVI. i.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[185:552](2110281.htm#fr_551) <span
id="iv.i.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p28"></span> Conferences XVI., XVII.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[185:553](2110281.htm#fr_552) <span
id="iv.i.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p29"></span> See Conference XVII. i.–v. and xxx.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[185:554](2110281.htm#fr_553) <span
id="iv.i.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p31"></span> Conference XX. i., ii. The story is also
told in the Institutes, IV. xxx.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[185:555](2110281.htm#fr_554) <span
id="iv.i.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p32"></span> Institute V. xxxii.–xlii.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[185:556](2110281.htm#fr_555) <span
id="iv.i.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p33"></span> Conference XX.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[185:557](2110281.htm#fr_556) <span
id="iv.i.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p34"></span> Institute V. xxxvi.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[185:558](2110281.htm#fr_557) <span
id="iv.i.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p35"></span> Conference XVIII. On the Sarabaites, see
the note on c. vii.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[185:559](2110281.htm#fr_558) <span
id="iv.i.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p36"></span> Conference XIX. i.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[185:560](2110281.htm#fr_559) <span
id="iv.i.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p37"></span> Conference XIX. i.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[186:561](2110281.htm#fr_560) <span
id="iv.i.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p38"></span> Conference XXI.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[186:562](2110281.htm#fr_561) <span
id="iv.i.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p39"></span> Conference XXII.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[186:563](2110281.htm#fr_562) <span
id="iv.i.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p40"></span> Conference XXIII.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[186:564](2110281.htm#fr_563) <span
id="iv.i.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p41"></span> Conference XXIV. i.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[186:565](2110281.htm#fr_564) <span
id="iv.i.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p42"></span> Conference XXIV.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[186:566](2110281.htm#fr_565) <span
id="iv.i.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p43"></span> Institute V. xxxvi. *sq*.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[186:567](2110281.htm#fr_566) <span
id="iv.i.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p45"></span> Conference XVII. xxx.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[186:568](2110281.htm#fr_567) <span
id="iv.i.i-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p46"></span> Butler’s *Coptic Churches*, Vol. I., p.
287.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[186:569](2110281.htm#fr_568) <span
id="iv.i.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p47"></span> Rosweyd, *Vitæ Patrum*; and the Bollandist
*Acta Sanctorum*, 14 April, Vol. II., 201–3.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[186:570](2110281.htm#fr_569) <span
id="iv.i.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p48"></span> *Dictionary of Christian Biography*, art.
Ammon; cf. Rufinus, Hist.: Monach, xxx.; and Palladius, Hist.: Lausiaca,
viii.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[186:571](2110281.htm#fr_570) <span
id="iv.i.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p49"></span> *Hist*., Monach, c. xxi.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[186:572](2110281.htm#fr_571) <span
id="iv.i.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p50"></span> Sozomen, H.E. VI. xxxi.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[186:573](2110281.htm#fr_572) <span
id="iv.i.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p51"></span> *Hist*., Laus., c. vii.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[186:574](2110281.htm#fr_573) <span
id="iv.i.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p52"></span> Epp.: ad Eustochium, ad Rustic.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[186:575](2110281.htm#fr_574) <span
id="iv.i.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p53"></span> Part. I., cc. vii., viii.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[187:576](2110281.htm#fr_575) <span
id="iv.i.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p54"></span> *The Ancient Coptic Churches of Egypt*, by
Alfred J. Butler. 2 vols. (Oxford, 1884).

<span id="fn_576"></span>[187:577](2110281.htm#fr_576) <span
id="iv.i.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p55"></span> Curzon, p. 79.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[187:578](2110281.htm#fr_577) <span
id="iv.i.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p56"></span> Butler, Vol. I., pp. 295, 6, 7.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[187:579](2110281.htm#fr_578) <span
id="iv.i.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p57"></span> Conference II. ii.; III. v.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[187:580](2110281.htm#fr_579) <span
id="iv.i.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p58"></span> Conference I.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[187:581](2110281.htm#fr_580) <span
id="iv.i.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p59"></span> Conference II.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[187:582](2110281.htm#fr_581) <span
id="iv.i.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p60"></span> Conference III.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[187:583](2110281.htm#fr_582) <span
id="iv.i.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p61"></span> Conference IV.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[187:584](2110281.htm#fr_583) <span
id="iv.i.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p62"></span> Conference V.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[187:585](2110281.htm#fr_584) <span
id="iv.i.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p63"></span> Conference VI.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[187:586](2110281.htm#fr_585) <span
id="iv.i.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p64"></span> Conference VII.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[187:587](2110281.htm#fr_586) <span
id="iv.i.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p65"></span> Conference VIII.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[187:588](2110281.htm#fr_587) <span
id="iv.i.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p66"></span> Conference IX. x.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[187:589](2110281.htm#fr_588) <span
id="iv.i.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p67"></span> See Conference X. cc. i–iii.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[188:590](2110281.htm#fr_589) <span
id="iv.i.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p69"></span> See Conference XI. i.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[188:591](2110281.htm#fr_590) <span
id="iv.i.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p71"></span> Compare the Institutes, IV. xxiii.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[188:592](2110281.htm#fr_591) <span
id="iv.i.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p72"></span> On the Incarnation, VII. xxxi.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[188:593](2110281.htm#fr_592) <span
id="iv.i.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p73"></span> Palladius Dial. iii.; Sozomen, H. E. VIII.
xxvi.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[188:594](2110281.htm#fr_593) <span
id="iv.i.i-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p74"></span> It is highly precarious to infer from the
language used in the Institutes, III. that Cassian visited Mesopotamia
before settling in Gaul. His departure from Rome may perhaps have been
occasioned by the Gothic invasion of Italy and Alaric’s sieges of Rome,
408–410.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[188:595](2110281.htm#fr_594) <span
id="iv.i.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p75"></span> Montalembert’s *Monks of the West*, Vol.
I. p. 464 (Eng. Translation). The names of Hilary of Arles, Vincent of
Lérins, Salvian, Eucherius of Lyons, Lupus of Troyes, and Cæsarius of
Arles, are alone sufficient to render the monastery of Lérins
illustrious in the annals of the Church of Gaul.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[189:596](2110281.htm#fr_595) <span
id="iv.i.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p77"></span> Montalembert, l. c.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[189:597](2110281.htm#fr_596) <span
id="iv.i.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p78"></span> The Acts of S. Victor’s martyrdom given by
Ruinart, *Acta Sincera*, p. 225, have been attributed by Tillemont and
others to Cassian, but without sufficient reason.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[189:598](2110281.htm#fr_597) <span
id="iv.i.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p79"></span> *The Church in Roman Gaul*, by R. Travers
Smith, p. 245.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[189:599](2110281.htm#fr_598) <span
id="iv.i.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p81"></span> This is the title which Cassian himself
gives to the work in his Preface to the Conferences.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[189:600](2110281.htm#fr_599) <span
id="iv.i.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p82"></span> Institutes, Preface.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[189:601](2110281.htm#fr_600) <span
id="iv.i.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p83"></span> Castor is commemorated on the twenty-first
of September. See the Bollandist *Acta Sanctorum*, Sept. VI. 249.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[189:602](2110281.htm#fr_601) <span
id="iv.i.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p84"></span> See the Institutes II. i., ix., xviii.; V.
iv.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[189:603](2110281.htm#fr_602) <span
id="iv.i.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p85"></span> With *Papa Leonti et Sancte frater
Helladi*, in the Preface to Conference I., compare *beatissimis
Episcopis Helladio ac Leontio*, in the Preface to Conference XVIII.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[190:604](2110281.htm#fr_603) <span
id="iv.i.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p89"></span> See the Preface to the work *On the
Incarnation against Nestorius*.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[190:605](2110281.htm#fr_604) <span
id="iv.i.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p90"></span> See the Epistle of Celestine to Nestorius
in Mansi IV. 1026, in which he apologizes for delay by saying that the
letter and other documents sent by Nestorius had had to be translated
into Latin.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[190:606](2110281.htm#fr_605) <span
id="iv.i.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p91"></span> See *On the Incarnation*, Book I. c. ii.
*sq*.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[190:607](2110281.htm#fr_606) <span
id="iv.i.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p93"></span> *The Anti-Pelagian Treatises of S.
Augustine*; with an Introduction by William Bright, D.D. (Oxford), 1889,
p. 1.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[190:608](2110281.htm#fr_607) <span
id="iv.i.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p94"></span> Epistle xciv.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[191:609](2110281.htm#fr_608) <span
id="iv.i.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p95"></span> *Anti-Pelagian Treatises*, p. liv., lv.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[191:610](2110281.htm#fr_609) <span
id="iv.i.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p97"></span> Epp. ccxxv., ccxxvi., in the
correspondence of S. Augustine. *Works*, Vol. II. 820, in the
Benedictine Edition.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[191:611](2110281.htm#fr_610) <span
id="iv.i.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p98"></span> Cassian himself quotes Augustine as an
authority for the Catholic doctrine of the Incarnation in his work
against Nestorius, VII. xxvii. But it is remarkable that, whereas on all
the other authorities quoted (Hilary, Ambrose, Jerome, Rufinus, Gregory,
Nazianzen, Athanasius, and Chrysostom) a high encomium is passed,
Augustine alone is alluded to with no words of praise, being simply
spoken of as priest (sacerdos) of Hippo Regius. There is no authority
for the reading “magnus sacerdos,” found in the editions of Cuyck and
Gazet, which misled Neander. Ch. *Hist*. Vol. IV. p. 376, E. T.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[191:612](2110281.htm#fr_611) <span
id="iv.i.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p99"></span> The only person referred to by name is
Hilary, who had just succeeded Honoratus as Bishop of Arles. This fixes
the date of the correspondence as 429.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[191:613](2110281.htm#fr_612) <span
id="iv.i.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p101"></span> Bright’s *Anti-Pelagian Treatises*, l. c.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[192:614](2110281.htm#fr_613) <span
id="iv.i.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p102"></span> The letter is given in full in Gazet’s
edition of Cassian, with certain doctrinal articles appended, which
really belong to a later date. See Dr. Newman’s note to the English
translation of Fleury, Book XXVI. c. xi.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[192:615](2110281.htm#fr_614) <span
id="iv.i.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p103"></span> The treatise is given in Gazet’s edition
of Cassian.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[192:616](2110281.htm#fr_615) <span
id="iv.i.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p104"></span> The propositions extracted by Prosper are
the following:—

<span id="iv.i.i-p105"></span>(1) That the initiative not only of our
actions but also of our good thoughts comes from God, who inspires us
with a good will to begin with, and supplies us with the opportunity of
carrying out what we rightly desire; for “every good gift and every
perfect gift cometh down from above, from the Father of light,” who both
begins what is good, and continues it and completes it in us. c. iii.
This proposition Prosper allows to be catholic and orthodox.

<span id="iv.i.i-p106"></span>(2) The Divine protection is inseparably
present with us, and so great is the kindness of the Creator towards His
creatures that His Providence not only accompanies it, but even
constantly precedes it, as the prophet experienced and plainly
confessed, saying, “My God will prevent me with His mercy.” And when He
sees in us some beginnings of a good will, He at once enlightens and
strengthens it, and urges it on towards salvation, increasing that which
He Himself implanted, or which He sees to have arisen from our own
efforts. c. viii.

<span id="iv.i.i-p107"></span>(3) Only in all these there is a
declaration of the grace of God *and* the freedom of the will, because
even of his own motion a man can be led to the quest of virtue, but
always stands in need of the help of the Lord. For neither does any one
enjoy good health whenever he likes, nor is he of his own will and
pleasure set free from disease and sickness. c. ix.

<span id="iv.i.i-p108"></span>(4) That it may be still clearer that,
through the excellence of nature, which is granted by the goodness of
the Creator, sometimes the first beginnings of a good will arise, which,
however, cannot attain to the complete performance of what is good
unless they are guided by the Lord, the apostle bears witness, and says,
“For to will is present with me, but to perform what is good I find
not.” *Ib*.

<span id="iv.i.i-p109"></span>(5) And so these are somehow mixed up and
indiscriminately confused, so that, among many persons, the question
which depends upon the other is involved in great difficulty; i.e., does
God have compassion upon us because we have shown the beginning of a
good will, or does the beginning of a good will follow because God has
had compassion upon us? For many, believing each of these alternatives,
and asserting them more broadly than is right, are entangled in all
kinds of opposite errors. For if we say that the beginning of free will
is in our own power, what about Paul the persecutor, what about Matthew
the publican, of whom the one was drawn to salvation while eager for
bloodshed and the punishment of the innocent, the other while eager for
violence and rapine? But, if we say that the beginning of our free will
is always due to the inspiration of the grace of God, what about the
faith of Zacchæus, or what are we to say of the goodness of the thief on
the cross, who by their own desires brought violence to bear on the
kingdom of heaven, and prevented the special leadings of their vocation?
c. xi.

<span id="iv.i.i-p110"></span>(6) These two, then, viz., the grace of
God and Free-will, seem opposed to each other, but really are in
harmony; and we gather from natural piety that we ought to have both
alike, lest if we withdraw one of them from men we should seem to have
broken the rule of the Church’s faith. *Ib*.

<span id="iv.i.i-p111"></span>(7) Adam, therefore, after the fall,
conceived a knowledge of evil which he had not previously, but did not
lose the knowledge of good which he already possessed. c. xii.

<span id="iv.i.i-p112"></span>(8) Wherefore we must take care not to
refer all the merits of the saints to the Lord in such a way as to
ascribe nothing but what is evil and perverse to human nature. *Ib*.

<span id="iv.i.i-p113"></span>(9) It cannot be doubted that there are by
nature some seeds of goodness implanted by the kindness of the Creator,
but unless they are quickened by the assistance of God they cannot
attain an increase of perfection. *Ib*.

<span id="iv.i.i-p114"></span>(10) And for this, too, we read that in
the case of Job, his well-tried athlete, when the Devil had challenged
him to single combat, the Divine righteousness had made provision. For,
if he had advanced against his foe not with his own strength, but solely
with the protection of God’s grace, and, supported only by Divine aid,
without any virtue of patience on his own part, had borne that manifold
weight of temptations and losses, contrived with all the cruelty of his
foe, might not the Devil have repeated with some justice that slanderous
speech which he had previously uttered, “Doth Job serve God for nought?
Hast Thou not hedged him in, and all his substance round about? But take
away thine hand,” i.e., allow him to fight with me in his own strength,
“and he will curse Thee to Thy face.” But, as after the struggle the
slanderous foe dared not give vent to any such murmur as this, he
admitted that he was vanquished by his (i.e., Job’s) strength, and not
by that of God: although, too, we must not hold that the grace of God
was altogether wanting to him, which gave to the tempter a power of
tempting in proportion to that which he had of resisting. c. xiv.

<span id="iv.i.i-p115"></span>(11) The Lord marvelled at him (viz., the
centurion), and praised him, and put him before all those of the people
of Israel who had believed, saying, “Verily, I say unto you, I have not
found so great faith in Israel.” For there would have been no ground for
praise or merit if Christ had only preferred in him what He Himself had
given. *Ib*.

<span id="iv.i.i-p116"></span>(12) Hence it comes that in our prayers we
proclaim God as not only our protector and Saviour, but actually as our
helper and sponsor. For whereas He first calls us to Him, and while we
are still ignorant and unwilling draws us towards salvation, He is our
protector and Saviour; but whereas, when we are already striving, He is
wont to bring us help, and to receive and defend those who fly to Him
for refuge, He is deemed our sponsor and refuge. c. xvii.

<span id="iv.i.i-p117"></span>This last extract is in itself perfectly
orthodox, and might be thought merely to express the distinction between
“preventing” and “co-operating” grace; but the context makes it clear
that Cassian means that in some cases grace “prevents,” while in others
the initial movement towards salvation comes from man, and grace is only
needed to “co-operate.”

<span id="fn_616"></span>[193:617](2110281.htm#fr_616) <span
id="iv.i.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p119"></span> Gennadius, in *Catal*., c. lxii. Ad
extremum rogatus a Leone Archidiacono, postea urbis Romæ Episcopo,
scripsit adversus Nestorium “De Incarnatione Domini” libros septem, et
in his scribendi apud Massiliam et vivendi finem fecit Theodosio et
Valentiniano regnantibus. The local commemoration of Cassian is on July
23.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[193:618](2110281.htm#fr_617) <span
id="iv.i.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p121"></span> On the history of Semi-Pelagianism see
Bright’s *Anti-Pelagian Treatises of S. Augustine*, Introd., pp.
xlix.–lxviii., and the *Christian Remembrancer*, Vol. XXXI. pp. 155–162.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[193:619](2110281.htm#fr_618) <span
id="iv.i.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p123"></span> *Historical Sketches*, Vol. III., p. 307.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[193:620](2110281.htm#fr_619) <span
id="iv.i.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p124"></span> The identification is anything but
certain, for though there is no difficulty in the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p124.1"></span>῾</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p124.2"></span>Ρ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.i-p124.3"></span>ωμαῖος</span>, as that is
also applied to our author by Photius, yet the additional statement made
in the Horologion, that he was originally <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.i-p124.4"></span>στρατιωτικὸς τήν τάξιν</span>, suggests that a
different person is alluded to, possibly the same as the Cassian
commemorated in the Roman martyrology on August 13.

<span id="iv.i.i-p125"></span>A list of some twenty-five churches where
Cassian is honoured as a saint is given in Guesnay’s *Cassianus
Illustratus*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The History of Cassian's Writings, MSS., and
Editions.](2110282)
