[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110086)  [Next](2110088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>There</span> was a certain village in the
country of the Senones which was every year annoyed with hail. The
inhabitants, constrained by an extreme of suffering, sought help from
Martin. A highly respectable embassy was sent to him by Auspicius, a man
of the rank of prefect, whose fields the storm had been wont to smite
more severely than it did those of others. But Martin, having there
offered up prayer, so completely freed the whole district from the
prevailing plague, that for twenty years, in which he afterwards
remained in the body, no one in those places suffered from hail. And
that this may not be thought to be accidental, but rather effected by
Martin, the tempest, returning afresh, once more fell upon the district
in the year in which he died. The world thus felt the departure of a
believing man to such a degree, that, as it justly rejoiced in his life,
so it also bewailed his death. But if any hearer, weak in faith, demands
also witnesses to prove those things which we have said, I will bring
forward, not one man, but many thousands, and will even summon the whole
region of the Senones to bear witness to the power which was
experienced. But not to speak of this, you, presbyter Refrigerius,
remember, I believe, that we lately had a conversation, concerning the
matter referred to, with Romulus, the son of that Auspicius I mentioned,
an honored and religious man. He related the points in question to us,
as if they had not been previously known; and as he was afraid of
constant losses in future harvests, he did, as you yourself beheld,
regret, with much lamentation, that Martin was not preserved up to this
time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](2110088)
