[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110241)  [Next](2110243) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span> <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_127"></span>

## <span id="iii.i-p0.1"></span>Introduction.

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>Very</span> little is known of the author of the
following Treatise. He writes under the assumed name of Peregrinus, but
Gennadius of Marseilles, <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) who
flourished <span class="sc"><span id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span>
495, some sixty years after its date, ascribes it to Vincentius, an
inmate of the famous monastery of Lérins, in the island of that
name, <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) and his ascription has
been universally accepted.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>Vincentius was of Gallic nationality. In
earlier life he had been engaged in secular pursuits, whether civil or
military is not clear, though the term he uses, “secularis militia,”
might possibly imply the latter. He refers to the Council of Ephesus,
held in the summer and early autumn of 431, as having been held some
three years previously to the time at which he was writing “ante
triennium ferme.” <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) This gives the
date of the Commonitory 434. Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, was still
living. <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) Sixtus the Third had
succeeded to the See of Rome; <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401)
his predecessor, Celestine, having died in 432. Gennadius says that
Vincentius died, “Theodosio et Valentiniano regnantibus.” <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) Theodosius died, leaving Valentinian
still reigning, in July, 450. Vincentius’ death, therefore, must have
occurred in or before that year.

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>Baronius places his name in the Roman
Martyrology, Tillemont doubts whether with sufficient reason. <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) He is commemorated on the 24th of May.

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span>Vincentius has been charged with
Semipelagianism. Whether he actually held the doctrine which was
afterwards called by that name is not clear. Certainly the express
enunciation of it is nowhere to be found in the Commonitory. But it is
extremely probable that at least his sympathies were with those who held
it. For not only does he omit the name of St. Augustine, who was
especially obnoxious to them, when making honorable mention at any time
of the champions of the faith, but he denounces his doctrine, though
under a misrepresentation of it, as one of the forms of that novel error
which he reprobates. <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) Indeed,
whoever will compare what he says in § 70 of the heresy which he
describes but forbears to name, with Prosper’s account of the charges
brought against Augustine by certain Semipelagian clergymen of
Marseilles, <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) will have little
doubt that Vincentius and they had the same teacher in view, and were of
the same mind with regard to his teaching. <span id="page_128">p.
128</span> <span id="iii.i-Page_128"></span>Be this however as it may,
when it is considered that the monks of Lérins, in common with the
general body of the churchmen of Southern Gaul, were strenuous upholders
of Semipelagianism, it will not be thought surprising that Vincentius
should have been suspected of at least a leaning in that direction.
Tillemont, who forbears to express himself decidedly, but evidently
inclines to that view, says “<span id="iii.i-p16.2"></span>L’opinion qui
le condamne et l’abandonne aux Semipelagiens passe aujourd’hui pour la
plus commune parmi les savans.” <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406)

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>It has been matter of question whether
Vincentius is to be credited with the authorship of the “Objectiones
Vincentianæ,” a collection of Sixteen Inferences alleged to be deducible
from St. Augustine’s writings, which has come down to us in Prosper’s
Reply.

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>Its date coincides so nearly with that of
the Commonitory as to preclude all doubt as to the identity of
authorship on that score, <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) and it
must be confessed that its animus and that of the 70th and 86th sections
of the Commonitory are too much in keeping to make it difficult to
believe that both are from the same pen.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p21.1"></span>Vincentius’s</span> object in the following
treatise is to provide himself, as he states, with a general rule
whereby to distinguish Catholic truth from heresy; and he commits what
he has learnt, he adds, to writing, that he may have it by him for
reference as a Commonitory, or Remembrancer, to refresh his memory.

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span>This rule, in brief, is the authority of
Holy Scripture. By that all questions must be tried in the first
instance. And it would be abundantly sufficient, but that,
unfortunately, men differ in the interpretation of Holy Scripture. The
rule, therefore, must be supplemented by an appeal to that sense of Holy
Scripture which is supported by universality, antiquity, and consent: by
universality, when it is the faith of the whole Church; by antiquity,
when it is that which has been held from the earliest times; by consent,
when it has been the acknowledged belief of all, or of almost all, whose
office and character gave authority to their determinations. This is the
famous “Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus,” with which
Vincentius’s name is associated. <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408)
The body of the work is taken up with its illustration and application.

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span>The work consisted originally of two books;
but unfortunately the second was lost, or rather, as Gennadius says, was
stolen, while the author was still alive; and there remains to us
nothing but a recapitulation of its contents, which the author,
unwilling to encounter the labour of rewriting the whole, has drawn
up. <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409)

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span>In prosecution of his purpose Vincentius
proceeds to show how his rule applies for the detection of error in the
instances of some of the more notorious heretics and schismatics who up
to his time had made havoc of the Church,—the Donatists and the Arians,
for instance, and the maintainers of the iteration of Baptism; and how
the great defenders of the Faith were guided in their maintenance of the
truth by its observance. <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410)

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span>But the perplexing question occurs:
Wherefore, in God’s providence, were persons, eminent for their
attainments and their piety, such as Photinus, Apollinaris, and
Nestorius, permitted to fall into heresy? <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) To which the answer is, For the
Church’s trial. And Vincentius proceeds to show, in the case of each of
these, how great a trial to the Church his fall was. This leads him to
give an account of their erroneous teaching severally, <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) from which he turns aside for a while
to expound the Catholic doctrine of the Trinity as opposed to the heresy
of Photinus, and of the Incarnation as opposed to the heresies of
Apollinaris and Nestorius, in an exposition remarkable for its clearness
and precision. <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) It contains so
much in common with the so-called Athanasian Creed, both as to the
sentiments and the <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_129"></span>language, that some have inferred from it,
that Vincentius was the author of that Formulary. <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414)

<span id="iii.i-p33"></span>Returning from this digression, Vincentius
proceeds, after promising to deal with these subjects more fully on a
future occasion, <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) to two other
very signal instances of heretical defection caused by the disregard of
antiquity and universality; those of Origen <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) and Tertullian, <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) of both of whom he draws a vivid
picture, contrasting them, such as they were before their fall with what
they became afterwards, and enlarging on the grievous injury to the
Church generally, and the distressing trial to individuals in
particular, consequent upon their defection.

<span id="iii.i-p37"></span>But it will be asked, Is Christian doctrine
to remain at a standstill? Is there to be no progress, as in other
sciences? <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) Undoubtedly there is
to be progress; but it must be real progress, analogous, for instance,
to the growth of the human body from infancy to childhood, from
childhood to mature age; or to the development of a plant from the seed
to the full-grown vegetable or tree; it must be such as the elucidation
of what was before obscure, the following out into detail of what was
before expressed only in general terms, <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) not the addition of new doctrine, not
the rejection of old.

<span id="iii.i-p40"></span>One difficulty which is not unlikely to
perplex a simple Christian is the readiness with which heretics appeal
to Scripture, following therein the example of their arch-leader, who,
in his temptation of our Lord, dared to make use of arms drawn from that
armoury. <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) This leads to the
question, How are we to ascertain the true sense of Scripture? And, in
the answer to it, to a more detailed exposition of the general rule
given at the outset.

<span id="iii.i-p42"></span>Scripture, then, must be interpreted in
accordance with the tradition of the Catholic Church, our guide being
antiquity, universality, consent.

<span id="iii.i-p43"></span>With regard to antiquity, that
interpretation must be held to which has been handed down from the
earliest times; with regard to universality, that which has always been
held, if not by all, at least by the most part, in preference to that
which has been held only by a few; with regard to consent, the
determination of a General Council on any point will of course be of
summary authority, and will hold the first place; next to this, the
interpretation which has been held uniformly and persistently by all
those Fathers, or by a majority of them, who have lived and died in the
communion of the Catholic Church. Accordingly, whatsoever interpretation
of Holy Scripture is opposed to an interpretation thus authenticated,
even though supported by the authority of one or another individual
teacher, however eminent, whether by his position, or his attainments,
or his piety, or by all of these together, must be rejected as novel and
unsound.

<span id="iii.i-p44"></span>Here the first Commonitory ends; but it ends
with a promise of a still further and more detailed inquiry, to be
prosecuted in the Commonitory which is to follow, into the way in which
the opinions of the ancient Fathers are to be collected, and the rule of
faith determined in accordance with them.

<span id="iii.i-p45"></span>Unfortunately that promise, however
fulfilled according to the author’s intention, has been frustrated to
his readers. The second Commonitory, as was said above, was lost, or
rather stolen, and all that remains to us is a brief and apparently
partial recapitulation of its contents and of the contents of the
preceding.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span id="iii.i-Page_130"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p46"></span>In this Vincentius repeats the rule for
ascertaining the Catholic doctrine which he had laid down at the outset,
enlarging especially upon the way in which the consent of the Fathers is
to be arrived at, and illustrating what he says by the course pursued by
the Council of Ephesus in the matter of Nestorius,—how the Fathers of
the Council, instead of resting upon their own judgment, eminent as many
of them were, collected together the opinions of the most illustrious of
their predecessors, and following their consentient belief, determined
the question before them. To this most noteworthy example he adds the
authority of two bishops of Rome, Sixtus III., then occupying the Papal
Chair, and Celestine, his immediate predecessor,—the gist of the whole
being the confirmation of the rule which it had been his object to
enforce throughout the Treatise—that profane novelties must be rejected,
and that faith alone adhered to which the universal Church has held
consentiently from the earliest times, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p46.1"></span>Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_397"></span>[127:398](2110242.htm#fr_397) <span
id="iii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span> *De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis*.
Gennadius’s work is to be found at the end of the second volume of
Vallarsius’s edition of St. Jerome’s works.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[127:399](2110242.htm#fr_398) <span
id="iii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span> Now St. Honorat, so called from St.
Honoratus, the founder of the monastery.

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>The monastery seems at first to have
consisted of an aggregation of separate cells, each of which, according
to the usage of that time, would be called a “monasterium.” “Tota ubique
insula, exstructis cellulis, unum velut monasterium evasit.”—<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.i-p4.1"></span>Cardinal</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.i-p4.2"></span>Noris</span>, *Histor*. *Pelag*.
p. 251. “Monasterium potest unius monachi habitaculum nominari.”—<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.i-p4.3"></span>Cassian</span>. *Collat*. xvii.
18.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>Among its more prominent members,
contemporary with Vincentius, were Honoratus and Hilary, afterwards
successively bishops of Arles, and Faustus, afterwards bishop of Riez,
all of them in sympathy with the neighbouring clergy of Marseilles,
opposed to St. Augustine’s later teaching, and holding what was
afterwards called Semipelagian doctrine.

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>The adjoining islet of <span
id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>St. Marguérite, one of the <span
id="iii.i-p6.2"></span>Lérins group, has acquired notoriety of late,
from having been the place to which Marshal Bazaine, the betrayer of
Metz, was banished in 1873.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[127:400](2110242.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span> § 79.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[127:401](2110242.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span> § 80.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[127:402](2110242.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span> § 85.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[127:403](2110242.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span> De Illustr. Eccles. Scrip. c. 84.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[127:404](2110242.htm#fr_403) <span
id="iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span> xv. p. 146.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[127:405](2110242.htm#fr_404) <span
id="iii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span> Cardinal Noris does not hesitate to say of
him, “Non modo Semipelagianum se prodit, sed disertis verbis Augustini
discipulos tanquam hæreticos traducit.”—*Historia Pelagiana*, p. 245.
See below, Appendix II.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[127:406](2110242.htm#fr_405) <span
id="iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span> See Prosper’s letter to Augustine in
Augustine’s works, Ep. 225<span id="iii.i-p16.1"></span>, Tom. ii. Ed.
Paris, 1836, etc.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[128:407](2110242.htm#fr_406) <span
id="iii.i-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span> T. xv. p. 146.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[128:408](2110242.htm#fr_407) <span
id="iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span> The Objectiones Vincentianæ must have been
published at some time between the publication of St. Augustine’s
Antipelagian Treatises and the death of Prosper. They are to be found in
Prosper’s Reply, contained in St. Augustine’s works, Appendix, Tom. x.
coll. 2535. *et seq*. Paris, 1836, etc.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[128:409](2110242.htm#fr_408) <span
id="iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span> § 6.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[128:410](2110242.htm#fr_409) <span
id="iii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span> §§ 77–88.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[128:411](2110242.htm#fr_410) <span
id="iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span> §§ 9 *sqq*.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[128:412](2110242.htm#fr_411) <span
id="iii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p29"></span> §§ 27 *sqq*.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[128:413](2110242.htm#fr_412) <span
id="iii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p30"></span> §§ 32 *sqq*.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[128:414](2110242.htm#fr_413) <span
id="iii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p31"></span> §§ 36 *sqq*.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[129:415](2110242.htm#fr_414) <span
id="iii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p32"></span> <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p32.1"></span>Antelmi</span>, *Nova de Symbolo Athanasiano
Disquisitio*. See the note on § 42, Appendix I.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[129:416](2110242.htm#fr_415) <span
id="iii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p34"></span> § 42.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[129:417](2110242.htm#fr_416) <span
id="iii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p35"></span> §§ 44–46.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[129:418](2110242.htm#fr_417) <span
id="iii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p36"></span> § 47.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[129:419](2110242.htm#fr_418) <span
id="iii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p38"></span> § 55.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[129:420](2110242.htm#fr_419) <span
id="iii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p39"></span> §§ 55–60. For instances in point, he might
have referred to the enlargement and expansion of the earlier Creed,
first in the Nicene, afterward in the Constantinopolitan Formulary.
Thus, in the Definition of the Faith of the Council of Chalcedon, the
Fathers are careful to explain that they are making no addition to the
original deposit, but amply unfolding and rendering more intelligible
what before had been less distinctly set forth: “Teaching in its fulness
the doctrine which from the beginning hath remained unshaken, it
decrees, in the first place that the Creed of the 318 (the original
Nicene Creed) remain untouched; and on account of those who impugn the
Holy Spirit, it ratifies and confirms the doctrine subsequently
delivered, concerning the essence of the Holy Spirit, by the hundred and
fifty holy Fathers, (the Constantinopolitan Creed), which they
promulgated for universal acceptance, not as though they were supplying
some omission of their predecessors, but testifying in express words in
writing their own minds concerning the Holy Spirit.”

<span id="fn_420"></span>[129:421](2110242.htm#fr_420) <span
id="iii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p41"></span> §§ 65 *sqq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Object of the Following Treatise.](2110243)
