[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110082)  [Next](2110084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>The</span> following is a small matter
which I learned lately from the narration of Arpagius the presbyter, but
I do not think it ought to be passed over. The wife of the courtier
Avitianus had sent some oil to Martin, that he might bless it (such is
the custom) so as to be ready when needful to meet different causes of
disease. It was contained in a glass jar of a shape which, round
throughout, gradually bulges <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) out
towards the middle, with a long neck; but the hollow of the extended
neck was not filled, because it is the custom to fill vessels of the
kind in such a way that the top may be left free for the knobs which
stop up the jar. The presbyter testified that he saw the oil increase
under the blessing of Martin, so much that, the abundance of it
overflowing the jar, it ran down from the top in every direction. He
added that it bubbled up with the same <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) effect, while the vessel was being
carried back to the mistress of the household; for the oil so steadily
flowed over in the hands of the boy carrying it, that the abundance of
the liquid, thus pouring down, covered all his garment. He said,
moreover, that the lady received the vessel so full even to the brim,
that (as the same presbyter tells <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) us at the present day) there was no
room in that jar for inserting the stopper by which people are
accustomed to close those vessels, the contents of which are to be
preserved with special care. That, too, was a remarkable thing that
happened to this man.” Here he looked at me. “He had set down a glass
vessel containing oil blessed by Martin in a pretty high window; and a
boy of the family, not knowing that a jar was there, drew towards him
the cloth covering it, with rather much violence. The vessel, in
consequence, fell down on the marble pavement. Upon this, all were
filled with dread lest the blessing of God, bestowed on the vessel by
Martin, had been lost; but the jar was found as safe as ever, just as if
it had fallen on the softest feathers. Now, this result should be
ascribed, not so much to chance, as to the power of Martin, whose
blessing could not possibly perish.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p5"></span>“There is this, too, which was
effected by a certain person, whose name, because he is present, and has
forbidden it to be mentioned, shall be suppressed: Saturninus too, who
is now with us, was present on the occasion referred to. A dog was
barking at us in a somewhat disagreeable manner. ’ I command thee,’ said
the person in question, ‘in the name of Martin, to be quiet.’ The
dog—his barking seemed to stick in his throat, and one might have
thought that his tongue had been cut out—*was* silent. Thus it is really
a small matter that Martin himself performed miracles: believe me that
other people also have accomplished many things in his name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[47:129](2110083.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p2"></span> The text of this sentence is very
uncertain, and the meaning somewhat obscure.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[47:130](2110083.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p3"></span> Here, again, the text is in
confusion.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[47:131](2110083.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p4"></span> Text and meaning both very obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](2110084)
