[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110432)  [Next](2110434) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p1"></span>Of the renunciation of the apostles
and the primitive church.

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p2.1"></span>As</span> if he (who, by his assertion
that he was endowed with the privileges of a Roman citizen from his
birth, testifies that he was no mean person according to this world’s
rank) might not likewise have been supported by the property which
formerly belonged to him! And as if those men who were possessors of
lands and houses in Jerusalem and sold everything and kept back nothing
whatever for themselves, and brought the price of them and laid it at
the feet of the apostles, might not have supplied their bodily
necessities from their own property, had this been considered the best
plan by the apostles, or had they themselves deemed it preferable! But
they gave up all their property at once, and preferred to be supported
by their own labour, and by the contributions of the Gentiles, of whose
collection the holy Apostle speaks in writing to the Romans, and
declaring his own office in this matter to them, and urging them on
likewise to make this collection: “But now I go to Jerusalem to minister
to the saints. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a
certain contribution for the poor saints who are at Jerusalem: it has
pleased them indeed, and their debtors they are. For if the Gentiles are
made partakers of their spiritual things, they ought also to minister to
them in carnal things.” <span id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) To the
Corinthians also he shows the same anxiety about this, and urges them
the more diligently to prepare before his arrival a collection, which he
was intending to send for their needs. “But concerning the collection
for the saints, as I appointed to the churches of Galatia, so also do
ye. Let each one of you on the first day of the week put apart with
himself, laying up what it shall well please him, that when I come the
collections be not then to be made. But when I come whomsoever you shall
approve by your letters, them I will send to carry your grace to
Jerusalem.” And that he may stimulate them to make a larger collection,
he adds, “But if it be meet that I also go, they shall go with
me:” <span id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) meaning if your offering is
of such a character as <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-Page_254"></span>to deserve to be taken there by my
ministration. To the Galatians too, he testifies that when he was
settling the division of the ministry of preaching with the apostles, he
had arranged this with James, Peter, and John: that he should undertake
the preaching to the Gentiles, but should never repudiate care and
anxious thought for the poor who were at Jerusalem, who for Christ’s
sake gave up all their goods, and submitted to voluntary poverty. “And
when they saw,” said he, “the grace of God which was given to me, James
and Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, gave to me and to
Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that we should preach to the
Gentiles, but they to those of the circumcision: only they would that we
should be mindful of the poor.” A matter which he testifies that he
attended to most carefully, saying, “which also I was anxious of myself
to do.” <span id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) Who then are the more
blessed, those who but lately were gathered out of the number of the
heathen, and being unable to climb to the heights of the perfection of
the gospel, clung to their own property, in whose case it was considered
a great thing by the Apostle if at least they were restrained from the
worship of idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and
from blood, <span id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) and had embraced the
faith of Christ, with their goods and all: or those who live up to the
demands of the gospel, and carry the Lord’s cross daily, and want
nothing out of their property to remain for their own use? And if the
blessed Apostle himself, bound with chains and fetters, or hampered by
the difficulties of travelling, and for these reasons not being able to
provide with his hands, as he generally did, for the supply of his food,
declares that he received that which supplied his wants from the
brethren who came from Macedonia; “For that which was lacking to me,” he
says, “the brethren who came from Macedonia supplied:” <span
id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) and to the Philippians he says: “For
ye Philippians know also that in the beginning of the gospel, when I
came from Macedonia, no church communicated with me in the matter of
giving and receiving, except you only; because even in Thessalonica once
and again you sent to supply my needs:” <span
id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) (if this was so) then, according to
the notion of these men, which they have formed in the coldness of their
heart, will those men really be more blessed than the Apostle, because
it is found that they have ministered to him of their substance? But
this no one will venture to assert, however big a fool he may be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_893"></span>[253:894](2110433.htm#fr_893) <span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p3"></span> [Rom. xv.
25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[253:895](2110433.htm#fr_894) <span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xvi.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[254:896](2110433.htm#fr_895) <span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p5"></span> [Gal.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[254:897](2110433.htm#fr_896) <span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p6"></span> [Acts xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[254:898](2110433.htm#fr_897) <span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p7"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[254:899](2110433.htm#fr_898) <span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p8"></span> [Phil.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.vii.xvii-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. That if we want to imitate the apostles we ought
not to live according to our own prescriptions, but to follow their
example.](2110434)
