[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110723)  [Next](2110725) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.viii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xv-p1"></span>The answer what devils can and what
they cannot do in regard to the thoughts of men.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.viii.xv-p2.1"></span>Serenus</span>: Nobody doubts that
unclean spirits can influence the character of our thoughts, but this is
by affecting them from without by sensible influences, i.e., either from
our inclinations or from our words, and those likings to which they see
that we are especially disposed. But they cannot possibly come near to
those which have not yet come forth from the inmost recesses of the
soul. And the thoughts too, which they suggest, whether they are
actually or in a kind of way embraced, are discovered by them not from
the nature of the soul itself, i.e., that inner inclination which lies
concealed so to speak in the very marrow, but from motions and signs
given by the outward man, as for example, when they suggest gluttony, if
they have seen a monk raising his eyes anxiously to the window or to the
sun, or inquiring eagerly what o’clock it is, they know that he has
admitted the feeling of greediness. If when they suggest fornication
they find him calmly submitting to the attack of lust, or see him
perturbed in body, or at any rate not groaning as he ought under the
wantonness of an impure suggestion, they know that the dart of lust is
already fixed in his very soul. If they stir up incitements to grief, or
anger, or rage, they can tell whether they have taken root in the heart
by the movements of the body, and visible disturbances, when, for
instance, they have noticed him either groaning silently, or panting
with indignation or changing colour; and so they cunningly discover the
fault to which he is given over. For they know that every one of us is
enticed in a regular way by that one, to the incitement of which they
see, by a sort of assenting motion of the body, that he has yielded his
consent and agreement. And it is no wonder that this is discovered by
those powers of the air, when we see that even clever men can often
discover the state of the inner man from his mien and look and external
bearing. How much more surely then can this be discovered by those who
as being of a spiritual nature are certainly much more subtle and
cleverer than men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. An illustration showing how we are taught that
unclean spirits know the thoughts of men.](2110725)
