[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110652)  [Next](2110654) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xii-p1"></span>What is our free will, which stands in
between the lust of the flesh and the spirit.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.xii-p2.1"></span>Between</span> these two desires then the
free will of the soul stands in an intermediate position somewhat worthy
of blame, and neither delights in the excesses of sin, nor acquiesces in
the sorrows of virtue. Seeking to restrain itself from carnal passions
in such a way as not nevertheless to be willing to undergo the requisite
suffering, and wanting to secure bodily chastity without chastising the
flesh, and to acquire purity of heart without the exertion of vigils,
and to abound in spiritual virtues together with carnal ease, and to
attain the grace of patience without the irritation of contradiction,
and to practise the humility of Christ without the loss of worldly
honour, to aim at the simplicity of religion in conjunction with worldly
ambition, to serve Christ not without the praise and favour of men, to
profess the strictness which truth demands without giving the slightest
offence to anybody: in a word, it is anxious to pursue future blessings
in such a way as not to lose present ones. And this free will would
never lead us to attain true perfection, but would plunge us into a most
miserable condition of lukewarmness, and make us like those who are
rebuked by the Lord’s remonstrance in the Apocalypse: “I know thy works,
that thou art neither hot nor cold. I would that thou wert hot or cold.
But now thou art lukewarm, and I will forthwith spue thee out of my
mouth;” <span id="fr_1302"></span>[1303](#fn_1302) were it not that
these contentions which rise up on both sides disturb and destroy this
condition of lukewarmness. For when we give in to this free will of ours
and want to let ourselves go in the direction of this slackness, at once
the desires of the flesh start up, and injure us with their sinful
passions, and do not suffer us to continue in that state of purity in
which we delight, and allure us to that cold and thorny path of pleasure
which we have to dread. Again, if inflamed with fervour of spirit, we
want to root out the works of the flesh, and without any regard to human
weakness try to raise ourselves altogether to excessive efforts after
virtue, the frailty of the flesh comes in, and recalls us and restrains
us from that over excess of spirit which is bad for us: and so the
result is that as these two desires are contradicting each other in a
struggle of this kind, the soul’s free will, which does not like either
to give itself up entirely to carnal desires, nor to throw itself into
the exertions which virtue calls for, is tempered as it were by a fair
balance, while this struggle between the two hinders that more dangerous
free will of the soul, and makes a sort of equitable balance in the
scales of our body, which marks out the limits of flesh and spirit most
accurately, and does not allow the mind inflamed with fervour of spirit
to sway to the right hand, nor the flesh to incline through the pricks
of sin, to the left. And while this struggle goes on day after day in us
to our profit, we are driven most beneficially to come to that fourth
stage which we do not like, so as to gain purity of heart not by ease
and carelessness, but by constant efforts and <span id="page_335">p.
335</span> <span id="iv.iv.v.xii-Page_335"></span>contrition of spirit;
to retain our chastity of the flesh by prolonged fastings, hunger,
thirst, and watchfulness; to acquire purpose of heart by reading,
vigils, constant prayer and the wretchedness of solitude; to preserve
patience by the endurance of tribulation; to serve our Maker in the
midst of blasphemies and abounding insults; to follow after truth if
need be amid the hatred of the world and its enmity; and while, with
such a struggle going on in our body, we are secured from slothful
carelessness, and incited to that effort which is against the grain, and
to the desire for virtue, our proper balance is admirably secured, and
on one side the languid choice of our free will is tempered by fervour
of spirit, and on the other the frigid coldness of the flesh is
moderated by a gentle warmth, and while the desire of the spirit does
not allow the mind to be dragged into unbridled licence, neither does
the weakness of the flesh allow the spirit to be drawn on to
unreasonable aspirations after holiness, lest in the one case incentives
to all kinds of sins might arise, or in the other the earliest of all
sins might lift its head and wound us with a yet more fatal dart of
pride: but a due equilibrium will result from this struggle, and open to
us a safe and secure path of virtue between the two, and teach the
soldier of Christ ever to walk on the King’s highway. And thus the
result will be that when, in consequence of the lukewarmness arising
from this sluggish will of which we have spoken, the mind has been more
easily entangled in carnal desires, it is checked by the desire of the
spirit, which by no means acquiesces in earthly sins; and again, if
through over much feeling our spirit has been carried in unbounded
fervour and towards ill-considered and impossible heights, it is
recalled by the weakness of the flesh to sounder considerations and
rising above the lukewarm condition of our free will with due proportion
and even course proceeds along the way of perfection. Something of this
sort we hear that the Lord ordained in the case of the building of that
tower in the book of Genesis, where a confusion of tongues suddenly
sprang up, and put a stop to the blasphemous and wicked attempts of men.
For there would have remained there in opposition to God, aye and
against the interest of those who had begun to assail His Divine
Majesty, an agreement boding no good, unless by God’s providence the
difference of languages, raising disturbances among them, had forced
them because of the variations of their words to go on to a better
condition, and a happy and valuable discord had recalled to salvation
those whom a ruinous union had driven to destruction, as when divisions
arose they began to experience human weakness of which when puffed up by
their wicked plots they had hitherto known nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[334:1303](2110653.htm#fr_1302) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xii-p3"></span> [Rev.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Of the advantage of the delay which results from
the struggle between flesh and spirit.](2110654)
