[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110303)  [Next](2110305) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p1"></span>Of their Method of Praying.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>These</span> aforesaid prayers, then,
they begin and finish in such a way that when the Psalm is ended they do
not hurry at once to kneel down, as some of us do in this country, who,
before <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vii-Page_208"></span>the Psalm is fairly ended, make haste
to prostrate themselves for prayer, in their hurry to finish the
service <span id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692) as quickly as possible.
For though we have chosen to exceed the limit which was anciently fixed
by our predecessors, supplying the number of the remaining Psalms, we
are anxious to get to the end of the service, thinking of the
refreshment of the wearied body rather than looking for profit and
benefit from the prayer. Among them, therefore, it is not so, but before
they bend their knees they pray for a few moments, and while they are
standing up spend the greater part of the time in prayer. And so after
this, for the briefest space of time, they prostrate themselves to the
ground, as if but adoring the Divine Mercy, and as soon as possible rise
up, and again standing erect with outspread hands—just as they had been
standing to pray before—remain with thoughts intent upon their prayers.
For when you lie prostrate for any length of time upon the ground you
are more open to an attack, they say, not only of wandering thoughts but
also slumber. And would that we too did not know the truth of this by
experience and daily practice—we who when prostrating ourselves on the
ground too often wish for this attitude to be prolonged for some time,
not for the sake of our prayer so much as for the sake of resting. But
when he who is to “collect” the prayer <span
id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693) rises from the ground they all start
up at once, so that no one would venture to bend the knee before *he*
bows down, nor to delay when *he* has risen from the ground, lest it
should be thought that he has offered his own prayer independently
instead of following the leader to the close.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_692"></span>[208:693](2110304.htm#fr_692) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p3"></span> *Ad celeritatem missæ*. The word
“missa” is here used for the breaking up of the congregation after
service, as it is again in Book III. c. vii., where Cassian says that
one who came late for prayer had to wait, standing before the door, for
the “missa” of the whole assembly. Cf. III. c. viii., “post vigiliarum
missam,” and the rule of S. Benedict (c. xvii.): “After the three Psalms
are finished let one lesson be read, a verse, and Kyrie Eleison: *et
missæ fiant*.” A full account of the various meanings given to the word
will be found in the *Dictionary of Christian Antiquities*, Vol. II. p.
1193 *sq*.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[208:694](2110304.htm#fr_693) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p4"></span> *Colligere orationem*. The phrase
corresponds to the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>συνάπτειν</span>, but Ducange gives but
few instances of its use in Latin. It is found, however, in Canon xxx.
of the Council of Agde. “Plebs *collecta oratione* ad vesperam ab
Episcopo cum benedictione dimittatur.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of the Prayer which follows the Psalm.](2110305)
