[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110808)  [Next](2110810) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p1"></span>Of the custom which is kept up in the
Province of Egypt for signifying the time of Easter.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p2.1"></span>In</span> the country of Egypt this custom
is by ancient tradition observed that—when Epiphany is past, which the
priests of that province regard as the time, both of our Lord’s baptism
and also of His birth in the flesh, and so celebrate the commemoration
of either mystery not separately as in the Western provinces but on the
single festival of this day, <span id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659)
—letters are sent from the Bishop of Alexandria through all the Churches
of Egypt, by which the beginning of Lent, and the day of Easter are
pointed out not only in all the cities but also in all the
monasteries. <span id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660) In accordance
then with this custom, a very few days after the previous conference had
been held with Abbot Isaac, there arrived the festal letters of
Theophilus <span id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661) the Bishop of the
aforesaid city, in which together with the announcement of Easter he
considered as well the foolish heresy of the Anthropomorphites <span
id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662) at great length, and abundantly
refuted it. And this was received by almost all the body of monks
residing in the whole province of Egypt with such bitterness owing to
their simplicity and error, that the greater part of the Elders decreed
that on the contrary the aforesaid Bishop ought to be abhorred by the
whole body of the brethren as tainted with heresy of the worst kind,
because he seemed to impugn the teaching of holy Scripture by the denial
that Almighty God was formed in the fashion of a human <span
id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xi.ii-Page_402"></span>figure, though Scripture teaches with
perfect clearness that Adam was created in His image. Lastly this letter
was rejected also by those who were living in the desert of Scete and
who excelled all who were in the monasteries of Egypt, in perfection and
in knowledge, so that except Abbot Paphnutius the presbyter of our
congregation, not one of the other presbyters, who presided over the
other three churches in the same desert, would suffer it to be even read
or repeated at all in their meetings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[401:1660](2110809.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p3"></span> The observance of Epiphany can be
traced back in the Christian Church to the second century, and, as
Cassian tells us here, in the East (in which its observance apparently
originated) it was in the first instance a double festival commemorating
both the Nativity and the Baptism of our Lord. From the East its
observance passed over to the West, where however the Nativity was
already observed as a separate festival, and hence the *special*
reference of Epiphany was somewhat altered, and the manifestation to the
Magi was coupled with that at the Baptism: hence the plural
*Epiphaniorum dies*. Meanwhile, as the West adopted the observance of
this festival from the East, so the East followed the West in observing
a separate feast of the Nativity. Cassian’s words show us that when he
wrote the two festivals were both observed separately in the West,
though apparently *not* yet (to the best of his belief) in the East, but
the language of a homily by S. Chrysostom (Vol. ii. p. 354 Ed.
Montfaucon) delivered in <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 386 shows that the separation
of the two festivals had already begun at Antioch, and all the evidence
goes to show that “the Western plan was being gradually adopted in the
period which we may roughly define as the last quarter of the 4th and
the first quarter of the 5th century.” Dictionary of Christian
Antiquities, Vol. i. p. 361. See further Origines du Culte Chrétien, par
L’Abbé Duchesne, p. 247 *sq*.

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[401:1661](2110809.htm#fr_1660) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p4"></span> The “Festal letters” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p4.1"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p4.2"></span>οταστικαὶ
ἐπιστολαί</span>, Euseb. VII. xx., xxi.) were delivered by the Bishop of
Alexandria as Homilies, and then put into the form of an Epistle and
sent round to all the churches of Egypt; and, according to some late
writers, to the Bishops of all the principal sees, in accordance with a
decision of the Council of Nicæa, in order to inform them of the right
day on which Easter should be celebrated. Cassian here speaks of them as
sent immediately after Epiphany, and this was certainly the time at
which the announcement of the date of Easter was made in the West
shortly after his day (so the Council of Orleans, Canon i., <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p4.3"></span>a.d.</span> 541); that of
Braga <span class="sc"><span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p4.4"></span>a.d.</span>
572, Canon ix., and that of Auxerre <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p4.5"></span>a.d.</span> 572, Canon ii.), but there is
ample evidence in the Festal letters both of S. Athanasius and of S.
Cyril that at Alexandria the homilies were preached on the previous
Easter, and it is difficult to resist the inference that Cassian’s
memory is here at fault as to the exact time at which the incident
related really occurred, and that he is transferring to Egypt the custom
with which he was familiar in the West, assigning to the festival of
Epiphany what really must have taken place at Easter.

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[401:1662](2110809.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p4.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p5"></span> Theophilus succeeded Timothy as Bishop
of Alexandria in the summer of 385. The festal letters of which Cassian
here speaks were issued by him in the year 399.

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[401:1663](2110809.htm#fr_1662) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ii-p6"></span> The Anthropomorphite heresy, into
which the monks of Egypt had fallen, “supposed that God possesses eyes,
a face, and hands and other members of a bodily organization.” It arose
from taking too literally those passages of the Old Testament in which
God is spoken of in human terms, out of condescension to man’s limited
powers of grasping the Divine nature and appears historically to have
been a recoil from the allegorism of Origen and others of the
Alexandrian school. The Festal letter of Theophilus in which he
condemned these views, and maintained the incorporeal nature of God is
no longer extant, but is alluded to also by Sozomen, H. E. VIII. xi.,
where an account is given of the Origenistic controversy of which it was
the occasion, and out of which Theophilus came so badly. On the heresy
see also Epiphanius, Hær. lxx.; Augustine. Hær. l. and lxxvi.; and
Theodoret, H. E. IV. x.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of Abbot Sarapion and the heresy of the
Anthropomorphites into which he fell in the error of
simplicity.](2110810)
