[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110150)  [Next](2110152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xvii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xvii-p1.1"></span>The</span> people going on from thence,
and being again tried with want of water, hardly restrained themselves
from destroying their leader. Then Moses, under divine orders, striking
with his rod the rock at the place which is called Horeb, brought forth
an abundant supply of water. But when they came to Raphidin, the
Amalekites destroyed numbers of the people by their attacks. Moses,
leading out his men to battle, placed Joshua at the head of the army;
and, in company with Aaron and Hur, was himself simply to be a spectator
of the fight, while, at the same time, for the purpose of praying to the
Lord, he went up to the top of a mountain. But when the armies had met
with doubtful issue, through the prayers of Moses, Joshua slew the enemy
until nightfall. At the same time, Jothor, Moses’ father-in-law, with
his daughter Sepphora (who, having been married to Moses, had remained
at home when her husband went into Egypt), and his children, having
learned the things which were being done by Moses, came to him. By his
advice Moses divided the people into various ranks; and, setting
tribunes, centurions, and decurions <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) over them, thus furnished a mode of
discipline and order to posterity. Jothor then returned to his own
country, while the Israelites came on to Mount Sinai. There Moses was
admonished by the Lord that the people should be sanctified, since they
were to hearken to the words of God; and that was carefully seen to. But
when God rested on the mountain, the air was shaken with the loud sounds
of trumpets, and thick clouds rolled around with frequent flashes of
lightning. But Moses and Aaron were on the top of the mountain beside
the Lord, while the people stood around the bottom of the mountain. Thus
a law was given, manifold and full of the words of God, and frequently
repeated; but if any one is desirous of knowing particulars regarding
it, he must consult the original, as we here only briefly touch upon it.
“There shall not be,” said God, “any strange gods among you, but ye
shall worship me alone; thou shalt not make to time any idol; thou shalt
not take the name of thy God in vain; thou shalt do no work upon the
Sabbath; honor thy father and thy mother; thou shalt not kill; thou
shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not bear
false witness against thy neighbor; thou shalt not covet anything
belonging to thy neighbor.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[78:281](2110151.htm#fr_280) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xvii-p2"></span> These words denote what is expressed
in the Greek, “rulers of thousands, of hundreds, and of tens.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.](2110152)
