[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110357)  [Next](2110359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iv.xxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxix-p1"></span>Of the obedience of a brother who at
the Abbot’s bidding carried about in public ten baskets and sold them by
retail.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxix-p2.1"></span>We</span> will also not be silent about
a brother whom we knew, who belonged to a high family according to the
rank of this world, for he was sprung from a father who was a count and
extremely wealthy, and had been well brought up with a liberal
education. This man, when he had left his parents and fled to the
monastery, in order to prove the humility of his disposition and the
ardour of his faith was at once ordered by his superior to load his
shoulders with ten baskets (which there was no need to sell publicly),
and to hawk them about through the streets for sale: this condition
being attached, so that he might be kept longer at the work, viz.: that
if any one should chance to want to buy them all together, he was not to
allow it, but was to sell them to purchasers separately. And this he
carried out with the utmost zeal, and trampling under foot all shame and
confusion, out of love for Christ, and for His Name’s sake, he put the
baskets on his shoulders and sold them by retail at the price fixed and
brought back the money to the monastery; not in the least upset by the
novelty of so mean and unusual a duty, and paying no attention to the
indignity of the thing and the splendour of his birth, and the disgrace
of the sale, as he was aiming at gaining through the grace of obedience
that humility of Christ which is the true nobility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX. Of the humility of Abbot Pinufius, who left a very
famous Cœnobium over which he presided as Presbyter, and out of the love
of subjection sought a distant monastery where he could be received as a
novice.](2110359)
