[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110029)  [Next](2110031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p1"></span>Words cannot describe the Excellences
of Martin.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>But</span> now my book must be brought to
an end, and my discourse finished. This is not because all that was
worthy of being said concerning Martin is now exhausted, but because I,
just as sluggish poets grow less careful towards the end of their work,
give over, being baffled by the immensity of the matter. For, although
his <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="ii.ii.xxvii-Page_17"></span>outward deeds could in some sort of way
be set forth in words, no language, I truly own, can ever be capable of
describing his inner life and daily conduct, and his mind always bent
upon the things of heaven. No one can adequately make known his
perseverance and self-mastery in abstinence and fastings, or his power
in watchings and prayers, along with the nights, as well as days, which
were spent by him, while not a moment was separated from the service of
God, either for indulging in ease, or engaging in business. But, in
fact, he did not indulge either in food or sleep, except in so far as
the necessities of nature required. I freely confess that, if, as the
saying is, Homer himself were to ascend from the shades below, he could
not do justice to this subject in words; to such an extent did all
excellences surpass in Martin the possibility of being embodied in
language. Never did a single hour or moment pass in which he was not
either actually engaged in prayer; or, if it happened that he was
occupied with something else, still he never let his mind loose from
prayer. In truth, just as it is the custom of blacksmiths, in the midst
of their work to beat their own anvil as a sort of relief to the
laborer, so Martin even when he appeared to be doing something else, was
still engaged in prayer. O truly blessed man in whom there was no
guile—judging no man, condemning no man, returning evil for evil to no
man! He displayed indeed such marvelous patience in the endurance of
injuries, that even when he was chief <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) priest, he allowed himself to be wronged
by the lowest clerics with impunity; nor did he either remove them from
the office on account of such conduct, or, as far as in him lay, repel
them from a place in his affection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[17:41](2110030.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.ii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p3"></span> “Summus sacerdos”: “that is,” remarks
Hornius, “bishop. They were also in those ages styled Popes (Papæ). This
is clear from Cyprian, Jerome, and others of a much later age.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. Wonderful Piety of Martin.](2110031)
