[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110271)  [Next](2110273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p1"></span>The Council of Ephesus.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p2"></span>\[79.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>These</span> then are the men whose writings,
whether as judges or as witnesses, were recited in the Council: St.
Peter, bishop of Alexandria, a most excellent Doctor and most blessed
martyr, Saint Athanasius, bishop of the same city, a most faithful
Teacher, and most eminent Confessor, Saint Theophilus, also bishop of
the same city, a man illustrious for his faith, his life, his knowledge,
whose successor, the revered Cyril, now <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) adorns the Alexandrian Church. And
lest perchance the doctrine ratified by the Council should be thought
peculiar to one city and province, there were added also those lights of
Cappadocia, St. Gregory of Nazianzus, bishop and Confessor, St. Basil of
Cæsarea in Cappadocia, bishop and Confessor, and the other St. Gregory,
St. Gregory of Nyssa, for his faith, his conversation, his integrity,
and his wisdom, most worthy to be the brother of Basil. And lest Greece
or the East should seem to stand alone, to prove that the Western and
Latin world also have always held the same belief, there were read in
the Council certain Epistles of St. Felix, martyr, and St. Julius, both
bishops of Rome. And that not only the Head, but the other parts, of the
world also might bear witness to the judgment of the council, there was
added from the South the most blessed Cyprian, bishop of Carthage and
martyr, and from the North St. Ambrose, bishop of Milan.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p4"></span>\[80.\] These all then, to the sacred
number of the decalogue, <span id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) were
produced at Ephesus <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="iii.xxxi-Page_155"></span>as doctors, councillors, witnesses,
judges. And that blessed council holding their doctrine, following their
counsel, believing their witness, submitting to their judgment without
haste, without foregone conclusion, without partiality, gave their
determination concerning the Rules of Faith. A much greater number of
the ancients might have been adduced; but it was needless, because
neither was it fit that the time should be occupied by a multitude of
witnesses, nor does any one suppose that those ten were really of a
different mind from the rest of their colleagues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_518"></span>[154:519](2110272.htm#fr_518) <span
id="iii.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p3"></span> This marks Vincentius’s date within very
narrow limits, *viz*. after the Council of Ephesus, and before Cyril’s
death. Cyril died in 444.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[154:520](2110272.htm#fr_519) <span
id="iii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p5"></span> Vincentius’s copy of the acts of the
Council appears to have contained extracts from no more than ten
Fathers. But the Fathers from whose writings extracts were read were
twelve in number; the two omitted by Vincentius being Atticus, bishop of
Constantinople, and Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium. In Labbe’s
*Concilia*, where the whole are given, it is remarked that in one
manuscript the two last mentioned occupy a different place from the
others.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p6"></span>Dean Milman (*Latin Christianity*, vol. 1,
p. 164) speaks of the passages read, “as of very doubtful bearing on the
question raised by Nestorius.” It is true only two, those from
Athanasius and Gregory Nazianzen, contain the crucial term “Theotocos”
but all express the truth which “Theotocos” symbolises. That the word
was not of recent introduction, Bishop Pearson (*Creed*, Art. 3) shows
by quotations from other writers besides those produced at the Council,
going back as far as to Origen.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p7"></span>The Fathers cited may certainly be said to
fulfil to some extent Vincentius’s requirement of universality. They
represent the teaching of Alexandria, Rome, Carthage, Milan,
Constantinople, and Asia Minor; but his appeal would have been more to
his purpose if antiquity had been more expressly represented. With the
exception of Cyprian, all the passages cited were from writers of
comparatively recent date at the time, though, as Vincentius truly
remarks, others might have been produced.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p8"></span>Petavius (*De Incarn*. l. xiv. c. 15), in
defending the *cultus* of the blessed Virgin and of the saints
generally, lays much stress on this omission of citations from earlier
Fathers at the Council, as he does also on similar omissions in the case
of the fourth, fifth, and sixth Councils, with what object is
sufficiently obvious. Bishop Bull points out Petavius’s disposition to
disparage or misrepresent the teaching of the earlier Fathers, in
another and still more important instance. (*Defens. Fid. Nic*.)
*Introd*. § 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. The Constancy of the Ephesine Fathers in driving
away Novelty and maintaining Antiquity.](2110273)
