[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110598)  [Next](2110600) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.viii-p1"></span>Of the fall and deception of a monk
of Mesopotamia.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is a long business too to tell
the story of the deception of that monk of Mesopotamia, who observed an
abstinence that could be imitated by but few in that country, which he
had practised for many years concealed in his cell, and at last was so
deceived by revelations and dreams that came from the devil that after
so many labours and good deeds, in which he had surpassed all those who
dwelt in the same parts, he actually relapsed miserably into Judaism and
circumcision of the flesh. For when the devil by accustoming him to
visions through the wish to entice him to believe a falsehood in the
end, had like a messenger of truth revealed to him for a long while what
was perfectly true, at length he showed him Christian folk together with
the leaders of our religion and creed; viz. Apostles and Martyrs, in
darkness and filth, and foul and disfigured with all squalor, and on the
other hand the Jewish people with Moses, the patriarchs and prophets,
dancing with all joy and shining with dazzling light; and so persuaded
him that if he wanted to share their reward and bliss, he must at once
submit to circumcision. And so none of these would have been so
miserably deceived, if they had endeavoured to obtain a power of
discretion. Thus the mischances and trials of many show how dangerous it
is to be without the grace of discretion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. A question about the acquirement of true
discretion.](2110600)
