[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110019)  [Next](2110021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p1"></span>Cures effected by St. Martin.

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>Moreover</span>, the gift <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) of accomplishing cures was so largely
possessed by Martin, that scarcely any sick person came to him for
assistance without being at once restored to health. This will clearly
appear from the following example. A certain girl at Treves <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) was so completely prostrated by a
terrible paralysis that for a long time she had been quite unable to
make use of her body for any purpose, and being, as it were, already
dead, only the smallest breath of life seemed still to remain in her.
Her afflicted relatives were standing by, expecting nothing but her
death, when it was suddenly announced that Martin had come to that city.
When the father of the girl found that such was the case, he ran to make
a request in behalf of his all but lifeless child. It happened that
Martin had already entered the church. There, while the people were
looking on, and in the presence of many other bishops, the old man,
uttering a cry of grief, embraced the saint’s knees and said: “My
daughter is dying of a miserable kind of infirmity; and, what is more
dreadful than death itself, she is now alive only in the spirit, her
flesh being already dead before the time. I beseech thee to go to her,
and give her thy blessing; for I believe that through you she will be
restored to health.” Martin, troubled by such an address, was
bewildered, and shrank back, saying that this was a matter not in his
own hands; that the old man was mistaken in the judgment he <span
id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="ii.ii.xvii-Page_12"></span>had
formed; and that he was not worthy to be the instrument through whom the
Lord should make a display of his power. The father, in tears,
persevered in still more earnestly pressing the case, and entreated
Martin to visit the dying girl. At last, constrained by the bishops
standing by to go as requested, he went down to the home of the girl. An
immense crowd was waiting at the doors, to see what the servant of the
Lord would do. And first, betaking himself to his familiar arms in
affairs of that kind, he cast himself down on the ground and prayed.
Then gazing earnestly upon the ailing girl, he requests that oil should
be given him. After he had received and blessed this, he poured the
powerful sacred liquid into the mouth of the girl, and immediately her
voice returned to her. Then gradually, through contact with him, her
limbs began, one by one, to recover life, till, at last, in the presence
of the people, she arose with firm steps.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[11:31](2110020.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p3"></span> The Latin word *gratia* here
corresponds to the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>χάρισμα</span>. St. Paul says much
respecting the various <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p3.2"></span>χαρίσματα</span> in [1 Cor.
12.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009)<span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p3.3"></span>., and speaks, among others, of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.ii.xvii-p3.4"></span>χαρίσματα ἰαμάτων</span>
(v. 9).

<span id="fn_31"></span>[11:32](2110020.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> The name *Treveri* at first denoted the
people (as often in Cæsar, *Bell. Gall*. i. 37, &c.), and was afterwards
applied to their chief city, the modern Treves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Martin casts out Several Devils.](2110021)
