[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110700)  [Next](2110702) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x"></span> <span id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-Page_356"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p1"></span>Of the excellence of the perfect man
who is figuratively spoken of as ambidextrous.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p2.1"></span>Those</span> are they then who are
figuratively spoken of in holy Scripture as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p2.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p2.3"></span>μφοτεροδέξιον</span> , i.e., ambidextrous,
as Ehud is described in the book of Judges “who used either hand as the
right <span id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392) hand.” And this power
we also can spiritually acquire, if by making a right and proper use of
those things which are fortunate, and which seem to be “on the right
hand,” as well as of those which are unfortunate and as we call it “on
the left hand,” we make them both belong to the right side, so that
whatever turns up proves in our case, to use the words of the Apostle,
“the armour of righteousness.” For we see that the inner man consists of
two parts, and if I may be allowed the expression, two hands, nor can
any of the saints do without that which we call the left hand: but by
means of it the perfection of virtue is shown, where a man by skilful
use can turn both hands into right hands. And in order to make our
meaning clearer, the saint has for his right hand his spiritual
achievements, in which he is found when with fervent spirit he gets the
better of his desires and passions, when he is free from all attacks of
the devil, and without any effort or difficulty rejects and cuts off all
carnal sins, when he is exalted above the earth and regards all things
present and earthly as light smoke or vain shadows, and scorns them as
what is about to vanish away, when with an overflowing heart he not only
longs most intensely for the future but actually sees it the more
clearly, when he is more effectually fed on spiritual contemplations,
when he sees heavenly mysteries more brightly laid open to him, when he
pours forth his prayers to God with greater purity and readiness, when
he is so inflamed with fervent of spirit as to pass with the utmost
readiness of soul to things invisible and eternal, so as scarcely to
believe that he any longer remains in the flesh. He has also a left
hand, when he is entangled in the toils of temptation, when he is
inflamed with the heat of desire for carnal lusts, when he is set on
fire by emotion towards rage and anger, when he is overcome by being
puffed up with pride or vainglory, when he is oppressed by a sorrow that
worketh death, when he is shaken to pieces by the contrivances and
attacks of accidie, and when he has lost all spiritual warmth, and grows
indifferent with a sort of lukewarmness and unreasonable grief so that
not only is he forsaken by good and kindling thoughts, but actually
Psalms, prayer, reading, and retirement in his cell all pall upon him,
and all virtuous exercises seem by an intolerable and horrible loathing
to have lost their savour. And when a monk is troubled in this way, then
he knows that he is attacked “on the left hand.” Anyone therefore who is
not at all puffed up through the aid of vainglory by any of those things
on the right hand which we have mentioned, and who struggles manfully
against those on the left hand, and does not yield to despair and give
in, but rather on the other hand seizes the armour of patience to
practise himself in virtue—this man can use both hands as right hands,
and in each action he proves triumphant and carries off the prize of
victory from that condition on the left hand as well as that on the
right. Such, we read, was the reward which the blessed Job obtained who
was certainly crowned (for a victory) on the right hand, when he was the
father of seven sons and walked as a rich and wealthy man, and yet
offered daily sacrifices to the Lord for their purification, in his
anxiety that they might prove acceptable and dear to God rather than to
himself, when his gates stood open to every stranger, when he was “feet
to lame and eyes to blind,” <span id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393)
when the shoulders of the suffering were kept warm by the wool of his
sheep, when he was a father to orphans and a husband to widows, when he
did not even in his heart rejoice at the fall of his enemy. And again it
was the same man who with still greater virtue triumphed over adversity
on the left hand, when deprived in one moment of his seven sons he was
not as a father overcome with bitter grief but as a true servant of God
rejoiced in the will of his Creator. When instead of being a wealthy man
he became poor, naked instead of rich, pining away instead of strong,
despised and contemptible instead of famous and honourable, and yet
preserved his fortitude of mind unshaken, when, lastly, bereft of all
his wealth and substance he took up his abode on the dunghill, and like
some stern executioner of his own body scraped with a potsherd the
matter that broke out, and plunging his fingers deep into his wounds
dragged out on every side masses of worms from his limbs. And in all
this he never fell into despair and blasphemy, nor murmured at all
against his Creator. Moreover also so little was he overcome by such a
weight of bitter temptations that the cloak which out of all his former
property remained to cover his body, and which alone could be <span
id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span id="iv.iv.vii.x-Page_357"></span>saved
from destruction by the devil because he was clothed with it, he rent
and cast off, and covered with it his nakedness which he voluntarily
endured, which the terrible robber had brought upon him. The hair of his
head too, which was the only thing left untouched out of all the remains
of his former glory, he shaved and cast to his tormentor, and cutting
off even that which his savage foe had left to him he exulted over him
and mocked him with that celestial cry of his: “If we have received good
at the hand of the Lord, should we not also receive evil? Naked came I
out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither. The Lord gave
and the Lord hath taken away; as it hath pleased the Lord, so is it
done; blessed be the name of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394) I should also with good reason call
Joseph ambidextrous, as in prosperity he was very dear to his father,
affectionate to his brethren, acceptable to God; and in adversity was
chaste, and faithful to the Lord, in prison most kind to the prisoners,
forgetful of wrongs, generous to his enemies; and to his brethren who
were envious of him and as far as lay in their powers, his murderers, he
proved not only affectionate but actually munificent. These men then and
those who are like them are rightly termed <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p5.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p5.3"></span>μφοτεροδέξιον</span> , i.e., ambidextrous.
For they can use either hand as the right hand, and passing through
those things which the Apostle enumerates can fairly say: “Through the
armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, through
honour and dishonour, through evil report and good report, etc.” And of
this right and left hand Solomon speaks as follows in the Song of songs,
in the person of the bride: “His left hand is under my head, and his
right hand shall embrace me.” <span id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395)
And while this passage shows that both are useful, yet it puts one under
the head, because misfortunes ought to be subject to the control of the
heart, since they are only useful for this; viz., to train us for a time
and discipline us for our salvation and make us perfect in the matter of
patience. But the right hand she hopes will ever cling to her to cherish
her and hold her fast in the blessed embrace of the Bridegroom, and
unite her to him indissolubly. We shall then be ambidextrous, when
neither abundance nor want affects us, and when the former does not
entice us to the luxury of a dangerous carelessness, while the latter
does not draw us to despair, and complaining; but when, giving thanks to
God in either case alike, we gain one and the same advantage out of good
and bad fortune. And such that truly ambidextrous man, the teacher of
the Gentiles, testifies that he himself was, when he says: “For I have
learnt in whatsoever state I am, to be content therewith. I know both
how to be brought low and I know how to abound: everywhere and in all
things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound
and to suffer need. I can do all things in Him which strengtheneth
me.” <span id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[356:1393](2110701.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p3"></span> [Judg. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p3.1"></span>,
where the LXX. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p3.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p3.3"></span>μφοτεροδέξιον</span>.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[356:1394](2110701.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p4"></span> [Job xxix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[357:1395](2110701.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p5"></span> [Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010), [Job
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[357:1396](2110701.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p6"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[357:1397](2110701.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p7"></span> [Phil. iv.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Of the two kinds of trials, which come upon us in a
three-fold way.](2110702)
