[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110846)  [Next](2110848) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.iv.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.iv.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.v.iv.vi-p1"></span>That without the grace of God we cannot
make any diligent efforts.

<span id="iv.v.iv.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>And</span> therefore though in many things,
indeed in everything, it can be shown that men always have need of God’s
help, and that human weakness cannot accomplish anything that has to do
with salvation by itself alone, i.e., without the aid of God, yet in
nothing is this more clearly shown than in the acquisition and
preservation of chastity. For as the discussion on the difficulty of its
perfection is put off for so long, let us meanwhile discourse briefly on
the instruments of it. Who, I ask, could, however fervent he might be in
spirit, relying on his own strength with no praise from men endure the
squalor of the desert, and I will not say the daily lack but the supply
of dry bread? Who without the Lord’s consolation, could put up with the
continual thirst for water, or deprive his human eyes of that sweet and
delicious morning sleep, and regularly compress his whole time of rest
and repose into the limits of four hours? Who would be sufficient
without God’s grace to give continual attendance to reading and constant
earnestness in work, receiving no advantage of <span id="page_425">p.
425</span> <span id="iv.v.iv.vi-Page_425"></span>present gain? And all
these matters, as we cannot desire them continuously without divine
inspiration, so in no respect whatever can we perform them without His
help. And that we may ensure that these things are not only proved to us
by the teaching of experience, but also made still clearer by sure proof
and arguments, does not some weakness intervene in the case of many
things which we wish usefully to perform, and though the full keenness
of our desire and the perfection of our will be not wanting, yet
interfere with the wish we have conceived, so that there is no carrying
out of our purpose, unless the power to perform it has been granted by
the mercy of the Lord, so that, although there are countless swarms of
people who are anxious to stick faithfully to the pursuit of virtue, you
can scarcely find any who are able to carry it out and endure it, to say
nothing of the fact that, even when no weakness at all hinders us, the
opportunity for doing everything that we wish does not lie in our own
power. For it is not in our power to secure the silence of solitude and
severe fasts and undisturbed study even when we could use such
opportunities, but by a chapter of accidents we are often very much
against our will kept away from the salutary ordinances so that we have
to pray to the Lord for opportunities of place or time in which to
practise them. And it is clear that the ability for these is not
sufficient for us unless there be also granted to us by the Lord an
opportunity of doing what we are capable of (as the Apostle also says:
“For we wanted to come to you once and again, but Satan hindered
us” <span id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) ), so that sometimes we
find for our advantage we are called away from these spiritual exercises
in order that while without our own consent the regularity of our
routine is broken and we yield something to weakness of the flesh, we
may even against our will be brought to a salutary patience. Of which
providential arrangement of God the blessed Apostle says something
similar: “For which I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from
me. And He said to me: My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength
is made perfect in weakness:” and again: “For we know not what to pray
for as we ought.” <span id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[425:1753](2110847.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="iv.v.iv.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv.vi-p3"></span> [1 Thess. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#018)<span id="iv.v.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[425:1754](2110847.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="iv.v.iv.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv.vi-p4"></span> [2 Cor.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009), [Rom.
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span
id="iv.v.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Of the main purpose of God and His daily
Providence.](2110848)
