[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110067)  [Next](2110069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>In</span> the same way, some time
afterwards, we made a journey with him while he visited the various
parishes in his diocese. He had gone forward a little by himself, some
necessity or other, I know not what, compelling us to keep behind. In
the meantime, a state-conveyance, full of military men, was coming along
the public highway. But when the animals near the side beheld Martin in
his shaggy garment, with a long black cloak over it, being alarmed, they
swerved a little in the opposite direction. Then, the reins getting
entangled, they threw into confusion those extended lines in which, as
you have often seen, those wretched creatures are held together; and as
they were with difficulty rearranged, delay, of course, was caused to
those people hastening forward. Enraged by this injury, the soldiers,
with hasty leaps, made for the ground. And then they began to belabor
Martin with whips and staves; and as he, in silence and with incredible
patience, submitted his back to them smiting him, this roused the
greater fury in these wretches, for they became all the more violent
from the fact, that he, as if he did not feel the blows showered upon
him, seemed to despise them. He fell almost lifeless to the earth; and
we, ere long, found him covered with blood, and wounded in every part of
his body. Lifting him up without delay, and placing him upon his own
ass, while we execrated the place of that cruel bloodshed, we hastened,
off as speedily as possible. In the meantime, the soldiers having
returned to their conveyance, after their fury was satisfied, urge the
beasts to proceed in the direction in which they had been going. But
they all remained fixed to the spot, as stiff as if they had been brazen
statues, and although their masters shouted at them, and the sound of
their whips echoed on every side, still the animals never moved. These
men next all fall to with lashes; in fact, while punishing the mules,
they waste all the Gallic whips they had. The whole of the neighboring
wood is laid hold of, and the beasts are beaten with enormous cudgels;
but these cruel hands still effected nothing: the animals continued to
stand in one and the same place like fixed effigies. The wretched men
knew not what to do, and they could no longer conceal from themselves
that, in some way or other, there was a higher power at work in the
bosoms of these brutes, so that they were, in fact, restrained by the
interposition of a deity. At length, therefore, returning to themselves,
they began to enquire who he was whom but a little before they had
scourged at the same place; and when, on pursuing the investigation,
they ascertained from those on the way that it was Martin who had been
so cruelly beaten by them, then, indeed, the cause of their misfortune
appeared manifest to all; and they could no longer doubt that they were
kept back on account of the injury done to that man. Accordingly, they
all rush after us at full speed, and, conscious of what they had done
and deserved, overwhelmed with shame, weeping, and having their heads
and faces smeared with the dust with which they themselves had
besprinkled their bodies, they cast themselves at Martin’s feet,
imploring his pardon, and begging that he would allow them to proceed.
They added that they had been sufficiently punished by their conscience
alone, and that they deeply felt that the earth might swallow them alive
in that very spot, or that rather, they, losing all sense, might justly
be stiffened into immovable rocks, just as they had seen their beasts of
burden fixed to the places in which they stood; but they begged and
entreated him to extend to them pardon for their crime, and to allow
them to go on their way. The blessed man had been aware, before they
came up to us, that they were in a state of detention, and had already
informed us of the fact; however, he kindly granted them forgiveness;
and, restoring their animals, permitted them to pursue their journey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](2110069)
