[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110583)  [Next](2110585) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xvii-p1"></span>The answer what the mind can and what
it cannot do with regard to the state of its thoughts.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>Moses</span>. It is impossible for the
mind not to be approached by thoughts, but it is in the power of every
earnest man either to admit them or to reject them. As then their rising
up does not entirely depend on ourselves, so the rejection or admission
of them lies in our own power. But because we said that it is impossible
for the mind not to be approached by thoughts, you must not lay
everything to the charge of the assault, or to those spirits who strive
to instil them into us, else there would not remain any free will in
man, nor would efforts for our improvement be in our power: but it is, I
say, to a great extent in our power to improve the character of our
thoughts and to let either holy and spiritual thoughts or earthly ones
grow up in our hearts. For for this purpose frequent reading and
continual meditation on the Scriptures is employed that from thence an
opportunity for spiritual recollection may be given to us, therefore the
frequent singing of Psalms is used, that thence constant feelings of
compunction may be provided, and earnest vigils and fasts and prayers,
that the mind may be brought low and not mind earthly things, but
contemplate things celestial, for if these things are dropped and
carelessness creeps on us, the mind being hardened with the foulness of
sin is sure to incline in a carnal direction and fall away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Comparison of a soul and a millstone.](2110585)
