[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110186)  [Next](2110188) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.liii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.liii-p0.1"></span>Chapter LIII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.liii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.liii-p1.1"></span>Joachas</span>, his son, having then
obtained the kingdom, held it for three months, being doomed to
captivity on account of his impiety. For Nechao, king of Egypt, bound
him and led him away captive, and not long after, while still a
prisoner, he ended his days. An annual tribute was demanded of the Jews,
and a king was given them at the will of the victor. His name was
Eliakim, but he afterwards changed it to Joachim. He was the brother of
Joacha, and the son of Josia, but liker his brother than his father,
displeasing God by his impiety. Accordingly, while he was in subjection
to the king of Egypt, and in token thereof paid him tribute,
Nabuchodonosor, the king of Babylon, seized the land of Judæa, and as
victor held it by the right of war for three years. For the king of
Egypt now giving way, and the boundaries of their empire being fixed
between them, it had been agreed that the Jews should belong to Babylon.
Thus after Joachim, having finished his reign of eleven years, had given
place to his son of the same name, and he had excited against himself
the wrath of the king of Babylon (God undoubtedly overruling everything,
having resolved to give the nation of the Jews up to captivity and
destruction), Nabuchodonosor entered Jerusalem with an army, and leveled
the walls and the temple to the ground. He also carried off an immense
amount of gold, with sacred ornaments either public or private, and all
of mature age both of the male and female sex, those only being left
behind whose weakness or age caused trouble to the conquerors. This
useless crowd had the task assigned them of working and cultivating the
fields in slavery, in order that the soil might not be neglected. Over
them a king called Sedechias was appointed; but while the empty shadow
of the name of king was allowed him, all real power was taken away.
Joachim, for his part, possessed the sovereignty only for three months.
He was carried away, along with the people, to Babylon, and was there
thrown into prison; but being, after a period of thirty years released,
while he was admitted by the king to his friendship, and made a partaker
with him at his table and in his counsels, he died at last, not without
some consolation in that his misfortunes had been removed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV.](2110188)
