[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110203)  [Next](2110205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>The</span> Jews, then, having returned, as
we have narrated above, to their native land, and the condition of their
affairs and of their city being not yet properly settled, the king of
the Persians made war on the Medes, and engaged in a successful battle
against their king, who was named Arphaxad. That monarch being slain, he
added the nation to his empire. He did the same to other nations, having
sent before him Holofernes whom he had appointed master of his host,
with a hundred and twenty thousand foot-soldiers, and twelve thousand
cavalry. He, after having ravaged in war, Cilicia and Arabia, took many
cities by force, or compelled them through fear to surrender. And now
the army, having moved on to Damascus, had struck the Jews with great
terror. But as they were unable to resist, and as, at the same time,
they could not bring their minds to acquiesce in the thought of
surrender, since they had previously known from experience the miseries
of slavery, they betook themselves in crowds to the temple. There, with
a general groaning and commingled wailing, they implored the divine
assistance; saying that they had been sufficiently punished by God for
their sins and offenses; and begging him to spare the remnant of them
who had recently been delivered from slavery. In the meantime,
Holofernes had admitted the Moabites to surrender, and joined them to
himself as allies in the war against the Jews. He inquired of their
chief men what was the power on which the Hebrews relied in not bringing
their minds to submit to the thought of submission. In reply, a certain
<span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xv-Page_105"></span>man called Achior stated to him the
facts, viz.: that the Jews being worshipers of God, and trained by their
fathers to pious observances, had formerly passed through a period of
slavery in Egypt, and that, brought out from that country by the divine
aid, and having passed over on foot the sea which was dried up before
them, they had at last conquered all the opposing nations, and recovered
the territory inhabited by their ancestors. That subsequently, with
various fluctuations in their affairs, they had either prospered or the
reverse, that, when they did sink into adversity, they had again escaped
from their sufferings, finding that God was, in turn, either angry
against them, or reconciled towards them, according to their deserts, so
that, when they sinned, they were chastised by the attacks of enemies or
by being sent into captivity, but were always unconquerable when they
enjoyed the divine favor. So then, if at the present time they are free
from guilt, they cannot possibly be subdued; but if they are otherwise
situated, they will easily be conquered. Upon this, Holofernes, flushed
with many victories, and thinking that everything must give way before
him, was roused to wrath, because victory on his part was regarded as
principally depending on the sin of the Jews, and ordered Achior to be
pushed forward into the camp of the Hebrews, that he might perish in
company with those who he had affirmed could not be conquered. Now, the
Jews had then made for the mountains; and those to whom the business had
been assigned, proceeded to the foot of the mountains, and there left
Achior in chains. When the Jews perceived that, they freed him from his
bonds and conducted him up the hill. On their inquiring the reason of
what had happened, he explained it to them, and, being received in
peace, awaited the result. I may add that, after the victory, he was
circumcised and became a Jew. Well, Holofernes, perceiving the
difficulty of the localities, because he could not reach the heights,
surrounded the mountains with soldiers, and took the greatest pains to
cut off the Hebrews from all water supplies. On that account, they felt
all the sooner the misery of a siege. Being therefore overcome through
want of water, they went in a company to Ozias, their leader, all
inclined to make a surrender. But he replied that they should wait a
little, and look for the divine assistance, so that the time of
surrender was fixed for the fifth day afterwards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.](2110205)
