[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110265)  [Next](2110267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="iii.xxv-p1"></span>Continuation of the Exposition of [1 Tim.
vi. 20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.xxv-p2"></span>\[60.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxv-p2.1"></span>But</span> let us return to the apostle. “O
Timothy,” he says, “Guard the deposit, shunning profane novelties of
words.” “Shun them as you would a viper, as you would a scorpion, as you
would a basilisk, lest they smite you not only with their touch, but
even with their eyes and breath.” What is “to shun”? Not even to
eat <span id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) with a person of this sort.
What is “shun”? “If anyone,” says St. John, “come to you and bring not
this doctrine. What doctrine? What but the Catholic and universal
doctrine, which has continued one and the same through the several
successions of ages by the uncorrupt tradition of the truth and so will
continue for ever—“Receive him not into your house, neither bid him
Godspeed, for he that biddeth him Godspeed communicates with him in his
evil deeds.” <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502)

<span id="iii.xxv-p5"></span>\[61.\] “Profane novelties of words.” What
words are these? Such as have nothing sacred, nothing religious, words
utterly remote from the inmost sanctuary of the Church which is the
temple of God. “Profane novelties of words, that is, of doctrines,
subjects, opinions, such as are contrary to antiquity and the faith of
the olden time. Which if they be received, it follows necessarily that
the faith of the blessed fathers is violated either in whole, or at all
events in great part; it follows necessarily that all the faithful of
all ages, all the saints, the chaste, the continent, the virgins, all
the clergy, Deacons and Priests, so many thousands of Confessors, so
vast an army of martyrs, such multitudes of cities and of peoples, so
many islands, provinces, kings, tribes, kingdoms, nations, in a word,
almost the whole earth, incorporated in Christ the Head, through the
Catholic faith, have been ignorant for so long a tract of time, have
been mistaken, have blasphemed, have not known what to believe, what to
confess.

<span id="iii.xxv-p6"></span>\[62.\] “Shun profane novelties of words,”
which to receive and follow was never the part of Catholics; of heretics
always was. In sooth, what heresy ever burst forth save under a definite
name, at a definite place, at a definite time? Who ever originated a
heresy that did not first dissever himself from the consentient
agreement of the universality and antiquity of the Catholic Church? That
this is so is demonstrated in the clearest way by examples. For who ever
before that profane Pelagius <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503)
attributed so much antecedent strength to Free-will, as to deny the
necessity of God’s grace to aid it towards good in every <span
id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="iii.xxv-Page_150"></span>single
act? Who ever before his monstrous disciple Cœlestius denied that the
whole human race is involved in the guilt of Adam’s sin? Who ever before
sacrilegious Arius dared to rend asunder the unity of the Trinity? Who
before impious Sabellius was so audacious as to confound the Trinity of
the Unity? Who before cruellest Novatian represented God as cruel in
that He had rather the wicked should die than that he should be
converted and live? Who before Simon Magus, who was smitten by the
apostle’s rebuke, and from whom that ancient sink of every thing vile
has flowed by a secret continuous succession even to Priscillian of our
own time,—who, I say, before this Simon Magus, dared to say that God,
the Creator, is the author of evil, that is, of our wickednesses,
impieties, flagitiousnesses, inasmuch as he asserts that He created with
His own hands a human nature of such a description, that of its own
motion, and by the impulse of its necessity-constrained will, it can do
nothing else, can will nothing else, but sin, seeing that tossed to and
fro, and set on fire by the furies of all sorts of vices, it is hurried
away by unquenchable lust into the utmost extremes of baseness?

<span id="iii.xxv-p12"></span>\[63.\] There are innumerable instances of
this kind, which for brevity’s sake, pass over; by all of which,
however, it is manifestly and clearly shown, that it is an established
law, in the case of almost all heresies, that they evermore delight in
profane novelties, scorn the decisions of antiquity, and, through
oppositions of science falsely so called, make shipwreck of the faith.
On the other hand, it is the sure characteristic of Catholics to keep
that which has been committed to their trust by the holy Fathers, to
condemn profane novelties, and, in the apostle’s words, once and again
repeated, to anathematize every one who preaches any other doctrine than
that which has been received. <span id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_501"></span>[149:502](2110266.htm#fr_501) <span
id="iii.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p3"></span> [1 Cor. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[149:503](2110266.htm#fr_502) <span
id="iii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p4"></span> [2 John
10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[149:504](2110266.htm#fr_503) <span
id="iii.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p7"></span> Pelagius, a monk, a Briton by birth,
resident in Rome, where by the strictness of his life he had acquired a
high reputation for sanctity, was led, partly perhaps by opposition to
St. Augustine’s teaching on the subject of election and predestination,
partly by indignation at the laxity of professing Christians, who
pleaded, in excuse for their low standard, the weakness of human nature,
to insist upon man’s natural power, and to deny his need of divine
grace.

<span id="iii.xxv-p8"></span>Pelagius was joined by another monk,
Cœlestius, a younger man, with whom about the year 410, the year in
which Rome was taken by the Goths, he began to teach openly and in
public what before he had held and taught in private. After the sack of
Rome, the two friends passed over into Africa, and from thence Pelagius
proceeded to Palestine, where he was in two separate synods acquitted of
the charge of heresy which had been brought against him by Orosius, a
Spanish monk, whom Augustine had sent for that purpose. But in 416, two
African synods condemned his doctrine, and Zosimus bishop of Rome, whom
he had appealed to, though he had set aside their decision, was
eventually obliged to yield to the firmness with which they held their
ground, and not only to condemn Pelagius, but to take stringent measures
against his adherents. “In 418, another African synod of two hundred and
fourteen bishops passed nine canons, which were afterwards generally
accepted throughout the Church, and came to be regarded as the most
important bulwark against Pelagianism.” The heresy was formally
condemned, in 431, by the General Council of Ephesus. Canons 2 and 4.

<span id="iii.xxv-p9"></span>The Pelagians denied the corruption of
man’s nature, and the necessity of divine grace. They held that infants
new-born are in the same state in which Adam was before his fall; that
Adam’s sin injured no one but himself, and affected his posterity no
other wise than by the evil example which it afforded; they held also
that men may live without sin if they will and that some have so lived.

<span id="iii.xxv-p10"></span>Those who were afterwards called
semi-Pelagians (they belonged chiefly to the churches of Southern Gaul)
were orthodox except in one particular: In their anxiety to justify, as
they thought, God’s dealings with man, they held that the first step in
the way of salvation must be from ourselves: we must ask that we may
receive, seek that we may find, knock that it may be opened to us;
thenceforward in every stage of the road, our strenuous efforts must be
aided by divine grace. They did not understand, or did not grant, that
to that same grace must be referred even the disposition to ask, to
seek, to knock. See Prosper’s letter to Augustine, August. Opera, Tom.
x.

<span id="iii.xxv-p11"></span>The semi-Pelagian doctrine was condemned
in the second Council of Orange (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxv-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span> 529), the third and fifth canons
of which are directed against it.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[150:505](2110266.htm#fr_504) <span
id="iii.xxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p13"></span> [Gal. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxv-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Heretics appeal to Scripture that they may more
easily succeed in deceiving.](2110267)
