[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110784)  [Next](2110786) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.x.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.iv.x.xv-p1"></span>Whether these four kinds of prayers are
necessary for everyone to offer all at once or separately and in turns.

<span id="iv.iv.x.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.x.xv-p2.1"></span>And</span> of these four kinds, although
sometimes occasions arise for richer and fuller prayers (for from the
class of supplications which arises from sorrow for sin, and from the
kind of prayer which flows from confidence in our offerings and the
performance of our vows in accordance with a pure conscience, and from
the intercession which proceeds from fervour of love, and from the
thanksgiving which is born of the consideration of God’s blessings and
His greatness and goodness, we know that oftentimes there proceed most
fervent and ardent prayers so that it is clear that all these kinds of
prayer of which we have spoken are found to be useful and needful for
all men, so that in one and the same man his changing feelings will give
utterance to pure and fervent petitions now of supplications, now of
prayers, now of intercessions) yet the first seems to belong more
especially to beginners, who are still troubled by the stings and
recollection of their sins; the second to those who have already
attained some loftiness of mind in their spiritual progress and the
quest of virtue; the third to those who fulfil the completion of their
vows by their works, and are so stimulated to intercede for others also
through the consideration of their weakness, and the earnestness of
their love; the fourth to those who have already torn from their hearts
the guilty thorns of conscience, and thus being now free from care can
contemplate with a pure mind the beneficence of God and His compassions,
which He has either granted in the past, or is giving in the present, or
preparing for the future, and thus are borne onward with fervent hearts
to that ardent prayer which cannot be embraced or expressed by the mouth
of men. Sometimes however the mind which is advancing to that perfect
state of purity and which is already beginning to be established in it,
will take in all these at one and the same time, and like some
incomprehensible and all-devouring flame, dart through them all and
offer up to God inexpressible prayers of the purest force, which the
Spirit Itself, intervening with groanings that cannot be uttered, while
we ourselves understand not, pours forth to God, grasping at that hour
and ineffably pouring forth in its supplications things so great that
they cannot be uttered with the mouth nor even at any other time be
recollected by the mind. And thence it comes that in whatever degree any
one stands, he is found sometimes to offer up pure and devout prayers;
as even in that first and lowly station which has to do with the
recollection of future judgment, he who still remains under the
punishment of terror and the fear of judgment is so smitten with sorrow
for the time being that he is filled with no less keenness of spirit
from the richness of his supplications than he who through the purity of
his heart gazes on and considers the blessings of God and is overcome
with ineffable joy and delight. For, as the Lord Himself says, he begins
to love the more, who knows that he has been forgiven the more. <span
id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[392:1598](2110785.htm#fr_1597) <span
id="iv.iv.x.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x.xv-p3"></span> Cf. S. [Luke vii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)<span id="iv.iv.x.xv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Of the kinds of prayer to which we ought to direct
ourselves.](2110786)
