[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110469)  [Next](2110471) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.viii.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xxii-p1"></span>The remedies by which we can root
out anger from our hearts.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xxii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.viii.xxii-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> the athlete of Christ
who strives lawfully ought thoroughly to root out the feeling of wrath.
And it will be a sure remedy for this disease, if in the first place we
make up our mind that we ought never to be angry at all, whether for
good or bad reasons: as we know that we shall at once lose the light of
discernment, and the security of good counsel, and our very uprightness,
and the temperate character of righteousness, if the <span
id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="iv.iii.viii.xxii-Page_264"></span>main light of our heart has been
darkened by its shadows: next, that the purity of our soul will
presently be clouded, and that it cannot possibly be made a temple for
the Holy Ghost while the spirit of anger resides in us; lastly, that we
should consider that we ought never to pray, nor pour out our prayer to
God, while we are angry. And above all, having before our eyes the
uncertain condition of mankind, we should realize daily that we are soon
to depart from the body, and that our continence and chastity, our
renunciation of all our possessions, our contempt of wealth, our efforts
in fastings and vigils will not help us at all, if solely on account of
anger and hatred eternal punishments are awarded to us by the judge of
the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IX. Of the Spirit of Dejection.](2110471)
