[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110187)  [Next](2110189) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.liv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.liv-p0.1"></span>Chapter LIV.

<span id="ii.vi.i.liv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.liv-p1.1"></span>Meanwhile</span> Sedechias, the king of the
useless multitude, although without power, being of an unfaithful
disposition and neglectful of God, and not understanding that captivity
had been brought upon them on account of the sins of the nation,
becoming at length ripe for suffering the last evils he could endure,
offended the mind of the king. Accordingly, after a period of nine
years, Nabuchodonosor made war against him, and having forced him to
flee within the walls, besieged him for three years. At this time, he
consulted Jeremia the prophet, who had already often proclaimed that
captivity impended over the city, to discover if perhaps there might
still be some hope. But he, not ignorant of the anger of heaven, having
frequently had the same question put to him, at length gave an answer,
denouncing special punishment upon the king. Then Sedechias, roused to
resentment, ordered the prophet to be thrust into prison. Ere long,
however, he regretted this cruel act, but, as the chief men of the Jews
(whose practice it had been even from the beginning to afflict the
righteous) opposed him, he did not venture to release the innocent man.
Under coercion from the same persons, the prophet was let down into a
pit <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) of great depth, and which
was disgusting from its filth and squalor, while a deadly stench issued
from it. This was done that he might not simply die by a common death.
But the king, impious though he was, yet showed himself somewhat more
merciful than the priests, and ordered the prophet to be taken out of
the pit, and restored to the safekeeping of the prison. In the meantime
the force of the enemy and want began to press the besieged hard, and
everything being consumed that could be eaten, famine took a firm hold
of them. Thus, its defenders being worn out with want of food, the town
was taken and burnt. The king, as the prophet had declared, had his eyes
put out, and was carried away to Babylon, while Jeremia, through the
mercy of the enemy, was taken out of his prison. When Nabuzardan, one of
the royal princes, was leading him away captive with the rest, the
choice was granted by him to the prophet, either to remain in his
deserted and desolated native country, or to go along with him in the
possession of the highest honors; and Jeremia preferred to abide in his
native land. Nabuchodonosor, having carried away the people, appointed
as governor over those left behind by the conquerors (either from the
circumstances attending the war, or from an absolute weariness of
accumulating spoil) Godolia, who belonged to the same nation. He gave
<span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.liv-Page_97"></span>him, however, no royal ensign, or even
the name of governor, because there was really no honor in ruling over
these few wretched persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_328"></span>[96:329](2110188.htm#fr_328) <span
id="ii.vi.i.liv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.liv-p2"></span> “Lacum,” as once before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II.](2110189)
