[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110231)  [Next](2110233) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xliii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xliii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLIII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xliii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xliii-p1.1"></span>In</span> the meantime, the emperor
compels those deputies of our party who had been sent from the council
at Ariminum to join in communion with the heretics. At the same time, he
hands them a confession of faith which had been drawn up by these wicked
men, and which, being expressed in deceptive terms, seemed to exhibit
the Catholic faith, while unfaithfulness secretly lay hid in it. For
under an appearance of false reasoning, it abolished the use of the word
*Ousia* as being ambiguous, and as having been too hastily adopted by
the fathers, while it rested upon no Scriptural authority. The object of
this was that the Son might not be believed to be of one substance with
the Father. The same confession of faith acknowledged that the Son was
*like* the Father. But deception was carefully prepared within the
words, in order that he might be like, but not equal. Thus, the deputies
being sent away, orders were given to the prefect that he should not
dissolve the Synod, until all professed by their subscriptions their
agreement to the declaration of faith which had been drawn up; and if
any should hold back with excessive obstinacy, they should be driven
into banishment, provided their number did not amount to fifteen. But
when the deputies returned, they were refused communion, although they
pleaded the force which had been brought to bear upon them by the king.
For when it was discovered what had been decreed, greater disturbance
arose in their affairs and purposes. Then by degrees numbers of our
people, partly overcome through the weakness of their character, and
partly influenced by the thought of a weary journeying into foreign
lands, surrendered to the opposite party. These were now, on the return
of the deputies, the stronger of the two bodies, and had taken
possession of the church, our friends being driven out of it. And when
the minds of our people once began to incline in that direction, they
rushed <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xliii-Page_118"></span>in flocks over to the other side,
until the number of our friends was diminished down to twenty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV.](2110233)
