[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110025)  [Next](2110027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiii-p1"></span>Martin preaches Repentance even to the
Devil.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Now</span>, the devil, while he tried to
impose upon the holy man by a thousand injurious arts, often thrust
himself upon him in a visible form, but in very various shapes. For
sometimes he presented himself to his view changed into the person of
Jupiter, often into that of Mercury and Minerva. Often, too, were heard
words of reproach, in which the crowd of demons assailed Martin with
scurrilous expressions. But knowing that all were false and groundless,
he was not affected by the charges brought against him. Moreover, some
of the brethren bore witness that they had heard a demon reproaching
Martin in abusive terms, and asking why he had taken back, on their
subsequent repentance, certain of the brethren who had, some time
previously, lost their baptism by falling into various errors. The demon
set forth the crimes of each of them; but they added that Martin,
resisting the devil firmly, answered him, that by-past sins are cleansed
away by the leading of a better life, and that through the mercy of God,
those are to be absolved from their sins who have given up their evil
ways. The devil saying in opposition to this that such guilty men as
those referred to did not come within the pale of pardon, and that no
mercy was extended by the Lord to those who had once fallen away, Martin
is said to have cried out in words to the following effect: “If thou,
thyself, wretched being, wouldst but desist from attacking mankind, and
even, at this period, when the day of judgment is at hand, wouldst only
repent of your deeds, I, with a true confidence in the Lord, would
promise you the mercy of Christ.” <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) O
what a holy boldness with respect to the loving-kindness of the Lord, in
which, although he could not assert authority, he nevertheless showed
the feelings dwelling within him! And since our discourse has here
sprung up concerning the devil and his devices, it does not seem away
from the point, although the matter does not <span id="page_15">p.
15</span> <span id="ii.ii.xxiii-Page_15"></span>bear immediately upon
Martin, to relate what took place; both because the virtues of Martin
do, to some extent, appear in the transaction, and the incident, which
was worthy of a miracle, will properly be put on record, with the view
of furnishing a caution, should anything of a similar character
subsequently occur.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[14:38](2110026.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.ii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxiii-p3"></span> This is a truly noteworthy passage. It
anticipates a well-known sentiment of Burns, the national bard of
Scotland. In his *Address to the Deil*, Burns has said that if the great
enemy would only “tak a thocht an’ men’,” he might still have a chance
of safety, and this idea seems very much in accordance with the opinion
of St. Martin as expressed above. Hornius, however, is very indignant on
account of it, and exclaims: “Intolerabilis hic Martini error. Nec
Sulpicius excusatione sua demit, sed auget. Origenes primus ejus erroris
author.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. A Case of Diabolic Deception.](2110027)
