[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110124)  [Next](2110126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Avoid</span> words of contention and
causes of animosity: flee also from all occasions of discord and strife.
For if, according to the doctrine of the Apostle “the servant <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) of the Lord must not strive,” how much
more does this become the handmaid of the Lord, whose mind ought to be
more gentle, as her sex is more bashful and retiring. Restrain thy
tongue from evil speaking, and put the bridle of the law upon thy mouth;
so that you shall speak, if you speak at all, only when it would be a
sin to be silent. Beware lest you utter anything which might be justly
found fault with. A word once spoken is like a stone which has been
thrown: wherefore it should be long thought over before it is uttered.
Blessed, assuredly, are the lips, which never utter what they would wish
to recall. The talk of a chaste mind ought itself also to be chaste,
such as may always rather edify than injure the hearers, according to
that commandment of the Apostle when he says, “Let no <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) corrupt communications proceed out of
your mouth, but that which is good for the edification of faith, that it
may convey grace to them that hear.” Precious to God is that tongue
which knows not to form words except about divine things, and holy is
that mouth from which heavenly utterances continually flow forth. Put
down by the authority of Scripture calumniators of those who are absent,
as being evil-minded persons, because the prophet mentions this also as
among the virtues of a perfect man, if, in the presence of the righteous
an evil-minded man, who brings forward things against his neighbor which
cannot be proved, is brought down to nothing. For it is not lawful for
you patiently to listen to evil-speaking against another, inasmuch as
you would not wish that to be done by others when directed against
yourself. Certainly, everything is unrighteous which goes against the
Gospel of Christ, and that is the case, if you quietly permit anything
to be done to another, which you would feel painful, if done by any one
to yourself. Accustom your tongue always to speak about those who are
good, and lend your ears rather to listen to the praises of good men
than to the condemnation of such as are wicked. Take heed that all the
good actions you perform are done for the sake of God, knowing that for
every such deed you will only receive a reward, so far as you have done
it out of regard to his fear and love. Study rather to be holy than to
appear so, because it is of no avail to be reckoned what you are not;
and the guilt of a twofold sin is contracted when you do not have what
you are credited with having, and when you pretend to possess what you
do not possess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[66:222](2110125.htm#fr_221) <span
id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p2"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024)<span
id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[66:223](2110125.htm#fr_222) <span
id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p3"></span> [Eph. iv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029)<span
id="ii.v.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.](2110126)
