[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110154)  [Next](2110156) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxi-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxi-p1.1"></span>There</span> followed the revolt of those,
who, with Dathan and Abiron as leaders, endeavored to set themselves up
against Moses and Aaron; but the earth, opening, swallowed them alive.
And not long after, a revolt of the whole people arose against Moses and
Aaron, so that they rushed into the tabernacle, which it was not lawful
for any but the priests to enter. Then truly death mowed them down in
heaps; and all would have perished in a moment, had not the Lord,
appeased by the prayers of Moses, turned aside the disaster.
Nevertheless, the number of those slain amounted to seven hundred and
fourteen thousand. <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) And not long
after, as had already often happened, a revolt of the people arose on
account of the want of water. Then Moses, instructed by God to strike
the rock with his rod, with a kind of trial new familiar to him, since
he had already done that before, struck the rock once and again, and
thus water flowed out of it. In regard, however, to this point, Moses is
said to have been reproved by God, that, through want of faith, he did
not bring out the water except by repeated blows; in fact, on account of
this transgression, he did not enter the land promised to him, as I
shall show farther on. Moses, then, moving away from that place, as he
was preparing to lead his <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxi-Page_81"></span>company along by the borders of Edom,
sent ambassadors to the king to beg liberty to pass by; for he thought
it right to abstain from war on account of the connection by blood; for
that nation was descended from Esau. But the king despised the
suppliants, and refused them liberty to pass by, being ready to contend
in arms. Then Moses directed his march towards the mountain, Or, keeping
clear of the forbidden road, that he might not furnish any cause of war
between those related by blood, and on that route he destroyed the king
of the nation of the Canaanites. He smote also Seon the king of the
Amorites, and possessed himself of all their towns: he conquered, too,
Basan and Balac. He pitched his camp beyond Jordan, not far from
Jericho. Then a battle took place against the Midianites, and they were
conquered and subdued. Moses died, after he had ruled the people forty
years in the wilderness. But the Hebrews are said to have remained in
the wilderness for so long a time, with this view, until all those who
had not believed the words of God perished. For, except Joshua and
Caleb, not one of those who were more than twenty years old on leaving
Egypt passed over Jordan. That Moses himself only saw the promised land,
and did not reach it, is ascribed to his sin, because, at that time when
he was ordered to strike the rock, and bring forth water, he doubted,
even after so many proofs of his miraculous power. He died in the one
hundred and twentieth year of his age. Nothing is known concerning the
place of his burial.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_286"></span>[80:287](2110155.htm#fr_286) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxi-p2"></span> “septingenti et xiiii milia.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII.](2110156)
