[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110333)  [Next](2110335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iv.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.v-p1"></span>The reason why those who give up the
world, when they are received in the monasteries, must lay aside their
own clothes and be clothed in others by the Abbot.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> each one on his admission
is stripped of all his former possessions, so that he is not allowed any
longer to keep even the clothes which he has on his back: but in the
council of the brethren he is brought forward into the midst and
stripped of his own clothes, and clad by the Abbot’s hands in the dress
of the monastery, so that by this he may know not only that he has been
despoiled of all his old things, but also that he has laid aside all
worldly pride, and come down to the want and poverty of Christ, and that
he is now to be supported not by wealth sought for by the world’s arts,
nor by anything reserved from his former state of unbelief, but that he
is to receive out of the holy and sacred funds of the monastery his
rations for his service; and that, as he knows that he is thence to be
clothed and fed and that he has nothing of his own, he may learn,
nevertheless, not to be anxious about the morrow, according to the
saying of the Gospel, and may not be ashamed to be on a level with the
poor, that is with the body of the brethren, with whom Christ was not
ashamed to be numbered, and to call himself their brother, but that
rather he may glory that he has been made to share the lot of his own
servants. <span id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_758"></span>[220:759](2110334.htm#fr_758) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.v-p3"></span> So the Rule of Pachomius (c. xxvi.)
orders that on the admission of a monk “they shall strip him of his
secular dress, and put on him the garb of the monks;” and that of S.
Benedict (c. lviii.), “He shall then be clothed in the religious habit,
and his secular clothes deposited in the wardrobe, that if, at the
instigation of the devil, he should ever leave the monastery, they may
be given back to him, and the religious dress be taken from him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The reason why the clothes of the renunciants with
which they joined the monastery are preserved by the steward.](2110335)
