[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110251)  [Next](2110253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span>Why Eminent Men are permitted by God to
become Authors of Novelties in the Church.

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span>\[27.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xi-p2.1"></span>But</span> some one will ask, How is it then,
that certain excellent persons, and of position in the Church, are often
permitted by God to preach novel doctrines to Catholics? A proper
question, certainly, <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="iii.xi-Page_138"></span>and one which ought to be very carefully and
fully dealt with, but answered at the same time, not in reliance upon
one’s own ability, but by the authority of the divine Law, and by appeal
to the Church’s determination.

<span id="iii.xi-p3"></span>Let us listen, then, to Holy Moses, and let
him teach us why learned men, and such as because of their knowledge are
even called Prophets by the apostle, are sometimes permitted to put
forth novel doctrines, which the Old Testament is wont, by way of
allegory, to call “strange gods,” forasmuch as heretics pay the same
sort of reverence to their notions that the Gentiles do to their gods.

<span id="iii.xi-p4"></span>\[28.\] Blessed Moses, then, writes thus in
Deuteronomy: <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) “If there arise
among you a prophet or a dreamer of dreams,” that is, one holding office
as a Doctor in the Church, who is believed by his disciples or auditors
to teach by revelation: well,—what follows? “and giveth thee a sign or a
wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof he spake,”—he is
pointing to some eminent doctor, whose learning is such that his
followers believe him not only to know things human, but, moreover, to
foreknow things superhuman, such as, their disciples commonly boast,
were Valentinus, Donatus, Photinus, Apollinaris, and the rest of that
sort! What next? “And shall say to thee, Let us go after other gods,
whom thou knowest not, and serve them.” What are those other gods but
strange errors which thou knowest not, that is, new and such as were
never heard of before? “And let us serve them;” that is, “Let us believe
them, follow them.” What last? “Thou shalt not hearken to the words of
that prophet or dreamer of dreams.” And why, I pray thee, does not God
forbid to be taught what God forbids to be heard? “For the Lord, your
God, trieth you, to know whether you love Him with all your heart and
with all your soul.” The reason is clearer than day why Divine
Providence sometimes permits certain doctors of the Churches to preach
new doctrines—“That the Lord your God may try you;” he says. And
assuredly it is a great trial when one whom thou believest to be a
prophet, a disciple of prophets, a doctor and defender of the truth,
whom thou hast folded to thy breast with the utmost veneration and love,
when such a one of a sudden secretly and furtively brings in noxious
errors, which thou canst neither quickly detect, being held by the
prestige of former authority, nor lightly think it right to condemn,
being prevented by affection for thine old master.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_460"></span>[138:461](2110252.htm#fr_460) <span
id="iii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p5"></span> [Deut. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)<span id="iii.xi-p5.1"></span>, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Examples from Church History, confirming the words of
Moses,--Nestorius, Photinus, Apollinaris.](2110253)
