[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110815)  [Next](2110817) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.xi.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ix-p1"></span>The answer on the efficacy of
understanding, which is gained by experience.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.xi.ix-p2.1"></span>Isaac</span>: Your minute and subtle
inquiry affords an indication of purity being very nearly reached. For
no one would be able even to make inquiries on these matters, I will not
say to look within and discriminate,—except one who had been urged to
sound the depths of such questions by careful and effectual diligence of
mind, and watchful anxiety, and one whom the constant aim after a well
controlled life had taught by practical experience to attempt the
entrance to this purity and to knock at its doors. And therefore as I
see you, I will not say, standing before the doors of that true prayer
of which we have been speaking, but touching its inner chambers and
inward parts as it were with the hands of experience, and already laying
hold of some parts of it, I do not think that I shall find any
difficulty in introducing you now within what I may call its hall, for
you to roam about its recesses, as the Lord may direct; nor do I think
that you will be hindered from investigating what is to be shown you by
any obstacles or difficulties. For he is next door to understanding who
carefully recognizes what he ought to ask about, nor is he far from
knowledge, who begins to understand how ignorant he is. And therefore I
am not afraid of the charge of betraying secrets, and of levity, if I
divulge what when speaking in my former discourse on the perfection of
prayer I had kept back from discussing, as I think that its force was to
be explained to us who are occupied with this subject and interest even
without the aid of my words, by the grace of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Of the method of continual prayer.](2110817)
