[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110158)  [Next](2110160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxv"></span> <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxv-Page_83"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxv-p1.1"></span>Accordingly</span>, when the Midianites, as
we have related above, ruled over them, they turned to the Lord,
imploring his wonted tender mercy, and obtained it. There was then among
the Hebrews one Gideon by name, a righteous man who was dear and
acceptable to God. The angel stood by him as he was returning home from
the harvest-field, and said unto him, “The Lord is with thee, thou
mighty man of valor.” But he in a humble voice complained that the Lord
was not <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) with him, because
captivity pressed sore upon his people, and he remembered with tears the
miracles wrought by the Lord, who had brought them out of the land of
Egypt. Then the angel said, “Go, in this spirit in which you have
spoken, and deliver the people from captivity.” But he declared that he
could not, with his <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) feeble
strength, since he was a man of very small importance, undertake such a
heavy task. The angel, however, persisted in urging him not to doubt
that those things could be done which the Lord said. So then, having
offered sacrifice, and overthrown the altar which the Midianites had
consecrated to the image of Baal, he went to his own people, and pitched
his camp near the camp of the enemy. But the nation of the Amalekites
had also joined themselves to the Midianites, while Gideon had not
gathered more than an army of thirty-two thousand men. But before the
battle began, God said to him that this was a larger number than he
wished him to lead forth to the conflict; that, if he did make use of so
many, the Hebrews would, in accordance with their usual wickedness
ascribe the result of the fight, not to God, but to their own bravery;
he should therefore furnish an opportunity of leaving to those who
desired to do so. When this was made known to the people, twenty and two
thousand left the camp. But of the ten thousand who had remained,
Gideon, as instructed by God, did not retain more than three hundred:
the rest he dismissed from the field. Thus, entering the camp of the
enemy in the middle watch of the night, and having ordered all his men
to sound their trumpets, he caused great terror to the enemy; and no one
had courage to resist; but they made off in a disgraceful flight
wherever they could. The Hebrews, however, meeting them in every
direction, cut the fugitives to pieces. Gideon pursued the kings beyond
Jordan, and having captured them, gave them over to death. In that
battle, a hundred and twenty thousand of the enemy are said to have been
slain, and fifteen thousand captured. Then, by universal consent, a
proposal was made to Gideon that he should be king of the people. But he
rejected this proposal, and preferred rather to live on equal terms with
his fellow-citizens than to be their ruler. Having, therefore, escaped
from their captivity, which had pressed upon the people for seven years,
they now enjoyed peace for a period of forty years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_290"></span>[83:291](2110159.htm#fr_290) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxv-p2"></span> “Non esse in se.”

<span id="fn_291"></span>[83:292](2110159.htm#fr_291) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxv-p3"></span> “Infractis viribus”: Vorstius well
remarks that “infractis” is here used with the sense of the simple
“fractis.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI.](2110160)
