[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110642)  [Next](2110644) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii"></span> <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v.ii-Page_331"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p1"></span>An investigation of the origin of a
sudden change of feeling from inexpressible joy to extreme dejection of
mind.

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.ii-p2.1"></span>So</span> then we asked this blessed Daniel
why it was that as we sat in the cells we were sometimes filled with the
utmost gladness of heart, together with inexpressible delight and
abundance of the holiest feelings, so that I will not say *speech*, but
*feeling* could not follow it, and pure prayers were readily breathed,
and the mind being filled with spiritual fruits, praying to God even in
sleep could feel that its petitions rose lightly and powerfully to God:
and again, why it was that for no reason we were suddenly filled with
the utmost grief, and weighed down with unreasonable depression, so that
we not only felt as if we ourselves were overcome with such feelings,
but also our cell grew dreadful, reading palled upon us, aye and our
very prayers were offered up unsteadily and vaguely, and almost as if we
were intoxicated: so that while we were groaning and endeavouring to
restore ourselves to our former disposition, our mind was unable to do
this, and the more earnestly it sought to fix again its gaze upon God,
so was it the more vehemently carried away to wandering thoughts by
shifting aberrations and so utterly deprived of all spiritual fruits, as
not to be capable of being roused from this deadly slumber even by the
desire of the kingdom of heaven, or by the fear of hell held out to it.
To this he replied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. His answer to the question raised.](2110644)
