[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110219)  [Next](2110221) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxi-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Then</span>, after an interval, Domitian,
the son of Vespasian, persecuted the Christians. At this date, he
banished John the Apostle and Evangelist to the island of Patmos. There
he, secret mysteries having been revealed to him, wrote and published
his book of the holy Revelation, which indeed is either foolishly or
impiously not accepted by many. And with no great interval there then
occurred the third persecution under Trajan. But he, when after torture
and racking he found nothing in the Christians worthy of death or
punishment, forbade any further cruelty to be put forth against them.
Then under Adrian the Jews attempted to rebel, and endeavored to plunder
both Syria and Palestine; but on an army being sent against them, they
were subdued. At this time Adrian, thinking that he would destroy the
Christian faith by inflicting an injury upon the place, set up the
images of demons both in the temple and in the place where the Lord
suffered. And because the Christians were thought principally to consist
of Jews (for the church at Jerusalem did not then have a priest except
of the circumcision), he ordered a cohort of soldiers to keep constant
guard in order to prevent all Jews from approaching to Jerusalem. This,
however, rather benefited <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) the
Christian faith, because almost all then believed in Christ as God while
continuing <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) in the observance of
the law. Undoubtedly that was arranged by the over-ruling care of the
Lord, in order that the slavery of the law might be taken away from the
liberty of the faith and of the church. In this way, Mark from among the
Gentiles was then, first of all, bishop at Jerusalem. A fourth
persecution is reckoned as having taken place under Adrian, which,
however, he afterwards forbade to be carried on, declaring it to be
unjust that any one should be put on his trial without a charge being
specified against him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_356"></span>[112:357](2110220.htm#fr_356) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxi-p2"></span> How so? Because, according to
Drusius, the Christian Jews were thus first taught to cast off the yoke
of the law, which they had observed up to this time.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[112:358](2110220.htm#fr_357) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxi-p3"></span> These were half-Jews and
half-Christians, and were known at a later date under the name of
Nazarites. They made use of what was called the Gospel according to the
Hebrews.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII.](2110221)
