[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110727)  [Next](2110729) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.viii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xix-p1"></span>The answer how far an agreement
exists among devils about the attack and its changes.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.viii.xix-p2.1"></span>Serenus</span>: It is a true assertion
that there is no lasting concord among bad men, and that perfect harmony
cannot exist even in regard to those particular faults which have
attractions for them all in common. For, as you have said, it can never
be that system and discipline are preserved among undisciplined things.
But in some matters, where community of interests, and necessity
enforces it, or participation in some gain recommends it, they must
arrange for some agreement for the time being. And we see very clearly
that this is so in the case of this war of spiritual wickedness; so that
not only do they observe times and changes among themselves, but
actually are known specially to occupy some particular spots and to
haunt them persistently: for since they must make their attacks through
certain fixed temptations and well defined sins, and at particular
times, we clearly infer from this that no one can at one and at the same
time be deluded by the emptiness of vainglory and inflamed by the lust
of fornication, nor at one and the same time be puffed up by the
outrageous haughtiness of spiritual pride, and subject to the
humiliation of carnal gluttony. Nor can anyone be overcome by silly
giggling and laughter and at the same time be excited by the stings of
anger, or at any rate filled with the pains of gnawing grief: but all
the spirits must one by one advance to attack the soul, in such a way
that when one has been vanquished and retreated, he must make way for
another spirit to attack it still more vehemently, or if he has come
forth victorious, he will none the less hand it over to be deceived by
another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Of the fact that opposite powers are not of the same
boldness, and that the occasions of temptation are not under their
control.](2110729)
