[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110032)  [Next](2110034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.i"></span>

### <span id="ii.iii.i-p0.1"></span>Letter I. To Eusebius.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p1"></span>Against Some Envious Assailants of Martin.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>Yesterday</span> a number of monks having come
to me, it happened that amid endless fables, and much tiresome
discourse, mention was made of the little work which I published
concerning the life of that saintly man Martin, and I was most happy to
hear that it was being eagerly and carefully read by multitudes. In the
meantime, however, I was told that a certain person, under the influence
of an evil spirit, had asked why Martin, who was said to have raised the
dead and to have rescued houses from the flames, had himself recently
become subject to the power of fire, and thus been exposed to suffering
of a dangerous character. Wretched man, whoever he is, that expressed
himself thus! We recognize his perfidious talk in the words of the Jews
of old, who reviled the Lord, when hanging upon the cross, in the
following terms: “He saved others; himself he cannot save.” <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) Truly it is clear that, whoever be the
person referred to, if he had lived in those times, he would have been
quite prepared to speak against the Lord in these terms, inasmuch as he
blasphemes a saint of the Lord, after a like fashion. How then, I ask
thee, whosoever thou art, how does the case stand? Was Martin really not
possessed of power, and not a partaker of holiness, because he became
exposed to danger from fire? O thou blessed man, and in all things like
to the Apostles, even in the reproaches which are thus heaped upon thee!
Assuredly those Gentiles are reported to have entertained the same sort
of thought respecting Paul also, when the viper had bitten him, for they
said, “This man must be a murderer, whom, although saved from the sea,
the fates do not permit to live.” <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)
But he, shaking off the viper into the fire, suffered no harm. They,
however, imagined that he would suddenly fall down, and speedily die;
but when they saw that no harm befell him, changing their minds, they
said that he was a God. But, O thou most miserable of men, you ought,
even from that example to have yourself been convinced of your falsity;
so that, if it had proved a stumbling-block to thee that Martin appeared
touched by the flame of fire, you should, on the other hand, have
ascribed his being merely touched to his merits and power, because,
though surrounded by flames, he did not perish. For acknowledge, thou
miserable man, acknowledge what you seem ignorant of, that almost all
the saints have been more remarkable for <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) the dangers they encountered, than even
for the virtues they displayed. I see, indeed, Peter strong in faith,
walking over the waves of the sea, in opposition to the nature of
things, and that he pressed the unstable waters with his footprints. But
not on that account does the preacher of the Gentiles <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) seem to me a smaller man, whom the waves
swallowed up; and, after three days <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)
and three nights, the water restored him emerging from the deep. Nay, I
am almost inclined to think that it was a greater thing to have lived in
the deep, than to have walked along the depths of the sea. But, thou
foolish man, you had not, as I suppose, read these things; or, having
read them, had not understood them. For the blessed Evangelist would not
have recorded in holy writ an incident of that kind—under divine
guidance—(except that, from such cases, the human mind might be
instructed as to the dangers connected with shipwrecks and serpents!)
and, as the Apostle relates, who gloried in his nakedness, and hunger,
and perils from robbers, all these things are indeed to be endured in
common by holy men, but that it has always been the chief excellence of
the righteous in enduring and conquering such things, while amid all
their trials, being patient and ever unconquerable, they overcame them
all the more courageously, the heavier was the burden which they had to
bear. Hence this event which is ascribed to the infirmity of Martin is,
in reality, full of dignity and glory, since indeed, being tried <span
id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_19"></span>by a most
dangerous calamity, he came forth a conqueror. But let no one wonder
that the incident referred to was omitted by me in that treatise which I
wrote concerning his life, since in that very work I openly acknowledged
that I had not embraced all his acts; and that for the good reason that,
if I had been minded to narrate them all, I must have presented an
enormous volume to my readers. And indeed, his achievements were not of
so limited a number that they could all be comprehended in a book.
Nevertheless, I shall not leave this incident, about which a question
has arisen, to remain in obscurity, but shall relate the whole affair as
it occurred, lest I should appear perchance to have intentionally passed
over that which might be put forward in calumniation of the saintly man.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p8"></span>Martin having, about the middle of winter,
come to a certain parish, <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) according
to the usual custom for the bishops to visit the churches in the
diocese, the clerics had prepared an abode for him in the private <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) part of the church, and had kindled a
large fire beneath the floor which was decayed and very thin. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) They also erected for him a couch
consisting of a large amount of straw. Then, when Martin betook himself
to rest, he was annoyed with the softness of the too luxurious bed,
inasmuch as he had been accustomed to lie on the bare ground with only a
piece of sackcloth stretched over him. Accordingly, influenced by the
injury which had, as it were, been done him, he threw aside the whole of
the straw. Now, it so happened that part of the straw which he had thus
removed fell upon the stove. He himself, in the meantime, rested, as was
his wont, upon the bare ground, tired out by his long journey. About
midnight, the fire bursting up through the stove which, as I have said,
was far from sound, laid hold of the dry straw. Martin, being wakened
out of sleep by this unexpected occurrence, and being prevented by the
pressing danger, but chiefly, as he afterwards related, by the snares
and urgency of the devil, was longer than he ought to have been in
having recourse to the aid of prayer. For, desiring to get outside, he
struggled long and laboriously with the bolt by which he had secured the
door. Ere long he perceived that he was surrounded by a fearful
conflagration; and the fire had even laid hold of the garment with which
he was clothed. At length recovering his habitual conviction that his
safety lay not in flight, but in the Lord, and seizing the shield of
faith and prayer, committing himself entirely to the Lord, he lay down
in the midst of the flames. Then truly, the fire having been removed by
divine interposition, he continued to pray amid a circle of flames that
did him no harm. But the monks, who were before the door, hearing the
sound of the crackling and struggling fire, broke open the barred door;
and, the fire being extinguished, they brought forth Martin from the
midst of the flames, all the time supposing that he must ere then have
been burnt to ashes by a fire of so long continuance. Now, as the Lord
is my witness, he himself related to me, and not without groans,
confessed that he was in this matter beguiled by the arts of the devil;
in that, when roused from sleep, he did not take the wise course of
repelling the danger by means of faith and prayer. He also added that
the flames raged around him all the time that, with a distempered mind,
he strove to throw open the door. But he declared that as soon as he
again sought assistance from the cross, and tried the weapons of prayer,
the central flames gave way, and that he then felt them shedding a dewy
refreshment over him, after having just experienced how cruelly they
burned him. Considering all which, let every one who reads this letter
understand that Martin was indeed tried by that danger, but passed
through it with true acceptance. <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[18:44](2110033.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p3"></span> St. [Matt. xxvii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042)<span id="ii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[18:45](2110033.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p4"></span> [Acts xxviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#004)<span id="ii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[18:46](2110033.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p5"></span> “magis insignes periculorum suorum”: such
is the construction of *insignis* with later writers.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[18:47](2110033.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p6"></span> This refers to St. Paul, being an echo of
the Apostle’s own words in [Rom. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p6.1"></span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p6.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p6.3"></span>γὼ ἐθνῶν ἀπόστολος</span>.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[18:48](2110033.htm#fr_47) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p6.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p7"></span> The writer here supposes that St. Paul
was sunk for three days and three nights in the sea—a mistaken inference
from [2 Cor. xi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>. The construction of the very long sentence
which soon follows is very confused, and has not been rigidly followed
in our translation.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[19:49](2110033.htm#fr_48) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p9"></span> “ad diœcesim quandam”: it seems certain
that *diocesis* has here the meaning of “parish.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[19:50](2110033.htm#fr_49) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p10"></span> “in secretario ecclesiæ”: it is very
difficult to say what is here meant by “secretarium.” It appears from
*Dial*. II. 1, that there might be two or more *secretaria* in one
church.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[19:51](2110033.htm#fr_50) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p11"></span> “pavimento”: this word usually means “a
floor,” or “pavement,” but some take it here to be the same as *fornax*.
This, however, can hardly be the case; and the meaning probably is that
the church was heated, as the baths were, by means of a *hypocaustum*,
or flue running below the pavement.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[19:52](2110033.htm#fr_51) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p12"></span> Halm here inserts “vere.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter II. To the Deacon Aurelius. Sulpitius has a Vision of St.
Martin.](2110034)
