[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111180)  [Next](2111182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.vi-p1"></span>He refutes another argument of
Nestorius, in which he tried to make out that Christ was like Adam in
every point.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.vi-p2.1"></span>But</span> since we cannot (as we should
much prefer) ignore them, it is now time to expose the rest of your more
subtle and insidious blasphemies that at least they may not deceive
ignorant folk. In one of your pestilent treatises you have maintained
and said that “Since man is the image of the Divine nature, and the
devil dragged this down and shattered it, God grieved over His image, as
an Emperor over his statue, and repairs the shattered image: and formed
without generation a nature from the Virgin, like that of Adam who was
born without generation; and raises up man’s nature by means of man: for
as by man came death, so also by man came the resurrection of the dead.”
They tell us that some poisoners have a custom of mixing honey with the
poison in the cups which they prepare; that the injurious ingredient may
be concealed by the sweet: and while a man is charmed with the sweetness
of the honey, he may be destroyed by the deadly poison. So then, when
you say that man is the image of the Divine nature, and that the devil
dragged <span id="page_608">p. 608</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.vi-Page_608"></span>this down and shattered it, and that
God grieved over His image as an Emperor over his statue, you smear (so
to speak) the lips of the cup with something sweet like honey, that men
may drain the cup offered to them, and not perceive its deadliness,
while they taste what is alluring. You put forward God’s name, in order
to speak falsehoods in the name of religion. You set holy things in the
front, in order to persuade men of what is untrue: and by means of your
confession of God you contrive to deny Him whom you are confessing. For
who is there who does not see whither you are going? What you are
contriving? You say indeed that God grieved over His image as an Emperor
over his statue, and repaired the shattered image, and formed without
generation a nature from the Virgin, like that of Adam who was born
without generation, and raises up man’s nature by man, for as by man
came death, so also by man came the resurrection of the dead. So then
with all your earnestness, with all your professions, you crafty
plotter, you have managed by your smooth assertions, by naming God in
the forefront, to come down to a (mere) man in the conclusion: and in
the end you degrade Him to the condition of a mere man, from whom under
colour of humility you have already taken away the glory of God. You say
then that the Divine goodness has restored the image of God which the
devil shattered and destroyed, for you say that He restores the
shattered image. Now with what craft you say that He restores the
shattered image in order to persuade us that there was nothing more in
Him, in whom the image is restored, than there was in the actual image,
of which the restoration was brought about. And thus you make out that
the Lord is only the same as Adam was: that the restorer of the image is
nothing more than the actual destructible image. Finally in what follows
you show what you are aiming and driving at, when you say that He formed
without generation a nature from the Virgin like that of Adam, who was
born without generation, and raises up man’s nature by man. You maintain
that the Lord Jesus Christ was in all respects like Adam: that the one
was without generation, and the other without generation: the one a mere
man, and the other a mere man. And thus you see that you have carefully
guarded and provided against our thinking of the Lord Jesus Christ as in
any way greater or better than Adam: since you have compared them
together by the same standard, so that you would think that you
detracted something from Adam’s perfection, if you added anything more
to Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Heretics usually cover their doctrines with a cloak
of holy Scripture.](2111182)
