[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111071)  [Next](2111073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.viii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xii-p1"></span>Of the value of work and the harm of
idleness.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.viii.xii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so though we also might have
the protection of our kinsfolk, yet we have preferred his abstinence to
all riches, and have chosen to procure our daily bodily sustenance by
our own exertions rather than rely on the sure provision made by our
relations, having less inclination for idle meditation on holy Scripture
of which you have spoken, and that fruitless attendance to reading than
to this laborious poverty. And certainly we should most gladly pursue
the former, if the authority of the apostles had taught us by their
examples that it was better for us, or the rules of the Elders had laid
it down for our good. But you must know that you are affected by this no
less than by that harm of which I spoke above, because though your body
may be sound and lusty, yet you are supported by another’s
contributions, a thing which properly belongs only to the feeble. For
certainly the whole human race, except only that class of monks, who
live in accordance with the Apostle’s command by the daily labours of
their own hands, looks for the charity of another’s compassion.
Wherefore it is clear that not only those who boast that they themselves
are supported either by the wealth of their relations or the labours of
their servants or the produce of their farms, but also the kings of this
world are supported by charity. This at any rate is embraced in the
definition of our predecessors, who have laid down that anything that is
taken for the requirements of daily food which has not been procured and
prepared by the labour of our own hands, ought to be referred to
charity, as the Apostle teaches, who altogether forbids the help of
another’s bounty to the idle and says: “If a man does not work, neither
let him eat.” <span id="fr_2310"></span>[2311](#fn_2310) These words
<span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xii-Page_537"></span>the blessed Antony used against some
one, and instructed us also by the example of his teaching, to shun the
pernicious allurements of our relations and of all who provide the
needful charity for our food as well as the delights of a pleasant home,
and to prefer to all the wealth of this world sandy wastes horrid with
the barrenness of nature, and districts overwhelmed by living
incrustations, and for that reason subject to no control or dominion of
man, so that we should not only avoid the society of men for the sake of
a pathless waste, but also that the character of a fruitful soil may
never entice us to the distractions of cultivating it, whereby the mind
would be recalled from the chief service of the heart, and rendered
useless for spiritual aims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2310"></span>[536:2311](2111072.htm#fr_2310) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xii-p3"></span> [2 Thess. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. A story of a barber's payments, introduced for the
sake of recognizing the devil's illusions.](2111073)
