[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111122)  [Next](2111124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.v.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.v.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vii.v.ii-p1"></span>He infers from what he has said that
the Virgin Mary gave birth to a Son who had pre-existed and was greater
than she herself was.

<span id="iv.vii.v.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.v.ii-p2.1"></span>You</span> see then that when the Apostle
says that God sent His Son, it was His own Son to use the actual words
of the Apostle, “His own Son” that God sent. For, since He sent His own
Son, it was not some one else’s Son that He sent, nor could He send Him
at all if He who was sent had no existence. He sent then, he says, “His
own Son, made of a woman.” Therefore because He sent Him, He sent one
who existed: and because He sent His own, it certainly was not another’s
but His own whom He sent. What then becomes of that argument of yours
drawn from this world’s subtleties? No one ever yet gave birth to one
who had already existed before. For had not the Lord a pre-existence
before Mary? Was not the Son of God existent before the daughter of man?
In a word did not God Himself exist before man—since certainly there is
no man who is not from God. You see then that I do not merely say that
Mary gave birth to one who had existed before her, not only, I say, one
who had existed before her, but one who was the author of her being, and
that in giving birth to her Creator, she became the mother of Him who
gave her being: because it was as simple for God to bring about birth
for Himself as for man and as easy for Him to arrange that He Himself
should be born of mankind, as that a man should be born. For the power
of God is not limited in regard to His own Person, as if what was
allowable to Him in the case of all others, was not allowable in His own
case, and as if He who in the Divine nature could do all things as God,
was yet unable in His own Person to become God in man. Setting aside
then and rejecting your foolish and feeble and dull arguments from
earthly things, we ought merely to put credence in straightforward
evidence and the naked truth, and to adapt our faith to those witnesses
of God alone, whom God sent, and in whose person He Himself, so to
speak, preached. For it is right to believe Him in a matter concerning
knowledge of Himself, as everything that we know of Him comes from Him
Himself, for God could not possibly be known of men, unless He Himself
gave us the knowledge of Himself. And so it is right that we should
believe everything of Him that we know, from whom comes everything that
we know, for if we do not believe Him from whom our knowledge comes, the
result will be that we shall know nothing at all, since we refuse to
believe Him, through whom our knowledge comes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. He proves from the Epistle to the Romans the eternal
Divinity of Christ.](2111124)
