[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111144)  [Next](2111146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vi.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p1"></span>He explains what it means to confess,
and what it means to dissolve Jesus.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.x-p2.1"></span>For</span> this it is which John, the man
so dear to God, foresaw from the Lord’s own revelation to him and so
spoke of Him, who was speaking in him. “Every spirit,” he says, “which
confesseth Jesus come in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that
dissolveth Jesus is not of God: and this is the spirit of Antichrist, of
whom you have heard already, and he is now already in the world.” <span
id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525) O the marvellous and singular
goodness of God, who like a most careful and skilful physician, foretold
beforehand the diseases that should come upon His Church, and when He
showed the mischief beforehand, gave in showing it, a remedy for it:
that all men when they saw the evil approaching, might at once flee as
far as possible from that which they already knew to be imminent. And so
Saint John says, “Every spirit that dissolveth Jesus is not of God; and
this is the spirit of Antichrist.” Do you recognize him, O you heretic?
Do you recognize that it is plainly and markedly spoken of you? For no
one thus dissolves Jesus but he who does not confess that He is God. For
since in this consists all the faith and all the worship of the Church;
viz., to confess that Jesus is very God; who can more dissolve His glory
and worship than one who denies the existence in Him of all that we all
worship? Take then, I beseech you, take care lest any one may even term
you Antichrist. Do you think that I am reviling and cursing? What I am
saying is not my own idea: for lo, the Evangelist says, “Every one that
dissolveth Jesus is not of God; and this is Antichrist.” If you do not
dissolve Jesus, and deny God, no one may call you Antichrist. But if you
deny it why do you accuse any one for calling you Antichrist? While you
are denying it, I declare you have said it of yourself. Would you like
to know whether this is true? Tell me, when Jesus was born of a Virgin,
what do you make Him to be—man or God? If God only, you certainly
dissolve Jesus, as you deny that in Him manhood was joined to Divinity.
But if you say He was man, none the less do you dissolve Him, as you
blasphemously say that a mere <span id="page_588">p. 588</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vi.x-Page_588"></span>man (as you will have it) was born.
Unless perhaps you think that you do not dissolve Jesus, you who deny
Him to be God, you who would certainly dissolve Him even if you did not
deny <span id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526) that man was born
together with God. But possibly you would like this to be made clearer
by examples. You shall have them in both directions. The Manichees are
outside the Church, who declare that Jesus was God alone: and the
Ebionites, who say that he was a mere man. For both of them deny and
dissolve Jesus: the one by saying that He is only man, the other by
saying that He is only God. For though their opinions were the opposite
of each other, yet the blasphemy of these diverse opinions is much the
same, except that if any distinction can be drawn between the magnitude
of the evils, your blasphemy which asserts that He is a mere man is
worse than that which says that He is only God: for though both are
wrong, yet it is more insulting to take away from the Lord what is
Divine than what is human. This then alone is the Catholic and the true
faith; viz., to believe that as the Lord Jesus Christ is God so also is
He man; and that as He is man so also is He God. “Every one who
dissolves Jesus is not of God.” But to dissolve Him is to try to rend
asunder what is united in Jesus; and to sever what is but one and
indivisible. But what is it in Jesus that is united and but one?
Certainly the manhood and the Godhead. He then dissolves Jesus who
severs these and rends them asunder. Otherwise, if he does not rend them
asunder and sever them, he does not dissolve Jesus: But if he rends them
asunder he certainly dissolves Him. <span
id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[587:2526](2111145.htm#fr_2525) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3"></span> S. [John
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#003)<span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3.1"></span>.
It will be noticed that Cassian quotes this passage with the reading
“Qui solvit Jesum,” where the Greek has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3.3"></span>μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν ᾽Ιησοῦν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3.4"></span>. </span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3.5"></span>Λύει</span> is found in
no Greek <span class="sc"><span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3.6"></span>ms.,</span>
uncial or cursive, and the only Greek authority for it is that of
Socrates who says it was the reading in “the old copies.” “Qui solvit”
was probably an early gloss, current in very early days in the West,
being found in Tertullian (adv. Marc. v. 16; De Jejun. i.) and in all
Latin <span class="sc"><span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3.7"></span>mss.</span>
whether of the Vetus or Vulgate (with a single exception), and finally
becoming universal in the Fathers of the Western Church. Cf. Westcott on
the Epp. of S. John, p. 156, *sq*.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[588:2527](2111145.htm#fr_2526) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.x-p3.8"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p4"></span> *Non negares* (Petschenig). Gazæus has
*denegares*.

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[588:2528](2111145.htm#fr_2527) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.x-p5"></span> The last sentences are placed in
brackets by Petschenig.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The mystery of the Lord's Incarnation clearly implies
the Divinity of Christ.](2111146)
