[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111068)  [Next](2111070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.viii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.viii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.ix-p1"></span>That those need not fear the
neighbourhood of their kinsfolk, who can emulate the mortification of
Abbot Apollos.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.viii.ix-p2.1"></span>But</span> that you may be able fairly to
measure the amount of your strength by a certain test of strictness I
will point out to you what was done by a certain old man; viz., Abbot
Apollos <span id="fr_2306"></span>[2307](#fn_2306) that if your secret
scrutiny of your heart decides that you are not behind this man in
purpose and goodness, you may venture on remaining in your country and
living near your kinsfolk without detriment to your purpose or injury to
your mode of life, and be sure that neither the feeling of nearness nor
your love for the district can interfere with the strictness of this
humble lot, <span id="fr_2307"></span>[2308](#fn_2307) which not only
your own will but the needs also of your pilgrimage enforce upon you in
this country. When then his own brother had come to this old man, whom
we have mentioned, in the dead of night, begging him to come out for a
little while from his monastery, to help him to rescue an ox, which as
he sadly complained had stuck in the mire of a swamp a little way off,
because he could not possibly rescue it alone, Abbot Apollos stolidly
replied to his entreaties: “Why did you not ask our younger brother who
was nearer to you as you passed by than I?” and when the other, thinking
that he had forgotten the death of his brother who had been long ago
buried, and that he was almost weak in his mind from excessive
abstinence and continual solitude, replied: “How could I summon one who
died fifteen years ago?” Abbot Apollos said: “Don’t you know that I too
have been dead to this world for twenty years, and that I can’t from my
tomb in this cell give you any assistance in what belongs to the affairs
of this present life? And Christ is so far from allowing me ever so
little to relax my purpose of mortification on which I have entered, for
extricating your ox, that He did not even permit the very shortest
intermission of it for my father’s funeral, which would have been
undertaken much more readily properly and piously.” And so do ye now
search out the secrets of your breast and carefully consider whether you
also can continually preserve such strictness of mind with regard to
your kinsfolk, and when you find that you are like him in this
mortification of soul, then at last you may know that in the same way
the neighbourhood of your kinsfolk and brothers will not hurt you, when,
I mean, you hold that though they are very close to you, you are dead to
them, in such a way that you suffer neither them to be benefited by your
assistance, nor yourselves to be relaxed by duties towards them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2306"></span>[535:2307](2111069.htm#fr_2306) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.ix-p3"></span> Cf. the note on II. xiii.

<span id="fn_2307"></span>[535:2308](2111069.htm#fr_2307) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.ix-p4"></span> Cf. the note on XIX. iii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. A question whether it is bad for a monk to have his
wants supplied by his kinsfolk.](2111070)
