[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111135)  [Next](2111137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vi.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vi.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.i-p1"></span>He vehemently inveighs against the
error of the Pelagians, who declared that Christ was a mere man.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.i-p2.1"></span>We</span> said in the first book that that
heresy which copies and follows the lead of Pelagianism, strives and
contends in every way to make it believed that the Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, when born of the Virgin was only a mere man; and that
having afterwards taken the path of virtue He merited by His holy and
pious life to be counted worthy for this <span id="page_581">p.
581</span> <span id="iv.vii.vi.i-Page_581"></span>holiness of His life
that the Divine Majesty should unite Itself to Him: and thus by cutting
off altogether from Him the honour of His sacred origin, it only left to
Him the selection on account of His merits. <span
id="fr_2491"></span>[2492](#fn_2491) And their aim and endeavour was
this; viz., that, by bringing Him down to the level of common men, and
making Him one of the common herd, they might assert that all men could
by their good life and deeds secure whatever He had secured by His good
life. <span id="fr_2492"></span>[2493](#fn_2492) A most dangerous and
deadly assertion indeed, which takes away what truly belongs to God, and
holds out false promises to men; and which should be condemned for
abominable lies on both sides, since it attacks God with wicked
blasphemy, and gives to men the hope of a false assurance. A most
perverse and wicked assertion as it gives to men what does not belong to
them, and takes away from God what is His. And so of this dangerous and
deadly evil this new heresy which has recently sprung up, <span
id="fr_2493"></span>[2494](#fn_2493) is in a way stirring and reviving
the embers, and raising a fresh flame from its ancient ashes by
asserting that our Lord Jesus Christ was born a mere man. And so why is
there any need for us to ask whether its consequences are dangerous, as
in its fountain head it is utterly wrong. It is unnecessary to examine
what it is like in its issues, as in its commencement it leaves us no
reason for examination. For what object is there in inquiring whether
like the earlier heresy, it holds out the same promises to man, if
(which is the most awful sin) it takes away the same things from God? So
that it would be almost wrong, when we see what it begins like, to ask
what there is to follow; as if some possible way might appear in the
sequel, in which a man who denies God, could prove that he was not
irreligious. The new heresy then, as we have already many times
declared, says that the Lord Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary,
only a mere man: and so that Mary should be called Christotocos not
Theotocos, because she was the mother of Christ, not of God. And further
to this blasphemous statement it adds arguments that are as wicked as
they are foolish, saying, “No one ever gave birth to one who was before
her.” As if the birth of the only begotten of God, predicted by
prophets, announced since the beginning of the world, could be dealt
with or measured by human reasons. Or did the Virgin Mary, O you
heretic, whoever you are, who slander her for her childbearing—bring
about and consummate that which came to pass, by her own strength, so
that in a matter and event of so great importance, human weakness can be
brought as an objection? And so if there was anything in this great
event which was the work of man, look for human arguments. But if
everything, which was done, was due to the power of God, why should you
consider what is impossible with men, when you see that it is the work
of Divine power? But of this more anon. Now let us follow up the subject
we began to treat of some little way back; that everybody may know that
you are trying to fan the flame in the ashes of Pelagianism, and to
revive the embers by breathing out fresh blasphemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2491"></span>[581:2492](2111136.htm#fr_2491) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.i-p3"></span> See above Book 1. cc. ii. iii.

<span id="fn_2492"></span>[581:2493](2111136.htm#fr_2492) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.i-p4"></span> See below Book VI. c. xiv. For the
twofold error of Pelagianism cf. a striking article on “Theodore of
Mopsuestia and Modern Thought” in the Church Quarterly Review, vol. i.
See esp. p 135; where, speaking of Pelagianism, the writer says: “As the
hypostatic union was denied lest it should derogate from the ethical
completeness of Christ, so the efficacious working of grace must be
explained away lest it should derogate from the moral dignity of
Christians. The divine and human elements must be kept as jealously
apart in the moral life of the members as in the person of the Head of
the Church. In the ultimate analysis it must be proved that the initial
movement in every good action came from the human will itself, though
when this was allowed, the grace of God might receive, by an exact
process of assessment, its due share of credit for the result.”

<span id="fn_2493"></span>[581:2494](2111136.htm#fr_2493) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.i-p5"></span> Viz., Nestorianism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. That the doctrine of Nestorius is closely connected
with the error of the Pelagians.](2111137)
