[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111023)  [Next](2111025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.v.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiv-p1"></span>A question on the different ways of
keeping Lent.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.v.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Germanus</span>: What is the reason why
Lent is kept for six weeks, while in some countries a possibly more
earnest care for religion seems to have added a seventh week as well,
though neither number when you subtract Sunday and Saturday, gives the
total of forty days? For only six and thirty days are included in these
weeks. <span id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[513:2206](2111024.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiv-p3"></span> On the different uses in regard to
the Lenten fast Socrates (H. E. V. xxii.) writes as follows: “Those at
Rome fast three successive weeks before Easter, excepting Saturdays and
Sundays. The Illyrians, Achaians, and Alexandrians observe a fast of six
weeks, which they call the forty days’ fast. Others commencing their
fast from the seventh week before Easter, and fasting for fifteen days
by intervals, yet call that time the forty days’ fast.” There are
difficulties in the way of accepting the statement about the custom at
Rome (see below), but the great variety of customs is fully confirmed by
Sozomen (H. E. VII. xix.): “In some churches the time before Easter,
which is called Quadragesima, and is devoted by the people to fasting,
is made to consist of six weeks: and this is the case in Illyria, and
the western regions, in Libya, throughout Egypt, and in Palestine:
whereas it is made to comprise seven weeks at Constantinople, and in the
neighbouring provinces as far as Phœnicia. In some churches the people
fast three alternate weeks during the space of six or seven weeks;
whereas in others they fast continuously during the three weeks
immediately preceding the festival.” The statement here made with regard
to the West is true except as regards Milan, where Saturday was kept (as
in the East) as a festival: while for the Constantinopolitan practice
Chrysostom (Hom. xi. in Gen. § 2) confirms what Sozomen says: while
Cassian’s language in the text bears witness to the fact that both Egypt
and Palestine agreed with the Roman practice. In either case, whether
the fast began seven or six weeks before Easter, the number of days
observed in the fast was the same; Saturdays (with the exception of
Easter Eve which was always regarded as a fast) being excluded in the
former case, while they were all included in the latter. Cf. below, c.
xxvi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. The answer to the effect that the fast of Lent has
reference to the tithe of the year.](2111025)
