[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111153)  [Next](2111155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p1"></span>He refutes his opponent by the
testimony of the Council of Antioch.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p2.1"></span>Therefore</span> since we have, as I
fancy, already in all the former books with the weight of sacred
testimonies, given a complete answer to the heretic who denies God, now
let us come to the faith of the Creed of Antioch and its value. For as
he <span id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546) was himself baptized and
regenerated in this, he ought to be confuted by his own profession, and
(so to speak) to be crushed beneath the weight of his own arms, for this
is the method, that as he is already convicted by the evidence of holy
Scripture, so now he may be convicted by evidence out of his own mouth.
Nor will there be any need to bring anything else to bear against him
when he has clearly and plainly convicted himself. The text then and the
faith of the Creed of Antioch is this. <span
id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547) “I believe in one and the only true
God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible. And
in one Lord Jesus Christ, His only begotten Son, and the first-born of
every creature, begotten of Him before all worlds, and not made: Very
God of Very God, Being of one substance with the Father: By whom both
the worlds were framed, and all things were made. Who for us came, and
was born of the Virgin Mary, and was crucified under Pontius Pilate and
was buried: and the third day He rose again according to the Scripture:
and ascended into heaven, and shall come again to judge the quick and
the dead,” etc. <span id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548) In the Creed
which gives the faith of all the Churches, I should like to know which
you would rather follow, the authority of men or of God? Though I would
not press hardly or unkindly upon you, but give the opportunity of
choosing whichever alternative you please, that accepting one, I may
deny the other: for I will grant you and yield to you either of them.
And what do I grant, I ask? I will force you to one or other even
against your will. For you ought, if you like, to understand of your own
free will that one or other of these is in the Creed: if you don’t like
it, you must be forced against your will to see it. For, as you know, a
Creed (Symbolum) gets its name from being a “collection.” <span
id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549) For what is called in Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p7.5"></span>σύμβολος</span> is
termed in Latin “Collatio.” But it is therefore a collection (collatio)
because when the faith of the whole Catholic law was collected together
by the apostles of the Lord, all those matters which are spread over the
whole body of the sacred writings with immense fulness of detail, were
collected together in sum in the matchless brevity of the Creed,
according to the Apostle’s words: “Completing His word, and cutting it
short in righteousness: because a short word shall the Lord make upon
the earth.” <span id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550) This then is the
“short word” which the Lord made, collecting together in few words the
faith of both of His Testaments, and including in a few brief clauses
the drift of all the Scriptures, building up His own out of His own, and
giving the force of the whole law in a most compendious <span
id="page_593">p. 593</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-Page_593"></span>and brief formula. Providing in
this, like a most tender father, for the carelessness and ignorance of
some of his children, that no mind however simple and ignorant might
have any trouble over what could so easily be retained in the memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[592:2547](2111154.htm#fr_2546) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p3"></span> Nestorius, who had belonged to the
monastery of St. Euprepius near the gate of Antioch before his elevation
to the see of Constantinople.

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[592:2548](2111154.htm#fr_2547) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p4"></span> This creed is plainly given by
Cassian as the baptismal formula of the Church of Antioch; and with
almost verbally a fragment of the Creed preserved in a *Contestatio*
comparing Nestorius to Paul of Samosata (<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p4.1"></span>a.d</span>. 429, or 430) which is said
by Leontius to have been the work of Eusebius afterward Bishop of
Dorylæum. The form is especially interesting as showing that the Creed
of Antioch, in common with several other Eastern Creeds, underwent
revision, probably about the middle of the fourth century, from the
desire to enrich the local creed with Nicene phraseology. The insertions
which are obviously due to the Creed of Nicæa are: non factum, Deum
verum ex Deo vero, homoousion patri, or as they would run in the
original <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p4.2"></span>οὐ
ποιηθέντα, Θεὸν ἀληθινὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ ἀλιθινοῦ, ὁμοούσιον τῷ Πατρι</span>,
and it has been suggested that they were probably introduced at the
Synod held at Antioch under Meletius in 363. Similar forms of local
creeds thus enlarged by the adoption of Nicene phraseology are (1) that
of Jerusalem as given by Cyril in his Catechetical Lectures, (2) the
Creed of Cappadocia, (3) that of Mesopotamia, and (4) the “Creed of
Charisius” preserved in the Acts of the Council of Ephesus (Mansi IV.
1348). On all of these see Dr. Hort’s “Two Dissertations,” p. 110 *sq*.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p5"></span>Another interesting feature in the
Creed as given by Cassian is that it was in the singular “Credo,” *I
believe*; whereas the Eastern Creeds are almost all in the plural <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p5.1"></span>πιστεύομεν</span>.
That however which is found in the Apostolical Constitutions (VII. xli.)
has the singular <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p5.2"></span>πιστεύω καὶ βαπτίζομαι</span>, and
therefore it is possible that Cassian may have preserved the original
form here. It is however more probable that the singular Credo is due to
a reminiscence of the form current in the Western church, which has
influenced the translation. See further Hahn’s Bibliothek des Symbole p.
64 *sq*.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[592:2549](2111154.htm#fr_2548) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p6"></span> Cassian nowhere quotes the last
section of the Creed of Antioch, as it did not concern the question at
issue. A few clauses of it may however be recovered from S. Chrysostom’s
Homilies (In 1 Cor. Hom. xl. § 2); viz., <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p6.1"></span>καὶ εἰς ἁμαρτιῶν ἂφεσιν καὶ εἰς νεκρῶν
ἀνάστασιν καὶ εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον</span>.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[592:2550](2111154.htm#fr_2549) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p7"></span> *Symbolus*, or more commonly and
correctly Symbolum (= <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p7.1"></span>σύμβολον</span>) is the general name for
the creed in the ancient church, met with from the days of Cyprian (who
uses it more than once, e.g., Ep. lxix.<span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p7.2"></span>) onwards. In the account which Cassian
gives in the text of the origin of the name he is certainly copying
Rufinus (whose exposition of the Apostles’ Creed is directly quoted by
him below in Book VII. c. xxvii.). The passage which Cassian evidently
has in his mind is the following: “Moreover for many and excellent
reasons they determined that it should be called Symbolum. For
‘Symbolum’ in Greek may mean both *Indicium* (a token) and *collatio* (a
collection), that is, that which several bring together into one; for
the apostles effected this in these sentences by bringing together into
one what each thought good.…Therefore being about to depart to preach,
the apostles appointed that token of their unanimity and faith.” (Ruf.
De Symb. § 2). Cf. also § 1. “In these words there is truly discovered
the prophecy which says: ‘Completing His work and cutting it short in
righteousness, because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth.’”
This explanation, however, of the origin of the term labours under the
fatal mistake of confusing two distinct Greek words, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p7.3"></span>συμβολή,</span> a
“collection,” and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p7.4"></span>σύμβολον,</span> a “watchword:” and the
true explanation of the word is probably that which Rufinus gives as an
alternative, which gives it the meaning of “watchword.” It was the
watchword of the Christian soldier, carefully and jealously guarded by
him, as that by which he could himself be distinguished from heretics,
and that for which he could challenge others of whose orthodoxy he might
be in doubt.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[592:2551](2111154.htm#fr_2550) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p7.6"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p8"></span> [Rom. ix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)<span
id="iv.vii.vii.iii-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. How the Creed has authority Divine as well as
human.](2111155)
