[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111170)  [Next](2111172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xx"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XX.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xx-p1"></span>He shows from what has been said that
we do not mean that God was mortal or of flesh before the worlds,
although Christ, who is God from eternity and was made man in time, is
but one Person.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.xx-p2.1"></span>But</span> perhaps you will say: If I
admit that the same Person was in the end of time born of a Virgin, who
was begotten before all things of God the Father, I shall imply that
before the beginning of the world God was in the flesh, as I say that He
was afterwards man, who was always God: and so I shall say that that man
who was afterwards born, had always existed. I do not want you to be
confused by this blind ignorance, and these obscure misconceptions, so
as to fancy that I am maintaining that the manhood <span
id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) which was born of Mary had existed
before the beginning of things, or asserting that God was always in a
bodily form before the commencement of the world.  I do not say, I
repeat it, I do not say that the manhood was in God before it was born:
but that God was afterwards born in the manhood. For that flesh which
was born of the flesh of the Virgin had not always existed: but God who
always was, came in the flesh of man of the flesh of the Virgin. For
“the Word was made flesh,” and did not manifest flesh together with
Himself: but in the glory of Divinity joined Himself to human flesh. For
tell me when or where the Word was made flesh, or where He emptied
Himself by taking the form of a servant: or where He became poor, though
He was rich? Where but in the holy womb of the Virgin, where at His
Incarnation, the Word of God is said to have been made flesh, at His
birth He truly took the form of a servant; and when He is in human
nature nailed to the Cross, He became poor, and was made poor in His
sufferings in the flesh, though He was rich in His Divine glory?
Otherwise if, as you say, at some later period the Deity entered into
Him as into one of the Prophets and saints, then “the Word was made
flesh” in those men also in whom He vouchsafed to dwell: then in each
one of them He emptied Himself and took upon Him the form of a servant.
And thus there is nothing new or unique in Christ. Neither His
conception, nor His birth nor His death had anything special or
miraculous about it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[601:2578](2111171.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xx-p3"></span> *Hominem*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. The authority of Holy Scripture teaches that Christ
existed from all eternity.](2111172)
