[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111093)  [Next](2111095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p1"></span>By the case of Leporius he establishes
the fact that an open sin ought to be expiated by an open confession;
and also teaches from his words what is the right view to be held on the
Incarnation.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p2.1"></span>And</span> from his confession or rather
lamentation we have thought it well to quote some part, for two reasons:
that their recantation might be a testimony to us, and an example to
those who are weak, and that they might not be ashamed to follow in
their amendment, the men whom they were not ashamed to follow in their
error; and that they might be cured by a like remedy as they suffered
from a like disease. He then acknowledging the perverseness of his
views, and seeing the light of faith, wrote to the Gallican Bishops, and
thus began: <span id="fr_2371"></span>[2372](#fn_2371) “I scarcely know,
O my most venerable lords and blessed priests, what first to accuse
myself of, and what first to excuse myself for. Clumsiness and pride and
foolish ignorance together with wrong notions, zeal combined with
indiscretion, and (to speak truly) a weak faith which was gradually
failing, all these were admitted by me and flourished to such an extent
that I am ashamed of having yielded to such and so many sins, while
<span id="page_554">p. 554</span> <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-Page_554"></span>at the same time I am profoundly
thankful for having been able to cast them out of my soul.” And after a
little he adds: “If then, not understanding this power of God, and wise
in our conceits and opinions, from fear lest God should seem to act a
part that was beneath Him, we suppose that a man was born in conjunction
with God, in such a way that we ascribe to God alone what belongs to God
separately, and attribute to man alone what belongs to man separately,
we clearly add a fourth Person to the Trinity and out of the one God the
Son begin to make not one but two Christs; from which may our Lord and
God Jesus Christ Himself preserve us. Therefore we confess that our Lord
and God Jesus Christ the only Son of God, who for His own sake <span
id="fr_2372"></span>[2373](#fn_2372) was begotten of the Father before
all worlds, when in time He was for our sakes <span
id="fr_2373"></span>[2374](#fn_2373) made man of the Holy Ghost and the
ever-virgin Mary, was God at His birth; and while we confess the two
substances of the flesh and the Word, <span
id="fr_2374"></span>[2375](#fn_2374) we always acknowledge with pious
belief and faith one and the same Person to be indivisibly God and man;
and we say that from the time when He took upon Him flesh all that
belonged to God was given to man, as all that belonged to man was joined
to God. <span id="fr_2375"></span>[2376](#fn_2375) And in this sense
‘the Word was made flesh:’ <span id="fr_2376"></span>[2377](#fn_2376)
not that He began by any conversion or change to be what He was not, but
that by the Divine ‘economy’ the Word of the Father never left the
Father, <span id="fr_2377"></span>[2378](#fn_2377) and yet vouchsafed to
become truly man, and the Only Begotten was incarnate through that
hidden mystery which He alone understands (for it is ours to *believe*:
His to *understand*). And thus God ‘the Word’ Himself receiving
everything that belongs to man, is made man, and the manhood <span
id="fr_2378"></span>[2379](#fn_2378) which is assumed, receiving
everything that belongs to God cannot but be God; but whereas He is said
to be incarnate and unmixed, we must not hold that there is any
diminution of His substance: for God knows how to communicate Himself
without suffering any corruption, and yet truly to communicate Himself.
He knows how to receive into Himself without Himself being increased
thereby, just as He knows how to impart Himself in such a way as Himself
to suffer no loss. We should not then in our feeble minds make guesses,
in accordance with visible proofs and experiments, from the case of
creatures which are equal, and which mutually enter into each other, nor
think that God and man are mixed together, and that out of such a fusion
of flesh and the Word (i.e., the Godhead and manhood) some sort of body
is produced. God forbid that we should imagine that the two natures
being in a way moulded together should become one substance. For a
mixture of this sort is destructive of both parts. For God, who contains
and is not Himself contained, who enters into things and is not Himself
entered into, who fills things and is not Himself filled, who is
everywhere at once in His completeness and is diffused everywhere,
communicates Himself graciously to human nature by the infusion of His
power.” And after a little: “Therefore the God-man, Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, is truly born for us of the Holy Ghost and the ever-virgin
Mary. And so in the two natures the Word and Flesh become one, so that
while each substance continues naturally perfect in itself, what is
Divine imparteth without suffering any loss, to the humanity, and what
is human participates in the Divine; nor is there one person God, and
another person man, but the same person is God who is also man: and
again the man who is also God is called and indeed is Jesus Christ the
only Son of God; and so we must always take care and believe so as not
to deny that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, Very God (whom we
confess as existing ever with the Father and equal to the Father before
all worlds) became from the moment when He took flesh the God-man. Nor
may we imagine that gradually as time went on He became God, and that He
was in one condition before the resurrection and in another after it,
but that He was always of the same fulness and power.” And again a
little later on: “But because the Word of God <span
id="fr_2379"></span>[2380](#fn_2379) vouchsafed to come down upon
manhood by assuming manhood, and manhood was taken up into the Word by
being assumed by God, God the Word in His completeness became complete
man. For it was not God the Father who was made man, nor the Holy Ghost,
but the Only Begotten <span id="page_555">p. 555</span> <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-Page_555"></span>of the Father; and so we must hold that
there is one Person of the Flesh and the Word: so as faithfully and
without any doubt to believe that one and the same Son of God, who can
never be divided, existing in two natures <span
id="fr_2380"></span>[2381](#fn_2380) (who was also spoken of as a
“giant” <span id="fr_2381"></span>[2382](#fn_2381) ) in the days of His
Flesh truly took upon Him all that belongs to man, and ever truly had as
His own what belongs to God: since even though <span
id="fr_2382"></span>[2383](#fn_2382) He was crucified in weakness, yet
He liveth by the power of God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2371"></span>[553:2372](2111094.htm#fr_2371) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p3"></span> The recantation of Leporius may be
found in the Bibliotheca Maxima Patrum. vol. vii. p. 14; Labbe,
Concilia, ii. p. 1678; and Migne Patrol. Lat. xxxi. p. 1221.

<span id="fn_2372"></span>[554:2373](2111094.htm#fr_2372) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p4"></span> *Sibi*…*nobis*.

<span id="fn_2373"></span>[554:2374](2111094.htm#fr_2373) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p5"></span> *Sibi*…*nobis*.

<span id="fn_2374"></span>[554:2375](2111094.htm#fr_2374) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p6"></span> *Caro* and *Verbum* when used in this
way stand for the Humanity and the Divinity of Christ.

<span id="fn_2375"></span>[554:2376](2111094.htm#fr_2375) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p7"></span> The meaning of course is not that the
manhood was endowed with the properties of Deity, or conversely the
Deity with the properties of Humanity, but simply that *two whole and
perfect natures* were joined together in the one Person.

<span id="fn_2376"></span>[554:2377](2111094.htm#fr_2376) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p8"></span> S. [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2377"></span>[554:2378](2111094.htm#fr_2377) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p9"></span> This phrase gives some countenance to
the idea that the recantation was actually drawn up by Augustine, as the
thought which it contains is a favorite one with him, as excluding any
notion that Christ ever for one moment ceased to be God. See Serm. 184.
“Intelligerent…Eum…in homine ad nos venisse et a Patre non recessisse.”
186 “manens quod erat.” Similar language is used by S. Leo, Serm. 18. c.
5. In Natio. 2. c. 2. and S. Thomas Aquinas in the well-known
Sacramental hymn “Verbum supernum prodiens, Nec Patris linquens
dexteram.” Cf. Bright’s S. Leo on the Incarnation, p. 220.

<span id="fn_2378"></span>[554:2379](2111094.htm#fr_2378) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p10"></span> Homo is here used as frequently by
Augustine and other early writers for “Manhood,” and not an “individual
man.” In this way it was freely used till the Nestorian Controversy,
after which it went out of favour as capable of a Nestorian
interpretation, and gave place to “humanitas” or “humana natura,” when
the manhood of Christ was spoken of. See the Church Quarterly Review
vol. xviii. p. 10; and Bright’s S. Leo on the Incarnation, p. 165.

<span id="fn_2379"></span>[554:2380](2111094.htm#fr_2379) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p11"></span> *Verbum Dei* (Petschenig) *Verbum
Deus* (Gazæus).

<span id="fn_2380"></span>[555:2381](2111094.htm#fr_2380) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p12"></span> Substantiæ.

<span id="fn_2381"></span>[555:2382](2111094.htm#fr_2381) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p13"></span> The allusion is to [Psa.
19.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005)<span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p13.1"></span>, where the Latin (Gallican Psalter) has
“Exultavit, ut gigas, ad currendam viam.” The mystical interpretation
which takes the words as referring to Christ is not uncommon. So in a
hymn “De Adventu Domini” (Mone. Vol. i. p. 43) we have the verse,
“Procedit a thalamo suo Pudoris aula regia Geminæ gigas substantiæ,
Alacris ut currat viam,” and in another “De natali Domini” (p. 58) “Ut
gigas egreditur ad currendam viam.”

<span id="fn_2382"></span>[555:2383](2111094.htm#fr_2382) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.v-p14"></span> *Etsi* (Petschenig) *Et sic*
(Gazæus).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The united doctrine of the Catholics is to be
received as the orthodox faith.](2111095)
