[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111119)  [Next](2111121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p1"></span>He brings forward the witness of God
the Father to the Divinity of the Son.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p2.1"></span>What</span> do you say now, you heretic?
Are these evidences of the faith, aye and of all your unbelief, enough
for you: or would you like some more to be added to them? but what can
be added after Prophets and Apostles? unless perhaps—as the Jews once
demanded—you too might ask for a sign to be given you from heaven? But
if you ask this, we must give you the same answer which was formerly
given to them: “An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign.
And no sign shall be given to it, but the sign of the prophet
Jonah.” <span id="fr_2445"></span>[2446](#fn_2445) And indeed this sign
would be enough for you as for the Jews who crucified Him, that you
might be taught to believe in the Lord God by this alone, through which
even those who had persecuted Him, came to believe. But as we have
mentioned a sign from heaven, I will show you a sign from heaven: and
one of such a character that even the devils have never gainsaid it:
while, constrained by the demands of truth, though they saw Jesus in
bodily form, they yet cried out that He was God, as indeed He was. What
then does the Evangelist say of the Lord Jesus Christ? “When He was
baptized,” he says, “straightway He went up out of the water. And lo,
the heavens were opened to Him, and He saw the Spirit descending like a
dove, and coming upon Him. And behold, a voice from heaven, saying: This
is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” <span
id="fr_2446"></span>[2447](#fn_2446) What do you say to this, you
heretic? Do you dislike the words spoken, or the Person of the Speaker?
The meaning of the utterance at any rate needs no explanation: nor does
the worth of the Speaker need the commendation of words. It is God the
Father who spoke. What He said is clear enough. Surely you cannot make
so shameless and blasphemous an assertion as to say that God the Father
is not to be believed concerning the only begotten Son of God? “This,”
He then says, “is My beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.” But perhaps
you will try to maintain that this is madness, and that this was said of
the Word and not of Christ. Tell me then who was it who was baptized?
The Word or Christ? Flesh or Spirit? You cannot possibly deny that it
was Christ. That man then, born of man and of God, conceived by the
descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Virgin, and by the overshadowing of
the Power of the Most High, and thus the Son of man and of God, He it
was, as you cannot deny, who was baptized. If then it was He who was
baptized, it was He also who was named, for certainly the Person who was
baptized was the one named. “This,” said He, “is My beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased.” Could anything be said with greater significance or
clearness? Christ was baptized. Christ went up out of the water. When
Christ was baptized the heavens were opened. For Christ’s sake the dove
descended upon Christ, the Holy Spirit was present in a bodily form. The
Father addressed Christ. If you venture to deny that this was spoken of
Christ, the only thing is for you to maintain that Christ was not
baptized, that the Spirit did not descend, and that the Father did not
speak. But the truth itself is urgent and weighs you down so that even
if you will not confess it, yet you cannot deny it. For what says the
Evangelist? “When He was baptized, straightway He went up out of the
water.” Who was baptized? Most certainly Christ. “And behold,” he says,
“the heavens were opened to Him.” To where, forsooth, save to Him who
was baptized? Most certainly to Christ. “And He saw the Spirit of God
descending like a dove and coming upon Him.” Who saw? Christ indeed.
Upon whom did It descend? Most certainly upon Christ. “And a voice came
from heaven. saying”—of whom? Of Christ indeed: for what follows? “This
is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” In order that it might be
made clear on whose account all this happened, there followed the voice,
saying: “This is My beloved Son,” as if to say: This is He on whose
account all this took place. For this is My Son: on His account the
heavens were opened: on His account My Spirit came: on His account My
voice was heard. For this is My Son. In saying then “This is My Son”
whom did He so designate? Certainly Him whom the dove touched.  And whom
did the dove touch? Christ indeed. Therefore Christ is the Son of God.
My promise is fulfilled, I fancy. Do you see <span id="page_573">p.
573</span> <span id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-Page_573"></span>then now, O heretic,
a sign given you from heaven; and not one only, but many and special
ones? For there is one in the opening of heaven, another in the descent
of the Spirit, a third in the voice of the Father. All of which most
clearly show that Christ is God, for the laying open of the heavens
indicates that He is God, and the descent of the Holy Spirit upon Him
supports His Divinity, and the address of the Father confirms it. For
heaven would not have been opened except in honour of its Lord: nor
would the Holy Ghost have descended in a bodily form except upon the Son
of God: nor would the Father have declared Him to be the Son, had he not
been truly such; especially with such tokens of a Divine birth, as not
merely to confirm the truth of the right faith, but also to exclude the
wickedness of guilty and erroneous belief. For when the Father had
expressly and pointedly said with the inexpressible majesty of a Divine
utterance, “This is My Son,” He added also what follows—I mean, “My
beloved, in whom I am well pleased.” As He had already declared Him by
the prophet to be God the Mighty and God the Great, so when He says
here, “My beloved Son in whom I am well pleased,” He adds further to the
name of His own Son the title also of His beloved Son, in whom He is
well pleased: that the addition of the titles might denote the special
properties of the Divine nature; and that that might specially redound
to the glory of the Son of God, which had never happened to any man. And
so just as in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ these special and unique
things happened; viz., that the heavens were opened, that in the sight
of all God the Father touched Him in a sort of way, through the coming
and presence of the dove, and pointed almost with His finger to Him
saying, “This is My Son;” so this too is special and unique in His case;
viz., that He is specially beloved, and is specially named as
well-pleasing to the Father, in order that these special accompaniments
might mark the special import of His nature, and that the special
character of His names might support the special position of the only
begotten Son, which the honour of the signs previously given had already
confirmed. But here comes the end of this book. For this saying of God
the Father can neither be added to, nor equalled by any words of men.
For us God the Father Himself is a sufficiently satisfactory witness
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, when He says “This is My Son.” If you
think that it is possible for these utterances of God the Father to be
gainsaid, then you are forced to contradict Him, who by the clearest
possible announcement caused Him to be acknowledged as His Son by the
whole world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2445"></span>[572:2446](2111120.htm#fr_2445) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p3"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2446"></span>[572:2447](2111120.htm#fr_2446) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p4"></span> S. [Matt.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.xvi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV.](2111121)
