[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111075)  [Next](2111077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.viii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xvi-p1"></span>That the rational part of our soul
is corrupt.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.viii.xvi-p2.1"></span>And</span> therefore if you want to
discover the source and origin of this fault, you must recognize that
the rational part of your mind and soul is corrupt, that part namely
from which the faults of presumption and vainglory for the most part
spring. Further this first member, so to speak, of your soul must be
healed by the judgment of a right discretion and the virtue of humility,
as when it is injured, while you fancy that you can not only still scale
the heights of perfection but actually teach others, and hold that you
are capable and sufficient to instruct others, through the pride of
vainglory you are carried away by these vain rovings, which your
confession discloses. And these you will then be able to get rid of
without difficulty, if you are established as I said in the humility of
true discretion and learn with sorrow of heart how hard and difficult a
thing it is for each of us to save his soul, and admit with the inmost
feelings of your heart that you are not only far removed from that pride
of teaching, but that you are actually still in need of the help of a
teacher.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. How the weaker part of the soul is the first to
yield to the devil's temptations.](2111077)
