[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111130)  [Next](2111132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.v.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.v.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.vii.v.x-p1"></span>He proves Christ’s Divinity from the
blasphemy of Judaizing Jews as well as from the confession of converts
to the faith of Christ.

<span id="iv.vii.v.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.v.x-p2.1"></span>But</span> if you would like to have this
proved to you rather from representatives of the Jews, consider the
Jewish people when after their unhappy ignorance and wicked persecution
they were converted, and acknowledged God here and there, and see
whether they could not rightly say, “Thou art our God, and we knew Thee
not.” But I will add something else, to prove it to you not only from
those Jews who confess Him, but also from those who deny Him. For ask
those Jews who still continue in their state of unbelief whether they
know or believe in God. They will certainly confess that they both know
and believe in Him. But on the other hand ask them whether they believe
in the Son of God. They will at once deny and begin to blaspheme against
Him. You see then that the Prophet said this of Him of whom the Jews
have always been ignorant, and whom now they know not; and not of Him
whom they imagine that they believe in and confess. And so full well can
those, who after having been in ignorance come out of Judaism to the
faith, say, “Thou art our God, and we knew Thee not.” For rightly do
those, who after having been ignorant come to believe, say that they
knew not Him in whom up to this time they have not believed, and whom
they strive not to know. For it is clear that those who after their
previous ignorance come to confess Him, say that formerly they knew Him
not, whom up to this time they have ignorantly denied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. He returns to the prophecy of Isaiah.](2111132)
