[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111187)  [Next](2111189) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xiii-p1"></span>How the devil always retained this
notion of Christ’s Divinity (because of His secret working which he
experienced) even up to His Cross and Death.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiii-p2.1"></span>But</span> perhaps he afterwards
ceased and rested, and when his temptations were van<span
id="page_611">p. 611</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiii-Page_611"></span>quished laid aside his suspicion
because he found no result? Nay, it rather remained always in him, and
even up to the very cross of the Lord the suspicion lasted in him and
was increased by peculiar terrors. What need is there of anything
further? Not even then did he cease to think of Him as the Son of God,
after that he knew that such licence was granted to His persecutors
against Him. But the crafty foe saw even in the midst of His bodily
sufferings the signs of Divinity, and though he would have much
preferred Him to be a (mere) man, was yet forced to suspect that He was
God: for though he would have preferred to believe what he wanted, yet
he was driven by surest proofs to that which he feared. And no wonder:
for although he beheld Him spitted on, and scourged, and disgraced, and
led to the Cross, yet he saw Divine powers abounding even in the midst
of the indignities and wrongs; when the veil of the temple is rent, when
the sun hides itself, the day is darkened, and all things feel the
effects of the Passion: all things even, which know not God, acknowledge
the work of Deity. And therefore the devil seeing this, and trembling,
tried in every way to arrive at the knowledge of His Godhead, even at
the very death of the manhood, saying in the person of those who
crucified Him: “If He be the Son of God, let Him come down now from the
Cross, and we will believe Him.” <span
id="fr_2623"></span>[2624](#fn_2623) He certainty perceived that by His
bodily Passion our Lord God was working out the redemption of man’s
salvation, and also that by it he was being destroyed and subdued, while
we were being redeemed and saved. And so the enemy of mankind wanted by
every means and every wile to defeat that which he knew was being done
for the redemption of all men. “If,” he says, “He be the Son of God, let
Him come down now from the Cross and we will believe Him:” on purpose
that the Lord might be moved by the reproach of the words, and destroy
the mystery, while He avenged the wrong. You see then that the Lord even
when hanging on the Cross was termed the Son of God. You see that they
suspect the fact to which they refer. And so do you learn, as I said
above, even from His persecutors, even from the devil, to believe on the
Son of God. Who ever came up to the unbelief of the devil? Who went
beyond it? *He* suspected that He was the Son of God even when He
endured death. *You* deny it even when He has risen. *He* suspected that
He was God, from whom He hid Himself. *You*, to whom He has proved it,
deny it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2623"></span>[611:2624](2111188.htm#fr_2623) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xiii-p3"></span> S. [Matt. xxvii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. He shows how heretics pervert holy Scripture, by
replying to the argument drawn from the Apostle's words, “Without
father, without mother,” etc.: Heb. vii.](2111189)
