[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111011)  [Next](2111013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.v.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xii-p1"></span>The answer on the nature of things
good, bad, and indifferent.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.v.xii-p2.1"></span>To</span> this Abbot Theonas thus began his
reply. It is indeed right for us, even when we can<span id="page_508">p.
508</span> <span id="iv.vi.v.xii-Page_508"></span>not see the reason, to
yield to the authority of the fathers and to a custom of our
predecessors that has been continued through so many years down to our
own time, and to observe it, as handed down from antiquity, with
constant care and reverence. But since you want to know the reasons and
grounds for this, receive in few words what we have heard as handed down
by our Elders on this subject. But before we bring forward the authority
of Holy Scripture, we will, if you please, say a little about the nature
and character of the fast, that afterwards the authority of Holy
Scripture may support our words. The Divine Wisdom has pointed out in
Ecclesiastes that for everything, i.e., for all things happy or those
which are considered unfortunate and unhappy, there is a right time:
saying: “For all things there is a time, and a time for everything under
the heaven. A time to bring forth and a time to die; a time to plant and
a time to pull down what is planted; a time to kill and a time to heal;
a time to destroy and a time to build; a time to weep and a time to
laugh; a time to mourn and a time to dance; a time to cast away stones
and a time to gather stones; a time to embrace and a time to refrain
from embracing; a time to get and a time to lose; a time to keep and a
time to send away; a time to scatter and a time to collect; a time to be
silent and a time to speak; a time to love and a time to hate; a time
for war and a time for peace;” and below: “For there is a time,” it
says, “for everything and for every deed.” <span
id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186) None therefore of these things does
it lay down as always good, but only when any of them are fittingly done
and at the right time, so that these very things which at one time, when
done at the right moment, turn out well, if they are ventured on at a
wrong or unsuitable time, are found to be useless or harmful; only
excepting those things which are in their own nature good or bad, and
which cannot ever be made the opposite, as, e.g., justice, prudence,
fortitude, temperance and the rest of the virtues, or on the other hand,
those faults, the description of which cannot possibly be altered or
fall under the other head. But those things which can sometimes turn out
with either result, so that, in accordance with the character of those
who use them, they are found to be either good or bad, these we consider
to be not absolutely in their own natures useful or injurious, but only
so in accordance with the mind of the doer, and the suitableness of the
time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[508:2187](2111012.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xii-p3"></span> [Eccl.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.vi.v.xii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. What kind of good fasting is.](2111013)
