[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111115)  [Next](2111117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p1"></span>He proves from the renowned
confession of the blessed Peter that Christ is God.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p2.1"></span>But</span> if you prefer the authority of
a greater person (although you ought not to slight the authority of any
one of either sex, on whom the confession of the mystery confers
weight—for whatever may be a person’s condition, or however humble his
position, yet the value of his faith is not thereby diminished) let us
interrogate no beginner or untaught schoolboy, nor a woman whose faith
might perhaps appear to be but rudimentary; but that greatest of
disciples among disciples, and of teachers among teachers, who presided
and ruled over the Roman Church, and held the chief place <span
id="fr_2440"></span>[2441](#fn_2440) in the priesthood as he did in the
faith. Tell us then, tell us, we pray, O Peter, thou chief of Apostles,
tell us how the Churches ought to believe in God. For it is right that
you should teach us, as you were taught by the Lord, and that you should
open to us the gate, of which you received the key. Shut out all those
who try to overthrow the heavenly house: and those who are endeavouring
to enter by secret holes and unlawful approaches: as it is clear that
none can enter the gate of the kingdom save one to whom the key bestowed
on the Churches is revealed by you. Tell us then how we ought to believe
in Jesus Christ and to confess our common Lord. You will surely reply
without hesitation: “Why do you consult me as to the way in which the
Lord should be confessed, when you have before you my own confession of
Him? Read the gospel, and you will not want me myself, when you have got
my confession. Nay, you have got me myself when you have my confession;
for though I have no weight apart from my confession, yet the actual
confession adds weight to my person.” Tell us then, O Evangelist, tell
us the confession: tell us the faith of the chief Apostle: did he
confess that Jesus was only a man, or God? did he say that there was
nothing but flesh in Him, or did he proclaim Him the Son of God? When
then the Lord Jesus Christ asked whom the disciples believed and
confessed Him to be, Peter, the first of the Apostles, replied—one in
the name of all—for the answer of one was to the same effect as the
faith of them all. But it was fitting that he should first give the
answer, that the order of the answer might correspond to the degree of
honour: and that he might outstrip them in confession, as he outstripped
them in age. What then does he <span id="page_570">p. 570</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iv.xii-Page_570"></span>say? “Thou art,” he says, “the Christ
the Son of the living God.” <span id="fr_2441"></span>[2442](#fn_2441) I
am obliged, you heretic, to make use of a plain and simple question to
confute you. Tell me, I pray, who was He, to whom Peter gave that
answer? You cannot deny that it was the Christ. I ask then, what do you
call Christ? man or God? Man certainly without any doubt: for hence
springs the whole of your heresy, because you deny that Christ is the
Son of God. And so too you say that Mary is Christotocos, but not
Theotocos, because she was the mother of Christ, not of God. Therefore
you maintain, that Christ is only a man, and not God, and so that He is
the Son of man not of God. What then does Peter reply to this? “Thou
art,” he says, “the Christ, the Son of the living God.” That Christ whom
you declare to be only the Son of man, he testifies to be the Son of
God. Whom would you like us to believe? you or Peter? I imagine that you
are not so shameless as to venture to prefer your own opinion to that of
the first of the Apostles. And yet what is there that you would not
venture on? or how can you help scorning the Apostle, if you can deny
God? “Thou art then,” he says, “the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
Is there anything puzzling or obscure in this? It is nothing but a plain
and open confession: he proclaims Christ to be the Son of God. Perhaps
you will deny that the words were spoken: but the Evangelist testifies
that they were. Or do you say that the Apostle told a lie? But it is an
awful lie to accuse an Apostle of lying. Or perhaps you will maintain
that the words were spoken of some other Christ? But this is a novel
kind of monstrous fabrication. What then is left for you? One thing
indeed; viz., that since what is written is read, and what is read is
true, you should finally be driven by force and compulsion (as you
cannot assert its falsehood) to desist from impugning its truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2440"></span>[569:2441](2111116.htm#fr_2440) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p3"></span> *Principatus*.

<span id="fn_2441"></span>[570:2442](2111116.htm#fr_2441) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p4"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.xii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The confession of the blessed Peter receives a
testimony to its truth from Christ Himself.](2111117)
