[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111052)  [Next](2111054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p1"></span>The answer to the objection raised.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>Theonas</span>: Your notion does not come
to much; as you yourselves have actually now begun to maintain that this
cannot possibly stand in the person of those who are out and out
sinners, but that it properly applies to those who are trying to keep
themselves clear from carnal sins. And since you have already separated
these from the number of sinners, it follows that you must shortly admit
them into the ranks of the faithful and holy. For what kinds of sin do
you say that those can commit, from which, if they are involved in them
after the grace of baptism, they can be freed by the daily grace of
Christ? or of what body of death are we to think that the Apostle said:
“Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Thanks be to God
through Jesus Christ our Lord”? <span
id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275) Is it not clear, as truth compels
you yourselves also to admit, that it is spoken not of those members of
capital crimes, by which the wages of eternal death are gained; viz.,
murder, fornication, adultery, drunkenness, thefts and robberies, but of
that body before mentioned, which the daily grace of Christ assists? For
whoever after baptism and the knowledge of God falls into that death,
must know that he will either have to be cleansed, not by the daily
grace of Christ, i.e., an easy forgiveness, which our Lord when at any
moment He is prayed to, is wont to grant to our errors, but by a
lifelong affliction of penitence and penal sorrow, or else will be
hereafter consigned to the punishment of eternal fire for them, as the
same Apostle thus declares: “Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor defilers of themselves
with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous persons, nor drunkards, nor
railers, nor extortioners shall possess the kingdom of God.” <span
id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) Or what is that law warring in our
members <span id="page_528">p. 528</span> <span
id="iv.vi.vii.xv-Page_528"></span>which resists the law of our mind, and
when it has led us resisting but captives to the law of sin and death,
and has made us serve it with the flesh, nevertheless suffers us to
serve the law of God with the mind? For I do not suppose that this law
of sin denotes crimes or can be taken of the offences mentioned above,
of which if a man is guilty he does not serve the law of God with the
mind, from which law he must first have departed in heart before he is
guilty of any of them with the flesh. For what is it to serve the law of
sin, but to do what is commanded by sin? What sort of sin then is it to
which so great holiness and perfection feels that it is captive, and yet
doubts not that it will be freed from it by the grace of Christ, saying:
“O wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord”? What law, I ask,
will you maintain to be implanted in our members, which, withdrawing us
from the law of God and bringing us into captivity to the law of sin,
could make us wretched rather than guilty so that we should not be
consigned to eternal punishment, but still as it were sigh for the
unbroken joys of bliss, and, seeking for a helper who shall restore us
to it, exclaim with the Apostle: “O wretched man that I am! Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?” For what is it to be led
captive to the law of sin but to continue to perform and commit sin? Or
what other chief good can be given which the saints cannot fulfil,
except that in comparison with which, as we said above, everything else
is not good? Indeed we know that many things in this world are good, and
chiefly, modesty, continence, sobriety, humility, justice, mercy,
temperance, piety: but all of these things fail to come up to that chief
good, and can be done I say not by apostles, but even by ordinary folk;
and, those by whom they are not done, are either chastised with eternal
punishment, or are set free by great exertions, as was said above, of
penitence, and not by the daily grace of Christ. It remains then for us
to admit that this saying of the Apostle is rightly applied only to the
persons of saints, who day after day falling under this law, which we
described, of sin not of crimes, are secure of their salvation and not
precipitated into wicked deeds, but, as has often been said, are drawn
away from the contemplation of God to the misery of bodily thoughts, and
are often deprived of the blessing of that true bliss. For if they felt
that by this law of their members they were bound daily to crimes, they
would complain of the loss not of happiness but of innocence, and the
Apostle Paul would not say: “O wretched man that I am,” but “Impure,” or
“Wicked man that I am,” and he would wish to be rid not of the body of
this death, i.e., this mortal state, but of the crimes and misdeeds of
this flesh. But because by reason of his state of human frailty he felt
that he was captive, i.e., led away to carnal cares and anxieties which
the law of sin and death causes, he groans over this law of sin under
which against his will he had fallen, and at once has recourse to Christ
and is saved by the present redemption of His grace. Whatever of anxiety
therefore that law of sin, which naturally produces the thorns and
thistles of mortal thoughts and cares, has caused to spring up in the
ground of the Apostle’s breast, that the law of grace at once plucks up.
“For the law,” says he, “of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath set
me free from the law of sin and death.” <span
id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[527:2276](2111053.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p3"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[527:2277](2111053.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[528:2278](2111053.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p5"></span> [Rom. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002)<span id="iv.vi.vii.xv-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. What is the body of sin.](2111054)
