[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111202)  [Next](2111204) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p1"></span>As he is going to produce the
testimony of Greek or Eastern Bishops, he brings forward in the first
place S. Gregory Nazianzen.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>But</span> perhaps because those
whom we have enumerated came from different parts of the world, their
authority may seem to you less valuable. An absurd thing, indeed,
because faith is not interfered with by place, and we have to consider
*what* a man is, not *where*: especially since religion unites all
together, and those who are in the one faith may be also known to be in
the one body. But still we will bring forward for you some, whom you
cannot despise, even from the East. Gregory, that most grand light of
knowledge and doctrine, who though he has been for some time dead, yet
still lives in authority and faith, and though he has been for some time
removed in the body from the Churches, yet has not forsaken them in word
and authority. “When then,” he says, “God had come forth from the
Virgin, in that human nature which He had taken, as He existed in one
out of two which are the opposite of each other; viz., flesh and spirit,
the one is taken into God, the other exalts into the grace of
Deity. <span id="fr_2675"></span>[2676](#fn_2675) O new and unheard of
intermingling! O marvellous and exquisite union! He who was, came to be,
and the Creator is created: and He who is infinite is embraced by the
soul which is the medium between God and the flesh: and He who makes all
rich, is made poor.” Again he says of the Epiphany: “But what happens?
What is done concerning us and for us? There is brought about some new
and unheard of change of natures and God is made man.” Again in this
passage: <span id="fr_2676"></span>[2677](#fn_2676) “The Son of God
began to be also the Son of man, not being changed from what He was, for
He is unchangeable, but taking to Himself what He was not: for He is
pitiful so that He, who could not be embraced, can now be embraced.” You
see how grandly and nobly he asserts the majesty of His Godhead so that
He may bring in the condescension of the Incarnation: for that admirable
teacher of the faith knew well that of all the blessings which God
granted to us at His coming into the world this was the chief, without
diminishing in any way His glory. For whatever God gave to man, ought to
increase the love of Him in us, and not to lessen the honour which we
give to Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2675"></span>[619:2676](2111203.htm#fr_2675) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p3"></span> *Aliud in Deum adsumiter, aliud
in Deitatis gratiam præstat*. So Petschenig edits. The text of Gazæus
has *aliud Deitatis gratia præstat*.

<span id="fn_2676"></span>[619:2677](2111203.htm#fr_2676) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p4"></span> Greg. Nazianz. Oratio xxxviii.
The Greek of the passage which Cassian translates is as follows: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>προελθὼν δὲ Θεὸς
μετὰ τῆς προσλήψεως ἓν ἐκ δύο τῶν ἐναντίων, σαρκὸς καὶ πνεύματος· ὧν τὸ
μὲν ἐθέωσε τὸ δὲ ἐθεώθη, ὦ τῆς καινῆς μίξεως, ὦ τῆς παραδόξου κράσεως, ὁ
ὢν γίνεται καὶ ὁ ἄκτιστος κτίζεται καὶ ὁ ἀχώρητος χωρεῖται διά μέσης
ψυχῆς νοερᾶς μεσιτευούσης θεότητι καὶ σαρκὸς παχύτητι, καὶ ὁ πλουτίζων
πτωχεύει</span>. Oratio xxxix. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p4.2"></span>Τί γίνεται καὶ τί τὸ μέγα· περὶ ἡμᾶς
μυστήριον</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p4.3"></span> ;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p4.4"></span>καινοτομοῦνται φύσεις καὶ Θεὸς
ἄνθρωπος γίνεται</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p4.5"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxviii-p4.6"></span>καὶ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ δέχεται καὶ υἱὸς
ἀνθρώπου γενὲσθαι τε καὶ κληθῆναι, οὐχ ὃ ἠν μεταβαλὼν, ἄτρεπτονυ γὰρ,
ἄλλ ὀ οὐκ ἦν προσλαβὼν, φιλάνθρωπος γάρ, ἵνα χωρηθᾑ ὁ ἀχώρητος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX. In the next place he puts the authority of S.
Athanasius.](2111204)
