[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111049)  [Next](2111051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p1"></span>Of this also: “But we know that the
law is spiritual,” etc.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p2.1"></span>And</span> this law the Apostle also
calls spiritual saying: “But we know that the law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin.” <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268) For
this law is spiritual which bids us eat in the sweat of our brow that
“true bread which cometh down from heaven” <span
id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269) but that sale under sin makes us
carnal. What, I ask, or whose is that sin? Doubtless Adam’s, by whose
fall and, if I may so say, ruinous transaction and fraudulent bargain we
were sold. For when he was led astray by the persuasion of the serpent
he brought all his descendants under the yoke of perpetual bondage, as
they were alienated by taking the forbidden food. For this custom is
generally observed between the buyer and seller, that one who wants to
make himself over to the power of another, receives from his buyer a
price for the loss of his liberty, and his consignment to perpetual
slavery. And we can very plainly see that this took place between Adam
and the serpent. For by eating of the forbidden tree he received from
the serpent the price of his liberty, and gave up his natural freedom
and chose to give himself up to perpetual slavery to him from whom he
had obtained the deadly price of the forbidden fruit; and thenceforth he
was bound by this condition and not without reason subjected all the
offspring of his posterity to perpetual service to him whose slave he
had become. For what can any marriage in slavery produce but slaves?
What then? Did that cunning and crafty buyer take away the rights of
ownership from the true and lawful lord? Not so. For neither did he
overcome all God’s property by the craft of a single act of deception so
that the true lord lost his rights of ownership, who though the buyer
himself was a rebel and a renegade, yet oppressed him with the yoke of
slavery; but because the Creator had endowed all reasonable creatures
with free will, he would not restore to their natural liberty against
their will those who contrary to right had sold themselves by the sin of
greedy lust. Since anything that is contrary to goodness and fairness is
abhorrent to Him who is the Author of justice and piety. For it would
have been wrong for Him to have recalled the blessing of freedom
granted, unfair for Him to have by His power oppressed man who was free,
and by taking him captive, not to have allowed him to exercise the
prerogative of the freedom he had received, as He was reserving his
salvation for future ages, that in due season the fulness of the
appointed time might be fulfilled. For it was right that his offspring
should remain under the ancient conditions for so long a time, until by
the price of His own blood the grace of the Lord redeemed them from
their original chains and set them free in the primeval state of
liberty, though He was able even then to save them, but would not,
because equity forbade Him to break the terms of His own decree. Would
you know the reason for your being sold? Hear thy Redeemer Himself
proclaiming openly by Isaiah the prophet: “What is this bill of the
divorce of your mother with which I have put her away? Or who is My
creditor to whom I sold you? Behold you are sold for your iniquities and
for your wicked deeds have I put your mother away.” Would you also
plainly see why when you were consigned to the yoke of slavery He would
not redeem you by the might of His own power? Hear what He added to the
former passage, and how He charges the same servants of sin with the
reason for their voluntary sale. “Is My hand shortened and become little
that I cannot redeem, or is there no strength in Me to deliver?” <span
id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270) But what it is which is always
standing in the way of His most powerful pity the same prophet shows
when he says: “Behold the hand of the Lord is not shortened that it
cannot save, neither is His ear heavy that it cannot hear: But your
iniquities have divided between you and your God and your sins have hid
His face from you that He should not hear.” <span
id="fr_2271"></span>[2272](#fn_2271)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[526:2269](2111050.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p3"></span> [Rom. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[526:2270](2111050.htm#fr_2269) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p4"></span> S. [John vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033)<span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[526:2271](2111050.htm#fr_2270) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p5"></span> [Isa.
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002)<span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2271"></span>[526:2272](2111050.htm#fr_2271) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p6"></span> [Isa.
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002)<span
id="iv.vi.vii.xii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Of this also: “But I know that in me, that is in my
flesh, dwelleth no good thing.”](2111051)
