[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111156)  [Next](2111158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.vi-p1"></span>Once more he challenges him to the
profession of the Creed of Antioch.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>The</span> Creed then, O you heretic, of
which we gave the text above, though it is that of all the churches (for
the faith of all is but one) is yet specially that of the city and
Church of Antioch, i.e., of that Church in which you were brought up,
instructed, and regenerated. The faith of this Creed brought you to the
fountain of life, to saving regeneration, to the grace of the Eucharist,
to the Communion of the Lord: And what more! Alas for the grievous and
mournful complaint! Even to the ministerial office, the height of the
presbyterate, the dignity of the priesthood. Do you, you wretched
madman, think that this is a light or trivial matter? Do you not see
what you have done? Into what a depth you have plunged yourself? In
losing the faith of the Creed, you have lost everything that you were.
For the mysteries of the priesthood and of your salvation rested on the
truth of the Creed. Can you possibly deny that? I say that you have
denied your very self. But perhaps you think that you cannot deny
yourself. Let us look at the text of the Creed; that if you say what you
used to do, you may not be refuted, but if you say things widely
different and contrary, you may not look to be confuted by me, as you
have condemned yourself already. For if you now maintain something else
than what is in the Creed and what you formerly maintained yourself, how
can you help ascribing your punishment to nobody but yourself, when you
see that the opinion of everybody else about you is the same as your
own? “I believe,” the Creed says, “in one God, the Father Almighty,
Maker of all things visible and invisible; and in the Lord Jesus Christ,
His only begotten Son, the first-born of every creature; Begotten of Him
before all worlds, and not made.” It is well that you should first reply
to this: Do you confess this of Jesus Christ the Son of God, or do you
deny it? If you confess it, everything is right enough. But if not, how
do you now deny what you yourself formerly confessed? Choose then which
you will: Of two things one must follow; viz., that that same confession
of yours, if it still holds good, should alone set you free, or if you
deny it, be the first to condemn you. For you said in the Creed: “I
believe in one Lord Jesus Christ His only begotten Son, and the
first-born of every creature.” If the Lord Jesus Christ is the only
begotten, and the first-born of every creature, then by our own
confession He is certainly God. For no other is the only begotten and
first-born of every creature but the only begotten Son of God: as He is
the first-born of the creatures, so He is also God the Creator of all.
And how can you say that He was a mere man at His birth from the Virgin,
whom you confessed to be God before the world. Next the Creed says:
“Begotten of the Father before all worlds, and not made.” This Creed was
uttered by you. You said by your Creed, that Jesus Christ was begotten
before the worlds of God the Father, and not made. Does the Creed say
anything about those phantasms, of which you now rave? Did you yourself
say anything about them? Where is the statue? Where that instrument of
yours, I pray? For God forbid that this should be another’s and not
yours. Where is it that you assert that the Lord Jesus Christ is like a
statue, and so you think that He ought to be worshipped not because He
is God, but because He is the image of God; and out of the Lord of glory
you make an instrument, and blasphemously say that He ought to be adored
not for His own sake, but for the sake of Him who (as it were) breathes
in Him and sounds through Him? You said in the Creed that the Lord Jesus
Christ was begotten of the Father before all worlds, and not made: and
this certainly belongs to none but the only begotten Son of God: that
His birth should not be a creation, and that He could be said simply to
be begotten, not made: for it is contrary to the nature of things and to
His honour that the Creator of all should be believed to be a creature:
and that He, the author of all things that have a commencement, should
Himself have a beginning, as all things began from Him. And so we say
that He was begotten <span id="page_595">p. 595</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vii.vi-Page_595"></span>not made: for His generation was
unique and no ordinary creation. And since He is God, begotten of God,
the Godhead of Him who is begotten must have everything complete which
the majesty of Him who begat has.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. He continues the same line of argument drawn from
the Creed of Antioch.](2111158)
