[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111116)  [Next](2111118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xiii-p1"></span>The confession of the blessed Peter
receives a testimony to its truth from Christ Himself.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>But</span> still, as I have made use of
the testimony of the chief Apostle, in which he openly confessed the
Lord Jesus Christ as God, let us see how He whom he confessed approved
of his confession; for of far more value than the Apostle’s words is the
fact that God Himself commended his utterance. When then the Apostle
said: “Thou art the Christ the Son of the living God,” what was the
answer of our Lord and Saviour? “Blessed art thou,” said He, “Simon
Barjonah, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee but the
Spirit of My Father which is in heaven.” If you do not like to use the
testimony of the Apostle use that of God. For by commending what was
said God added His own authority to the Apostle’s utterance, so that
although the utterance came from the lips of the Apostle, yet God who
approved of it made it His own. “Blessed art thou,” said He, “Simon
Barjonah, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but the
Spirit of My Father which is in heaven.” Thus in the words of the
Apostle you have the testimony of the Holy Spirit and of the Son who was
present and of God the Father. What more can you want, or what comes up
to this? The Son commended: the Father was present: the Holy Ghost
revealed. The utterance of the Apostle thus gives the testimony of the
entire Godhead: for this utterance must necessarily have the authority
of Him from whose prompting it proceeds. “Blessed then art thou,” said
He, “Simon Barjonah, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee,
but the Spirit of My Father which is in heaven.” If then flesh and blood
did not reveal this to Peter or inspire him, you must at last see who
inspires you. If the Spirit of God taught him who confessed that Christ
was God, you see how you are taught by the spirit of the devil if you
can deny it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. How the confession of the blessed Peter is the faith
of the whole Church.](2111118)
