<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-001d) [Next](dob-01tx.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. xxv">{p. xxv}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### BRAHMA-*G*ÂLA SUTTA.

   THE phase of beliefs which this Suttanta is intended to meet, into
which its argument fits, has been set out in some detail in the opening
chapter of my 'American Lectures.' As there pointed out{1}, the
discussion which thus opens this series of dialogues forms also the
first question in the Kathâ Vatthu, and the first question in the
Milinda, We cannot be far wrong if, in our endeavours to understand the
real meaning of the original Buddhism, we attach as much weight to this
question as did the author or authors of these ancient and authoritative
Buddhist books.

   The Suttanta sets out in sixty-two divisions{2} various speculations
or theories in which the theorisers, going out always from various forms
of the ancient view of a 'soul'--a sort of subtle manikin inside the
body but separate from it, and continuing, after it leaves the body, as
a separate entity--attempt to reconstruct the past, or to arrange the
future. All such speculation is condemned. And necessarily so, since the
Buddhist philosophy is put together without this ancient idea of 'soul.'

   The Buddhist scheme endeavours, in other words, to include all the
truth which previous thinkers had grafted on to the old savage theories
of a semi-material, subtle, permanent entity inside the body, while
rejecting those theories themselves; it endeavours to retain all the
philosophic truth which previous thinkers had grafted on to the
theosophies--the corollaries of the soul theories--while rejecting those
theosophies themselves. The reasons given for this position are
threefold: firstly, that such speculators about ultimate things,

{1. 'American Lectures on Buddhism.' London, 1896, pp. 38-43.

2\. Summed up below, [pp. 52, 53](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2052.md); and set out
more fully in the list in the 'American Lectures,' pp. 31-33.}

<span id="p. xxvi">{p. xxvi}</span>

either in the past or the future, have insufficient evidence. see only
one side of the shield{1}; secondly, that such speculations do not lead
to emancipation, to Arahatship{2}; and thirdly, that such theories are
really derived from the hopes, the feelings, and the sensations arising
from evanescent phenomena{3}--they belong, in other words, to the realm
of hastily formed, empirical opinion (di*tth*i), not to that of the
higher wisdom (paññâ). So that Buddhism, in the first place, holds a
position somewhat similar to the modern Agnostic position. Secondly,
while acknowledging the importance of feeling and of intellect, it lays
special stress upon the regulation, the cultivation, of the will{4}. And
thirdly, it distinguishes between a lower and a higher wisdom{5}.

   Several scholars, and especially--with more knowledge and detail--Dr.
Karl Neumann, have maintained that the position of Buddhism in the
history of Indian philosophy is analogous to that of Schopenhauer in
European philosophy. On the other hand, it is maintained by Professor
Deussen that Schopenhauer's position is analogous to that of the
Upanishads. The reconciliation will probably be found to be that what
Buddhism took over, with more or less of modification, from the
Upanishads, is about the same as that part of the Upanishad doctrine
which is found, in European phraseology, in Schopenhauer; and what
Buddhism rejected altogether is not to be found in Schopenhauer. He
himself, who however knew both systems only from second-hand and
inaccurate authorities, says, 'If I am to take the results of my own
philosophy as the standard of truth, I should be obliged to concede to
Buddhism the pre-eminence over other (systems of philosophy).'

   However this question may be decided--and its discussion, at the
necessary length, by a competent student of philosophy, is a very
pressing want--it is certain from the details given in our Suttanta that
there were then current in Northern India many other philosophic and
theosophic speculations besides those the priests found it expedient to
adopt, and have preserved for us in the Upanishads. And who can doubt
but that some, if not all of them, may also have had their influence on
the new doctrine? There was always much philosophising in India outside
the narrow and inexact limits

{1. See the fable quoted below, [pp. 187, 188](dob-06in.htm#p.%20187.md).

2\. See below, pp. [44](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2044.md),
[188](dob-06in.htm#p.%20188.md).

3\. See for instance below, [pp. 53, 4](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2053.md).

4\. See the paper on 'The Will in Buddhism,' J. R. A. S., 1898.

5\. See below, [p. 42](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2042.md), &c., of this Suttanta.}

<span id="p. xxvii">{p. xxvii}</span>

of the so-called six Darsanas; and we have to thank Buddhist scholars
for preserving, in their Pâli and Sanskrit works, the evidences of such
philosophy as the priests wished to exclude from notice{1}.

<span class="small">{1. Professor Cowell has been good enough to inform
me that, in his opinion, the attempted restriction of all philosophy to
the six Dar*s*anas, and the very use of the term, is late mediaeval. The
six are of course not mutually exclusive; and this, and the omissions in
the classification of philosophy under these six heads, render it rather
like a classification of animals into men, horses, birds, ghosts,
beetles, and sparrows.}</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: I. The Brahma-*g*âla Sutta](dob-01tx.md)
