<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-07tx) [Next](dob-08tx.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 206">{p. 206}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### KASSAPA-SÎHANÂDA SUTTA.

   IN this Sutta the Buddha, in conversation with a naked ascetic,
explains his position as regards asceticism--so far, that is, as is
compatible with his invariable method (as represented in the Dialogues)
when discussing a point on which he differs from his interlocutor.

   When speaking on sacrifice to a sacrificial priest, on union with God
to an adherent of the current theology, on Brahman claims to superior
social rank to a proud Brahman, on mystic insight to a man who trusts in
it, on the soul to one who believes in the soul theory, the method
followed is always the same. Gotama puts himself as far as possible in
the mental position of the questioner. He attacks none of his cherished
convictions. He accepts as the starting-point of his own exposition the
desirability of the act or condition prized by his opponent--of the
union with God (as in the Tevi*gg*a), or of sacrifice (as in the
Kû*t*adanta), or of social rank (as in the Amba*tth*a), or of seeing
heavenly sights, &c. (as in the Mahâli), or of the soul theory (as in
the Potthapâda). He even adopts the very phraseology of his questioner.
And then, partly by putting a new and (from the Buddhist point of view)
a higher meaning into the words; partly by an appeal to such ethical
conceptions as are common ground between them; he gradually leads his
opponent up to his conclusion. This is, of course, always
Arahatship--that is the sweetest fruit of the life of a recluse, that is
the best sacrifice, that the highest social rank, that the best means of
seeing heavenly sights, and a more worthy object; and so on. In our
Sutta it is the path to Arahatship which is the best asceticism.

   There is both courtesy and dignity in the method employed. But no
little dialectic skill, and an easy mastery of the ethical points
involved, are required to bring about the result. On the hypothesis that
the Buddha is a sun myth, and his principal disciples personifications
of the stars,

<span id="p. 207">{p. 207}</span>

the facts seem difficult to explain. One would expect, then, something
quite different. How is it that the other disciples who must, in that
case, have concocted these Dialogues, refrain so entirely from
astrological and mythological details? How is it they attribute to their
hero qualities of courtesy and sympathy, and a grasp of ethical
problems, all quite foreign, even antagonistic, to those usually
ascribed to sun-heroes--mostly somewhat truculent and very un-ethical
personages?

   On the hypothesis that he was an historical person, of that training
and character he is represented in the Pi*t*akas to have had, the method
is precisely that which it is most probable he would have actually
followed.

   Whoever put the Dialogues together may have had a sufficiently clear
memory of the way he conversed, may well have even remembered particular
occasions and persons. To the mental vision of the compiler, the
doctrine taught loomed so much larger than anything else, that he was
necessarily more concerned with that, than with any historical accuracy
in the details of the story. He was, in this respect, in much the same
position as Plato when recording the dialogues of Socrates. But he was
not, like Plato, giving his own opinions. We ought, no doubt, to think
of compilers, rather than of a compiler. The memory of co-disciples had
to be respected, and kept in mind. And so far as the actual doctrine is
concerned our Dialogues are probably a more exact reproduction of the
thoughts of the teacher than the dialogues of Plato.

   However this may be, the method followed in all these Dialogues has
one disadvantage. In accepting the position of the adversary, and
adopting his language, the authors compel us, in order to follow what
they give us as Gotama's view, to read a good deal between the lines.
The *argumentum ad hominem* can never be the same as a statement of
opinion given without reference to any particular person. That is
strikingly the case with our present Sutta.

   When addressing his five hearers--the Pa*ñk*avaggiyâ, the first five
converts, and the first Arahats--in the Deer-park at Benares, on the
occasion of his first discourse, the Buddha is represented to have
spoken of asceticism in a very different way. He there calls it one of
'two extremes which are to be avoided'; and describes it as 'painful,
unworthy, and unprofitable{1}.' So in the Puggala Pa*ññ*atti (IV, 24)
the very practices set out in our Sutta, by Kassapa the ascetic,

<span class="small">{1. 'Buddhist Suttas' (S. B. E.), p. 147.}</span>

<span id="p. 208">{p. 208}</span>

as desirable and praiseworthy, are set out as the actions by which a man
injures himself. There is nothing of this sort in our Sutta. To judge
from it alone one might fairly conclude that the Buddha approved of
asceticism, only insisting that the self-mastery and self-control of the
Path were the highest and best forms of it. There is really no
inconsistency in these three Suttas. But while the first discourse and
the Puggala passage were both addressed to disciples, our Sutta is
addressed to an ascetic, and the language used is modified accordingly.
The conclusion in all is exactly the same. It is clear that at the time
when our Sutta was put together the practice of self-mortification had
already been carried out to a considerable extent in India. And further
details, in some of which the self-imposed penances are even more
extreme, are given in other Dialogues of the same date, notably in the
twelfth Sutta of the Ma*ggh*ima. This is oddly enough also called a
Sîhanâda Sutta, and the reason is not far to seek.

   The carrying out of such practices, in all countries, wins for the
ascetic a very high reputation. Those who despise earthly comforts, and
even submit themselves to voluntary torture, are looked upon with a kind
of fearsome wonder, as more holy than other men. And no doubt, in most
cases, the ascetics laid claim to special virtue. In the Suttas dealing
with the practices of the ascetics, Gotama, in laying stress on the more
moderate view, takes occasion also to dispute this claim. He maintains,
as in our Sutta, that the insight and self-control and self-mastery of
the Path, or of the system of intellectual and moral self-training laid
down for the Bhikkhu, are really harder than the merely physical
practices so much more evident to the eye of the vulgar. It was a point
that had to be made. And the Suttas in which it is made are designated
as Sîhanâdas, literally 'the lion's roars'--the proud claim by the
Arahat to a dignity and veneration greater than that allowed by the
people to the self-torturer, or even to the man who

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>'Bescorched, befrozen, lone in fearsome woods,<br />
Naked, without a fire, afire within,<br />
Struggled, in awful silence, towards the goal{1}!'</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

And the boast goes really even further. Not only were the ascetics no
better than the Arahats, they were even not so practical. The
self-mortification was an actual hindrance. It turned men's minds from
more essential matters. Diogenes was not only not superior to other men,
no nearer to the

<span class="small">{1 M. I, 79 = *G*ât. I, 390.}</span>

<span id="p. 209">{p. 209}</span>

truth than they, by reason of his tub and of his physical renunciation;
he was their ethical inferior, and was intellectually wrong. So hard, so
very hard, was the struggle{1} that the Arahat, or the man striving
towards Arahatship, should be always sufficiently clothed, and take
regular baths, regular exercise, regular food. The line was to be drawn
at another point. He was to avoid, not what was necessary to maintain
himself in full bodily vigour and power, but all undue luxury, and all
worry about personal comfort. It was his duty to keep himself in health.

   It is open to question whether the earnest and unworldly would now
draw the line at the precise point at which Gotama drew it; either as
regards what they would think proper for themselves now, or what they
would have thought most proper for those living in India then. Probably
they would think rather that he erred on the side of austerity. His
contemporaries the Niga*nth*as thought the other way. And the most
serious schism in the Buddhist Order, that raised by Devadatta, was
especially defended on the ground that Gotama would not, as regards
various points, adopt ascetic practices which Devadatta held to be then
necessary.

   It is probable that Gotama was largely guided by the opinions and
practice of previous recluses. For we have already seen that in other
matters, important it is true but not essential, Gotama adopted and
extended, so far as it agreed with the rest of his system, what had
already been put forward by others. But we cannot, as yet, speak on this
point with as much certainty as we could in the other cases of the
ethical view of sacrifice, of the ethical connotation attached to the
word Brahman{2}, and of the reasonable view as to social distinctions
and questions of impurity. Our available texts are only sufficient, at
present, to suggest the probability.

   The technical term tapas is already found in the Rig-veda, though
only in the latest hymns included in the collection. It is literally
'glow, burning,' and very early acquired the secondary sense of
retirement into solitude, and of the attempted conquest of one's lower
nature by the burning heat of bodily austerity. And this must have been
a common practice, for the time of the year most favourable to such

{1. So also Kâ*th*aka Upanishad II, 7-13.

2\. See B*ri*had. III, 5, 1; 8, 10; IV, 4, 21-23; *Kh*ând. IV, 1, 7.
Compare Âpastamba I, 8, 23, 6; Vas. VI, 3, 23, 25; XXVI, 11 = Manu II,
87 = Vish*n*u LV, 21; the passages quoted from the Mahâbhârata by Muir,
'Metrical Translations,' pp. 263-4, and Deussen, 'Vedanta-system,' p.
155.}

<span id="p. 210">{p. 210}</span>

tapas came to be known as the month tapas. There was no association with
the word of what we call 'penance,' a conception arising out of an
entirely different order of religious ideas. There was no idea of
atonement for, punishment of, making amends for sin. But just as the
sacrificer was supposed, by a sort of charm that he worked by his
sacrifice, to attain ends desirable for himself, so there was supposed
to be a sort of charm in tapas producing mystic and marvellous results.
The distinction seems to have been that it was rather power, worldly
success, wealth, children, and heaven that were attained by sacrifice;
and mystic, extraordinary, superhuman faculties that were attained by
tapas.

   By a natural anthropomorphism the gods too were supposed, for like
ends, to offer sacrifice and to perform tapas. Thus it is sometimes by
sacrifice, but more often by tapas, that in the different cosmological
legends one god or the other is supposed to bring forth creation{1}. In
the latter case an expression often used on such occasions is tapas
atapasyata, literally 'he glowed a glow,' and the exact meaning of this
enigmatic phrase is by no means certain. It may have been meant to
convey that he glowed with fierce resolve, or that he glowed with deep
thought, or that he glowed with strong desire, or that he carried out
each or some or all of the practices given in Kassapa's three lists of
self-mortifications in our Sutta. All these various ideas may possibly
be meant to be inferred together, and before they were ascribed to gods
similar actions must have been well known among men.

   There were some, as one would expect, who therefore placed austerity
above sacrifice, or held that it could take the place of sacrifice{2}.
The more conservative view of the learned Brahman--that it is repeating
by heart to oneself, and teaching others, the Vedic verses, that is the
chief thing (with which twelve other qualities or practices should
always be associated)--is only given with the interesting note that one
teacher thinks 'the true' only, another thinks austerity only to be
necessary, and yet a third thinks that learning and teaching the Veda is
enough by itself, 'for that is tapas, that is tapas{3}.' There are
several passages making similar comparisons. Thus one text says: 'There
are three branches of duty--sacrifice study of the Veda and charity are
the first, austerity (tapas) is the second, to dwell as a learner one's
life

{1. *S*atapatha-Br. VI, 1, 1, 13, and several times in the early
Upanishads.

2\. So *Kh*ând. Up. III, 17, 2 and 4.

3\. Tait. I, 9. Compare, on the ethics, Manu VI, 92 and the Ten
Pâramitâs. The idea that Veda-learning is tapas is a common one.}

<span id="p. 211">{p. 211}</span>

long in the house of one's teacher is the third. All these have as
reward heavenly worlds. But he who stands firm in Brahman obtains
deathlessness{1}.'

   So in the passages which explain (by no means consistently) where the
soul goes to after it leaves the body, we have a somewhat corresponding
division{2}. According to the *Kh*ândogya, those who know a certain
mystical doctrine about five fires, and those who in the forest follow
faith and austerity (tapas), go along the path of the gods to the Brahma
worlds. On the other hand, they who sacrifice, and give alms go to the
moon, and thence return to earth, and are reborn in high or low
positions according to their deeds. But the bad become insects.

   According to the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, those who know the mystic
doctrine of the five fires, and those who in the woods practise faith
and truth (not tapas) go to the Brahma worlds. on the other hand, those
who practise sacrifice, charity, and austerity (tapas) go to the moon,
and are thence reborn on earth. But those who follow neither of these
two paths become insects.

   Here austerity is put into a lower grade than it occupies in the last
extract. Other later passages are Mu*nd*aka II, 7; III, 2, 4, 6;
Pra*s*na I, 9; V, 4. Though the details differ there is a general
consensus that above both sacrifice and austerity, which are themselves
meritorious, there is a something higher, a certain kind of truth or
faith or wisdom.

   This is the exact analogue, from the Upanishad point of view, to the
doctrine of the Buddhists that Arahatship is better than austerity. And
though the Upanishad belief is not worked out with the same consistency,
nor carried so far to its logical conclusion, as the Buddhist, that is
simply to be explained by the facts that it is not only earlier,
belonging to a time when thought was less matured, but is also not the
work of one mind, but of several. There can be but little doubt that
Gotama, during his years of study and austerity before he attained
Nirvana under the Tree of Wisdom, had come into contact with the very
beliefs, or at least with beliefs similar to those, now preserved in the
Upanishads; and that his general conclusion was based upon them. That he
practically condemns physical tapas (austerity) altogether is no
argument against his indebtedness, so far as the superiority of wisdom
to austerity is concerned, to the older theory.

   In the passages in which that older theory is set forth we

{1. *Kh*ând. Up. II, 23, 1.

2\. *Kh*ând. Up. V. 10; B*ri*had. VI, 2; Pra*s*na I, 9; V, 4, 5.}

<span id="p. 212">{p. 212}</span>

have the germs--indistinct statements, no doubt, and inconsistent, but
still the first source--of the well-known theory of the Â*s*ramas; the
Efforts (or perhaps Trainings), four stages into which the life of each
member of the ranks of the twice-born (the Dvi*g*as) should be divided.
In later times these are (1) the student, (2) the householder, (3) the
hermit, and (4) the wandering ascetic; that is, the Brahma*k*ârin, the
G*ri*hastha, the Vânaprastha, and the Yati{1}. And stress was laid on
the order in which the stages of effort were taken up, it being held
improper for a man to enter the latter without having passed through the
former.

   The Upanishad passages know nothing or the curious technical term of
Effort (Â*s*rama) applied to these stages. And they have really only two
divisions (and these not regarded as consecutive stages), that of the
sacrificer and of the hermit (not the Bhikshu). Of course studentship is
understood as preliminary to both. But we are here at a standpoint
really quite apart from the Â*s*rama theory, and *S*a<u>n</u>kara and
other commentators are obliged to resort to curious and irreconcilable
shifts when they try to read back into these old texts the later and
more developed doctrine{2}.

   Even the names of the several Â*s*ramas do not occur, as such, in the
older Upanishads. Brahma*k*ârin is frequently used for pupil, Yati in
two or three passages means ascetic; but G*ri*hastha, Vânaprastha, and
Bhikshu do not even occur{3}. The earliest mention of the four Efforts
is in the old law books. Gautama (III, 2) gives them as Brahma*k*ârin,
G*ri*hastha, Bhikshu, and Vaikhânasa (student, householder, wandering
beggar, and hermit). Âpastamba (II, 9, 21, 1) has a different order, and
different names for the four stages--Gârhasthya*m*, Â*k*âryakula*m*,
Mauna*m*, and Vânaprasthya*m*{4}.

   Hofrath Bühler dated these works (very hypothetically) in the fifth
and third, or possibly in the sixth and fourth centuries B.C.{5} The
theory of the Four Efforts was then

{1. So Manu V, 137; VI, 87. Compare VIII, 390, and VI, 97.

2\. See Max Müller's interesting note in his translation of the
Upanishads (Part I, pp. 82-84).

3\. See Jacob's Concordance under the words.

4\. Comp. Baudhâyana II, 10, 17, 6, and Âpastamba II, 4, 9, 13.

5\. He ventures on a conjecture as to possible date in the case of
Âpastamba only. Him he places on linguistic grohnds not later than the
third century B.C.; and, if the argument resting on the mention of
*S*vetaketu hold good, then a century or two older. Burnell, whom Bühler
(Baudh. p. xxx) calls 'the first authority on the literature of the
Schools of the Taittirîya Veda,' to which Âpastamba belonged, was not
convinced by the arguments leading up to the above conclusion. He only
ventured, after reading them, to put Âpastamba 'at least B.C.' (Manu, p.
xxvii). Baudhâyana was some generations was same generations older than
Âpastamba (see Bühler, Âp. pp. xxi-xxii) And Gautama was older still.}

<span id="p. 213">{p. 213}</span>

already current, but by no means settled as to detail. It must evidently
have taken shape between the date of the Upanishads just quoted and that
of the law books; that is to say, either just before or some time after
the rise of Buddhism. We can, I think, go safely further, and say that
it must have been, in all probability, after Buddha, and even after the
time when the Pi*t*aks were put together. For neither the technical term
Â*s*rama, nor any of the four stages of it, are mentioned in the
Pi*t*akas.

   The theory has become finally formulated, in the order as to detail
which has permanently survived, in the later law books from Vasish*th*a
onwards. He gives the Four Efforts or stages in the life of an orthodox
person, as (1) Student, (2) Householder, (3) Hermit, (4) Wandering
Mendicant--Brahma*k*ârin, G*ri*hastha, Vânaprastha, and
Parivrâ*g*aka{1}.

   It will be noticed that this final arrangement differs in
two--respects--and both of them of importance--from the earliest. In the
first place the wandering beggar is put in the last, that is in the
highest, place. He is not subordinated, as he was at first to the
hermit. In the second place the expression Bhikshu, applied in Gautama
to the wandering mendicant, is dropped in the later books.

    The commentators are at great pains to harmonise the divergent
order. And they do so by suggesting that the earlier arrangement (which,
of course, the strange one) is meant to infer exactly the same as does
the contrary later arrangement so familiar to them. To them the
wandering mendicant had become the last, in order of time and
importance, of the Four Efforts; and they try to put back their own view
into the words of the ancient writers they are dealing with. But if the
order they were familiar with implies one thing, the older order, which
is exactly the reverse can scarcely imply the same. Or if it does, then
the question arises, why should it? In either case the explanation may
be sought for in the history of the two ideas.

   Now the distinction befween the twois quite clear, though the
ambiguity of the English word 'ascetic,' often applied to both, may tend
to hide it from view{2}. Gautama starts his

{1. Vas. VII, 2.

2\. Thus B¨ uses the one term 'ascetic' to render a number of Sanskrit
words--for sa*m*nyâsin as Baudh. II, 10, 17; for bhikshu at Gaut. III,
2, 11; for parivrâ*g*aka at Vâs. X, 1; for yati at Manu VI, 54, 56, 69,
86; for tâpasa at Manu VI, 27; for muni at Manu VI, 11. Of these the
last two refer to the hermit in the woods (the tapasa), the others to
the wandering mendicant (the bhikshu). Even for the old Brahman who
remains at home under the protection of his son (the Veda-sa*m*nyâsin),
he has 'become an ascetic' (sa*m*nyased in the Sanskrit, Manu VI, 94).

This rendering can, in each case, be easily justified. Each of the
Sanskrit words means one or other form, one or other degree, of what may
be called asceticism. But the differences might be made clear by variety
of rendering.}

<span id="p. 214">{p. 214}</span>

description of the hermit by saying that he is to feed on roots and
fruits, and practise tapas. And all the later books lay stress on the
same point; often giving, as instances of the tapas, one or other of the
very practices detailed by Kassapa the tâpasa, in his three lists, in
our Sutta{1}. On the other hand, the wandering mendicant does not
practise these severe physical self-mortifications. He is never called
tâpasa, and though he has abandoned the world, and wanders without a
home, simply clad, and begging his food, his self-restraint is mental
rather than physical. Of the fifteen rules laid down for him by Gautama,
who calls him the Bhikshu (in X, 11-25), four or five are precisely
equivalent to rules the Buddhist Bhikshu has to observe. There is one
significant rule in Baudhâyana, however, which is quite contrary to the
corresponding Buddhist rule. According to it the twice-born mendicant of
the priestly books is, in begging for food, to observe the rules of
ceremonial purity, what we call now the rules of caste{2}.

   Now while the belief in the special efficacy and holiness of
austerity, self-torture, tapas; is a world-wide phenomenon, and the
practice of it was, no doubt, very early in India too, the idea of the
wandering mendicant is peculiar to India. And though the origin and
early history of this institution are at present obscure, we have no
reason to believe that it was of ancient date.

   It was older than the Buddha's time. Both Buddhist and *G*ain records
agree on this point. And they are confirmed by an isolated passage in an
Upanishad which, as a whole, is pre-Buddhistic{3}. There it is said that
he who desires to see

{1. Gautama has altogether ten rules for the hermit, none of which were
applicable to the Buddhist Bhikshu (Gaut. III, 26-35).

2\. Baudhâyana II, 10, 18, 4, 5. Manu VI, 27 (of the hermit). So also
Vas. X, 31, according to the commentator. But Bühler thinks otherwise;
and Manu VI, 94 confirms Bühler's view.

3\. B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka Upanishad III, 5, 1.}

<span id="p. 215">{p. 215}</span>

the god Brahman cannot attain his end by speculation; he must put away
learning and become childlike, put away childishness and become a muni
(a silent one){1}, put away silence and become a Brâhma*n*a (that is, of
course, not a Brahma*n*a by birth, but one in a sense nearly the same as
Gotama attaches to the word in the So*n*ada*nd*a Sutta). This is to
explain why it is that 'Brâhma*n*as' (in the ethical sense) give up
cravings for children and wealth and the world and adopt begging as a
regular habit (bhikshâ*k*arya*m* *k*aranti). Another recension of the
same passage, also preserved in the same Upanishad{2}, but in a
connection which Deussen thinks is a later interpolation{3}, ascribes
this habit to 'men of old.' The statement is no doubt ambiguous. It
might be taken to apply to the hermit (the tâpasa) who also begged. But
I think on the whole that the wandering mendicant is more probably
referred to, and referred to as belonging to a higher sphere than the
muni, the ascetic. If that be so, this is the earliest passage in which
any one of these three ideas (the wandering mendicant, his superiority
to the ascetic, and the special ethical sense of the word Brahmana{4})
have, as yet, been found.

   The oldest reference in the priestly literature to unorthodox
Bhikshus (not necessarily Buddhists) is probably the Maitrî Upanishad
VII, 8, which is much later. There is a custom, often referred to in the
law books, of students begging their food. This was doubtless of long
standing. But it is a conception altogether different from that of the
wandering mendicant. The word Bhikshu does not occur in any of these
passages. And indeed of all the Upanishads indexed in Colonel Jacob's
'Concordance' the word only occurs in one--in the little tract called
the Parama-ha*m*sa Upanishad.

   Whenever it may have arisen, the peculiar institution of the Bhikshu
is quite as likely, if not more likely, to have originated in Kshatriya
circles than among the learned Brahmans. All our authorities--Brahman
Upanishads, Buddhist Pi*t*akas, *G*ain A<u>n</u>gas--agree in ascribing
to Kshatriyas a most important, not to say predominant, part in such
religious activity as lay apart from sacrifice. To take for granted that

{1. Afterwards an epithet often used, in the priestly literature of the
hermit (the tâpasa), in the Buddhist books of the Arahat.

2\. B*ri*had. IV, 4, 22.

3\. 'Sechzig Upanishads,' p. 465.

4\. Perhaps, on this third notion, *Kh*ând. IV, I, 7 is another passage
of about the same date. A wise *S*ûdra is apparently there calied a
Brâhma*n*a. But the application is by no means certain.}

<span id="p. 216">{p. 216}</span>

the Brahmans must have originated the idea, or the practice, is to
ignore all these authorities. And it is only in the Kshatriya
books--those of the Buddhists and *G*ains--that the details of the
practice receive much weight, or are dealt with in full detail.

   The oldest law book has barely a page on the rules for Bhikshus,
whereas the regulations, of about the same age, preserved in the
Buddhist texts, fill the three volumes translated, under the title
'Vinaya Texts,' in the 'Sacred Books of the East.' And as time goes on
the priestly literature continues to treat the life of a Bhikshu as
entirely subordinate, and in the curtest manner. Even Manu has only
three or four pages on the subject. The inconsistency, brevity, and
incompleteness of the regulations in the priestly books lead one to
suppose that, at the time when they were written, there were not enough
Bhikshus, belonging to those circles, to make the regulations intended
for them alone a matter of much practical importance. In other words,
the development also of the Bhikshu idea was due rather to the
Kshatriyas than to the sacrificing priests.

   The latter were naturally half-hearted in the matter. Even after they
had invented the Â*s*rama theory, they did not seem to be very keen
about it. On the contrary, there are several passages the other way.
Âpastamba closes his exposition of them with a remark that upsets the
whole theory: 'There is no reason to place one Â*s*rama before
another{1}.' And just before that he quotes a saying of Pra*g*âpati from
which it follows that those who become Bhikshus do not gain salvation at
all, 'they become dust and perish.'

   This was no doubt the real inmost opinion of the more narrow-minded
of the priests. But the first maker of the phrase did not quite like to
put this forward in his own name--the idea of the Bhikshu as a man
worthy of special esteem had already become too strong for that. So he
makes the god his stalking-horse; and tries, by using his name, to gain
respectability and acceptance for his view. And it survives accordingly
as late as the earlier portion of Manu (II, 230), where mention is made
of 'the Three Â*s*ramas,' omitting the Bhikshu. We ought not to be
surprised to find that, though the whole passage is reproduced, in other
respects, in the Institutes of Vish*n*u (XXXI, 7), this very curious and
interesting phrase is replaced by another which avoids the difficulty.

<span class="small">{1 Âp. II, 9, 24, 15.}</span>

<span id="p. 217">{p. 217}</span>

   Baudhâyana also actually quotes with approval another old saying:
'There was forsooth an Asura, Kapila by name, the son of Prahlâda.
Striving against the gods he made these divisions (the Â*s*ramas). A
wise man should not take heed of them{1}.

   If the priests, when the custom of 'going forth' as a Bhikshu was
becoming prevalent, had wished to counteract it, to put obstacles in the
way, and especially to prevent any one doing so without first having
become thoroughly saturated with the priest1y view of things, they could
scarcely have taken a more efficacious step than the establishment of
this theory. And so far as it served this purpose, and so far, only, do
they seem to have cared much for it. We have no evidence that the theory
had, at any time, become a practical reality--that is, that any
considerable number of the twice-born, or even of the Brahmans, did
actually carry out all the four Â*s*ramas. Among the circles led by the
opinion of learned and orthodox priests it was, no doubt, really held
improper for any man to become a *religieux* until he was getting old,
or without having first gone through a regular course of Vedic study.
And whenever he did renounce the world he was expected to follow such of
the ancient customs (now preserved in the priestly books under the three
heads of Vânaprastha, Parivrâ*g*aka, and Vedasa*m*nyâsin) as he chose to
follow. But even then he need not observe a clear distinction between
these various heads. The percentage of elderly Brahmans who followed any
of the three at all must always have been very small indeed, and of
these a good many probably became Vedasa*m*nyâsins, a group which lies
outside of the Â*s*ramas. The rules are admitted to be obsolete now.
*S*a<u>n</u>kara says they were not observed in his time{2}. And the
theory seems to be little more than a priestly protest against the
doctrine, acted upon by Buddhists, *G*ains, and others, and laid down in
the Madhura Sutta, that even youths might 'go forth' without any
previous Vedic study{3}.

   There were, in other words, in the Indian community of that time, a
number of people--very small, no doubt, compared with the total
population, but still amounting to some thousands--who estimated the
mystic power of tapas above that of sacrifice; who gave up the latter,
and devoted themselves, in the woods, to those kinds of bodily austerity
and

{1. Baudh. II, 6, 11, 28.

2\. See the passage quoted by Deussen, 'Vedânta-system,' p. 40.

3\. See the fu11 text in Chalmer's paper in the J. R. A. S. for 1894.}

<span id="p. 218">{p. 218}</span>

self-torture of which our Sutta gives the earliest detailed account.
There were others who rejected both, and preferred the life of the
wandering mendicant. In both classes there were unworthy men who used
their religious professions for the 'low aims' set out in the tract on
the Sîlas incorporated in our Sutta, whose very words, in not a few
instances, recur in the old law books.

   But there was also no little earnestness, no little 'plain living and
high thinking' among these 'irregular friars.' And there was a great
deal of sympathy, both with their aims and with their practice (provided
always they keep to the priestly view of things), among the official
class, the regular sacrificing priests. Instead of condemning them, the
priests tried, therefore, rather to regulate them. One Vikhanas compiled
a special book on Tapas, called either after the author the Vaikhânasa
Sûtra, or after the subject the *S*râma*n*aka Sûtra, which is several
times referred to as an authority in the law books whose precepts are
doubtless, in part, taken from it{1}. Tapas was then, in accordance with
the general view in the circles in which the law books were composed,
regarded as the higher of the two, and put therefore at the end in the
list of Â*s*ramas. But there was also another view which had already
made itself felt in the Upanishads, which is the basis of our Sutta, and
which no doubt became more widely spread in consequence of its having
been the view taken up by the progressive party we now call Buddhists.
According to this view the life of the Bhikshu, of the wandering
mendicant, was the higher. This view, disliked by the more
narrow-minded, but regarded with favour by the more spiritually-minded
of the Brahmans, gradually attained so unquestionably the upper hand,
that the order of the last two of the Â*s*ramas had to be changed. Tapas
became then a preliminary stage to, instead of the final crown of, the
religious life.

   But the other view continued to be held by a large and influential
minority. The strong leaning of the human heart to impute a singular
efficacy to physical self-mortifications

<span class="small">{1. See Bühler's 'Manu,' XXVII, and the commentators
referred to in Bühler's notes, pp. 202 and 203. Also Vas. IX, 10; Gaut.
III, 27; Baudh. II, 6, 11, 14, 15 (which proves the identity of the
two); III, 3, 15-18. Haradatta on Âpastamba II, 9, 21, 21 (where he also
says they are the same). Dr. Burnell had in his possession fragments of
this work, or what, in his opinion, seemed to be so. He says it was used
by followers of the Black Ya*g*ur-veda. Bühler also (Âp. p. 154, note)
says the Sûtra is in existence, and procurable in Gu*g*arât.}</span>

<span id="p. 219">{p. 219}</span>

of all kinds could not be eradicated. Many of the laity still looked on
those who carried out such practices with peculiar favour. The tendency
made itself felt even in Buddhism, in spite of our present Sutta, and of
many other passages to a similar effect. There is a special name for the
'extra vows,' the dhutangas, carried out by such of the brethren as were
inclined that way. And these receive special glorification in a whole
book at the end of the Milinda{1}. It is true that, even in these 'extra
vows,' all the extreme forms of tapas are omitted. But this is only a
matter of degree. In the priestly law books, also, though they go
somewhat further than the dhutangas, the most extreme forms are omitted,
especially in the rules for hermits and mendicants contained in the
earlier books. This is another point in which the early Buddhists and
the more advanced of the learned Brahmans of their time are found to be
acting in sympathy. But the discussion of the details would take us too
far from our subject.

   The Niga*nth*as, Â*g*îvakas, and others went to the other extreme,
and like the Buddhists, they never admitted any theory like that of the
distinction in time between the Four Â*s*ramas{2}. It is even doubtful
how far that distinction became a really valid and practical reality
among the learned priests. They alone, as we have seen, always laid
stress on the importance of not 'going forth,' either as ascetic or as
wandering mendicant (tâpasa or bhikshu), unless first the years of
studentship, and then the life as a sacrificing householder, had been
fulfilled. They spoke occasionally of *Three Efforts* only. And as we
have seen the lawyers differed in the order in which they mention the
two classes of *religieux*{3}.

{1. My 'Milinda,' II, 244-274.

2\. The Buddhists admitted a distinction in class as between tâpasas and
bhikkhus. They often distinguish between the simple pabba*gg*â of the
latter and the tâpasa-pabba*gg*â of the former. See for instance *G*ât.
III, 119 (of non-Buddhists).

3\. When the warrior hero of the Râmâya*n*a brutally murders a peaceful
hermit, it is not necessary to call in the Â*s*rama rules to justify the
foul deed. The offence (in the view of the poet on the part of the
hermit, in the view of most Westerns on the part of the hero) is simply
social insolence. Would public opinion, in Kosala, have sanctioned such
an act, or enjoyed such a story, in the time of the Pi*t*akas? The
original Râmâya*n*a probably arose, as Professor Jacobi has shown, in
Kosala; but this episode (VII, 76) is not in the oldest part. The
doctrine for which the poet claims the approval of the gods (and which,
therefore was not unquestioned among men, or he need not have done so)
is that a *S*ûmay not become a tâpasa.}

<span id="p. 220">{p. 220}</span>

   By the time that the later order was settled the word Bhikshu had
come to mean so specially a Buddhist mendicant that the learned Brahmans
no longer thought it fitting to apply the term to their own mendicants.
This at least may be the explanation of the fact that it is used in
Gautama's law book, and not afterwards.

   The history of the word is somewhat doubtful. It is not found as yet,
as we have seen above, in any pre-Buddhistic text. Perhaps the *G*ains
or the Buddhists first used it. But it was more probably a term common
before their time, though not long before, to all mendicants. The form
is sufficiently curious for Pâ*n*ini to take special notice of it in the
rule for the formation from desideratives of nouns in *u*{1}. In another
rule{2} he mentions two Bhikshu Sûtras--manual for mendicants, as the
Vaikhânasa Sûtra was for the hermits (tâpasas). These are used by the
Pârâ*s*âri*n*as and the Karmaandinas, two groups or corporations,
doubtless, of Brahmanical mendicants. Professor Weber refers to this in
his History of Indian Literature, pe 305, and Professor Kielhorn has
been kind enough to inform me that nothing more has been since
discovered on the matter. These Sûtras are not mentioned elsewhere. And
they can never have acquired so much importance as the Vaikhânasa Sûtra,
or they would almost certainly have been referred to in the sections in
the later law books on mendicants, just as the Vaikhânasa is in the
sections of the tâpasas.

   It is also very curious to find Brâma*n*a Bhikshus with special class
names as if they belonged to an Order like those of the Buddhists and
the *G*ains. No such Brahmanical Orders of recluses (pabba*g*itâ) are
mentioned in the Pi*t*akas. When Brâma*n*a Bhikshus are referred to, it
is either as isolated recluses, or by a generic name not implying any
separate Order. Thus in an important passage of the A<u>n</u>guttara we
have the folowing list of *religieux*, contemporaries of the Buddha:--

|      |                 |
|-----:|-----------------|
|  1\. | Â*g*ivikâ.      |
|  2\. | Niga*nth*â.     |
|  3\. | Mu*nd*a-sâvakâ. |
|  4\. | *G*a*t*ilakâ.   |
|  5\. | Paribbâ*g*akâ.  |
|  6\. | Maga*nd*ikâ.    |
|  7\. | Teda*nd*ikâ.    |
|  8\. | Aviruddhakâ.    |
|  9\. | Gotamakâ.       |
| 10\. | Devadhammikâ.   |

   No. 1. *The men of the livelihood*, among whom Makkhali Gosâ was a
recognised leader, were especially addicted to

{1. II, 3, 4.

2\. IV, 3, 110.}

<span id="p. 221">{p. 221}</span>

tapas of all kinds, and went always quite naked. The name probably
means: 'Those who claimed to be especially strict in their rules as to
means of livelihood.' The Buddhists also laid special stress on this.
The fifth of the eight divisions of the Eightfold Path is sammâ
â*g*îvo{1}.

   No. 2. *The Unfettered* are the sect we now call *G*ains, then under
the leadership of the Nâtaputta. They were also addicted, but to a
somewhat less degree, to tapas; and Buddhaghosa here adds that they wore
a loin cloth.

   No. 3. *The disciples of the Shaveling* are stated by Buddhaghosa to
be the same as No. 2. The reading is doubtful, and his explanation
requires explanation. Perhaps some special subdivision of the *G*ains is
intended.

   No. 4. *Those who wear their hair in braids*. To do so was the rule
for the orthodox hermits (the Vânaprasthas or Tâpasas, Gautama III, 34).
The Brâma*n*a Bhikshu, on the other hand, was either to be bald, or to
have only a forelock (ibid. 22).

   No. 5. *The wanderers*. This is a generic term for wandering
mendicants. They went, according to Buddhaghosa, fully clad.

   Nos. 6-10 are said by Buddhaghosa to be followers of the Titthiyâ,
that is the leaders of all schools that were non-Buddhist. It is
precisely here that the list becomes most interesing, the first five
names being otherwise known. And it is much to be regretted that the
tradition had not preserved any better explanation of the terms that the
vague phrase repeated by Buddhaghosa.

   No. 6 is quite unintelligible at present.

   No. 7. *The Bearers of the triple staff* have not been found
elsewhere, as yet, earlier than the latest part of Manu (XII, 10). It is
very possibly the name given in the Buddhist community to the Brahmana
Bhikshus (not Tâpasas). They carried three staves bound up as one, as a
sign, it is supposed, of their self-restraint in thought, word, and
deed. This explanation may possibly hold good for so early a date. But
it may also be nothing more than an edifying gloss on an old word whose
original meaning had been forgotten. In that case the gloss would be
founded on such passages as Gaut. III, 17{2}, where the idea of this
threefold division of conduct recurs in the law books. But the technical
term trida*nd*in is not mentioned in them.

{1. See on this Order the passages quoted above in the note at p. 71;
and Leumann in the 'Vienna Oriental Journal,' III, 128.

2\. Comp. Baudhâyana XI, 6, 11, 23; Manu V, 165; IX, 29.}

<span id="p. 222">{p. 222}</span>

   No.8. *The not opposing ones, the Friends*, are not mentioned
elsewhere.

   No. 9. *The followers of Gotama* means, almost certainly, the
followers of some other member of the Sâkya clan, distinct from our
Gotama, who also founded an Order. We only know of one who did so,
Devadatta. The only alternative is that some Brâma*n*a, belonging to the
Gotama gotra, is here referred to as having had a community of Bhikshus
named after him. But we know nothing of any such person.

   No. 10. *Those who follow the religion of the God* are not mentioned
elsewhere, Who is 'the God'? Is it Sakka (Indra) or *S*iva? The Deva of
the names Devadatta, Devase*tth*i, Devadaha, &c, is probably the same.

   We find in this suggestive list several names, used technically as
the designation of particular sects, but in meaning applicable quite as
much to most of the others. They all claimed to be pure as regards means
of livelihood, to be unfettered, to be friends; they all wandered from
place to place, they were all mendicants. And the names can only
gradually have come to have the special meaning of the member of one
school, or order, only. We should not, therefore, be surprised if the
name Bhikshu, also, has had a similar history{1}.

<span class="small">{1. There is a similar list, also full of
interesting puzzles, but applicable of course to a date later by some
centuries than the above, in the Milinda, p, 191, Worshippers of *S*iva
are there expressly mentioned.}</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: VIII. Kassapa-sîhanâda Sutta](dob-08tx.md)
