<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-10in) [Next](dob-11in)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 267">{p. 267}</span>

## X. SUBHA SUTTA.

### \[CONDUCT, CONCENTRATION, AND INTELLECT.\]

   <span id="text p. 204">\[204\]</span> I. 1. Thus have I heard. The
venerable Ânanda was once staying at Sâvatthi in the *G*eta Wood, in
Anâtha Pi*nd*ika's pleasaunce, shortly after the Exalted One had died
away{1}. Now at that time the young Brahman Subha, the son of the man of
Tudi{2}, was dwelling at Sâvatthi on some business or other.

   2. Now Subha, the young Brahman, addressed a certain young man, and
said:

   'Come now, young man. Go to the Sama*n*a Ânanda, and ask in my name
as to whether his sickness and indisposition has abated, as to his
health and vigour and condition of ease; and say: "'Twere well if the
venerable Ânanda would be so kind as to pay a visit to Subha, the young
Brahman, the son of the man of Tudi."'

   3. 'Very well, Sir,' said that young man in reply. And he went to the
place where the venerable Ânanda was staying, and exchanged with him the
greetings and compliments of politeness and courtesy, and took his seat
apart. And, so seated, he delivered to the venerable Ânanda the message
with which he had been charged.

   <span id="text p. 205">\[205\]</span> 4. On hearing that message, the
venerable Ânanda said to him:

   'It is not just now, young man, convenient, for I have just taken
medicine. But perhaps I may be able to go on the morrow, if so be that
conditions and opportunity seem fit.'

{1. The full details are given in Sumangala Vilâsinî, p. 7.

2\. A village near Sâvatthi, now in Nepal territory.}

<span id="p. 268">{p. 268}</span>

   Then that young man arose from his seat, and went to Subha, and told
him all, and added:

   'So, Sir, the matter has been so far accomplished that perhaps the
venerable Ânanda may be able to come on the morrow, if so be that
conditions and opportunity seem fit.'

   5. And the venerable Ânanda, when the night had passed away, dressed
himself early in the morning, and went, in his robes and carrying his
bowl, with a Bhikkhu from the *K*etiya countrya, as his attendant, to
Subha's house, and took his seat on the mat spread out for him. And
Subha, the young Brahman, the son of the man of Tudi, came there where
he sat, and exchanged with the venerable Ânanda the greetings and
compliments of politeness and courtesy, and took his seat on one side.
And, so seated, he said to the venerable Ânanda:

   <span id="text p. 206">\[206\]</span> 'You, Sir, have waited long on
the venerable Gotama, constantly near him, continually in his company.
You, Sir, will know what were the things the venerable Gotama was wont
to praise; to which he used to incite the folk, in which he established
them, and made them firm. What were they, Ânanda?'

   6. 'Three are the bodies of doctrine, O Brahman, which the Exalted
One was wont to praise; to which he used to incite the folk, in which he
established them, and made them firm. And what are the three? The so
noble body of doctrine regarding right conduct, the so noble body of
doctrine regarding self-concentration, the so noble body of doctrine
regarding intelligence{1}.'

   'And what, Ânanda, is this so noble body of doctrine regarding right
conduct (Sîla) in praise of which the venerable Gotama was wont to
speak; to which he used to incite the folk, in which he established
them, and made them firm?'

   7. \[The reply §§ 7-29 is [§§ 40-63](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2078) of the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta, including:

<span class="small">{1. On these three Skandhas of doctrine, see above,
[p. 82](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2082), and A. I, 125, &c.}</span>

<span id="p. 269">{p. 269}</span>

   1. The appearance of a Buddha, and his preaching.

   2. The awakening of a hearer, and his entry into the Order.

   3. His self-training in act, word, and speech.

   4. The minor details of morality he observes.

   5. The absence of fear, confidence of heart thence resulting.

   And the answer concludes the enumeration with the words:--\]

   30. 'And there is yet something further, according to this system,
still to be done.'

   'Wonderful is this, Ânanda, and mysterious--both that this so noble
group of conduct is well-rounded, not incomplete; and that I perceive no
other, like unto it, among the other Sama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as outside
of this communion. <span id="text p. 207">\[207\]</span> And were they
also to perceive such in themselves, then would they be satisfied with
thus much, and would say: "So far is enough. We have done thus much. The
aim of our Sama*n*aship has been reached." But you, Ânanda, on the other
hand, say: "There is yet something further, according to your system,
still to be done."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the First Portion for Recitation in the Subha Sutta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   II. 1. 'And what, Ânanda, is this so noble body of doctrine regarding
self-concentration (Samâdhi) in praise of which the venerable Gotama was
wont to speak; to which he used to incite the folk, in which he
established them, and made them firm?'

   \[The answer §§ 2-18 is [§§ 64-82](dob-02tx.htm#text%20p.%2070) of
the Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta, that is to say:

   1. The way in which he learns to guard the door of his senses.

   2. The constant mindfulness and self-possession that he gains.

<span id="p. 270">{p. 270}</span>

   3. The power of being content with little, with simplicity of life.

   4. The emancipation of heart from the Five Hindrances--covetousness,
ill-temper, sloth of body and mind, excitement and worry, and
perplexity.

   5. The resulting joy and peace that pervades his bodily frame, and
fills his heart.

   6-9. The Four Raptures (*Gh*ânas). And the answer is followed by the
same injunction as to something further to be done, and the same
rejoinder as above in Chapter I, § 30.\]

   <span id="text p. 208">\[208\]</span> 20. 'And what, Ânanda, is this
so noble body of doctrine regarding intellect (Pa*ññ*â) in praise of
which the venerable Gotama was wont to speak; to which he used to incite
the folk, in which he established them, and made them firm?'

   \[The answer, §§ 20-26 is §§ [83](dob-02tx.htm#text%20p.%2076),
[85](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2077), and [97](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2092) of the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta, that is to say:

   1. The *N*â*n*a-dassana--the insight which sees that the body is
impermanent, and that mind (Vi*ññ*âna) is bound up with it, has no
existence independent of it.

   2. The power of calling up mental images.

   3. The perception of the Four Truths as to sorrow and the Eightfold
Path; the rooting out of one's mind of the Intoxicants (the Asâvas); and
the final. assurance, consequent thereon, of Emancipation gained.\]

   <span id="text p. 209">\[209\]</span> 27. 'This, young Brahman, is
that so noble body of doctrine regarding intellect, of which that
Exalted One was wont to speak in praise; to which he used to incite the
folk, in which he established them, and made them firm.'

   <span id="text p. 210">\[210\]</span> 'Wonderful is this, Ânanda, and
mysterious--both that this so noble group of doctrine regarding
intellect is well-rounded, not incomplete; and that I perceive no other,
like unto it among the other Sama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as outside of this
communion. And

<span id="p. 271">{p. 271}</span>

there is not, in this matter, anything further to be accomplished. Most
excellent, Ânanda, are the words of thy mouth, most excellent! Just as
if a man were to set up that which has been thrown down, or were to
reveal that which has been hidden away, or were to point out the right
road to him who has gone astray, or were to bring a light into the
darkness so that those who have eyes could see external forms--just even
so has the truth been made known to me, in many a figure, by the
venerable Ânanda. And I, even I, betake myself to that venerable Gotama
as my guide, to the truth, and to the Order. May the venerable Ânanda
receive me as an adherent, as one who, from this day forth, as long as
life endures. has taken them as his guide.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the Subha Suttanta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: Introduction to the Kevaddha
Sutta](dob-11in)
