<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-11in) [Next](dob-12in)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 276">{p. 276}</span>

## XI. KEVADDHA SUTTA.

### \[THE THREE WONDERS, AND THE GODS.\]

   <span id="text p. 211">\[211\]</span> 1. Thus have I heard. The
Exalted One was once staying at Nâlandâ in the Pâvârika's mango
grove{1}. Now Kevaddha{2}, a young householder, came where the Exalted
One was, and bowed down in salutation to him, and took a seat on one
side. And, so seated, he said to the Exalted One:

   'This Nâlandâ of ours, Sir, is influential and prosperous, full of
folk, crowded with people devoted to the Exalted One. It were well if
the Exalted One were to give command to some brother to perform, by
power surpassing that of ordinary men, a mystic wonder. Thus would this
Nâlandâ of ours become even so much the more devoted to the Exalted
One.'

   On his speaking thus the Exalted One said to him:

   'But, Kevaddha, it is not thus that I am wont to give instruction to
the brethren: "Come now, my brethren; perform ye a mystic wonder, by
power surpassing that of ordinary men, for the lay folk clad in their
garments of white!"

   2. And a second time Kevaddha made the same request to the Exalted
One, and received a second time the same reply.

{1. Afterwards the site of the famous Buddhist University.

2\. The MSS. differ as to the spelling of this name. It is improbable
that a wealthy and distinguished man, of high social position, should
have been called Keva*tt*a, 'fisherman.' However, Dr. Neumann, who has
translated this Suttanta in his 'Buddhistische Anthropologie,' pp.
62-100, has adopted this form; and it may turn out to be the better of
the two.}

<span id="p. 277">{p. 277}</span>

   <span id="text p. 212">\[212\]</span> 3. And a third time Kevaddha,
the young householder, addressed the Exalted One, and said:

   'I would fain do no injury to the Exalted One. I only say that this
Nâlandâ of ours is influential and prosperous, full of folk, crowded
with people devoted to the Exalted One. It were well if the Exalted One
were to give command to some brother to perform, by power surpassing
that of ordinary men, a mystic wonder. Thus would this Nâlandâ of ours
become even so much the more devoted to the Exalted One.'

   'There are three sorts of wonders, Kevaddha, which I, having myself
understood and realised them, have made known to others. And what are
the three? The mystic wonder, the wonder of manifestation, and the
wonder of education{1}.

   4. 'And what, Kevaddha, is the mystic wonder?

   'In this case, Kevaddha, suppose that a brother enjoys the
possession, in various ways, of mystic power--from being one he becomes
multiform, from being multiform he becomes one: from being visible he
becomes invisible: he passes without hindrance to the further side of a
wall or a battlement or a mountain, as if through air: he penetrates up
and down through solid ground, as if through water: he walks on water
without dividing it, as if on solid ground: he travels cross-legged
through the sky, like the birds on wing: he touches and feels with the
hand even the Moon and the Sun, beings of mystic power and potency
though they be: he reaches, even in the body, up to the heaven of
Brahmâ. And some believer, of trusting heart, should behold him doing
so.

   <span id="text p. 213">\[213\]</span> 5. 'Then that believer should
announce the fact to an unbeliever, saying: "Wonderful, Sir, and
marvellous is the mystic power and potency of that recluse. For verily I
saw him indulging himself, in various ways, in mystic power:--from being
one becoming multiform (&c., as before, down to) reaching, even in the
body, up to the heaven of Brahmâ."'

<span class="small">{1. These are explained at length in the Sa*m*gârava
Sutta, A. I, 168-173.}</span>

<span id="p. 278">{p. 278}</span>

   'Then that unbeliever should say to him: "Well, Sir! there is a
certain charm called the Gandhara Charm. It is by the efficacy thereof
that he performs all this{1}."'

   'Now what think you, Kevaddha? Might not the unbeliever so say?'

   'Yes, Sir; he might.'

   'Well, Kevaddha! It is because I perceive danger in the practice of
mystic wonders, that I loathe, and abhor, and am ashamed thereof.

   6. 'And what, Kevaddha, is the wonder of manifestation?

   'Suppose, in this case, Kevaddha, that a brother can make manifest
the heart and the feelings, the reasonings and the thoughts, of other
beings, of other individuals, saying: "So and so is in your mind. You
are thinking of such and such a matter. Thus and thus are your
emotions." And some believer, of trusting heart, should see him doing
so{2}.

   <span id="text p. 214">\[214\]</span> 7. 'Then that believer should
announce the fact to an unbeliever, saying: "Wonderful, Sir, and
marvellous is the mystic power and potency of that recluse. For verily I
saw him making manifest the heart and the feelings, the reasonings and
the thoughts, of other beings, of other individuals, saying: "So and so
is in your mind. You are thinking of such and such a matter. Thus and
thus are your emotions."

   'Then that unbeliever should say to him: "Well, Sir! there is a charm
called the Jewel Charm{3}. It is by the efficacy thereof that he
performs all this."

{1. The Gandhâra Charm is mentioned at *G*ât. IV, 498, 499, as a
well-known charm for the single purpose only of making oneself
invisible.

2\. The Sa*m*gârava Sutta (*loc. cit.*) tells us how--either by omens,
or by interpreting exterior sounds, or by hearing the actual sound of
the man's mental operations, or by knowing, in his own heart, the heart
of the other.

3\. Identified here, by Buddhaghosa, with the *K*intâma*n*î Vi*gg*â,
which, according to *G*ât. III, 504, is only for following up trails.
Compare Sum. 265, 267, 271.

It is most probable that the *G*âtaka is right in both cases as to the
meaning of these charm-names, and that the objector is intentionally
represented, like Ka*n*ha in the Amba*tth*a Suttanta, to be 'drawing the
long bow.'}

<span id="p. 279">{p. 279}</span>

'Now what think you, Kevaddha? Might not the unbeliever so say?'

   'Yes, Sir; he might.'

   'Well, Kevaddha! It is because I perceive danger in the practice of
the wonder of manifestation, that I loathe, and abhor, and am ashamed
thereof.

   8. 'And what, Kevaddha, is the wonder of education?

   'Suppose, Kevaddha, that a brother teaches thus: "Reason in this way,
do not reason in that way. Consider thus, and not thus. Get rid of this
disposition, train yourself, and remain, in that." This, Kevaddha, is
what is called "The wonder of education."

   'And further, Kevaddha, suppose that a Tathâgata is born into the
world, &c.'

   \[The text repeats the Sâma*ññ*a-phala Suttanta, [§§ 40 to
84](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2078), and [§ 97](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2092), that is to
say:

   1. The preaching of the Buddha.

   2. The a wakening of a hearer, and his renunciation of the world.

   3. His self-training in act, word, and speech.

   4. The minor details of mere morality (summarised above at [p.
58](dob-02in.htm#p.%2058)) which he observes.

   5. The absence of fear, confidence of heart thence arising.

   6. The way in which he learns to guard the doors of his senses.

   7. The constant self-possession he thus gains.

   8. The power of being content with little, of simplicity of life.

   9. The emancipation of the heart from the Five
Hindrances--covetousness, ill-temper, sloth of body and mind, excitement
and worry, and perplexity.

   10. The resulting joy and peace that he gains.

   11. The training in the Four Raptures.

<span id="p. 280">{p. 280}</span>

   12. The insight arising from the knowledge of the nature of the body,
and its impermanence, and of the fact that consciousness is bound up
with it.

   13. The realisation of the Four Truths, the destruction of the
Intoxicants, and the final assurance of the emancipation of Arahatship.

   The refrain throughout is: 'This, Kevaddha, is what is called the
wonder of education.'\]

   <span id="text p. 215">\[215\]</span> 67. 'So these, Kevaddha, are
the three wonders I have understood and realised myself, and made known
to others.

   '{1}Once upon a time, Kevaddha, there occurred to a certain brother
in this very company of the brethren, a doubt on the following point:
"Where now do these four great elements--earth, water, fire, and
wind--pass away, leaving no trace behind?" So that brother, Kevaddha,
worked himself up into such a state of ecstasy that the way leading. to
the world of the Gods became clear to his ecstatic vision.

   68. 'Then that brother, Kevaddha, went up to the realm of the Four
Great Kings; and said to the gods thereof: "Where, my friends, do the
four great elements--earth, water, fire, and wind--cease, leaving no
trace behind?"

   'And when he had thus spoken the gods in the heaven of the Four Great
Kings said to him: "We, brother, do not know that. But there are the
Four Great Kings. more potent and more glorious than we. They will know
it."

   <span id="text p. 216-219">\[216-219\]</span> 69-79. 'Then that
brother, Kevaddha, went to the Four Great Kings, \[and put the same
question, and was sent on, by a similar reply, to the Thirty-three, who
sent him on to their king, Sakka; who sent him on to the Yâma gods. who
sent him on to their king, Suyâma; who sent him on to the Tusita gods,
who sent him on to their king, Santusita; who sent him on

<span class="small">{1. From here to the end has been translated by the
late Henry C. Warren in his 'Buddhism in Translations,' [pp.
308](../bits/bits067) foll.}</span>

<span id="p. 281">{p. 281}</span>

to the Nimmâna-rati gods, who sent him on to their king, Sunimmita; who
sent him on to the Para-nimmita Vasavatti gods, who sent him on to their
king, Vasavatti; who sent him on to the gods of the Brahmâ-world{1}.'\]

   <span id="text p. 320">\[320\]</span> 80. 'Then that brother,
Kevaddha, became so absorbed by self-concentration that the way to the
Brahmâ-world became clear to his mind thus pacified. And he drew near to
the gods of the retinue of Brahmâ, and said: "Where, my friends, do the
four great elements-earth, water, fire, and wind-cease, leaving no trace
behind?"

   'And when he had thus spoken the gods of the retinue of Brahmâ
replied: "We, brother, do not know that. But there is Brahmâ, the Great
Brahmâ, the Supreme One, the Mighty One, the All-seeing One, the Ruler,
the Lord of all, the Controller, the Creator, the Chief of all,
appointing to each his place, the Ancient of days, the Father of all
that are and are to be{2}! He is more potent and more glorious than we.
He will know it."

   '"Where then is that Great Brahmâ now?"

   '"We, brother. know not where Brahmâ is, nor why Brahmâ is, nor
whence. But, brother, when the signs of his coming appear, when the
light ariseth, and the glory shineth, then will He be manifest. For that
is the portent of the manifestation of Brahmâ when the light ariseth,
and the glory shineth."

   <span id="text p. 221">\[221\]</span> 81. 'And it was not long,
Kevaddha, before that Great Brahmâ became manifest. And that brother
drew near to him, and said: "Where, my friend, do the four great
elements--earth, water, fire, and wind--cease, leaving no trace
behind?"'

   And when he had thus spoken that Great Brahmâ said to him: "I,
brother, am the Great Brahmâ, the Supreme, the Mighty, the All-seeing,
the Ruler, the

{1. The question and answer in §68 is repeated, in the text, in each
case.

2\. So also above, [p. 31](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2031).}

<span id="p. 282">{p. 282}</span>

Lord of all, the Controller, the Creator, the Chief of all, appointing
to each his place, the Ancient of days, the Father of all that are and
are to be!"

   82. 'Then that brother answered Brahmâ, and said: "I did not ask you,
friend, as to whether you were indeed all that you now say. But I ask
you where the four great elements--earth, water, fire, and wind--cease,
leaving no trace behind?"

   83. 'Then again, Kevaddha, Brahmâ gave the same reply. And that
brother, yet a third time, put to Brahmâ his question as before. 'Then,
Kevaddha, the Great Brahmâ took that brother by the arm and led him
aside, and said:

   <span id="text p. 221">\[221\]</span> '"These gods, the retinue of
Brahmâ, hold me, brother, to be such that there is nothing I cannot see,
nothing I have not understood, nothing I have not realised. Therefore I
gave no answer in their presence. I do not know, brother, where those
four great elements--earth, water, fire, and wind--cease, leaving no
trace behind. Therefore you, brother, have done wrong, have acted ill,
in that, ignoring{1} the Exalted One. you have undertaken this long
search, among others, for an answer to this question. Go you now, return
to the Exalted One, ask him the question, and accept the answer
according as he shall make reply."

   84. 'Then, Kevaddha, that Bhikkhu, as quickly as one could stretch
forth his bended arm, or draw it in when stretched forth, vanished from
the Brahmâ-world, and appeared before me. And he bowed in salutation to
me, and took his seat on one side; and, so seated, he said to me: "Where
is it, Sir, that these four great elements--earth, water, fire, and
wind--cease, leaving no trace behind?"

   85. 'And when he had thus spoken, Kevaddha, I answered him thus:
"Long, long ago, brother,

<span class="small">{1. Atisitvâ. The Siamese edition has
abhisi*m*sitvâ. On atisitvâ see Morris in the J. P. T. S., 1886, and
Fausböll at S. N. II, 366.}</span>

<span id="p. 283">{p. 283}</span>

sea-faring traders were wont, when they were setting sail on an ocean
voyage, to take with them a land-sighting bird. And when the ship got
out of sight of the shore they would let the land-sighting bird free.
Such a bird would fly to the East, and to the South, and to the West,
and to the North, to the zenith, and to the intermediate points of the
compass. And if anywhere on the horizon it caught sight of land, thither
would it fly. But if no land, all round about, were visible, it would
come back even to the ship. Just so, brother, do you, having sought an
answer to this question, and sought it in vain, even up to the
Brahmâ-world, come back therefore to me. <span
id="text p. 223">\[223\]</span> Now the question, brother, should not be
put as you have put it. Instead of asking where the four great elements
cease, leaving no trace behind, you should have asked:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"Where do earth, water, fire, and wind,<br />
And long and short, and fine and coarse.<br />
Pure and impure, no footing find?<br />
Where is it that both name and form{1}<br />
Die out, leaving no trace behind?"</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   'On that the answer is:

   'The intellect of Arahatship, the invisible, the endless, accessible
from every side{2}--

{1. Nâmaâ*ñ* *k*a rûpa*ñ* *k*a; that is, the mental and the physical.
Dr. Neumann puts this into nineteenth-century language by translating
'subject and object.' And however un-Buddhistic the phrase may be--for
no Buddhist would use an expression apparently implying a unity in the
subject--it really, if by subject be understood an ever-changing group
of impermanent faculties or qualities, comes very near to the Buddhist
meaning.

2\. Paha*m*. Buddhaghosa takes this in the sense of tittha; that is,
ghat, flight of steps or shelving beach from which to step down into
water. James d'Alwis, who usually gives the view of Ba*t*uwan Tu*d*âwa,
took it as = pabha*m*, shining--which Buddhaghosa, who gives it as an
alternative explanation, had rejected ('Buddhist Nirvâ*n*a,' p. 39). Dr.
Neumann, the only European writer who has discussed the point. thinks it
is put by the poet, *metri causa*, for pa*g*aha*m*, 'rejecting.' But an
English poet, if he wanted to save a syllable, would scarcely write
'recting' for 'rejecting.' And the Pâli poet, had he wished to give that
meaning, could easily have found other means. He need have gone no
further afield than adopting simply *g*aha*m*. That vi*ññ*âna, when
qualified by such adjectives as those here used, can be meant for the
vi*ññ*âna of a man who has attained to Nirvâ*n*a, could be supported by
other passages from the Pi*t*akas.}

<span id="p. 284">{p. 284}</span>

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>'There is it that earth, water, fire, and wind,<br />
And long and short, and fine and coarse,<br />
Pure and impure, no footing find.<br />
There is it that both name and form<br />
Die out, leaving no trace behind.<br />
When intellection ceases they all also cease.'</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   Thus spake the Exalted One. And Kevaddha, the young householder,
pleased at heart, rejoiced at the spoken word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the Kevaddha Suttanta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: Introduction to the Lohi*kk*a
Sutta](dob-12in)
