<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-12in) [Next](dob-13in.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 288">{p. 288}</span>

## XII. LOHI*KK*A SUTTA.

### \[SOME POINTS IN THE ETHICS OF TEACHING.\]

   <span id="text p. 224">\[224\]</span> 1. Thus have I heard. The
Exalted One, when once passing on a tour through the Kosala districts
with a great multitude of the members of the Order, with about five
hundred Bhikshus, arrived at Sâlavatikâ (a village surrounded by a row
of Sâla trees). Now at that time Lohi*kk*a{1} the Brahman was
established at Sâlavatikâ, a spot teeming with life, with much grassland
and woodland and corn, on a royal domain granted him by King Pasenadi of
Kosala, as a royal gift, with power over it as if he were the king{2}.

   2. Now at that time Lohi*kk*a the Brahman was thinking of harbouring
the following wicked view: 'Suppose that a Sama*n*a or a Brâhma*n*a have
reached up to some good state (of mind), then he should tell no one else
about it. For what can one man do for another? To tell others would be
like the man who, having broken through an old bond, should entangle
himself in a new one. Like that, I say, is this (desire to declare to
others); it is a form of lust. For what can one man do for another{3}?'

{1. This is, I think, a local name; the name of the place from which he
had come. If that be so, the better rendering throughout would be 'the
Lohi*kk*a Brahman.'

2\. See above, pp. [108](dob-03tx), [144](dob-04tx.md).

3\. This is open to two interpretations: 'What can the teacher gain from
a disciple?' or 'What can a disciple gain from a teacher?' 'Why should
you trouble about others? they cannot help you!' or 'Why should you
trouble about others? you cannot help them!' But in either case the
implied ground of the argument is the proposition that a man's rise or
fall, progress or defeat, in intellectual and religious matters, lies in
himself. He must work out his own salvation.}

<span id="p. 289">{p. 289}</span>

   3. Now Lohi*kk*a the Brahman heard the news: 'They say that the
Sama*n*a Gotama, of the sons of the Sâkyas, who went out from the Sâkya
clan to adopt the religious life, has now arrived, with a great company
of the brethren of his Order, on his tour through the Kosala districts,
at Sâlavatikâ. Now regarding that venerable Gotama, such is the high
reputation that has been noised abroad:--that Exalted One is an Arahat,
fully awakened, abounding in wisdom and goodness, happy, with knowledge
of the worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to mortals willing to be led, a
teacher for gods and men, an exalted one, a Buddha. He, by himself,
thoroughly knows, and sees as it were face to face, this
universe--including the worlds above of the gods, the Brahmâs, and the
Mâras; and the world below with its Sama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, its
princes and peoples--and having known it, he makes his knowledge known
to others. The truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in its progress,
lovely in its consummation, doth he proclaim both in the spirit and in
the letter. The higher life doth he make known in all its fullness, and
in all its purity. And good is it to pay visits to Arahats like that.'

   <span id="text p. 226">\[226\]</span> 4. Then Lohi*kk*a the Brahman
said to Bhesikâ the barber: 'Come now, good Bhesikâ, go where the
Sama*n*a Gotama is staying, and, on your arrival, ask in my name as to
whether his sickness and indisposition has abated, as to his health and
vigour and condition of ease; and speak thus: "May the venerable Gotama,
and with him the brethren of the Order, accept the to-morrow's meal from
Lohi*kk*a the Brahman."'

   5. 'Very well, Sir,' said Bhesikâ the barber, acquiescing in the word
of Lohi*kk*a the Brahman, and did so even as he had been enjoined. And
the Exalted One consented, by silence, to his request.

   6. And when Bhesikâ the barber perceived that the Exalted One had
consented, he rose from his seat, and passing the Exalted One with his
right hand towards him, went to Lohi*kk*a the Brahman, and on his
arrival spake to him thus:

<span id="p. 290">{p. 290}</span>

   'We addressed that Exalted One{1}, Sir, in your name, even as you
commanded. And the Exalted One hath consented to eome.'

   <span id="text p. 226">\[226\]</span> 7. Then Lohi*kk*a the Brahman,
when the night had passed, made' ready at his own dwelling-place sweet
food, both hard and soft, and said to Bhesikâ the barber: 'Come now,
good Bhesikâ, go where the Sama*n*a Gotama is. staying, and on your
arrival, announce the time to him, saying: "It is time, O Gotama, and
the meal is ready."'

   'Very well, Sir,' said Bhesikâ the barber in assent to the words of
Lohi*kk*a the Brahman; and did so even as he had been enjoined.

   And the Exalted One, who had robed himself early in the early
morning, went robed, and carrying his bowl with him, with the brethren
of the Order, towards Sâlavatikâ.

   8. Now, as he went, Bhesikâ the Barber walked, step by step, behind
the Exalted One. And he said to him:

   'The following wicked opinion has occurred to Lohi*kk*a the Brahman:
"Suppose that a Sama*n*a or a Brâhma*n*a have reached up to some good
state (of mind), then he should tell no one else about it. For what can
one man do for another? To tell others would be like the man who, having
broken through an old bond, should entangle himself in a new one. Like
that, I say, is this (desire to declare to others); it is a form of
lust." 'Twere well, Sir, if the Exalted One would disabuse his mind
thereof. For what can one man do for another?'

   'That may well be, Bhesikâ, that may well be.'

   <span id="text p. 227">\[227\]</span> 9. And the Exalted One went on
to the dwelling-place of Lohi*kk*a the Brahman, and sat down on the seat
prepared for him. And Lohi*kk*a the Brahman satisfied the Order, with
the Buddha at its head, with his own hand, with sweet food both hard

<span class="small">{1. It is clear from this expression that Bhesikâ
was already a follower of the new teaching.}</span>

<span id="p. 291">{p. 291}</span>

and soft, until they refused any more. And when the Exalted One had
finished his meal, and had cleansed the bowl and his hands, Lohi*kk*a
the Brahman brought a low seat and sat down beside him. And to him, thus
seated, the Exalted One spake as follows:

   'Is it true, what they say, Lohi*kk*a, that the following wicked
opinion has arisen in your mind: \[and he set forth the opinion as above
set forth\]?'

   'That is so. Gotama.'

   10. I Now what think you, Lohi*kk*a? Are you not established at
Sâlavatikâ?'

   'Yes, that is so, Gotama.'

   'Then suppose, Lohi*kk*a, one were to speak thus: "Lohi*kk*a the
Brahman has a domain at Sâlavatikâ. Let him alone enjoy all the revenue
and all the produce of Sâlavatikâ, allowing nothing to anybody else!"
Would the utterer of that speech be a danger-maker as touching the men
who live in dependence upon you, or not?'

   'He would be a danger-maker, Gotama?'

   'And making that danger, would he be a person who sympathised with
their welfare, or not?'

   'He would not be considering their welfare, Gotama.'

   'And not considering their welfare, would his heart stand fast in
love toward them, or in enmity?'

   'In enmity, Gotama.'

   'But when one's heart stands fast in enmity, is that unsound
doctrine, or sound?'

   'It is unsound doctrine, Gotama.'

   'Now if a man hold unsound doctrine, Lohi*kk*a, I declare that one of
two future births will be his lot, either purgatory or rebirth as an
animal.'

   <span id="text p. 228">\[228\]</span> 11. 'Now what think you,
Lohi*kk*a? Is not King Pasenadi of Kosala in possession of Kâsi and
Kosala?'

   'Yes, that is so, Gotama.'

   'Then suppose, Lohi*kk*a, one were to speak thus: "King Pasenadi of
Kosala is in possession of Kâsi and Kosala. Let him enjoy all the
revenue and all the produce of Kâsi and Kosala. allowing nothing to

<span id="p. 292">{p. 292}</span>

anybody else." Would the utterer ot that speech be a danger-maker as
touching the men who live in dependence on King Pasenadi of Kosala--both
you yourself and others--or not?'

   'He would be a danger-maker, Gotama.'

   'And making that danger, would he be a person who sympathised with
their welfare, or not?'

   'He would not be considering their welfare, Gotama.'

   'And not considering their welfare, would his heart stand fast in
love toward them, or in enmity?'

   'In enmity, Gotama.'

   'But when one's heart stands fast in enmity, is that unsound
doctrine, or sound?'

   'It is unsound doctrine, Gotama.'

   'Now if a man hold unsound doctrine, Lohi*kk*a, I declare that one of
two future births will be his lot, either purgatory or rebirth as an
animal.

   12 and 14. 'So then, Lohi*kk*a, you admit that he who should say that
you, being in occupation of Sâlavatikâ, should therefore yourself enjoy
all the revenue and produce thereof, bestowing nothing on any one else;
and he who should say that King Pasenadi of Kosala, being in power over
Kâsi and Kosala, should therefore himself enjoy all the revenue and
produce thereof, bestowing nothing on any one else--would be making
danger for those living in dependence on you; or for those, you and
others, living in dependence upon the King. And that those who thus make
danger for others, must be wanting in sympathy for them. And that the
man wanting in sympathy has his heart set fast in enmity. And that to
have one's heart set fast in enmity is unsound doctrine:--

   13 and 15. 'Then just so, Lohi*kk*a, he who should say: "Suppose a
Sama*n*a or a Brâhma*n*a to have reached up to some good state (of
mind), then should he tell no one else about it. For what can one man do
for another? To tell others would be like the man who, having broken
through an old bond, should entangle himself in a new one. Like that, I
say, is this desire to declare to others, it is a form of lust;"--<span
id="text p. 229">\[229\]</span> just

<span id="p. 293">{p. 293}</span>

so he, who should say thus, would be putting obstacles in the way of
those clansman who, having taken upon themselves the Doctrine and
Discipline set forth by Him-who-has-won-the-Truth, have attained to
great distinction therein--to the fruit of conversion, for instance, or
to the fruit of once returning, or to the fruit of never returning, or
even to Arahatship--he would be putting obstacles in the way of those
who are bringing to fruition the course of conduct that will lead to
rebirth in states of bliss in heaven{1}. But putting obstacles in their
way he would be out of sympathy for their welfare; being out of sympathy
for their welfare his heart would become established in enmity; and when
one's heart is established in enmity, that is unsound doctrine. Now if a
man hold unsound doctrine, Lohi*kk*a, I declare that one of two future
births will be his lot, either purgatory or rebirth as an animal{2}.

   <span id="text p. 230">\[230\]</span> 16. 'There are these three
sorts of teachers in the world, Lohi*kk*a, who are worthy of blame. And
whosoever should blame such a one, his rebuke would be justified, in
accord with the facts and the truth, not improper. What are the three?

   'In the first place, Lohi*kk*a, there is a sort of teacher who has
not himself attained to that aim of Sama*n*aship for the sake of which
he left his home and adopted the homeless life. Without having himself
attained to it he teaches a doctrine (Dhamma) to his hearers, saying:
"This is good for you, this will make you happy." Then those hearers of
his neither listen to him, nor give ear to his words, nor become
stedfast in heart through their knowledge thereof; they go their own
way, apart from the teaching of the master. Such a teacher may be
rebuked, setting out these facts, and

{1. Literally 'Who are making heavenly embryos ripe for rebirth in
heavenly states.'

2\. Paragraphs 12, 13 are repeated of the case put about Pasenadi, king
of Kosala. In the translation both cases are included at the beginning
of § 12.}

<span id="p. 294">{p. 294}</span>

adding: "You are like one who should make advances to her who keeps
repulsing him, or should embrace her who turns her face away from him.
Like that, do I say, is this lust of yours (to go on posing as a teacher
of men, no one heeding, since they trust you not). For what, then, can
one man do for another?"

   'This, Lohi*kk*a, is the first sort of teacher in the world worthy of
blame. And whosoever should blame such a one, his rebuke would be
justified, in accord with the facts and the truth, not improper.

   17. 'In the second place, Lohi*kk*a, there is a sort of teacher who
has not himself attained to that aim of Sama*n*aship for the sake of
which he left his home and adopted the homeless life. Without having
himself attained to it he teaches a doctrine to his hearers, saying:
"This is good for you; that will make you happy." And to him his
disciples listen; <span id="text p. 231">\[231\]</span> they give ear to
his words; they become stedfast in heart by their understanding what is
said; and they go not their own way, apart from the teaching of the
master. Such a teacher may be rebuked, setting out these facts and
adding: "You are like a man who, neglecting his own field, should take
thought to weed out his neighbour's field. Like that, do I say, is this
lust of yours (to go on teaching others when you have not taught
yourself). For what, then, can one man do for another?"

   'This, Lohi*kk*a, is the second sort of teacher in the world worthy
of blame. And whosoever should blame such a one, his rebuke would be
justified, in accord with the facts and the truth, not improper.

   18. 'And again, Lohi*kk*a, in the third place, there is a sort of
teacher who has himself attained to that aim of Sama*n*aship for the
sake of which he left his home and adopted the homeless life. Having
himself attained it, he teaches the doctrine to his hearers, saying:
"This is good for you, that will make you happy." But those hearers of
his neither listen to him, nor give ear to his words, nor become
stedfast in heart through understanding thereof; they go their own way,
apart

<span id="p. 295">{p. 295}</span>

from the teaching of the master. Such a teacher may be rebuked, setting
out these facts, and adding: "You are like a man who, having broken
through an old bond, should entangle himself in a new one. Like that, do
I say, is this lust of yours (to go on teaching when you have not
trained yourself to teach). For what, then, can one man do for another?

   'This, Lohi*kk*a, is the third sort of teacher in the world worthy of
blame. And whosoever should blame such a one, his rebuke would be
justified, in accord with the facts and the truth, not improper. And
these, Lohi*kk*a, are the three sorts of teachers of which I spoke.'

   <span id="text p. 232, 233">\[232, 233\]</span> 19. And when he had
thus spoken, Lohi*kk*a the Brahman spake thus to the Exalted One:

   'But is there, Gotama, any sort of teacher not worthy of blame in the
world?'

   'Yes, Lohi*kk*a, there is a teacher not worthy, in the world, of
blame.'

   'And what sort of a teacher, Gotama, is so?'

   \[The answer is in the words of the exposition set out above in the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala, as follows:--

   1. The appearance of a Tathâgata (one who won the truth), his
preaching, the conversion of a hearer, his adoption of the homeless
state. (Above, [pp. 78, 79](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2078)..md)

   2. The minor details of mere morality that he practises. (Above, [pp.
57, 58](dob-02in.htm#p.%2057)..md)

   3. The Confidence of heart he gains from this practice. (Above, [p.
79](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2079)..md)

   4. The paragraph on 'Guarded is the door of his Senses.' (Above, [pp.
79, 80](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2079)..md)

   5. The paragraph on 'Mindful and Self-possessed.' (Above, [pp. 80,
81](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2080)..md)

   6. The paragraph on Simplicity of life, being content with little.
(Above, [p. 81](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2081)..md)

   7. The paragraphs on Emancipation from the Five
Hindrances--covetousness, ill-temper, laziness, worry, and perplexity.
(Above, [pp. 82-84](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2082)..md)

<span id="p. 296">{p. 296}</span>

   8. The paragraph on the Joy and Peace that, as a result of this
emancipation, fills his whole being. (Above, [p.
84](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2084)..md)

   9. The paragraphs on the Four Raptures (*Gh*ânas). (Above, [pp.
84-86](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2084)..md)

   10. The paragraphs on the Insight arising from Knowledge (the
knowledge of the First Path). (Above, [pp. 86,
87](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2086)..md)

   11. The paragraphs on the Realisation of the Four Noble Truths, the
destruction of the Intoxications--lust, delusions, becomings, and
ignorance--and the attainment of Arahatship. (Above, [pp. 92,
93](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2092)..md)

   The refrain throughout and the closing paragraph is:\]

   'And whosoever the teacher be, Lohi*kk*a, under whom the disciple
attains to distinction so excellent as that{1}, that, Lohi*kk*a, is a
teacher not open to blame in the world. And whosoever should blame such
a one, his rebuke would be unjustifiable, not in accord either with the
facts or with the truth, without good ground.'

   <span id="text p. 234">\[234\]</span> 78. And when he had thus
spoken, Lohi*kk*a the Brahman said to the Exalted One:

   'Just, Gotama, as if a man had caught hold of a man, falling over the
precipitous edge of purgatory, by the hair of his head, and lifted him
up safe back on the firm land--just so have I, on the point of falling
into purgatory, been lifted back on to the land by the venerable Gotama.
Most excellent, O Gotama, are the words of thy mouth, most excellent!
Just as if a man were to set up what has been thrown down, or were to
reveal what has been hidden away, or were to point out the right road to
him who has gone astray or were to bring a light into the darkness so
that those who had eyes could see external forms--just even so has the
truth been made known to me, in many a

<span class="small">{I. U*l*âra*m* visesa*m* adhiga*kkh*ati. See for
instance Sa*m*yutta V, 154, 5.}</span>

<span id="p. 297">{p. 297}</span>

figure, by the venerable Gotama. And I, even I, betake myself to the
venerable Gotama as my guide, to the Doctrine, and to the Order. May the
venerable Gotama accept me as a disciple; as one who, from this day
forth as long as life endures, has taken him as his guide!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the Lohi*kk*a Suttanta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top.md)   [Next: Introduction to the Tevi*gg*a
Sutta](dob-13in.md)
