<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-02tx) [Next](dob-03tx)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 96">{p. 96}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### AMBA*TTH*A SUTTA.

   THIS is one of several Suttas (mentioned in the notes to the
celebrated verse quoted at the end of Chapter I) which deal with the
subject of caste.

   It is sufficiently evident from the comparative frequency of the
discussions on the matter of Brahman pretensions that this was a burning
question at the time when the Dialogues were composed. No other social
problem is referred to so often; and Brahmans would not be so often
represented as expressing astonishment or indignation at the position
taken up regarding it by the early Buddhists unless there had really
been a serious difference on the subject between the two schools. But
the difference, though real, has been gravely misunderstood.

   Some writers on Buddhism do not hesitate to ascribe to Gotama the
rôle of a successful political reformer, by representing him as having
fought for the poor and despised against the rich and privileged
classes, and as having gone far to abolish caste. Other writers gird at
the Buddha because most of the leaders of this Order were drawn from the
ranks of the respectable and the well-to-do, with an education in
keeping with their social position; and disparage him for neglecting the
humble and the wretched, for not using his influence to abolish, or to
mitigate, the harshness of caste rules.

   Both views are equally unhistorical. It is well known that the
population of India is now divided into a number of sections (we call
them 'castes'), the members of which are debarred from the right of
intermarriage (from the *connubium*) with those outside their caste, and
also, but in constantly varying degrees, from the right of eating
together (of *commensality*) with the members of other sections. Each
such 'caste' has also a councilor committee by which it is governed, and
which settles all disputes regarding the caste.

   The disastrous effects, from the ethical, social, and political
points of view, of these restrictions, and of caste as a whole, have
been often grossly exaggerated, and the benefits of the

<span id="p. 97">{p. 97}</span>

system ignored. And we are entirely unwarranted in supposing the system,
as it now exists, to have been in existence also at the time when
Buddhism arose in the valley of the Ganges. Our knowledge of the actual
facts of caste, even as it now exists, is still confused and inaccurate.
The theories put forward to explain the facts are loose and
irreconcilable. And an accurate statement of the corresponding facts, if
any, at the time of Gotama, has yet to be drawn up.

   We have long known that the *connubium* was the cause of a long and
determined struggle between the patricians and the plebeians in Rome.
Evidence has been yearly accumulating on the existence of restrictions
as to intermarriage, and as to the right of eating together, among other
Aryan tribes--Greeks, Germans, Russians, and so on. Even without the
fact of the existence, now, of such restrictions among the modern
successors of the ancient Aryans in India, it would have been almost
certain that they also were addicted to similar customs. It is certain
that the notion of such usages was familiar enough to some at least of
the tribes that preceded the Aryans in India. It is quite a mistake to
look upon all these tribes as far below the Aryans in culture. Both the
Kolarians and the Dravidians were probably quite the equals of the
Aryans in social organisation. And the Aryans probably adopted much from
them, especially in matters relating to land tenure, village community,
government, taxation, and so on. Their custom of endogamy and exogamy,
their ideas as to purity and the reverse, may have differed from those
of the Aryans, but were similar in kind. Rules of endogamy and exogamy;
privileges, restricted to certain classes, of eating together, are not
only Indian or Aryan, but world-wide phenomena. Both the spirit, and to
a large degree the actual details, of modern Indian caste usages, are
identical with these ancient, and no doubt universal, customs. It is in
them that we have *the key to the origin of caste*.

   At any moment in the history of a nation such customs seem, to a
superficial observer, to be fixed and immutable. As a matter of fact
they are never quite the same in successive centuries, or even
generations. A man's visible frame, though no change is at any moment
perceptible, is really never the same for two consecutive moments, and
the result of constant minute variations becomes clear after the lapse
of time. The numerous and complicated details which we sum up under the
convenient (but often misleading) single name of caste are solely
dependent for their sanction on public opinion. That opinion seems
stable. But it is always tending to vary as to the degree of importance
attached to some particular one of

<span id="p. 98">{p. 98}</span>

the details, as to the size and complexity of the particular groups in
which each detail ought to be observed.

   This last statement may be illustrated by the case of the Chaliyas.
When the Dutch started cinnamon cultivation in Ceylon on a large scale,
they wanted labourers. The peasantry, who belonged almost exclusively to
one caste, the Goigamas, regarded it as unworthy of a free man to work
for hire. Some of them, however, in the struggle of motives, found the
pressure of poverty too strong for them, and accepted service as
coolies. The others, thinking this bad form, became averse to giving
their daughters in marriage to such coolies. These feelings were
naturally stronger at first among the Goigamas of good social position,
and it became a mark of superiority not to have a relative married to a
worker in the cinnamon gardens. And such workers were called Chaliyas.
By the time that the families of Chaliyas were numerous enough to afford
mates for the male or female coolies, the Chaliyas found it impossible
to find wives elsewhere. And thus, under the very eyes of Europeans, the
size of one group had been diminished by the very considerable number of
persons engaged in a new and despised trade; In other words, what we
call a new caste had arisen, the caste of the Chaliyas. When the English
took Ceylon they gave up the government cultivation of cinnamon. The
gardens were carried on, in ever lessening numbers, by private
individuals. The number of the Chaliyas consequently declined. Numbers
of them, as they gradually returned to ordinary peasant work, became
reabsorbed among the Goigammas. This was an instance of a change
precisely contrary to that which happened when the caste gradually
arose. But all did not succeed in returning; and there are, therefore,
still some Chaliyas left. And the caste survives though the members of
it are now no longer exclusively, or even largely, employed in cinnamon
gardens; and many of them have become wealthy and honoured.

   What had happened in this case was, not two separate and striking
revolutions, but a long series of slight changes in public opinion, no
doubt quite imperceptible at the time to the very people among whom the
changes were taking place. And after all the changes were not so very
slow. Three or four generations were enough to cover the whole series
with the consequent results. Who can doubt but that the history of
ancient India, if we had only access to the necessary evidence, would be
found to cover, in its two thousand five hundred years, and through its
wide territory, a constant succession of similar variations; and that
similar variations are recurring still to-day.

<span id="p. 99">{p. 99}</span>

   Owing to the fact that the particular set of people who worked their
way to the top based its claims on religious grounds, not on political
power or wealth, the system has, no doubt, lasted longer in India than
in Europe. But public opinion still insists in considerable circles,
even in Europe, on restrictions of a more or less defined kind, both as
to marriage and as to eating together. And in India the problem still
remains to trace in the literature the gradual growth of the system--the
gradual formation of new sections among the people, the gradual
extension of the institution to the families of people engaged in
certain trades, belonging to the same sect or tribe, tracing their
ancestry (whether rightly or wrongly) to the same source, All these
factors, and others besides, are real factors. But they are phases of
the extension and growth, not explanations of the origin, of the system.

   There is no evidence to show that at the time when the conversations
recorded in the Dialogues took place (that is to say, in the sixth
century B.C.) there was any substantial difference, as regards the
barriers in question, between the peoples dwelling in the valley of the
Ganges and their contemporaries dwelling on the shores of the
Mediterranean. The point of greatest weight in the establishment of the
great difference in the subsequent development--the supremacy, in India,
of the priests--was still being hotly debated. And all our evidence
tends to show that at least in the wide extent of territory covered by
the Pi*t*akas--countries close upon a hundred thousand square miles in
area--the struggle was being decided rather against the Brahmans than
for them. There were distinctions as to marriage; endogamous and
exogamous groups. In a few instances, all among the lower classes of the
people, these amounted, probably, to what would now be called
caste-divisions. But of castes, in the modern sense, among the
preponderating majority there is little or no conclusive evidence,

   There was a common phrase current among the people, which divided all
the world into four va*nn*â (colours or complexions)--the nobles, the
priests, the other Aryan people, and the non-Aryan *S*ûdras (Khattiyâ,
Brâhma*n*â, Vessâ, and Suddâ). The priests put themselves first, and had
a theological legend in support of their contention. But it is clear
from the Pi*t*akas that this was not admitted by the nobles, And it is
also clear that no one of these divisions was a caste. There was neither
*connubium* nor commensality between all the members of one va*nn*â, nor
was there a governing council for each. The fourth was distinguished
from the others by race, The remaining three were distinguished from
each other by

<span id="p. 100">{p. 100}</span>

social position. And though in a general rough way the classification
corresponded to the actual facts of life, there were insensible
gradations within the four classes, and the boundary between them was
both variable and undefined.

   And this enumeration of the populace was not complete. Outside these
classes there were others, resembling in many points the modern low
castes, and always when mentioned in the Pi*t*akas following after the
above four. Thus in A<u>n</u>guttara I, 162{1}, the argument is that
just as there is no real difference in oxen, in spite of the fact that
they can be arranged in classes by difference of colour (va*nn*a), and
the strong, active, well-trained ox is selected by preference, without
regard to his colour (va*nn*a); so also, when presenting gifts, the man
of strong, active, well-trained mind should be selected as
donee--without reference to the fact of his belonging to any one of the
four classes of society (va*nn*â), or of his being a *K*a*nd*âla or a
Pukkusa. It is plain that this passage distinguishes the last two from
the four va*nn*â and therefore from the *S*ûdras.

   Other old texts{2} insert between these two three further names--the
Ve*n*as, the Nesâdas, and the Rathakâras, that is to say, the workers in
rushes{3}, bird-catchers, and cart-makers. By these are meant aboriginal
tribesmen who were *hereditary* craftsmen in these three crafts; for
they are called hîna-gâtiyo, low tribes. They no doubt formed castes in
the modern sense, though we have no information as to their marriage
customs. They are represented in the *G*âtaka book as living in villages
of their own; outside the towns in which ordinary people dwelt, and
formed evidently a numerically insignificant portion of the populace.

   In the last passage quoted in the previous note there are mentioned,
as distinct from these low tribes (the hîna-*g*âtiyo), certain low
occupations (hîna-sippâni)--mat-makers, potters, weavers,
leather-workers, and barbers. As they are excluded from the list of
those distinguished by birth (*g*âti), it is implied that there was no
hard and fast line, determined by birth, for those who gained their
living by these trades. There would be a natural tendency for the son to
follow the father's craft{4};

{1. Compare Petavatthu II, 6, 12.

2\. Assalâyana (No. 93 in the Ma*ggh*ima); A<u>n</u>guttara II, 85 = P.
P. IV, 19; Samyutta I, 93; Vinaya IV, 6-10, &c.

3\. Sometimes explained as carpenters, sometimes as basket-makers,
sometimes as makers of sunshades.

4\. Further exemplified by the number of people described as
keva*tt*a-putto, assâroha-putto, na*t*a-putto, sûda-putto, &c.}

<span id="p. 101">{p. 101}</span>

centuries afterwards they had become castes, and they were then on the
border line. But they were not castes as yet.

   Besides the above, who were all freemen, there were also slaves. We
only hear of them quite occasionally, as domestic servants, in the
houses of the very rich. Individuals had been captured in predatory
raids, and reduced to slavery (*G*ât. IV, 220); or had been deprived of
their freedom as a judicial punishment (*G*ât. I, 200); or had submitted
to slavery of their own accord ('Vinaya Texts,' I, 191; Sum. I, 168).
Children born to such slaves were also slaves, and the emancipation of
slaves is often referred to. But we hear nothing of such later
developments of slavery as rendered the Roman *latifundia*, or the
plantations of some Christian slave-owners, scenes of misery and
oppression. For the most part the slaves were household servants, and
not badly treated, and their numbers seem to have been insignificant{1}.

   What we find then, in the Buddha's time, is caste in the making. The
great mass of the people were distinguished quite roughly into four
classes--social strata--of which the boundary lines were vague and
uncertain. At the one end of the scale certain outlying tribes, and
certain hereditary crafts of a dirty or despised kind, were already,
probably, castes. At the other end of the scale Brahmans by birth (not
necessarily sacrificial priests, for they followed all sorts of
occupations) were putting forward caste claims that were not yet
universally admitted. There were social customs about the details of
which we know very little (and dependent probably, more exactly upon the
gotta rather than upon the *g*âti), which raised barriers, not seldom
broken through, as to intermarriage of people admittedly belonging to
the same va*nn*a, and *a fortiori* of others. And there was a social
code, based on the idea of impurity, which prevented familiar
intercourse (such as commensality) between people of different rank; and
rendered disgraceful the use of certain foods. We find, however, no
usages which cannot be amply paralleled in the history of other peoples
throughout the world in similar stages of social evolution. The
key-stone of the arch of the peculiarly Indian caste organisation--the
absolute supremacy of the Brahmans--had not yet been put in position,
had not, in fact, been yet made ready. *The caste-system, in any proper
or exact use of the term, did not exist*.

   In the face of this set of circumstances Gotama, took up

<span class="small">{1. See also A. I, 145, 206; II, 67; III, 36, 132,
217; Vin. IV, 224; D. I, 5, 60, 72, 93, 141 (translated above); *G*ât.
I, 226, 385; III, 343, 437; Dhp. Cy. 238, &c.}</span>

<span id="p. 102">{p. 102}</span>

a distinct position. It meets us, it is true, in two phases; but it
forms one consistent and logical whole.

   In the first place, as regards his own Order, over which alone he had
complete control, he ignores completely and absolutely all advantages or
disadvantages arising from birth, occupation, and social status, and
sweeps away all barriers and disabilities arising from the arbitrary
rules of mere ceremonial or social impurity.

   One of the most distinguished members of his Order, the very one of
them who was referred to as the chief authority, after Gotama himself,
on the rules of the Order, was Upâli, who had formerly been a barber,
one of the despised occupations. So Sunita, one of the brethren whose
verses are chosen for insertion in the Thera Gâthâ, was a Pukkusa, one
of the low tribes. Sâti, the propounder of a deadly heresy, was of the
sons of the fisherfolk, afterwards a low caste, and even then an
occupation, on account of its cruelty, particularly abhorred. Nanda was
a cowherd. The two Pa*nth*akas were born out of wedlock, to a girl of
good family through intercourse with a slave (so that by the rule laid
down in Manu 31, they were actually outcasts). Kâpâ was the daughter of
a deer-stalker, Pu*nn*â and Pu*nn*ikâ had been slave girls.
Sumangalamâtâ was daughter and wife to workers in rushes, and Subhâ was
the daughter of a smith. More instances could doubtless be quoted
already, and others will become known when more texts are published.

   It does not show much historical insight to sneer at the numbers as
small, and to suggest that the supposed enlightenment or liberality was
mere pretence. The facts speak for themselves; and the percentage of
low-born members of the Order was probably in fair proportion to the
percentage of persons belonging to the despised *g*âtis and sippas as
compared with the rest of the population. Thus of the Therîs mentioned
in the Therî Gâthâ we know the social position of sixty, of whom five
are mentioned above--that is, 8½ per cent. of the whole number were
base-born. It is most likely that this is just about the proportion
which persons in similar social rank bore to the rest of the population.

   Whether the Buddhist Order differed in this respect from the other
similar communities which are mentioned in the Buddhist books as having
already existed when the Buddhist Order was founded, is still matter of
controversy. The Buddhist books are mostly silent on the matter. But
that very silence is valuable evidence. It is scarcely likely that if
there had been much difference, there should be no allusion to it in the
Pi*t*akas. And the few passages in print confirm this. We

<span id="p. 103">{p. 103}</span>

have seen how in the Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta (above, [p.
77](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2077)) it is taken for granted that a slave could
join an Order (that is any order, not the Buddhist). And in the
Agga*ññ*a Sutta of the Dîgha, and the Madhura Sutta of the Ma*ggh*ima,
there is express mention of *S*ûdras becoming Sama*n*as, as if it were a
recognised and common occurrence, long before the time of the rise of
Buddhism. So in the *G*âtaka (III, 381) we hear of a potter, and at IV,
392 of a *K*andala, who become Sama*n*as (not Buddhist Sama*n*as){1}.

   On the other hand, it is just possible that in these passages the
custom afterwards followed in the Buddhist Order is simply put back to
earlier times, and is an anachronism. The low-born, however earnest in
their search after truth, were no doubt excluded from any community of
hermits or religious recluses in which Brahmans had the upper hand. But
all the twice-born (the Dvi*g*as, that is the Khattiyas, Brâhma*n*as,
and Vessas) were certainly justified, by public opinion, in becoming
Sama*n*as. To what extent the *S*ûdras, and the tribes below the
*S*ûdras, were accorded, in communities other than the Buddhist, a
similar privilege, is at present doubtful. But the Buddha certainly
adopted, and probably extended, the most rational view current at the
time.

   There is one point, however, in which he seems to have restricted
(and for a valid reason) the existing custom. It is impossible to avoid
the inference from the passage just referred to (in the Sâma*ññ*a-phala,
above, p. 77 ), that the existing orders, or most of them, admitted
slaves to their ranks. Now among a number of rules laid down to regulate
admission to the Buddhist Order, in such wise that the existing rights
of third parties should not be encroached upon, there is a rule
(translated in 'Vinaya Texts,' S. B. E., I, 199) that no runaway slave
shall be admitted. And in the form of words to be used at the chapter
held for admitting new members, one of the questions asked of the
candidate is: 'Are you a freeman{2}?' Whenever slaves were admitted to
the Order, they must have previously obtained the consent of their
masters, and also, I think, have been emancipated.

   Secondly, as regards all such matters as we may now fairly call
'questions of caste' outside the Order, the Buddha adopted the only
course then open to any man of sense; that is to say, he strove to
influence that public opinion, on which the observances depend, by a
constant inculcation of reasonable views. Thus in the Âmagandha Sutta{3}
of the Sutta

{1. See Fick, 'Sociale Gliederung im nordöstlichen Indien,' pp. 50, 51.

2\. 'Vinaya Texts,' I, 230.

3\. Translated by Fausböll, S. B. E., pp. 40-43.}

<span id="p. 104">{p. 104}</span>

Nipâta (certainly one of the very oldest of our documents) it is laid
down, in eloquent words, that defilement does not come from eating this
or that, prepared or given by this or that person, but from evil deeds
and words and thoughts.

   This is a particularly interesting passage, being one of the few in
which sayings of previous Buddhas are recorded. In other words the
Buddhists put forward this view as having been enunciated long ago--with
the intended implication that it was a self-evident proposition which
was common ground to the wise. No originality, no special insight, is
claimed on account of a view that would have put an end to so many
foolish prejudices based on superstition. The Buddha's position is again
to adopt, in this matter, the sensible position already put forward by
others.

   As to other details also, which it would take too long to set out
here, Gotama followed the same plan. On the general question, however,
he had opinions, presumably his own. For they are not found elsewhere.
And in the early Buddhist texts (always ready to give credit to others,
and even anxious wherever possible to support their views by showing
that others, especially in ancient times, had held them) these views are
not referred to as part of the doctrine of either earlier or
contemporary teachers.

   We may class the utterances on this point under three
heads--biological, ethical, and historical.

   In the Vâse*tth*a Sutta of the Sutta Nipâta (several verses of which
have been inserted also in the Dhammapada) the question, as in the
So*n*ada*nd*a Sutta, translated below, is as to what makes a man a
Brahman. As his answer the Buddha reminds his questioners of the fact
that whereas in the case of plants (large or small), insects,
quadrupeds, serpents, fish, and birds, there are many species and marks
(due to the species) by which they can be distinguished--in the case of
man there are no such species, and no such marks. 'Herein,' as pointed
out by Mr. Chalmers{1}, 'Gotama was in accord with the conclusion of
modern biologists, that "the *Anthropidae* are represented by the single
genus and species, Man"--a conclusion the more remarkable as the
accident of colour did not mislead Gotama' as it did so many of his
contemporaries then; and even, within living memory, so many in the
West. He goes on to draw the conclusion that distinctions made between
different men are mere matters of prejudice and custom; that it is
wisdom and goodness that make the only valid distinction, that make a
man a Brahman; that the

<span class="small">{1. J. R. A. S., 1894, p. 396.}</span>

<span id="p. 105">{p. 105}</span>

Arahat is therefore the true Brahman; and that it is only the ignorant
who had, for so long, maintained that it was birth that made a man a
Brahman.

   Similar arguments frequently recur. In the Madhura Sutta, a dialogue,
shortly after the Buddha's death, between the king of Madhura and
Ka*kk*âna, the point raised is whether the Brahmans are right in their
exclusive claims. 'The Brahmans say thus, Ka*kk*âna:--"The Brahmans are
the most distinguished of the four divisions into which the people is
classified{1}; every other division is inferior. The Brahmans are the
white division; all the rest are black. The Brahmans alone are accounted
pure, not those who are not Brahmans. The Brahmans are the legitimate
sons of God (of Brahmâ), born from His mouth, specially made by Him,
heirs of Brahmâ! What do you, Sir, say to this?"'

   The Buddhist answer is first to remind the king of the actual facts
of life--how a prosperous member of any one of the four va*nn*as would
find members of each of the other three to wait upon him and serve him.
There was no difference between them in this respect. Then, secondly, he
points out how a wicked man (whatever his va*nn*a), in accordance with
the doctrine of Karma acknowledged by all good men (not only by
Buddhists), will be reborn in some state of woe; and a good man in some
state of bliss. Thirdly, a criminal, whatever his va*nn*a, would be
equally subject to punishment for his crime. And lastly, a man, whatever
his va*nn*a, would, on joining an order, on becoming a *religieux*,
receive equal respect and honour from the people{2}.

   A Brahman might object that all this ignores the important point that
the Brahmans were, originally, born of Brahmâ, and are his legitimate
heirs. It was this claim to especial connection with the mysterious
powers of a supernatural kind, so widely believed in, that formed their
chief weapon in the struggle. We find the Buddhist reply to that in the
Agga*ññ*a Sutta of the Dîgha, in many respects one of the most
interesting and instructive of all the Dialogues{3}. It is a kind

{1. Literally 'are the best colour' (va*nn*a, with reference to the
well-known classification into four va*nn*as; neither of which was a
caste, referred to above).

2\. This Madhura Sutta has now been edited and translated, with valuable
introduction and notes, by Mr. Robert Chalmers, in the Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society, 1894.

3\. The larger portion of this Sutta (from the beginning of the genesis
part down to the election of the first king) is also preserved in the
Mahâvastu. See Senart's edition, vol. i, pp. 338-348. The reading
agninya*m* (p. 340, 17, &c.) represents the Pâli agga*ññ*am.}

<span id="p. 106">{p. 106}</span>

of Buddhist book of Genesis. In it the pretensions of the Brahmans are
put forward in the same terms as those just quoted above from the
Madhura Sutta.

   Gotama replies that they make these claims in forgetfulness of the
past. The claims have no basis in fact. It is righteousness (dhamma) and
not class distinction (va*nn*a) that makes the real difference between
man and man{1}. Do we not daily see Brahman women with child and bearing
sons just like other folk? How can they then say that they are born of
God? And as to their origin, when the evolution of the world began,
beings were at first immaterial, feeding on joy, giving light from
themselves, passing through the air. There was thick darkness round
about them, and neither sun nor moon, nor stars, nor sex, nor measures
of time. Then the earth rose in the midst of the waters, beautiful as
honey in taste and colour and smell, and the beings, eating thereof,
lost their brightness, and then sun and moon and stars appeared, and
time began to run. And then also their bodies became more coarse and
material, and differences of complexion (va*nn*a) became manifest among
them. Then some prided themselves, and despised others, on the ground of
their finer complexion. And thereupon the fine-tasting earth ceased to
be so.

   Then successively fine moss, and sweet creepers, and delicate rice
appeared, and each time the beings ate thereof with a similar result.
Then differences of sex appeared; and households were formed; and the
lazy stored up the rice, instead of gathering it each evening and
morning; and the rights of property arose, and were infringed. And when
lusts were felt, and thefts committed, the beings, now become men, met
together, and chose certain men, differing from the others in no wise
except in virtue (dhamma), to restrain the evil doers by blame or fines
or banishment. These were the first Kshatriyas. And others they chose to
restrain the evil dispositions which led to the evil doing. And these
were the first Brahmans, differing from the others in no wise, except
only in virtue (dhamma).

   Then certain others, to keep their households going, and maintain
their wives, started occupations of various kinds. And these were the
first vessas. And some abandoned their homes and became the first
recluses (sama*n*as). But all were alike in origin, and the only
distinction between them was in virtue. And the highest of them all was
acknowledged

<span class="small">{1. The words here are quoted in the Milinda, vol.
i, p. 229 of my translation.}</span>

<span id="p. 107">{p. 107}</span>

to be the Arahat, who had made himself so by the destruction of the Four
Mental Intoxications (the Âsavas) and by breaking the bonds that tied
him to rebirths; the man who had laid aside every burden, who had lived
the life, had accomplished all that had to be done, had gained his end,
and by the highest knowledge was set free!

   We may not accept the historical accuracy of this legend. Indeed a
continual note of good-humoured irony runs through the whole story, with
its fanciful etymologies of the names of the four va*nn*â; and the aroma
of it would be lost on the hearer who took it *au grand sérieux*. But it
reveals a sound and healthy insight, and is much nearer to the actual
facts than the Brahman legend it was intended to replace.

   Had the Buddha's views on the whole question won the day--and widely
shared, as they were, by others, they very nearly prevailed--the
evolution of social grades and distinctions would have gone on in India
on lines similar to those it followed in the West, and the caste system
of India would never have been built up{1}.

<span class="small">{1. There is an admirable little book by M. Senart
on the origin of caste, on the Brahman views about it, and on the
present actual facts of caste in India, entitled 'Les Castes dans
I'Inde.' Dr. Fick also in his 'Sociale Gliederung im nordöstlichen
Indien zu Buddha's Zeit' has collected the evidence found in the
*G*âtaka book, and analysed it with great skill. Similar monographs on
the Pi*t*akas, and on the Epics, are much to be desired.}</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: III. Amba*tth*a Sutta](dob-03tx)
