<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-08in) [Next](dob-09in)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 223">{p. 223}</span>

## VIII. KASSAPA-SÎHANÂDA SUTTA.

### \[THE NAKED ASCETIC.\]

   <span id="text p. 161">\[161\]</span> 1. Thus have I heard. The
Blessed One was once dwelling at Ugu*ññ*â, in the Ka*nn*akatthala
deer-park{1}. Now Kassapa, a naked ascetic, came to where the Exalted
One was, and exchanged with him the greetings and compliments of
civility and courtesy, and stood respectfully aside. And, so standing,
he said to the Exalted One:

   2. 'I have heard it said, O Gotama, thus: "The Sama*n*a Gotama
disparages all penance; verily he reviles and finds fault with every
ascetic, with every one who lives a hard life." Now those, O Gotama, who
said this, were they therein repeating Gotama's words, and not reporting
him falsely? Are they announcing, as a minor tenet of his, a matter
really following from his Dhamma (his system)? Is there nothing in this
opinion of his, so put forward as wrapt up with his system, or as a
corollary from it, that could meet with objection{2}? For we would fain
bring no false accusation against the venerable Gotama.'

   3. 'No, Kassapa. Those who said so were not

{1. Miga-dâye. That is, a place set apart for deer to roam in in safety,
a public park in which no hunting was allowed.

2\. It would, perhaps, be more agreeable to the context if one could
render this idiomatic phrase: 'Is there anything in this opinion of
theirs as to his system, or as to this corollary they have drawn from
it, which amounts to being a matter he would object to?' But I do not
see how this could be reconciled with the syntax of the Pâli sentence.
And Buddhaghosa takes it as rendered above, summarising it in the words:
'Is your opinion herein altogether free from blame?'}

<span id="p. 224">{p. 224}</span>

following my words, On the contrary, they were reporting me falsely. and
at variance with the fact,

   <span id="text p. 162">\[162\]</span> 'Herein, O Kassapa, I am wont
to be aware, with vision bright and purified, seeing beyond what men can
see, how some men given to asceticism, living a hard life, are reborn,
on the dissolution of the body, after death, into some unhappy, fallen
state of misery and woe; while others, living just so, are reborn into
some happy state, or into a heavenly world--how some men given to
asceticism, but living a life less hard, are equally reborn, on the
dissolution of the body, after death into some unhappy, fallen state of
misery and woe; while others, living just so, are reborn in some happy
state, or into a heavenly world. How then could I, O Kassapa, who am
thus aware, as they really are, of the states whence men have come, and
whither they will go, as they pass away from one form of existence, and
take shape in another,--how could I disparage all penance; or bluntly
revile and find fault with every ascetic, with every one who lives a
life that is hard?

   4. Now there are, O Kassapa, certain recluses and Brahmans who are
clever, subtle, experiences in controversy, hair splitters, who go
about, one would think, breaking itno pieces by teir wisdom the
speculations of their adversaries. And as between them and me there is,
as to some points, agreement, and as to some points, not. As to some of
those things they approve, we also approve thereof. As to some of those
things they disapprove, we also disapprove thereof. As to some of the
things they approve, we disapprove thereof. As to some of the things
they disapprove, we approve thereof. And some things we approve of, so
do they. And some things we disapprove of, so do they <span
id="text p. 163">\[163\]</span> And some things we approve, they do not.
And some things we disapprove of, they approve of.

   5. 'And I went to them, and said: "As for those things, my friends,
on which we do not agree, let us leave them alone. As to those things on
which we

<span id="p. 225">{p. 225}</span>

agree, let the wise put questions about them, ask for reasons as to
them, talk them over, with or to their teacher, with or to their fellow
disciples; saying: 'Those conditions of heart, Sirs, which are evil or
accounted as evil among you, which are blameworthy or accounted as such
among you, which are insufficient for the attainment of Arahatship, or
accounted as such among you, depraved or accounted as such among
you--who is it who conducts himself as one who has more absolutely put
them away from him, the Sama*n*a Gotama, or the other venerable ones,
the teachers of schools?'"

   6. 'Then it may well be, O Kassapa, that the wise, so putting
questions one to the other, asking for reasons, talking the matter over,
should say: "The Sama*n*a Gotama conducts himself as one who has
absolutely put those conditions away from him; whereas the venerable
ones, the other teachers of schools, have done so only partially." Thus
is it, O Kassapa, that the wise, so putting questions one to the other,
asking for reasons, talking the matter over, would, for the most part,
speak in praise of us therein.

   7. 'And again, O Kassapa, let the wise put questions one to another,
ask for reasons, talk the matter over, with or to their teacher, with or
to their fellow disciples, saying: "Those conditions of heart, Sirs,
which are good or accounted as such among you, which are blameless or
accounted as such among you, which suffice to lead a man to ArahatShip
or are accounted as sufficient among you, which are pure or accounted as
such among you--who is it who conducts himself as one who has more
completely taken them upon him, the Sama*n*a Gotama, or the other
venerable ones, the teachers of schools?"

   8. 'Then it may wen be, O Kassapa, that the wise, so putting
questions one to the other, asking for reasons, talking the matter over,
should say: "The Sama*n*a Gotama conducts himself as one who has
completely taken these conditions upon him, whereas the venerable

<span id="p. 226">{p. 226}</span>

ones, the other teachers of schools, have done so only partially." Thus
it is, O Kassapa, that the wise, so putting questions one to the other,
asking for reasons, talking the matter over, would, for the most part,
speak in praise of us therein.

   <span id="text p. 164">\[164\]</span> 9-12. '\[And further, also, O
Kassapa, the wise would, for the most part, acknowledge that the body of
my disciples were more addicted to that which is generally acknowledged
to be good, refrain themselves more completely from that which is
generally acknowledged to be evil, than the venerable ones, the
disciples of other teachers{1}.\]

   <span id="text p. 165">\[165\]</span> 13. 'Now there is, O Kassapa, a
way, there is a method which if a man follow he will of himself, both
see and know that: "The Sama*n*a Gotama is one who speaks in due season,
speaks that which is, that which redounds to advantage, that which is
the Norm (the Dhamma), that which is the law of self-restraint (the
Vinaya)."

   'And what, Kassapa, is that way, what that method, which if a man
follow, he will, of himself, know that, and see that. Verily it is this
Noble Eightfold Path, that is to say: Right Views, Right Aspirations,
Right Speech, Right Action, Right Mode of Livelihood, Right Effort,
Right Mindfulness, and Right Rapture.

   'This, Kassapa, is that way, this that method, which if a man follow,
he will of himself, both know and see that: "The Sama*n*a Gotama is one
who speaks in due season, speaks that which is, that which redounds to
profit, that which is the Norm, that which is the law of
self-restraint."'

   14. And when he had spoken thus, Kassapa, the naked ascetic, said to
the Exalted One:

   'And so also, Gotama, are the following ascetic practices accounted,
in the opinion of some Sama*n*as

<span class="small">{1. The four paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8 are here
repeated in full in the text with the change only of reading '*the body
of the disciples of the Sama*n*a Gotama*' instead of '*the Sama*n*a
Gotama,*' and similarly for the other teachers.}</span>

<span id="p. 227">{p. 227}</span>

and Brâhma*n*as, as Sama*n*a-ship and Brâhma*n*a-ship{1}.--<span
id="text p. 166">\[166\]</span>.

   'He goes naked:--

   'He is of loose habits (performing his bodily functions, and eating
food, in a standing posture, not crouching down, or sitting down, as
well-bred people do):--

   'He licks his hands clean (after eating, instead of washing them, as
others do){2}:--

   '(When on his rounds for alms, if politely requested to step nearer,
or to wait a moment, in order that food may be put into his bowl), he
passes stolidly on (lest he should incur the guilt of following another
person's word):--

   'He refuses to accept food brought (to him, before he has started on
his daily round for alms):--

   'He refuses to accept (food) if told that it has been prepared)
especially for him:--

   'He refuses to accept any invitation (to call on his rounds at any
particular house, or to pass along any particular street) or to go to
any particular place):--

   'He will not accept (food taken direct) from the mouth of the pot or
pans (in which it is cooked; lest

{1. The following description of the naked ascetic recurs in the
Ma*ggh*ima I, 77, 238, 342; II, 161, and in the Puggala Pan*ññ*atti IV,

2\. It consists of a string of enigmatic phrases which are interpreted
in my translation, according to Buddhaghosa here, and the unknown
commentator on the Puggala. These two are very nearly word for word the
same. The differences are just such as would arise when two authors are
drawing upon ope uniform tradition.

It would seem from M. I, 238, if compared with I, 524, that it was the
Â*g*îvakas (see note above on [p. 71](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2071)) who were
more especially known for the practice of these forms of asceticism: and
from M. I, 167 that it was these forms that had been followed by Gotama
himself before his eyes were opened, before he attained to Nirvâ*n*a.
(M. I, 167.)

2\. Hatthâpalekhano. The tradition was in doubt about this word. Both
commentators give an alternative rendering: 'He scratched himself clean
with his hand after stooling.' And the Puggala Pa*ññ*atti commentator
adds a very curious piece of old folklore as his reason for this
explanation.

3\. Ka*l*opi; not in Childers. It no doubt means some cooking vessel of
a particular shape, but the exact signification, and the derivation of
it are both unknown. It may possibly be a Kolarian on Dravidian word.
Many centuries afterwards karo*t*a and karo*t*i were included in the
Vyutpatti, and the Amara Ko*s*a, as meaning 'vessel.' It is of course
out of the question that a word of the fifth century B. C. can be
derived from either of them; but they are evidently the descendants of
allied forms. Childers gives another form khalopî on the authority of
the Abhidhâna Padîpikâ (twelfth century), verse 456, where it occurs in
a list of names of pots. Another--kha*l*opi--is put in his text by
Trenckner at Milinda, p. 107, from one MS., but the other two differ.
Both commentators paraphrase it here by ukkhali pa*kkh*i vaâ.}

<span id="p. 228">{p. 228}</span>

those vessels should be struck or scraped, on his account, with the
spoon):--

   '(He will) not (accept food placed) within the threshold (lest it
should have been placed there specially for him):--

   '(He will) not (accept food placed) among the sticks{1} (lest it
should have been placed there specially for him):--

   '(He will) not (accept food place) among the pestles (lest it should
have been placed there specially for him):--

   'When two persons are eating together he wil not accept (food, taken
from what they are eating, if offered to him by only one of the two):--

   'He will not accept food from a woman with child (lest the child
should suffer want):--

   'He will not accept food from a woman giving suck (lest the milk
should grow less):--

   'He will not accept food from a woman in intercourse with a man{2}
(lest their intercourse be hindered):--

{1. Na Da*nd*a-m-antara*m*. That is, perhaps, among the firewood; but
the expression is not clear. The Commentaries only give the reason. Dr.
Neumann (on Ma*ggh*ima I, 77) has, 'he does not spy beyond the lattice'
or perhaps 'beyond the bars of the grate' (spähte nicht über das
Gitter), but this seems putting a great deal of meaning into the sticks,
and not sufficiently reproducing the force of antara*m*. And how can
pa*t*iga*n*hâti mean 'spy'? We have, no doubt, to fill out an elliptical
phrase. But it is just such cases as those in this paragraph where we
are more likely to go right if we follow the ancient tradition.

2\. Na purisantara-gatâya. The commentators only give the reason. On the
meaning, of the word compare *G*ât. I, 290.}

<span id="p. 229">{p. 229}</span>

   'He will not accept food collected (by the faithful in time of
drought){1}:--

   'He will not accept food where a dog is standing by (lest the dog
should lose a meal):--

   'He will not accept food where flies are swarming round (lest the
flies should suffer):--

   'He will not accept fish, nor meat, nor strong drink, nor
intoxicants, nor gruel{2}:--

   'He is a "One-houser" (turning back from his round as soon as he has
received an alms at any one house), a "One-mouthful-man":--

   'Or he is a "Two-houser," a "Two-mouthful-man":--

   'Or he is a "Seven-houser," a "Seven-mouthful-man":--

   'He keeps himself going on only one alms{3}, or only two, or so on up
to only seven:--

   'He takes food only once a day, or once every two days, or so on up
to once every seven days. Thus does he dwell addicted to the practice of
taking food according to rule, at regular intervals, up to even half a
month.

   'And so also, Gotama, are the following ascetic practices accounted,
in the opinion of some Sama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, as Sama*n*aship and
Brâhma*n*aship:--

{1. Na sa*m*khittisu. Both meaning and derivation are uncertain. Dr.
Neumann has 'not from the dirty.'

2\. Thusodaka. It is not fermented. The traditional interpretation here
is: 'a drink called Suvîraka*m* (after the country Suvîra) made of the
constituents, especially the husk, of all cereals.' The use of salt
Sovîraka as a cure for wind in the stomach is mentioned at Mahâ Vagga
VI, 16. 3; and it was allowed, as a beverage, if mixed with water, to
the Buddhist Bhikkhus. In Vimâna Vatthu XIX, 8 it is mentioned in a list
of drinks given to them. Childers calls it 'sour gruel' following
Subhûti in the first edition (1865) of the Abhidhâna Padîpikâ (verse
460), but in the Abh. Pad. Sûkî (published in 1893) Subhûti renders it
'kongey'; something of the same sort as barley water. Buddhaghosa adds:
'Everyone agrees that it is wrong to drink intoxicants. These ascetics
see sin even in this.' The corresponding Sanskrit word, tusodaka, is
found only in Su*s*ruta.

3\. Datti. 'A small pot,' says Buddhaghosa, 'in which special titbits
are put aside, and kept.'}

<span id="p. 230">{p. 230}</span>

   'He feeds on potherbs, on wild rice{1}, on Nivâra seeds, on leather
parings{2}, on the water-plant called Ha*t*a, on the fine powder which
adheres to the grains of rice beneath the husk, on the discarded scum of
boiling rice, on the flour of oil-seeds{3}, on grasses, on cow-dung, on
fruits and roots from the woods, on fruits that have fallen of
themselves.

   'And so also, Gotama, are the following ascetic practices accounted,
in the opinion of some Sama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, as Sama*n*aship and
Brâhma*n*aship:--

   'He wears coarse hempen cloth:--

   'He wears coarse cloth of interwoven hemp and other materials:--

   'He wears cloths taken from corpses and thrown away{4}:--

   'He wears clothing made of rags picked up from a dust heap:--

   'He wears clothing made of the bark of the Tiritaka tree{6}:--

   <span id="text p. 167">\[167\]</span> 'He wears the natural hide of a
black antelope:--

   'He wears a dress made of a network of strips of a black antelope's
hide{6}:--

   'He wears a dress made of Kusa grass fibre:--

   'He wears a garment of bark:--

{1. Samaka, not in Childers. See M. I, 156. *G*ât. II, 365; III, 144.

2\. Daddula, not in Childers. See M. I, 78, 156, 188.

3\. Pi*ññ*aka, not in Childers. See Vin. IV, 341. The commentators here
merely say: 'This is plain.'

4\. *Kh*ava-dussâni pi dhâreti. The commentators give an alternative
explanation: 'Clothing made of Eraka grass tied together.' Was such
clothing then used to wrap dead bodies in?

5\. Tirîtâni pi dhâreti. This custom is referred to at Mahâ Vagga VIII,
29, as having been there followed by ascetics. The use of such garments
is there forbidden to the Bhikkhus.

6\. A*g*inakkhipam pi dhâreti. Buddhaghosa gives here an explanation
different from that given by him on Vin. III, 34 (quoted 'Vinaya Texts,'
II, 247), where the word also occurs. The Puggala Pa*ññ*atti gives both
explanations as possible. Khipa at A. I, 33 means some sort of net.
A*g*inakkhipa is referred to at S. I, 117 as the characteristic dress of
an old Brahman.}

<span id="p. 231">{p. 231}</span>

   'He wears a garment made of small slips or slabs of wood (shingle)
pieced together{1}:--

   'He wears, as a garment, a blanket of human hair{2}:--

   'He wears, as a garment, a blanket made of horses' tails{3}:--

   'He wears, as a garment, a blanket made of the feathers of owls:--

   'He is a "plucker-out-of-hair-and-beard," addicted to the practice of
plucking out both hair and beard:--

   'He is a "stander-up," rejecting the use of a seat:--

   'He is a "croucher-down-on-the-heels," addicted to exerting himself
when crouching down on his heels{4}:--

   'He is a "bed-of-thorns-man," putting iron spikes or natural thorns
under the skin on which he sleeps{5}:--

   'He uses a plank bed:--

   'He sleeps on the bare ground{6}:--

   'He sleeps always on one side:--

   'He is a "dust-and-dirt-wearer," (smearing his body with oil he
stands where dust clouds blow, and lets the dust adhere to his body):--

   'He lives and sleeps in the open air{7}:--

   'Whatsoever seat is offered to him, that he accepts

{1. Phalaka-*k*îram pi dhâreti. See Mahâ Vagga VIII, 28. 2; *K*ulla
Vagga V, 29. 3.

2\. So of A*g*ita of the garment of hair, above, p. 73. Both
commentators say the hair is human hair.

3\. Vala-kâmbalam pi dhâreti. So the commentators here. The alternative
rendering given by us at 'Vinaya Texts,' II, 247, 'skin of a wild
beast,' should be corrected accordingly. That would be vâ*l*a, and all
the passages where our word occurs read vâla. Comp. A. I, 240.

4\. Ukku*t*ikappadhâna. Compare Dhp. 141, 2 = Divy. 339. The commentator
says he progressed in this posture by a series of hops. The posture is
impossible to Europeans, who, if they crouch down on their heels, cannot
keep their balance when the heels touch the ground. But natives of India
will sit so for hours without fatigue.

5\. Both commentators add: 'or stands, or walks up and down.'

6\. Tha*nd*ila-seyyam pi kappeti. The Burmese MSS. and Buddhaghosa, but
not the Siamese edition, read ta*nd*ila. So does my MS. at Dhp. 141. The
Puggala omits the word. S. IV, 118, and Mil. 351 have the *th*.

7\. Abbhokâsiko *k*a hoti. There is no comment on this. But compare
*G*ât. IV, 8; Mil. 342.}

<span id="p. 232">{p. 232}</span>

(without being offended at its being not dignified enough):--

   'He is a "filth-eater," addicted to the practice of feeding on the
four kinds of filth (cow-dung, cow's urine, ashes, and clay){1}:--

   'He is a "non-drinker," addicted to the practice of never drinking
cold water (lest he should injure the souls in it){2}:--

   'He is an "evening-third-man," addicted to the practice of going down
into water thrice a day (to wash away his sins).

   15. 'If a man, O Kassapa, should go naked, and be of loose habits,
and lick his hands clean with his tongue, and do and be all those other
things you gave in detail, down to his being addicted to the practice of
taking food, according to rule, at regular intervals up to even half a
month--if he does all this, and the state of blissful attainment in
conduct, in heart, in intellect, have not been practised by him,
realised by him, then is he far from Sama*n*aship, far from
Brâhma*n*aship. But from the time, O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has
cultivated the heart of love that knows no anger, that knows no
illwill--from the time when, by the destruction of the deadly
intoxications (the lusts of the flesh, the lust after future life, and
the defilements of delusion and ignorance), he dwells in that
emancipation of heart, that emancipation of mind, that is free from
those intoxications, and that he, while yet in this visible world, has
come to realise and know-from that time, O Kassapa, is it that the
Bhikkhu is called a Sama*n*a, is called a Brâhma*n*a!'

{1. Veka*t*iko. So of an Â*g*îvaka at *G*ât. I, 390, and compare 'Vinaya
Texts,' II, 59. My rendering of the word at Mil. 259 ought, I think, to
be corrected accordingly. But why was not this entered among the foods
above, where one of them was already mentioned? It looks like an
afterthought, or a gloss.

2\. Apânako. Compare my Milinda II, 85 foll. on this curious belief.

3\. That is, of course, a true recluse, an actual Arahat. Throughout
these sections Gotama is purposely at cross purposes with his
questioner. Kassapa uses the word Brâhma*n*a in his own sense; that is,
not in the ordinary sense, but of the ideal *religieux*. Gotama, in his
answer, keeps the word; but he means. something quite different, he
means an Arahat. On the persistent way in which the Pi*t*aka texts try
to put this new meaning into the word, see above, in the [Introduction
to the Kû*t*adanta](dob-05in).}

<span id="p. 233">{p. 233}</span>

   'And if a man, O Kassapa, feed on potherbs, on wild rice, on Nivâra
seeds, or on any of those other things you gave in detail down to fruits
that have fallen of themselves, and the state of blissful attainment in
conduct, in heart, in intellect, have not been practised by him,
realised by him, then is he far from Sama*n*aship, far from
Brâhma*n*aship. But from the time, O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has
cultivated the heart of love that knows no anger, that knows no
illwill--from the time when, by the destruction of the deadly
intoxications (the lusts of the flesh, the lust after future life, and
the defilements of delusion and ignorance), he dwells in that
emancipation of heart, that emancipation of mind, that is free from
those intoxications, and that he, while yet in this visible world, has
come to realise and know--from that time, O Kassapa, is it that the
Bhikkhu is called a Sama*n*a, is called a Brâhma*n*a!

   <span id="text p. 168">\[168\]</span> 'And if a man, O Kassapa, wear
coarse hempen cloth, or carry out all or any of those other practices
you gave in detail down to bathing in water three times a day, and the
state of blissful attainment in conduct, in heart, in intellect, have
not been practised by him, realised by him, then is he far from
Sama*n*aship, far from Brâhma*n*aship. But from the time, O Kassapa,
when a Bhikkhu has cultivated the heart of love that knows no anger,
that knows no illwill--from the time when, by the destruction of the
deadly intoxications (the lusts of the flesh, the lust after future
life, and the defilements of delusion and ignorance), he dwells in that
emancipation of heart, that emancipation of mind, that is free from
those intoxications, and that he, while yet in this visible world, has
come to realise and know--from that time, O Kassapa, is it that the
Bhikkhu is called a Sama*n*a, is called a Brâhma*n*a!'

<span id="p. 234">{p. 234}</span>

   <span id="text p. 169">\[169\]</span> 16. And when he had thus
spoken, Kassapa, the naked ascetic, said to the Blessed One: 'How hard
then, Gotama, must Sama*n*aship be to gain, how hard must Brâhma*n*aship
be!'

   'That, Kassapa, is a common saying in the world that the life of a
Sama*n*a and of a Brâhma*n*a is hard to lead. But if the hardness, the
very great hardness, of that life depended merely on this ascetism, on
the carrying out of any or all of those practices you have detailed,
then it would not be fitting to say that the life of the Sama*n*a, of
the Brâhma*n*a, was hard to lead. It would be quite possible for a
householder, or for the son of a householder, or for any one, down to
the slave girl who carries the water-jar, to say: "Let me now go naked,
let me become of low habits," and so on through all the items of those
three lists of yours. But since, Kassapa, quite apart from these
matters, quite apart from all kinds of penance, the life is hard, very
hard to lead; therefore is it that it is fitting to say: "How hard must
Sama*n*aship be to gain, how hard must Brâhma*n*aship be!" For from the
time, O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has cultivated the heart of love that
knows no anger, that knows no illwill--from the time when, by the
destruction of the deadly intoxications (the lusts of the flesh, the
lust after future life, and the defilements of delusion and ignorance),
he dwells in that emancipation of heart, in that emancipation of mind,
that is free from those intoxications, and that he, while yet in this
visible world, has come to realise and know--from that time, O Kassapa,
is it that the Bhikkhu is called a Sama*n*a, is called a Brâhma*n*a{1}!'

   <span id="text p. 170">\[170\]</span> 17. And when he had thus
spoken, Kassapa, the naked ascetic, said to the Blessed One: 'Hard is
it, Gotama, to know when a man is a Sama*n*a, hard to know when a man is
a Brâhma*n*a!'

   'That, Kassapa, is a common saying in the world

<span class="small">{1. This paragraph, like the last and like the next,
is, in the Pâli, broken up into three sections, one for each of the
three lists or penances.}</span>

<span id="p. 235">{p. 235}</span>

that it is hard to know a Sama*n*a, hard to know a Brâhma*n*a. But if
being a Sama*n*a, if being a Brâhma*n*a, depended merely on this
asceticism, on the carrying out of any or each of those practices you
have detailed, then it would not be fitting to say that a Sama*n*a is
hard to recognise, a Brâhma*n*a is hard to recognise. It would be quite
possible for a householder, or for the son of a householder, or for any
one down to the slave girl who carries the water-jar, to know: "This man
goes naked, or is of loose habits, or licks his fingers with his
tongue," and so on through all the items of those three lists of yours.
But since, Kassapa, quite apart from these matters, quite apart from all
kinds of penance, it is hard to recognise a Sama*n*a, hard to recognise
a Brâhma*n*a, therefore is it fitting to say: "Hard is it to know when a
man is a Sama*n*a, to know when a man is a Brâhma*n*a!" For from the
time, O Kassapa, when a Bhikkhu has cultivated the heart of love that
knows no anger, that knows no illwill--from the time when, by the
destruction of the deadly intoxications (the lusts of the flesh, the
lust after future life, and the defilements of delusion and ignorance),
he dwells in that emancipation of heart, in that emancipation of mind,
that is free from those intoxications, and that he, while yet in this
visible world, has come to realise and know--from that time, O Kassapa,
is it that the Bhikkhu is called a Sama*n*a, is called a Brâhma*n*a!'

   <span id="text p. 171">\[171\]</span> 18. And when he had thus
spoken, Kassapa, the naked ascetic, said to the Blessed One: 'What then,
Gotama, is that blissful attainment in conduct, in heart, and in mind?'

   \[The answer <span id="text p. 171-173">\[171-173\]</span> is all the
paragraphs in the Sâma*nn*a-phala translated above, and here divided as
follows:--

 

Under Conduct (Sila).

   1. The paragraphs on the appearance of a Buddha, the conversion of a
layman, his entry into the Order (§§ 40-42 above, [pp.
78-79](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2078)).

<span id="p. 236">{p. 236}</span>

   2. The Sîlas, as in the Brahma-*g*âla, [§§
8-27](dob-01tx.htm#text%20p.%204). See above, [pp. 57,
58](dob-02in.htm#p.%2057).

   3. The paragraph on Confidence (§ 63 above, [p.
79](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2079)).

 

Under the heart (*K*itta).

   4. The paragraph on 'Guarded is the door of his senses' (§ 64 above,
[pp. 79, 80](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2079)).

   5. The paragraph on 'Mindful and Self-possessed' (§ 65 above, [pp.
80, 81](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2080)).

   6. The paragraph on Simplicity of Life, being content with little (§
66 above, [p. 81](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2081)).

   7. The paragraphs on Emancipation from the Five
Hindrances--covetousness, ill-temper, laziness, worry, and perplexity
(§§ 67-74 above, [pp. 82-84](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2082)).

   8. The paragraph on the Joy and Peace, that, as a result of this
emancipation, fills his whole being (§ 75 above, [p.
84](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2084)).

   9. The paragraphs on the Four Ecstasies (*Gh*ânas,--§§ 75-82 above,
[pp. 84-86](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2084)).

 

Under Intelligence (Pa*ññ*â).

   10. The paragraphs on the Insight arising from Knowledge
(*Ñ*â*n*a-dassana,--§§ 83, 84 above, [pp. 86,
87](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2086).)

   11. The paragraphs on the power of projecting mental images (§§ 85,
86 above, [p. 87](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2087)).

   12. The paragraphs on the five modes of special intuition
(abhi*ññ*â):--

|            |                                              |
|------------|----------------------------------------------|
|       *a*. | The practice of Iddhi.                       |
|       *b*. | Hearing heavenly sounds.                     |
|       *c*. | Knowledge of other people's thoughts.        |
|       *d*. | Knowledge of one's own previous births.      |
|       *e*. | Knowledge of other people's previous births. |

   13. The realisation of the Four Noble Truths, the destruction of the
Intoxications, and the attainment of Arahatship.\]

   'And there is no other state of blissful attainment

<span id="p. 237">{p. 237}</span>

in conduct and heart and mind which is, Kassapa, higher and sweeter than
this{1}.

   <span id="text p. 174">\[174\]</span> 21. 'Now there are some
recluses and Brahmans, Kassapa, who lay emphasis on conduct. They speak,
in various ways, in praise of morality. But so far as regards the really
noble, the highest conduct, I am aware of no one who is equal to myself,
much less superior. And it is I who have gone the furthest therein; that
is, in the highest conduct (of the Path).

   'There are some recluses and Brahmans, Kassapa, who lay emphasis on
self-mortification, and scrupulous care of others. They speak in various
ways in praise of self-torture and of austere scrupulousness. But so far
as regards the really noblest, the highest sort of self-mortification
and scrupulous regard for others, I am aware of no one else who is equal
to myself, much less superior. And it is I who have gone the furthest
therein; that is, in the highest sort of scrupulous regard for
others{2}.

   'There are some recluses and Brahmans, Kassapa, who lay emphasis on
intelligence. They speak, in various ways, in praise of intelligence.
But so far as regards the really noblest, the highest intelligence, I am
aware of no one else who is equal to myself, much less superior. And it
is I who have gone the furthest therein; that is, in the highest
Wisdom{3} (of the Path).

{1. 'And by this,' says Buddhaghosa, 'he means Arahatship. For the
doctrine of the Exalted One has Arahatship as its end.'

2\. At A<u>n</u>guttara II, 200 (compare M. I, 240-242) it is said that
those addicted to tapo-gigu*kkh*â are incapable of Arahatship. Gotama
must either, therefore, be here referring to his years of penance before
he attained Nirvâ*n*a under the Tree of Wisdom; or he must be putting a
new meaning into the expression, and taking 'the higher scrupulousness'
in the sense of the self-control of the Path. Probably both are implied.

Gigu*kkh*â. is translated by Childers as 'disgust, loathing,' following
the Sanskrit dictionaries. The example of it given at M. I, 78 is 'being
so mindful, in going out or coming in, that pity is stirred up in one
even towards a drop of water, to the effect that: "may I not bring
injury on the minute creatures therein."' It comes therefore to very
nearly the same thing as ahi*m*sâ.

3\. Adhipa*ññ*â. From A<u>n</u>guttara II, 93 it is clear that this is
the wisdom of the higher stages only of the Path, not of Arahatship. For
the man who has adhipa*ññ*â has then to strive on till he attains to
Arahatship. Puggala pa*ññ*atti IV, 26 is not really inconsistent with
this.}

<span id="p. 239">{p. 239}</span>

   'There are some recluses and Brahmans, Kassapa, who lay emphasis on
emancipation. They speak, in various ways, in praise of emancipation.
But so far as regards the really noblest, the highest emancipation, I am
aware of no one else who is equal to myself, much less superior. And it
is I who have gone the furthest therein; that is, in the most complete
emancipation (of the Path).

   <span id="text p. 175">\[175\]</span> 22. 'Now it may well be,
Kassapa, that the recluses of adverse schools may say: "The Sama*n*a
Gotama utters forth a lion's roar; but it is in solitude that he roars,
not where men are assembled." Then should they be answered: "Say not so.
The Sama*n*a Gotama utters his lion's roar, and that too in the
assemblies where men congregate."

   'And it may well be, Kassapa, that the recluses of adverse schools
should thus, in succession, raise each of the following objections:--

   "But it is not in full confidence that he roars:--

   "But men put no questions to him:--

   "But even when questioned, he cannot answer:--

   "But even when he answers, he gives no satisfaction by his exposition
of the problem put:--

   "But men do not hold his opinion worthy to be listened to:--

   "But even when men listen to his word, they experience no conviction
therefrom:--

   "But even when convinced, men give no outward sign of their faith:--

   "But even when they give such outward sign, they arrive not at the
truth:--

   "But even when they arrive at the truth they cannot carry it out:"--

   'Then in each such case, Kassapa, they should be answered as before,
until the answer runs:--"Say not so. For the Sama*n*a Gotama both utters
forth his

<span id="p. 239">{p. 239}</span>

lion's roar, and that too in assemblies where men congregate, and in
full confidence in the justice of his claim, and men put their questions
to him on that, and on being questioned he expounds the problem put, and
by his exposition thereof satisfaction arises in their hearts, and they
hold it worthy to listen to his word, and in listening to it they
experience conviction, and being convinced they give outward signs
thereof, and they penetrate even to the truth, and having grasped it
they are able also to carry the truth out!

   23. 'I was staying once, Kassapa, at Râ*g*agaha, on the hill called
the Vulture's Peak. And there a follower of the same mode of life as
yours, by name <span id="text p. 176">\[176\]</span> Nigrodha, asked me
a question about the higher forms of austere scrupulousness of life. And
having been thus questioned I expounded the problem put. And when I had
thus answered what he asked, he was well pleased, as if with a great
joy{1}:

   'And who, Sir, on hearing the doctrine of the Exalted One, would not
be well pleased, as if with a great joy. I also, who have now heard the
doctrine of the Exalted One, am thus well pleased, even as if with a
great joy. Most excellent, Lord, are the words of thy mouth, most
excellent, just as if a man were to set up what has been thrown down, or
were to reveal that which has been hidden away, or were to point out the
right road to him who has gone astray, or were to bring a lamp into the
darkness, so that those who have eyes could see external forms--just
even so, Lord, has the truth been made known to me, in many a figure, by
the Exalted One. And I, even I, betake myself as my guide to the Exalted
One, and to the Doctrine, and to the Brotherhood. I would fain, Lord,
renounce the world under the Exalted One; I would fain be admitted to
his Order.'

   24. 'Whosoever, Kassapa, having formerly been a member of another
school, wishes to renounce the world and receive initiation in this
doctrine and

<span class="small">{1. The whole conversation will be translated below.
It forms the subject of the Udumbarika Sîhanâda Suttanta, No. 25 in the
Dîgha.}</span>

<span id="p. 240">{p. 240}</span>

discipline, he temains in probation for four months{1}. And at the end
of the four months the brethren, exalted in spirit, give him initiation,
and receive him into the Order, raising him up into the state of a
Bhikkhu. But nevertheless I recognise, in such cases, the distinction
there may be between individuals.'

   'Since, Lord, the four months' probation is the regular custom, I
too, then, will remain on probation for that time. Then let the
brethren, exalted in spirit, give me initiation and raise me up into the
state of a Bhikkhu.' \[177\]

   So Kassapa, the naked ascetic, received initiation, and was admitted
to membership of the Order under the Exalted One. And from immediately
after his initiation the venerable Kassapa remained alone and separate,
earnest, zealous, and master of himself. And e'er long he attained to
that supreme goal{2} for the sake of which clansmen go forth from the
household life into the homeless state: yea, that supreme goal did he,
by himself, and while yet in this visible world, bring himself to the
knowledge of, and continue to realise, and to see face to face. And he
became sure that rebirth was at an end for him, that the higher life had
been fulfilled, that everything that should be done had been
accomplished, and that after this present life there would be no beyond!

   And so the venerable Kassapa became yet another among the Arahats.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the Kassapa-Sihanada Suttanta{3}.

{1. According to the rule laid down in Vinaya I, 69.

2\. That is, Arahatship, Nirvâ*n*a.

3\. The Burmese MSS. call it the Mahâ Sihanâda Sutta, which is also the
name given in the MSS. to the Twelfth Sutta in the Ma*ggh*ima-called
there in the text (p. 83), and in the Milinda (p. 396), the
Lomaha*m*sana Pariyâya. We have had an instance above (p. 55) or several
different names being given, in the text itself, to the same Sutta. And
I had already, in 1880, called attention in my 'Buddhist Birth Stories'
(pp. lx, lxi) to the numerous instances in the *G*âtaka Book of the same
*G*âtaka being known, in the collection itself, by different names. It
is evident that the titles were considered a very secondary matter.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: Introduction to the Po*tth*apâda
Sutta](dob-09in)
