<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-04in) [Next](dob-05in)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 144">{p. 144}</span>

## IV. SO*N*ADA*ND*A SUTTA.

### \[CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE BRAHMAN.\]

   <span id="text p. 111">\[111\]</span> I. Thus have I heard. The
Blessed One once, when going on a tour through the Anga country with a
great multitude of the brethren, with about five hundred brethren,
arrived at *K*ampâ{1}. And there at *K*ampâ he lodged on the bank of the
Gaggarâ Lake{2}.

   Now at that time the Brahman So*n*ada*nd*a was dwelling at *K*ampâ, a
place teeming with life{3}, with much grassland and woodland and water
and corn, on a royal domain granted him by Seniya Bimbisâra, the king of
Magadhâ{4}, as a royal fief, with power over it as if he were the king.

   2. Now the Brahmans and householders of *K*ampâ heard the news: 'They
say that the Sama*n*a Gotama of the Sâkya clan, who went out from a
Sâkya family to adopt the religious life, has now arrived, with a great

{1. *K*ampâ, the capital of Angâ, was on the East bank of the river of
the same name (*G*ât. IV, 454), which formed the Eastern boundary of
Magadhâ. It was close to the modern Bagulpur, about Lat. 24° 10' by
Long. 87°. Like other names of famous places in India, it was used over
again by colonists in the Far East, and there means what we now call
Cochin China and Annam (I-Tsing, p. 58).

2\. So called after Queen Gaggarâ, who had had it excavated, says
Buddhaghosa (Sum. I, 279). He adds that on its banks was a grove or
champaka trees, so well known for the fragrance of their beautiful white
flowers. It was under those trees that the wandering mendicants put up.

3\. Sattussada. The meaning is really quite settled, though Fausböll
wrongly translates ussada 'desire,' and Oldenberg and myself 'uneven,'
at S. N. 783 = Vin. I, 3. See No. 15 in the list of the thirty-two
marks. Also *G*ât. IV, 188 = Dhp. A. 339; *G*ât. IV, 60 = Dhp. A. 95;
*G*ât. IV, 4; P. G. D. 22-44; Asl.307.

4\. In the Buddha's time Angâ was subject to Magadhâ.}

<span id="p. 145">{p. 145}</span>

company of the brethren at *K*ampâ, and is staying there on the shore of
the Gaggarâ Lake. Now regarding that venerable Gotama, such is the high
reputation that has been noised abroad:--That Blessed One is an Arahat,
a fully awakened one, abounding in wisdom and goodness, happy, with
knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to mortals willing to be
led, a teacher for gods and men, a Blessed One, a Buddha. He, by
himself, thoroughly knows and sees, as it were, face to face this
universe,--including the worlds above of the gods, the Brahmas, and the
Mâras, and the world below with its recluses and Brahmans, its princes
and peoples,--and having known it, he makes his knowledge known to
others. The truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in its progress, lovely
in its consummation, doth he proclaim, both in the spirit and in the
letter, the higher life cloth he make known, in all its fullness and in
all its purity.

   'And good is it to pay visits to Arahats like that.'

   <span id="text p. 112">\[112\]</span> And the Brahmans and
householders of *K*ampâ began to leave *K*ampâ in companies and in bands
from each district{1}, so that they could be counted, to go to the
Gaggarâ Lake.

   3. Now at that time So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman had gone apart to the
upper terrace of his house for his siesta, and seeing the people thus go
by, he said to his doorkeeper: 'Why are the people of *K*ampâ going
forth like this towards the Gaggarâ Lake?'

   Then the doorkeeper told him the news. And he said: 'Then, good
doorkeeper, go to the Brahmans and householders of *K*ampâ, and say to
them: "So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman desires them to wait. He will himself
come to see the Sama*n*a Gotama."'

   'Very well, Sir,' said the doorkeeper, and he did so.

   <span id="text p. 113">\[113\]</span> 4. Now at that time there were
about five hundred Brahmans from different kingdoms lodging at *K*ampâ
for some business or other. And when they heard that So*n*ada*nd*a was
intending to visit the

<span class="small">{1. Perhaps in 'companies and separately'; but I
follow Buddhaghosa. Comp. M. I, 231; A. II, 55.}</span>

<span id="p. 146">{p. 146}</span>

Sama*n*a Gotama, they went to So*n*ada*nd*a, and asked whether that was
so.

   'That is my intention, Sirs. I propose to call on the Sama*n*a
Gotama.'

   'Let not the venerable So*n*ada*nd*a do that. It is not fitting for
him to do so. If it were the venerable So*n*ada*nd*a who went to call
upon him, then the venerable So*n*ada*nd*a's reputation would decrease
and the Sama*n*a Gotama's would increase. This is the first reason why
you, Sir, should not call upon him, but he upon you.'

   5. And they laid before So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman in like manner also
other considerations, to wit:

   That he was well born on both sides, of pure descent through the
mother and through the father back through seven generations, with no
slur put upon him, and no reproach, in respect of birth.--

   That he was prosperous, well to do, and rich--

   <span id="text p. 114">\[114\]</span> That he was a repeater (of the
sacred words), knowing the mystic verses by heart, one who had mastered
the Three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual, the phonology, and the
exegesis (as a fourth), and the legends as a fifth, learned in the words
and in the grammar, versed in Lokâyata (Nature-lore), and in the theory
of the signs on the body of a great man--

   That he was handsome, pleasant to look upon, inspiring trust, gifted
with great beauty of complexion, fair in colour, fine in presence{1},
stately{2} to behold--

   That he was virtuous, increased in virtue, gifted with virtue that
had waxed great--

   That he had a pleasant voice and pleasing delivery, and was gifted
with polite address, distinct, not husky{3}, suitable for making clear
the matter in hand--

   That he was the teacher of the teachers of many,

{1. Brahma-va*kk*asî. 'With a body like that of Mahâ Brahmâ,' says
Buddhaghosa (p. 282). The Burmese and Siamese MSS. read va*kkh*a*s*î

2\. Akkhuddâvakâso, for which Buddhaghosa (pp. 282, 284) gives three
contradictory explanations.

3\. Ane*l*agalâya. 'Not slobbering,' says Buddhaghosa.}

<span id="p. 147">{p. 147}</span>

instructing three hundred Brahmans in the repetition of the mystic
verses, and that many young Brahmans, from various directions and
various counties, all craving for the verses, came to learn them by
heart under him--

   That he was aged, old, and well stricken in years, long-lived and
full of days--

   That he was honoured, held of weight, esteemed worthy, venerated and
revered by Seniya Bimbisâra, the king of Magadhâ--

   That he was honoured, held of weight, esteemed worthy, venerated and
revered by Pokkharasâdi, the Brahman--

   That he dwelt at *K*ampâ, a place teeming with life, with much
grassland and woodland and corn, on a royal fief granted him by Seniya
Bimbisâra, the king of Magadhâ, as a royal gift, with power over it as
if he were the king--

   For each of these reasons it was not fitting that he, So*n*ada*nd*a
the Brahman, should call upon the Sama*n*a Gotama, but rather that the
Sama*n*a Gotama should call upon him.

   6. And when they had thus spoken, So*n*ada*nd*a said to them:

   <span id="text p. 115">\[115\]</span> 'Then, Sirs, listen, and hear
why it is fitting that I should call upon the venerable Gotama, and not
he should call upon me--

   'Truly, Sirs, the venerable Gotama is well born on both sides, of
pure descent through the mother and the father back through seven
generations, with no slur put upon him, and no reproach in respect of
birth--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama has gone forth (into the religious
life), giving up the great clan of his relations{1}--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama has gone forth (into the religious
life), giving up much money and gold, treasure both buried and above the
ground--

<span class="small">{1. 'Eighty thousand families on the mother's, and
eighty thousand on the father's side,' says Buddhaghosa--making a total
for the Sâkya clan of 800,000, reckoning five to a family.}</span>

<span id="p. 148">{p. 148}</span>

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama, while he was still a young man,
without a grey hair on his head, in the beauty of his early manhood, has
gone forth from the household life into the homeless state--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama, though his father and mother were
unwilling, and wept, their cheeks being wet with tears, nevertheless cut
off his hair and beard, and donned the yellow robes, and went out from
the household life into the homeless state--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama is handsome, pleasant to look upon,
inspiring trust, gifted with great beauty of complexion, fair in colour,
fine in presence, stately to behold--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama is virtuous with the virtue of the
Arahats, good and virtuous, gifted with goodness and virtue--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama hath a pleasant voice, and a
pleasing delivery, he is gifted with polite address, distinct, not
husky, suitable for making clear the matter in hand--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama is the teacher of the teachers of
many--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama has no passion of lust left in him,
and has put away all fickleness of mind--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama believes in Karma, and in
action{1}, he is one who puts righteousness in the forefront (of his
exhortations) to the Brahman race--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama went forth from a distinguished
family primeval{2} among the Kshatriya clans--

{1. Kamma-vâdî kiriya-vâdî. Compare 'Vinaya Texts,' II, 109, 112.

2\. Âdîna-khattiya-kulâ. The reading is doubtful, and the Burmese MSS.,
after their constant habit, have replaced it by an easy reading,
abhinna-khattiya-kulâ, 'unbroken Kshatriya family.' But all the
Sinhalese MSS. agree in reading either âdina or âdîna; and if the
reading had once been abhinna, it is difficult to see how the alteration
to the more difficult reading should have occurred. Buddhaghosa skips
the clause, which (if it was in the text before him) is suggestive. He
would scarcely have done so unless the matter were really very simple.
'Autonomous' would make a good sense in the context; but I have taken
the word, in the sense of 'primordial, aboriginal,' as being a
derivative from âdi, in the same way as adhîna is from adhi. This is
simple enough; the only difficulty being that the word occurs nowhere
else.}

<span id="p. 149">{p. 149}</span>

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama went forth from a family
prosperous, well to do, and rich--

   <span id="text p. 116">\[116\]</span> 'Truly, Sirs, people come right
across the country from distant lands to ask questions of the Sama*n*a
Gotama--

   'Truly, Sirs, multitudes of heavenly beings put their trust in the
Sama*n*a Gotama--

   'Truly, Sirs, such is the high reputation noised abroad concerning
the Sama*n*a Gotama, that he is said to be an Arahat, exalted, fully
awakened, abounding in wisdom and righteousness, happy, with knowledge
of the worlds, a Blessed One, a Buddha--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama has all the thirty-two bodily marks
of a Great Being--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama bids all men welcome, is congenial,
conciliatory, not supercilious, accessible to all, not backward in
conversation--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama is honoured, held of weight,
esteemed and venerated and revered by the four classes (of his
followers--the brethren and sisters of the Order, laymen and lay
women)--

   'Truly, Sirs, many gods and men believe in the Sama*n*a Gotama--

   "Truly, Sirs, in whatsoever village or town the Sama*n*a Gotama
stays, there the non-humans do the humans no harm--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama as the head of an Order, of a
school, as the teacher of a school, is the acknowledged chief of all the
founders of sects. Whereas some Sama*n*as and Brahmans have gained a
reputation by all sorts of insignificant matters{1}, not

<span class="small">{1. Literally 'anyhow'; 'such as by wearing no
clothes' explains Buddhaghosa (p. 288).}</span>

<span id="p. 150">{p. 150}</span>

so the Sama*n*a Gotama. His reputation comes from perfection in conduct
and righteousness--

   'Truly, Sirs, the king of Magadhâ, Seniya Bimbisâra, with his
children and his wives, with his people and his courtiers, has put his
trust in the Sama*n*a Gotama--

   'Truly, Sirs, King Pasenadi of Kosala, with his children and his
wives, with his people and his courtiers, has put his trust in the
Sama*n*a Gotama--

   'Truly, Sirs, Pokkharasâdi the Brahman, with his children and his
wives, with his people and his intimates, has put his trust in the
Sama*n*a Gotama--

   'Truly, Sirs, the Sama*n*a Gotama is honoured, held of weight,
esteemed, and venerated and revered alike by Seniya Bimbisâra, the king
of Magadhâ, by Pasenadi the king of Kosala, and by Pokkharasâdi the
Brahman--

   <span id="text p. 117">\[117\]</span> 'Truy, Sirs, the Sama*n*a
Gotama has now arrived at *K*ampâ and is staying on the shores of the
Gaggarâ Lake. But all Sama*n*as and Brahmans who come into our village
borders are our guests. And guests we ought to esteem and honour, to
venerate and revere. And as he is now so come, he ought to be so
treated, as a guest--

   'For each and all of these considerations it is not fitting that the
Sama*n*a Gotama should call upon us, but rather does it behove us to
call upon him. And so far only do I know the excellencies of the
Sama*n*a Gotama, but these are not all of them, for his excellence is
beyond measure.'

   7. And when he had thus spoken, those Brahmans said to him: 'The
venerable So*n*ada*nd*a declares the praises of the Sama*n*a Gotama on
such wise, that were he to be dwelling even a hundred leagues from here,
it would be enough to make a believing man go thither to call upon him,
even had he to carry a bag (for the provisions for the journey) on his
back{1}. Let us then all go to call on the Sama*n*a Gotama together!'

<span class="small">{1. Pu*t*a*m*senâpi. Compare A. II, 183, where a
precisely similar phrase occurs.}</span>

<span id="p. 151">{p. 151}</span>

   So So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman went out to the Gaggarâ Lake with a
great company of Brahmans.

   8. Now the following hesitation arose in So*n*ada*nd*a's mind as he
passed through the wood: 'Were I to ask the Sama*n*a Gotama a question,
if he were to say: "The question ought not to be asked so, thus ought
the question to be framed;" the company might thereupon speak of me with
disrespect, saying: "Foolish is this So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman, and
inexpert. <span id="text p. 118">\[118\]</span> He is not even able to
ask a question rightly." But if they did so my reputation would
decrease; and with my reputation my incomings would grow less, for what
we have to enjoy, that depends on our reputation. But if the Sama*n*a
Gotama were to put a question to me, I might not be able to gain his
approval{1} by my explanation of the problem. And if they were then to
say to me: "The question ought not to be answered so; thus ought the
problem to be explained;" the company might thereupon speak of me with
disrespect, saying: "Foolish is this So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman, and
inexpert. He is not even able to satisfy the Sama*n*a Gotama by his
explanation of the problem put." But if they did so, my reputation would
decrease; and with my reputation my incomings would grow less, for what
we have to enjoy, that depends upon our reputation. But on the other
hand if, having come so far, I should turn back without calling upon the
Sama*n*a Gotama, then might the company speak disrespectfully of me,
saying: "Foolish is this So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman, and inexpert, though
obstinate with pride, he is so afraid that he dare not call on the
Sama*n*a Gotama. How can he turn back after having come so far?" But if
they did so, my reputation would decrease; and with my reputation my
incomings would grow less. For what we have to enjoy, that depends upon
our reputation.

   9. So So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman went up to where the

<span class="small">{1. *K*ittam na ârâdheyya*m*, 'win over his mind.'
Comp. M. I, 85, 341; II, 10; Mil. 25.}</span>

<span id="p. 152">{p. 152}</span>

Blessed One was. And when he had come there he exchanged with the
Blessed One the greetings and compliments of politeness and courtesy,
and took his seat on one side. And as to the Brahmans and householders
of *K*ampâ, some of them bowed to the Blessed One and took their seats
on one side; some of them exchanged with him the greetings and
compliments of politeness and courtesy, and then took their seats on one
side; some of them called out their name and family, and then took their
seats on one side; and some of them took their seats on one side in
silence.

   <span id="text p. 119">\[119\]</span> 10. Now as So*n*ada*nd*a was
seated there he was still filled with hesitation, thinking as before set
out; and he added to himself: 'Oh! would that the Sama*n*a Gotama would
but ask me some question on my own subject, on the threefold Vedic lore.
Verily, I should then be able to gain his approval by my exposition of
the problem put!'

   11. Now the Blessed One became aware in his own mind of the
hesitation in the mind of So*n*ada*nd*a, and he thought: 'This
So*n*ada*nd*a is afflicted in his heart. I had better question him on
his own doctrine.' And he said to him: 'What are the things, Brahman,
which the Brahmans say a man ought to have in order to be a Brahman, so
that if he says: "I am a Brahman," he speaks accurately and does not
become guilty of falsehood?'

   12. Then So*n*ada*nd*a thought: <span id="text p. 120">\[120\]</span>
'What I wished and desired and had in my mind and hoped for--that the
Sama*n*a Gotama should put to me some question on my own subject, on the
threefold Vedic lore--that he now does. Oh! that I may be able to
satisfy his heart with my exposition thereof!'

   13. And drawing his body up erect, and looking round on the assembly,
he said to the Blessed One: 'The Brahmans, Gotama, declare him to be a
Brahman who can accurately say "I am a Brahman" without being guilty of
falsehood, who has five things. And what are the five? In the first
place, Sir, a Brahman is well born on both sides, on the mother's side
and on

<span id="p. 153">{p. 153}</span>

the father's side, of pure descent back through seven generations, with
no slur put upon him, and no reproach, in respect of birth--

   'Then he is a repeater (of the sacred words), knowing the mystic
verses by heart, one who has mastered the Three Vedas, with the indices,
the ritual, the phonology, and the exegesis (as a fourth), and the
legends as a fifth, learned in the phrases and in the grammar, versed in
Lokâyata sophistry, and in the theory of the signs on the body of a
great man--

   'Then he is handsome, pleasant to look upon, inspiring trust, gifted
with great beauty of complexion, fair in colour, fine in presence,
stately to behold,--

   'Then he is virtuous, increased in virtue, gifted with virtue that
has grown great--

   'Then he is learned and wise, the first, or it may be the second,
among those who hold out the ladle{1}.'

   14. 'But of these five things, oh Brahman, is it possible to leave
one out, and to declare the man who has the other four to be a Brahman,
to be one who can accurately, and without falling into falsehood, claim
to be a Brahman?'

   'Yes, Gotama, that can be done. We could leave out colour{2}. For
what does colour matter? <span id="text p. 121">\[121\]</span> If he
have the other four--good birth, technical training, virtue, and wisdom,
as just set forth{3}-Brahmans would still declare him to be a Brahman;
and he could rightly, without danger of falsehood, claim to be one.'

   15. 'But of these four things, oh Brahman, is it possible to leave
one out, and to declare the man who has the other three to be a Brahman,
to be one who can rightly, and without falling into falsehood, claim to
be a Brahman?'

   'Yes, Gotama, that could be done. We could leave out the verses. For
what do the verses matter? If

{1. That is, 'officiate at a sacrifice by pouring out of a spoon a
libation of butter, or of spirituous Soma, to the fire god.'

2\. Va*nn*a, much the same as 'caste,' though that rendering is not
strictly accurate. (See the Introduction to the Amba*tth*a.)

3\. The full text is repeated, both here and in the following sections.}

<span id="p. 154">{p. 154}</span>

he have the other three--good birth, virtue, and wisdom--Brahmans would
still declare him to be a Brahman; and he could rightly, without danger
of falsehood, claim to be one.'

   16. 'But of these three things, Brahman, is it possible to leave one
out, and to declare the man who has the other two to be a Brahman, to be
one who can accurately, and without falling into falsehood, claim to be
a Brahman?'

   'Yes, Gotama, that could be done. We could leave out birth. For what
does birth matter? If he have the other two--virtue and wisdom--Brahmans
would still declare him to be a Brahman; and he could rightly, without
danger of falsehood, claim to be one.'

   <span id="text p. 122">\[122\]</span> 17. And when he had thus spoken
the other Brahmans said to So*n*ada*nd*a: 'Say not so, venerable
So*n*ada*nd*a, say not so! He depreciates not only our colour, but he
depreciates our verses and our birth. Verily the venerable So*n*ada*nd*a
is going over to the doctrine of the Sama*n*a Gotama.'

   18. Then the Blessed One said to those Brahmans: 'If you, oh
Brahmans, think that So*n*ada*nd*a is unlearned, that he speaks
unfittingly, that he is unwise, that he is unable to hold his own with
me in this matter, let him keep silence, and do you discuss with me. But
if you think him learned, able in speech, wise, able to hold his own,
then do you keep silence, and let him discuss with me.'

   19. And when he had thus spoken, So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman said to
those Brahmans: 'Let not the venerable ones say so. Say not so, Sirs.
<span id="text p. 123">\[123\]</span> I do not depreciate either our
colour, nor our verses, nor our birth.'

   20. Now at that time a young Brahman named Angaka{1}, sister's son to
So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman, was seated in that company. And So*n*ada*nd*a
said to those

<span class="small">{1. This name looks suspiciously like a kind of
personification of the five A<u>n</u>gas (the five characteristics) of
the true Brahman as just above, § 13, set out.}</span>

<span id="p. 155">{p. 155}</span>

Brahmans: 'Do the venerable ones see this Angaka, our nephew?'

   'Yes, Sir, we see him.'

   'Well! Angaka, Sirs, is handsome, pleasant to look upon, inspiring
trust, gifted with great beauty of complexion, fair in colour, fine in
presence, stately to behold--none in this assembly is like unto him in
colour, save only the Sama*n*a Gotama.

   'And Angaka, Sirs, is a repeater (of the sacred words), knowing the
mystic verses by heart, one who has mastered the Three Vedas, with the
indices, the ritual, the phonology, and the exegesis (as a fourth), and
the legends as a fifth, learned in the phrases and the grammar, versed
in Lokâyata (Nature-lore), and in the theory of the signs on the body of
a great man--I myself have taught him the verses.

   'And Angaka, Sirs, is well born on both sides, on the mother's side
and on the father's side, of pure descent back through seven
generations, with no slur put upon him, and no reproach in respect of
birth--I myself know his forebears, on the mother's side and on the
father's.

   'If Angaka, Sirs, should kill living things, and take what has not
been given, and go the way of the adulterer, and speak lies, and drink
strong drink, what then, Sirs, would his colour avail him? what the
verses? what his birth?

   'It is in so far, Sirs, as a Brahman is virtuous, increased in
virtue, gifted with virtue that has grown great; in so far as he is
learned and wise, the first, or it may be the second, among those who
hold out the ladle, that Brahmans would declare him, as endowed with
these two qualities, to be a Brahman, to be one who could rightly say "I
am a Brahman" without falling into falsehood.'

   21. 'But of these two things, oh Brahman, is it possible to leave one
out, and to declare the man who has the other to be a Brahman, to be one
who can rightly, and without falling into falsehood, claim to be a
Brahman?'

<span id="p. 156">{p. 156}</span>

   <span id="text p. 124">\[124\]</span> 'Not that, Gotama! For wisdom,
oh Gotama, is purified by uprightness, and uprightness is purified by
wisdom. Where there is uprightness, wisdom is there, and where there is
wisdom, uprightness is there. To the upright there is wisdom, to the
wise there is uprightness, and wisdom and goodness are declared to be
the best thing in the world{1}. Just, oh Gotama, as one might wash hand
with hand, or foot with foot, just even so, oh Gotama, is wisdom
purified by uprightness, and uprightness is purified by wisdom. Where
there is uprightness, wisdom is there, and where there is wisdom,
uprightness is there. To the upright, there is wisdom, to the wise there
is uprightness, and wisdom and goodness are declared to be the best
thing in the world.'

   22. 'That is just so, oh Brahman. And I, too, say the same. But what,
then, is that uprightness and what that wisdom?,

   'We only know, oh Gotama, the general statement in this matter. May
the venerable Gotama be pleased to explain the meaning of the phrase.'

   'Well then, oh Brahman, give ear, and pay earnest attention, and I
will speak.'

   23. 'Very well, Sir,' said So*n*ada*nd*a in assent to the Blessed
One. And the Blessed One said:

   \[*Here follow the paragraphs* 40-63 *in the Sâma*ññ

a-Phala Sutta above, [pp. 62-70](dob-02tx.htm#text%20p.%2062) *of the
text; that is, the paragraph on the appearance of a Buddha, his
preaching, the conversion of the hearer, his renunciation of the world,
all the Sîlas, and the paragraph on Confidence,* § 63.\]

   'This also, oh Brahman, is that uprightness' (Sîla).

   \[*Here follow the paragraphs on the* Gh*ânas, beginning*

<span class="small">{1. Oldenberg renders this ('Buddha,' p. 283) as
follows: 'The wisdom of the upright and the uprightness of the wise
have, of all uprightness and wisdom in the world, the highest value.' I
cannot see how this can be grammatically justified; though the sentiment
is admirable enough, and would have somewhat relieved the monotony of
the paragraph. On pa*ññ*â*n*a as nominative, not genitive, see, for
instance, S. I, 41, 42; Sum. I, 171, 290; A. IV, 342.}</span>

<span id="p. 157">{p. 157}</span>

*at* So vivi*kk*' eva kâmehi *in* [§ 75](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2084) *of the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala down to the end of* § 82*, then the paragraphs on
Insight arising from Knowledge, on the Mental Image, on the Wondrous
Gifts, on the Heavenly Ear, on Knowledge of the hearts of others, on
Memory of one's own previous births, on the Divine Eye, and on the
Destruction of the Deadly Floods, all as in the Sâma*ññ*a-phala,* §§
83-98 *inclusive*.\]

   'This, oh Brahman, is that wisdom{1}.'

   24. When he had thus spoken, So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman said to the
Blessed One:

   <span id="text p. 125">\[125\]</span> 'Most excellent, oh Gotama (are
the words of thy mouth), most excellent! Just as if a man were to set up
that which has been thrown down, or were to reveal that which has been
hidden away, or were to point out the right road to him who has gone
astray, or were to bring a light into the darkness so that those who had
eyes could see external forms--just even so has the truth been made
known to me, in many a figure, by the venerable Gotama. I, even I,
betake myself to the venerable Gotama as my guide, to the truth, and to
the Order. And may the venerable Gotama accept me as a disciple, as one
who, from this day forth, as long as life endures, has taken him as his
guide. And may the venerable Gotama grant me the favour of taking his
to-morrow's meal with me, and also the members of the Order with him.'

   Then the Blessed One signified, by silence, his consent. And
So*n*ada*nd*a, on seeing that he had done so, arose from his seat and
bowed down before the Blessed

<span class="small">{1. The repetition here is nearly the same as that
in the Amba*tth*a Sutta, summarised above at the translation of [p.
100](dob-03tx.htm#text%20p.%20100) of the text. The only difference is
that the paragraphs 64-74 of the Sâma*ññ*a-phala there included as
coming under *K*ara*n*a (Conduct) are here included under Sîla
(Uprightness). The *Gh*ânas, there put, not under Vi*gg*â (Wisdom), but
under *K*ara*n*a, are here put, not under Sîla, but under Pa*ññ*â
(Intelligence). In other words Pa*ññ*â includes all that was there
included under Vi*gg*a, and the Four *Gh*ânas besides. But Sîla includes
all that is put in the Amba*tth*a under Sîla--all indeed of the eight
divisions of Sîla as summarised above, [pp.
57-59](dob-02in.htm#p.%2057). See Buddhaghosa's notes at pp. 219, 268,
292.}</span>

<span id="p. 158">{p. 158}</span>

One, and walking round him with his right hand towards him, departed
thence. And at early dawn he made ready at his house sweet food, both
hard and soft, and had the time announced to the Blessed One: 'It is
time, oh Gotama, and the meal is ready.'

   25. Then the Blessed One, who had dressed in the early morning, put
on his outer robe, and taking his bowl with him, went with the brethren
to So*n*ada*nd*a's house, and sat down on the seat prepared for him. And
So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman satisfied the Blessed One, and the brethren,
with his own hand, with sweet food, both hard and soft, until they
refused any more.

   And when the Blessed One had finished his meal, and cleansed the bowl
and his hands, So*n*ada*nd*a took a low seat, and sat down beside him,
and said:

   26. 'If, oh Gotama, after I have entered the assembly, I should rise
from my seat to bow down before the venerable Gotama, then the assembly
would find fault with me{1}. Now he with whom the assembly should find
fault, his reputation would grow less; and he who should lose his
reputation, his income would grow less. For that which we have to enjoy,
that depends upon our reputation. If then, when I am seated in the
assembly, I stretch forth my joined palms in salutation, let the
venerable Gotama accept that from me as arising up from my seat. <span
id="text p. 126">\[126\]</span> And if when I am seated in the assembly
I take off my turban, let the venerable Gotama accept that from me as a
salutation with my head. So if, when I am in my chariot, I were to get
down from the chariot to salute the venerable Gotama, the surrounders
would find fault with me. If, then, when mounted on my chariot, I bend
down low the staff of my goad, let the venerable Gotama accept that from
me as if I had got down. And if, when mounted on my chariot, I should
wave

<span class="small">{1. On the ground, says Buddhaghosa (p. 292), that
he would be saluting a much younger man, one young enough to be his
grandson. If this tradition be correct, it would follow that this Sutta
must be describing events very early in the public ministry of the
Buddha.}</span>

<span id="p. 159">{p. 159}</span>

my hand, let the venerable Gotama accept that from me as if I had bowed
low in salutation{1}!'

   27. Then the Blessed One instructed and roused and incited and
gladdened So*n*ada*nd*a the Brahman with religious discourse, and then
rose from his seat and departed thence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the So*n*ada*nd*a Sutta.

<span class="small">{1. It will be seen from this section that
So*n*ada*nd*a is represented as being a convert only to a limited
extent. He still keeps on his school of Vedic studies, and is keenly
anxious to retain the good opinion of his students, and of other
Brahmans. And if that part of the Buddha's doctrine put before him in
this Sutta be examined, it will be found to be, with perhaps one or two
exceptions, quite compatible with the best Brahman views. No doubt if
every detail were carried to its strict logical conclusion there would
be no further need for Vedic studies, except from the historical
standpoint. But those details are, on the face of them, ethical. They
belong to a plane not touched on in the then Vedic studies. They could
be accepted by an adherent of the soul theory of life. And the essential
doctrines of Buddhism--the Path, the Truths, and Arahatship--are barely
even referred to.}</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: Introduction to the Kû*t*adanta
Sutta](dob-05in)
