<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-11tx) [Next](dob-12tx.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 285">{p. 285}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### LOHI*KK*A SUTTA.

   IT is not easy to put ourselves in the mental position suitable for
appreciating the kind of idea that underlies the argument in this
Suttanta. The social view against which it is directed lies too remote
from the social views universally admitted now in the West. But in the
sixth century B.C., in the Eastern valley of the Ganges, the question as
to the ethics of teachers and teaching was one of wide interest and of
great importance.

   *S*a<u>n</u>kara quotes with approval the rules of the priestly law
books which lay down that the ears of a Sûdra who hears the Veda
(including of course the theosophy of the Upanishads) are to be filled
with molten lead and lac. His tongue is to be split if he recites it;
his body is to be cut through if he preserves it in his memory{1}. God
himself has bestowed the exclusive right of teaching upon the hereditary
priests{2}; who indeed claim to be, each of them, great divinities{3},
even to the gods{4}. And it would be a danger to social order if they
taught women, or any males not twice-born, or any twice-born males who
would not share their views as to the ethics of teaching, and as to the
privileges and prerogatives of the priest as teacher.

   These passages are much later than the Pi*t*akas. But they, and the
many others like them, give a fair idea of the spirit animating one
section at least of the priests, and of a trend of opinion that
doubtless had its supporters also in Pi*t*aka times. When Asoka thought
he had brought about such a change in public opinion that those who had
been very gods upon the earth had come to be gods no longer, he was very
far from thinking right. That is a battle that is not so easily won, But
the expression of his belief is sufficient to show that the striking
idea he thought he had killed was far older than our existing text of
Manu.

   On the other hand one may be permitted to doubt whether the gentle
measures approved by *S*a<u>n</u>kara for keeping people in that state
of life into which their evil deeds in a previous birth had brought
them, were ever actually, in practice, carried

{1. Commentary on the Vedanta-Sûtras I, 3, 38.

2\. Manu I, 88.

3\. Ibid. IX, 317, 319.

4\. Ibid. XI, 85.}

<span id="p. 286">{p. 286}</span>

out. The Pi*t*akas themselves give ample proof that, in spite of the
priests, there were not a few base-born people who succeeded, in that
time at least, not only in getting taught, but in becoming teachers. And
this was not the case only among the despised Buddhists. The numerous
passages collected by Dr. Muir in his article in the 'Indian Antiquary'
for 1877 show that the priestly literature itself--the law books and the
epics--has preserved evidence of the lax way in which the strict rules
as to exclusion from teaching or being taught were really carried out.
And that is especially the case, according to the priestly tradition, in
ancient times, as old, or older, than the rise of Buddhism.

   The fact doubtless is that, though there were bigots among the
Brahmans, and though they were strong enough to establish, before the
time to which our present Sutta refers, rules as to restriction of
teaching which no one in priestly circles could venture formally to
dispute--yet that there was also always a strong party in India, to
which many of the more liberal minded of the Brahmans themselves
belonged, who looked with sympathy on relaxations of these rules. The
general practice must have been that the hereditary priests kept the
magic of the sacrifice, and the emoluments and privileges that went with
the knowledge of it, in their own hands. Even the higher teaching of the
mysteries of theosophy was to be handed down only from priest--father to
son, or from priestly teacher to pupil. But there were many exceptions.
The numerous Brahmans who were not priests were wont, of course, to
emphasise the importance rather of birth than of knowledge. We have
enough evidence, even in the pre-Buddhistic Upanishads, of others,
besides the priests, being teachers of the higher wisdom. The four
powerful kings, and the still important free clans, though they gave
support to the Brahmans, gave also equal support to other teachers--just
as, in later times, Hindu and Buddhist sovereigns are found supporting
Buddhists and Hindus alike.

   Our knowledge of Indian views of life having been hitherto derived
almost exclusively from the priestly books, scholars have inevitably
tended to attach too great a degree of importance to what the priests
describe as the proper state of things. As a matter of fact it never
really prevailed. Even now the Brahmans, or those who in the census
returns claim to be such, form only about five per cent. of the
population. And of these the vast majority are not priests at all; they
are engaged in all sorts of worldly occupations{1}. We

<span class="small">{1. Baines, 'General Report on the Census of 1891,'
pp. 190, 202. The census shows that out of 261 millions only fifteen
millions could read or write. On this striking fact Mr. Baines comments
(p. 211): 'The second influence antagonistic to a more general spread of
literacy is the long continued existence of a hereditary class whose
object it has been to maintain their own monopoly of book. learning as
the chief buttress of their social supremacy. The opposition of the
Brahmins to the rise of the writer class has been already mentioned; and
the repugnance of both, in the present day, to the diffusion of learning
amongst the masses, can only be appreciated after long
experience.'}</span>

<span id="p. 287">{p. 287}</span>

must not judge India at any time, much less in the time of the Buddha,
through the yellow spectacles of *S*a<u>n</u>kara, or even of the
priestly compilers of Manu. As M. Barth said, already in 1873, in
protesting against Lassen for falling into this mistake{1}: 'We must
distinguish, more than Lassen does, between different epochs, as well as
between the pretensions of a caste and the real state of things. The
Brahmans had not yet monopolised the intellectual life. Certain
testimonies of the epics, applicable to this very period, as also the
very nature of the Vedic books, show for example that there existed
alongside of them an entire profane literature of great extent . . .
which was certainly, at first, in other hands. . . . Their teaching
(that of the Brahmans), it is true, appears to have been in a high
degree esoteric and exclusive.'

   The position taken up by the Buddha on this question, as appears from
our present Sutta (and such other passages as M. I, 513-524; A. I, 277;
III, 123-127; M. P. S. II, 32 = A. III, 69 = V, 56 = Mil. 144), is that
everyone should be allowed to learn; that everyone, having certain
abilities, should be allowed to teach; and that, if he does teach, he
should teach all and to all; keeping nothing back, shutting no one out.
But no man should take upon himself to teach others unless and until he
have first taught himself, and have also acquired the faculty of
imparting to others the truth he has gained himself.

   There can, I think, be very little doubt but that the great teacher
is here voicing the opinion of many others of liberal views, his
contemporaries and predecessors. He lays no claim, either in our Sutta
or elsewhere, to any special peculiarity in this respect. It is taken
for granted that the arguments put into his mouth in our Sutta will
appeal to the Brahman to whom they are addressed. And they are based not
on any distinctively Buddhist doctrine but on general ethical principles
accepted, or rather acceptable, by all.

<span class="small">{1. 'Revue Critique,' June, 1873, translated by Dr.
Muir in the 'Indian Antiquary,' 1874.}</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: XII. Lohi*kk*a Sutta](dob-12tx.md)
