<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-05in) [Next](dob-06in.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 173">{p. 173}</span>

## V. KÛ*T*ADANTA SUTTA.

### \[THE WRONG SACRIFICE AND THE RIGHT.\]

   <span id="text p. 127">\[127\]</span> 1. Thus have I heard. The
Blessed One once, when going on a tour through Magadhâ, with a great
multitude of the brethren, with about five hundred brethren, came to a
Brahman village in Magadhâ called Khânumata. And there at Khânumata he
lodged in the Ambala*tth*ikâ pleasaunce{1}.

   Now at that time the Brahman Kû*t*adanta was dwelling at Khânumata, a
place teeming with life, with much grassland and woodland and water and
corn, on a royal domain presented him by Seniya Bimbisâra the king of
Magadhâ, as a royal gift, with power over it as if he were the king.

   And just then a great sacrifice was being got ready on behalf of
Kû*t*adanta the Brahman. And a hundred bulls, and a hundred steers, and
a hundred heifers, and a hundred goats, and a hundred rams had been
brought to the post for the sacrifice.

   2. Now the Brahmans and householders of Khânumata heard the news of
the arrival of the Sama*n*a Gotama{2}. <span
id="text p. 128">\[128\]</span> And they began to leave Khânumata in
companies and in bands to go to the Ambala*tth*ikâ pleasaunce.

   3. And just then Kû*t*adanta the Brahman had gone apart to the upper
terrace of his house for his siesta; and seeing the people thus go by.
he asked his doorkeeper the reason. And the doorkeeper told him{3}.

{1. Not the same as the one with the same name half way between
Râ*g*agaha and Nâlânda (above, [p. 1](dob-01tx) of the text.md).
Buddhaghosa (p. 294) says it was like it.

2\. The whole of [§ 2](dob-04tx.md) of the So*n*ada*nd*a is here repeated.

3\. All given in the text in full, as in the So*n*ada*nd*a Sutta.}

<span id="p. 174">{p. 174}</span>

   4. Then Kû*t*adanta thought: 'I have heard that the Sama*n*a Gotama
understands about the successful performance of a sacrifice with its
threefold method and its sixteen accessory instruments. Now I don't know
all this, and yet I want to carry out a sacrifice. <span
id="text p. 129">\[129\]</span> It would be well for me to go to the
Sama*n*a Gotama, and ask him about it.'

   So he sent his doorkeeper to the Brahmans and householders of
Khânumata, to ask them to wait till he could go with them to call upon
the Blessed One.

   5. But there were at that time a number of Brahmans staying at
Khânumata to take part in the great sacrifice. And when they heard this
they went to Kû*t*adanta, and persuaded him, on the same grounds as the
Brahmans had laid before So*n*ada*nd*a, not to go. But he answered them
in the same terms as So*n*ada*nd*a had used to those Brahmans. <span
id="text p. 134">\[134\]</span> Then they were satisfied, and went with
him to call upon the Blessed One{1}.

   9. And when he was seated there Kû*t*adanta the Brahman told the
Blessed One what he had heard{2}, and requested him to tell him about
success in performing a sacrifice in its three modes{3} and with its
accessory articles of furniture of sixteen kinds{4}.

{1. [§§ 3-7](dob-04tx.htm#text%20p.%20112.md) inclusive of the
So*n*ada*nd*a are here repeated in full in the text.

2\. As in § 4.

3\. Vidhâ. Childers gives 'pride' as the only meaning of this word. But
he has made a strange muddle between it and vidho. All that he has under
both words should be struck out. All that he has under vidho should be
entered under vidhâ, which has always the one meaning 'mode, manner,
way.' Used ethically of the Arahats it refers, no doubt, to divers
'modes' of pride or delusion (as for instance in vidhâsu na vikampanti
at S. I, 84, and in the passage quoted in Childers). He makes vidhâ a
very rare word, and vidho a common one. It is just the contrary. Vidhâ
is frequent, especially at the end of adjectival compounds. Vidho is
most rare. It is given doubtfully by Buddhaghosa, in discussing a
doubtful reading at Sum. I, 269, in the sense of 'yoke'; and is a
possible reading at Vin. II, 136, 319; IV, 168, 363 in the sense of
'brooch' or 'buckle.'

Here vidhâ in Kû*t*adanta's mouth means, of course, mode of rite or
ritual. Gotama lays hold of the ambiguity of the word, and twists it
round to his ethical teaching in the sense of mode of generosity.

4\. Parikkhârâ, 'accessories, fillings, equipments, appurtenances,'--the
furniture of a room, the smallest things one wears, the few objects a
wandering mendicant carries about with him, and so on. Here again the
word is turned into a riddle, the solution of which is the basis of the
dialogue.}

<span id="p. 175">{p. 175}</span>

   'Well then, O Brahman, give ear and listen attentively and I will
speak.'

   'Very well, Sir,' said Kû*t*adanta in reply; and the Blessed One
spake as follows:--

   10. 'Long ago, O Brahman, there was a king by name Wide-realm (Mahâ
Vi*g*ita){1}, mighty, with great wealth and large property; with stores
of silver and gold, of aids to enjoyment{2}, of goods and corn; with his
treasure-houses and his garners full. Now when King Wide-realm was once
sitting alone in meditation he became anxious at the thought: "I have in
abundance all the good things a mortal can enjoy. The whole wide circle
of the earth is mine by conquest to possess. 'Twere well if I were to
offer a great sacrifice that should ensure me weal and welfare for many
days."

   'And he had the Brahman, his chaplain, called; and telling him all
that he had thought, <span id="text p. 135">\[135\]</span> he said: "So
I would fain, O Brahman, offer a great sacrifice--let the venerable one
instruct me how--for my weal and my welfare for many days."

   11. 'Thereupon the Brahman who was chaplain said to the king: "The
king's country, Sire, is harassed and harried. There are dacoits abroad
who pillage the villages and townships, and who make the roads unsafe.
Were the king, so long as that is so, to levy a fresh tax, verily his
majesty would be acting wrongly. But perchance his majesty might think:
'I'll soon put a stop to these scoundrels' game by degradation and
banishment, and fines and bonds and death!' But their licence cannot be
satisfactorily put a stop to so. The remnant left unpunished would still
go on harassing the realm. Now there is one method to adopt to

{1. Literally 'he who has a great realm'--just as we might say Lord
Broadacres.

2\. 'Such as jewels and plate,' says Buddhaghosa (p. 295).}

<span id="p. 176">{p. 176}</span>

put a thorough end to this disorder. Whosoever there be in the king's
realm who devote themselves to keeping cattle and the farm, to them let
his majesty the king give food and seed-corn. Whosoever there be in the
king's realm who devote themselves to trade, to them let his majesty the
king give capital. Whosoever there be in the king's realm who devote
themselves to government service{1}, to them let his majesty the king
give wages and food. Then those men, following each his own business,
will no longer harass the realm; the king's revenue will go up; the
country will be quiet and at peace; and the populace, pleased one with
another and happy, dancing their children in their arms. will dwell with
open doors."

   'Then King Wide-realm, O Brahman, accepted the word of his chaplain,
<span id="text p. 136">\[136\]</span> and did as he had said. And those
men, following each his business, harassed the realm no more. And the
king's revenue went up. And the country became quiet and at peace. And
the populace, pleased one with another and happy, dancing their children
in their arms, dwelt with open doors.

   12. 'So King Wide-realm had his chaplain called, and said: "The
disorder is at an end. The country is at peace. I want to offer that
great sacrifice--let the venerable one instruct me how--for my weal and
my welfare for many days."

   'Then let his majesty the king send invitations to whomsoever there
may be in his realm who are Kshatriyas, vassals of his, either in the
country or the towns; or who are ministers and officials of his, either
in the country or the towns; or who are Brahmans of position, either in
the country or the towns; or who are householders of substance, either
in the country or the towns, saying: "I intend to offer a great
sacrifice. Let the venerable ones give their sanction to what will be to
me for weal and welfare for many days."

   'Then King Wide-realm, O Brahman, accepted the

<span class="small">{1. Râ*g*a-porise. On this word, the locative
singular of a neuter abstract form, compare M. I, 85.}</span>

<span id="p. 177">{p. 177}</span>

word of his chaplain, <span id="text p. 137">\[137\]</span> and did as
he had said, And they each--Kshatriyas and ministers and Brahmans and
householders--made alike reply: "Let his majesty the king celebrate the
sacrifice. The time is suitable, O king{1}!"

   'Thus did these four, as colleagues by consent, become wherewithal to
furnish forth that sacrifice{2},

   13. 'King Wide-realm was gifted in the following eight ways:--

   'He was well born on both sides, on the mother's side and on the
father's, of pure descent back through seven generations, and no slur
was cast upon him, and no reproach, in respect of birth--

   'He was handsome, pleasant in appearance, inspiring trust, gifted
with great beauty of complexion, fair in colour, fine in presence,
stately to behold--

   'He was mighty, with great wealth, and large property, with stores of
silver and gold, of aids to enjoyment, of goods and corn, with his
treasure-houses and his garners full--

   'He was powerful, in command of an army, loyal and disciplined, in
four divisions (of elephants, cavalry, chariots, and bowmen), burning
up, methinks, his enemies by his very glory--

   'He was a believer, and generous, a noble giver, keeping open house,
a welling spring s whence Sama*n*as and Brahmans, the poor and the
wayfarers, beggars, and petitioners might draw, a doer of good deeds--

   'He was learned in all kinds of knowledge--

   'He knew the meaning of what had been said, and could explain: "This
saying has such and such a meaning, and that such and such"--

{1. 'Because it was right and fit to do such deeds when one was young
and rich. To spend one's days in selfishness, and then, in old age to
give gifts would be no good,' says Buddhaghosa (p. 297).

2\. Ya*ññ*assa parikkhârâ. The latter word is here twisted round to a
new sense.

3\. Opâna = udapâna. Compare M. I, 379; Vin. I, 236; Mil.411; Sum. I,
298; and the note at 'Vinaya Texts,' II, 115.}

<span id="p. 178">{p. 178}</span>

   'He was intelligent, expert and wise, and able to think out things
present or past or future{1}--

   'And these eight gifts of his, too, became wherewithal to furnish
forth that sacrifice.

   <span id="text p. 138">\[138\]</span> 14. 'The Brahman his chaplain
was gifted in the following four ways:--

   'He was well born on both sides, on the mother's and on the father's,
of pure descent back through seven generations, with no slur cast upon
him, and no reproach in respect of birth--

   'He was a student repeater who knew the mystic verses by heart,
master of the Three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual, the phonology,
and the exegesis (as a fourth ), and the legends as a fifth, learned in
the idioms and the grammar, versed in Lokâyata (Nature-lore) and in the
thirty marks on the body of a great man--

   'He was virtuous, established in virtue, gifted with virtue that had
grown great--

   'He was intelligent, expert, and wise; foremost, or at most the
second, among those who hold out the ladle.'

   'Thus these four gifts of his, too, became wherewithal to furnish
forth that sacrifice.

   15. 'And further, O Brahman, the chaplain, before the sacrifice had
begun, explained to King Wide-realm the three modes:

   'Should his majesty the king, before starting on the great sacrifice,
feel any such regret as: "Great, alas, will be the portion of my wealth
used up herein," let not the king harbour such regret. Should his
majesty the king, whilst he is offering the great sacrifice, feel any
such regret as: "Great, alas, will be the portion of my wealth used up
herein," let not the king harbour such regret. Should his majesty the
king, when the great sacrifice has been offered, feel any such regret
as: "Great, alas, has been the portion of my wealth used up herein," let
not the king harbour such regret:

<span class="small">{1. Buddhaghosa explains this as meaning that he
knew the result of Karma, he knew that his present prosperity was a gift
to him by the good deeds done to others in the past, and that there
would be a similar result in future for his good deeds done now.}</span>

<span id="p. 179">{p. 179}</span>

   'Thus did the chaplain, O Brahman, before the sacrifice had begun,
explain to King Wide-realm the three modes.

   16. 'And further, O Brahman, the chaplain, before the sacrifice had
begun, in order to prevent any compunction that might afterwards, in ten
ways, arise as regards those who had taken part therein, said: "Now
there will come to your sacrifice, Sire, men who destroy the life of
living things, and men who refrain therefrom--men who take what has not
been given, and men who refrain therefrom--men who act evilly in respect
of lusts, and men who refrain therefrom--men who speak lies, and men who
do not--men who slander, and men who do not-men who speak rudely, and
men who do not--men who chatter vain things, and men who refrain
therefrom--<span id="text p. 139, 140">\[139, 140\]</span> men who
covet, and men who covet not--men who harbour illwill, and men who
harbour it not--men whose views are wrong, and men whose views are
right. Of each of these let them, who do evil, alone with their evil.
For them who do well let your majesty offer, for them, Sire, arrange the
rites, them let the king gratify, in them shall your heart within find
peace."

   17. 'And further, O Brahman, the chaplain, whilst the king was
carrying out the sacrifice, instructed and aroused and incited and
gladdened his heart in sixteen ways: "Should there be people who should
say of the king, as he is offering the sacrifice: 'King Wide-realm is
celebrating sacrifice without having invited the four classes of his
subjects, without himself having the eight personal gifts, without the
assistance of a Brahman who has the four personal gifts;' then would
they speak not according to the fact. For the consent of the four
classes has been obtained, the king has the eight, and his Brahman has
the four, personal gifts. With regard to each and everyone of these
sixteen conditions the king may rest assured that it has been fulfilled.
He can sacrifice, and be glad, and possess his heart in peace{1}."

<span class="small">{1. This whole closing sentence is repeated, in the
text, of each of the sixteen.}</span>

<span id="p. 180">{p. 180}</span>

   <span id="text p. 141">\[141\]</span> 18. 'And further, O Brahman, at
that sacrifice neither were any oxen slain, neither goats, nor fowls,
nor fatted pigs, nor were any kinds of living creatures put to death. No
trees were cut down to be used as posts, no Dabbha grasses mown to strew
around the sacrificial spot. And the slaves and messengers and workmen
there employed were driven neither by rods nor fear, nor carried on
their work weeping with tears upon their faces. Whoso chose to help, he
worked; whoso chose not to help, worked not. What each chose to do, he
did; what they chose not to do, that was left undone. With ghee, and
oil, and butter, and milk, and honey, and sugar only was that sacrifice
accomplished.

   <span id="text p. 142">\[142\]</span> 19. 'And further, O Brahman,
the Kshatriya vassals, and the ministers and officials, and the Brahmans
of position, and the householders of substance, whether of the country
or of the towns, went to King Wide-realm, taking with them much wealth,
and said: "This abundant wealth, Sire, have we brought hither for the
king's use. Let his majesty accept it at our hands!"

   '"Sufficient wealth have I, my friends, laid up, the produce of
taxation that is just. Do you keep yours, and take away more with you!"

   'When they had thus been refused by the king, they went aside, and
considered thus one with the other: "It would not beseem us now, were we
to take this wealth away again to our own homes. King Wide-realm is
offering a great sacrifice. Let us too make an after-sacrifice!"

   20. 'So the Kshatriyas established a continual largesse to the east
of the king's sacrificial pit, and the officials to the south thereof,
and the Brahmans to the west thereof, and the householders to the north
thereof. And the things given, and the manner of their gift, was in all
respects like unto the great sacrifice of King Wide-realm himself.

   <span id="text p. 143">\[143\]</span> 'Thus, O Brahman, there was a
fourfold co-operation, and King Wide-realm was gifted with

<span id="p. 181">{p. 181}</span>

eight personal gifts, and his officiating Brahman with four. And there
were three modes of the giving of that sacrifice. This, O Brahman, is
what is called the due celebration of a sacrifice in its threefold mode
and with its furniture of sixteen kinds!'--

   21. And when he had thus spoken, those Brahmans lifted up their
voices in tumult, and said: 'How glorious the sacrifice, how pure its
accomplishment!' But Kû*t*adanta the Brahman sat there in silence.

   Then those Brahmans said to Kû*t*adanta: 'Why do you not approve the
good words of the Sama*n*a Gotama as well-said?'

   'I do not fail to approve: for he who approves not as well-said that
which has been well spoken by the Sama*n*a Gotama, verily his head would
split in twain. But I was considering that the Sama*n*a Gotama does not
say: "Thus have I heard," nor "Thus behoves it to be," but says only
"Thus it was then," or "It was like that then." So I thought: "For a
certainty the Sama*n*a Gotama himself must at that time have been King
Wide-realm, or the Brahman who officiated for him at that sacrifice.
Does the venerable Gotama admit that he who celebrates such a sacrifice,
or causes it, to be celebrated, is reborn at the dissolution of the
body, after death, into some state of happiness in heaven?'

   'Yes, O Brahman, that I admit. And at that time I was the Brahman
who, as chaplain, had that sacrifice performed.'

   22. 'Is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice less difficult and less
troublesome, with more fruit and more advantage still than this?'

   <span id="text p. 144">\[144\]</span> 'Yes, O Brahman, there is.'

   'And what, O Gotama, may that be?'

   'The perpetual gifts kept up in a family where they are given
specifically to virtuous recluses.

   23. 'But what is the reason, O Gotama, and what the cause, why such
perpetual givings specifically to virtuous recluses, and kept up in a
family, are less difficult and troublesome, of greater fruit and greater

<span id="p. 182">{p. 182}</span>

advantage than that other sacrifice with its three modes and its
accessories of sixteen kinds?'

   'To the latter sort of sacrifice, O Brahman, neither will the Arahats
go, nor such as have entered on the Arahat way. And why not? Because at
it beating with sticks takes place, and seizing by the throat{1}. But
they will go to the former, where such things are not. And therefore are
such perpetual gifts above the other sort of sacrifice.'

   24. 'And is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice less difficult and
less troublesome, of greater fruit and of greater advantage than either
of these?'

   <span id="text p. 145">\[145\]</span> 'Yes, O Brahman, there is.'

   'And what, O Gotama, may that be?'

   'The putting up of a dwelling place (Vihâra) on behalf of the Order
in all the four directions.'

   25. 'And is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice less difficult and
less troublesome, of greater fruit and of greater advantage than each
and all of these three?'

   'Yes, O Brahman, there is.'

   'And what, O Gotama, may that be?'

   'He who with trusting heart takes a Buddha as his guide, and the
Truth, and the Order--that is a sacrifice better than open largesse,
better than perpetual alms, better than the gift of a dwelling place.'

   <span id="text p. 146">\[146\]</span> 26. 'And is there, O Gotama,
any other sacrifice less difficult and less troublesome of greater fruit
and of greater advantage than all these four?'

   'When a man with trusting heart takes upon himself the
precepts--abstinence from destroying life; abstinence from taking what
has not been given; abstinence from evil conduct in respect of lusts;
abstinence from lying words; abstinence from strong, intoxicating,
maddening drinks, the root of carelessness--that is a sacrifice better
than open largesse, better than perpetual alms, better than the gift of
dwelling places, better than accepting guidance.'

<span class="small">{1. The attendants, at such a general largesse, says
Buddhaghosa (p. 303), push the recipients about, make them stand in a
queue, and use violence in doing so.}</span>

<span id="p. 183">{p. 183}</span>

   27. 'And is there, O Gotama, any other sacrifice less difficult and
less troublesome, of greater fruit and of greater advantage than all
these five?'

   'Yes, O Brahman, there is.'

   <span id="text p. 147">\[147\]</span> 'And what, O Gotama, may that
be?'

   \[The answer is the long passage from the Sâma*ññ*a-phala, § 40, [p.
62](dob-02tx.htm#text%20p.%2062) (of the text), down to § 75 (p. 74.md), on
the First *Gh*âna, as follows;--

   1. The Introductory paragraphs on the appearance of a Buddha, his
preaching, the conversion of a hearer, and his renunciation of the
world.

   2. The Sîlas (minor morality).

   3. The paragraph on Confidence.

   4. The paragraph on 'Guarded is the door of his senses.'

   5. The paragraph on 'Mindful and self-possessed.'

   6. The paragraph on Content.

   7. The paragraph on Solitude.

   8. The paragraphs on the Five Hindrances.

   9. The description of the First *Gh*âna.\]

   'This, O Brahman, is a sacrifice less difficult and less troublesome,
of greater fruit and greater advantage than the previous sacrifices.'

   \[The same is then said of the Second, Third, and Fourth *Gh*ânas, in
succession (as in the Sâma*nn*a-phala, [§§
77-82](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2085).md), and of the Insight arising from knowledge
(ibid. [§§ 83, 84](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2086).md), and further (omitting direct
mention either way of [§§ 85-96](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2087) inclusive.md) of the
knowledge of the destruction of the Âsavas, the deadly intoxications or
floods (ibid. [§§ 97-98](dob-02tx.htm#text%20p.%2092).md).\]

   'And there is no sacrifice man can celebrate, O Brahman, higher and
sweeter than this,'

   28. And when he had thus spoken, Kû*t*adanta the Brahman said to the
Blessed One:

   'Most excellent, O Gotama, are the words of thy mouth, most
excellent! Just as if a man were to set up

<span id="p. 184">{p. 184}</span>

what has been thrown down, or were to reveal that which has been hidden
away, or were to point out the right road to him who has gone astray, or
were to bring a light into the darkness so that those who had eyes could
see external forms--just even so has the truth been made known to me in
many a figure by the venerable Gotama. I, even I, betake myself to the
venerable Gotama as my guide, to the Doctrine and the Order. May the
venerable One accept me as a disciple, as one who, from this day forth,
as long as life endures, has taken him as his guide. And I <span
id="text p. 148">\[148\]</span> myself, O Gotama, will have the seven
hundred bulls, and the seven hundred steers, and the seven hundred
heifers, and the seven hundred goats, and the seven hundred rams set
free. To them I grant their life. Let them eat green grass and drink
fresh water, and may cool breezes waft around them.'

   29. Then the Blessed One discoursed to Kû*t*adanta the Brahman in due
order; that is to say, he spake to him of generosity, of right conduct,
of heaven, of the danger, the vanity, and the defilement of lusts, of
the advantages of renunciation. And when the Blessed One became aware
that Kû*t*adanta the Brahman had become prepared, softened,
unprejudiced, upraised, and believing in heart, then did he proclaim the
doctrine the Buddhas alone have won; that is to say, the doctrine of
sorrow, of its origin, of its cessation, and of the Path. And just as a
clean cloth, with all stains in it washed away, will readily take the
dye, just even so did Kû*t*adanta the Brahman, even while seated there,
obtain the pure and spotless Eye for the Truth, and he knew: 'Whatsoever
has a beginning, in that is inherent also the necessity of dissolution.'

   30. And then the Brahman Kû*t*adanta, as one who had seen the Truth,
had mastered it, understood it, dived deep down into it, who had passed
beyond doubt, and put away perplexity and gained full confidence, who
had become dependent on no other for his knowledge of the teaching of
the Master, addressed the Blessed One and said:

<span id="p. 185">{p. 185}</span>

   'May the venerable Gotama grant me the favour of taking his
to-morrow's meal with me, and also the members of the Order with him.'

   And the Blessed One signified, by silence, his consent. Then the
Brahman Kû*t*adanta, seeing that the Blessed One had accepted, rose from
his seat, and keeping his right towards him as he passed, he departed
thence. And at daybreak he had sweet food, both hard and soft, made
ready at the pit prepared for his sacrifice, and had the time announced
to the Blessed One: 'It is time, O Gotama; and the meal is ready.' And
the Blessed One, who had dressed early in the morning, put on his outer
robe, and taking his bowl" with him, went with the brethren to
Kû*t*adanta's sacrificial pit, and sat down there on the seat prepared
for him. And Kû*t*adanta the Brahman <span
id="text p. 149">\[149\]</span> satisfied the brethren with the Buddha
at their head, with his own hand, with sweet food, both hard and soft,
till they refused any more. And when the Blessed One had finished his
meal, and cleansed the bowl and his hands, Kû*t*adanta the Brahman took
a low seat and seated himself beside him. And when he was thus seated
the Blessed One instructed and aroused and incited and gladdened
Kû*t*adanta the Brahman with religious discourse; and then arose from
his seat and departed thence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kû*t*adanta Sutta is ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top.md)   [Next: Introduction to the Mahâli
Sutta](dob-06in.md)
