<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Dialogues of the Buddha

# {The Dîgha-Nikâya}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Note

These books were originally part of the series "Sacred Books of the
Buddhists", which, (exactly) like the "Sacred Books of the East" was
"translated by various oriental scholars and edited by F. Max Müller".
These were published in 1899 "under the patronage of His Majesty King
Chul<u>a</u>lankarana, King of Siam".

For the most part, I have used the [transcription
standards](../../stand.md) established for the [Sacred Books of the
East](../../sbe/index.md) at Intangible Textual Heritage, including an
underlined <u>n</u> to represent n-dot-over. Underlined vowels represent
vowels with line-over and umlauts (in Indian words only) represent the
'short' diacritic (neither of these two occur very often in these
books). Also, the % sign is used in the text to represent a large
checkmark (or square root sign) before an Indian word root. All other
diacritics and italicized letters appear exactly as they do in the text
(excepting scanning errors not fixed, of course). Because of the large
number of square brackets used in this text, all footnotes are enclosed
in curly braces instead. The pagination of the Pâli edition of The
Tevigga Sutta (No. XIII) was not included in the original edition; I
have supplied it from *The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation
of the Dîgha Nikâya* translated and edited by Maurice Walshe.

I have provided links to most of the internal references (and some to
other books at Intangible Textual Heritage as well); the colors of the
links are to help them stand out when they are in small font in the
footnotes. As of now, only the first (of three) volumes are included, so
some of the links are broken, but these will work as soon as the rest of
the books are finished.

<span class="small">This book was scanned, proofread, and formatted by
Christopher M. Weimer, March 2002. All HTML content is copyright and
freely distributable for noncommercial use without the expressed consent
of the author.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top.md)
