[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app03)  [Next](app05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. MUSAEUS

<span class="smallcaps">Musaeus</span>, said to be of <span
class="smallcaps">Athens</span>, was thought to have lived in
pre-Homeric times.

He was regarded as a follower of Orpheus, and titles of poems were
attributed to him.

1\. (<span class="smallcaps">Scholiast</span> on Apollonius Rhodius:
*Musaeus in his 'Titanographia' says that Cadmus set forth from the
Delphic shrine led by the heifer*).

2\. (*ib*.: *Medea sprinkled the drug with a juniper-branch, a tree
sacred to Apollo, and led the serpent by means of an incantation*).

3\. (<span class="smallcaps">Aristotle</span>): The eagle lays three
(*eggs*), hatches out two, and neglects the third.

4\. Art is ever far better than strength.

5\. In the same way the life-giving earth sends up the leaves: some it
withers away on the ash-trees, others it sends forth. So too the
generation and race of mankind also circle round.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

6\. (<span class="smallcaps">Clement</span>: *Eugamon of Cyrene
appropriated the work of Musaeus 'On the Thesprotians', and published it
as his own*).

7\. (

Clement: *Hesiod in his 'Melampous' writes*: '*It is* sweet to learn all
the things which the immortals have fixed for mortals as a clear sign of
things unhappy and things good.' *These lines are taken word for word
from Musaeus*).

8\. ({sc Ps.-Eratosthenes: *Musaeus tells how Zeus at birth was handed
over by Rhea to Themis, and by Themis to Amalthea, who gave him to the
Goat, the daughter of the Sun, to rear in the caves of Crete. When he
grew up and went to war with the Titans, he used the skin of the Goat as
his shield because it was invulnerable and bore a Gorgon's face in the
middle. He set the Goat in the sky as a constellation, while he himself
acquired the epithet Aigiochos, goat-skin holder'*).

9\. (*Melitê, a deme of the tribe Cecrôpis, was a daughter of Apollo
according to Musaeus, not a daughter of Myrmex as Hesiod says*).

10\. (*Triptolemus was the son of Ocean and Earth*).

11\. (*From a poem 'Eumolpia', attributed to Musaeus*):

Forthwith the voice of Chthoniê uttered a wise word, and with her
Pyrcôn, the servant of glorious Earth-Shaker.

12\. (*The head of Zeus, when Athena was born, was split by Palamon, not
by Hephaestus*).

13\. (*Argos begat four Aethiopian kings by Celainô daughter of Atlas*).

14\. (*In the theogony of Musaeus, Tartarus and Night came first*).

15\. (*There were two generations of Muses*).

16\. (*Zeus, after union with Asteria, gave her to Persês, son of a
Titan; to him she bore Hecate*).

17\. (*Shooting stars are borne up from Ocean and generated in the
Aether*).

18\. (*The Hyades, nurses of Dionysus, are five in number; they are
so-called because of their lamentation for their brother Hyas, killed
while hunting. They are the daughters of Aethra and Ocean, and sisters
of the seven Pleiades*).

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

19\. (*The sea starwort, Tripolion: useful for everything, hence men
pitch tents and dig it by night*).

19a. (*Hymns to Dionysus attributed to Orpheus and Musaeus. Orpheus
composed them, Musaeus corrected them to a slight extent and copied them
down*).

20\. (*Musaeus wrote a 'Hymn to Demeter' for the Lycomidae; this told
how Caucon son of Celaenos son of Phlyos took the rites of the Great
Goddesses from Eleusis to Andania in Messenia in the reign of Polycaon
and his wife Messênê*).

20a. (<span class="smallcaps">Herodotus</span>, vii. 6: *Onomacritus an
Athenian soothsayer was banished by Hipparchus for having inserted a
line into the writings of Musaeus, namely that the islands off Lemnos
would disappear under the sea*).

21\. (<span class="smallcaps">Herodotus</span>, VIII. 96: *Battle of
Salamis: the west wind carried many of the wrecked ships on to the shore
of Attica called Côlias; thus an oracle regarding this sea-battle by
Musaeus and others was fulfilled*).

22\. (*Oracle of Musaeus applied by the Athenians to the Battle of
Aegospotami*):

On the Athenians is coming a severe storm through the baseness of their
leaders, but there will be a consolation: they will completely bow the
city down, but they will pay the penalty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Epimenides of Crete](app05.md)
