[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app25)  [Next](app27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 31. EMPEDOCLES OF ACRAGAS

<span class="smallcaps">Empedocles</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Acragas</span> was in his prime about 450 B.C.

He wrote two poems in hexameter verses: *On Nature*, addressed to his
pupil Pausanias, and *Katharmoi* (*Purifications*), addressed to his
fellow-citizens of Acragas.

#### ON NATURE

1\. Pausanias, but you must listen, son of wise Anchites!

2\. For limited are the means of grasping (*i.e.* *the organs of sense
perception*) which are scattered throughout their limbs, and many are
the miseries that press in and blunt the thoughts. And having looked at
(*only*) a small part of existence during their lives, doomed to perish
swiftly like smoke they are carried aloft and wafted away, believing
only that upon which as individuals they chance to hit as they wander in
all directions; but every man preens himself on having found the Whole:
so little are these things to be seen by men or to be heard, or to be
comprehended by the mind! But you, since you have come here into
retirement, shall learn—not more than mortal intellect can attain.

3\. But, ye gods, avert from my tongue the madness of those men, and
guide forth from my reverent lips a pure stream! I beseech thee also,
much-wooed white-armed maiden Muse, convey (*to me*) such knowledge as
divine law allows us creatures of a day to hear, driving the
well-harnessed car from (*the realm of*) Piety! <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_30)

Nor shall the flowers of honour paid to fame by mortals force you at
least to accept them on condition that you rashly say more than is
holy—and are thereupon enthroned on the heights of wisdom!

But come, observe with every means, to see by which way

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

each thing is clear, and do not hold any (*percept of*) sight higher in
credibility than (*those*) according to hearing, nor (*set*) the
loud-sounding hearing above the evidence of the tongue (*taste*); nor
refuse credence at all to any of the other limbs where there exists a
path for perception, but use whatever way of perception makes each thing
clear.

4\. But it is of great concern to the lower orders to mistrust the
powerful; however, as the trustworthy evidence of my Muse commands,
grasp (*these things*), when my reasoned argument has been sifted in
your innermost heart! <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_31)

5\. To protect it within your silent bosom.

6\. Hear, first, the four roots of things: bright Zeus, and life-bearing
Hera, and Aidôneus, and Nêstis who causes a mortal spring of moisture to
flow with her tears.

7\. (*The Elements*): uncreated.

8\. And I shall tell you another thing: there is no creation of
substance in any one of mortal existences, nor any end in execrable
death, but only mixing and exchange of what has been mixed; and the name
'substance' (*Phusis*, '*nature*') is applied to them by mankind.

9\. But men, when these (*the Elements*) have been mixed in the form of
a man and come into the light, or in the form of a species of wild
animals, or plants, or birds, then say that this has 'come into being';
and when they separate, this men call sad fate (*death*). The terms that
Right demands they do not use; but through custom I myself also apply
these names.

10\. Death the Avenger.

11\. Fools!—for they have no long-sighted thoughts, since they imagine
that what previously did not exist comes into being, or that a thing
dies and is utterly destroyed.

12\. From what in no wise exists, it is impossible for anything to come
into being; and for Being to perish completely is incapable of
fulfilment and unthinkable; for it will always be there, wherever anyone
may place it on any occasion.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

13\. Nor is there any part of the Whole that is empty or overfull.

14\. No part of the Whole is empty; so whence could anything additional
come?

15\. A wise man would not conjecture such things in his heart, namely,
that so long as they are alive (which they call Life), they exist, and
experience bad and good fortune; but that before mortals were combined
(*out of the Elements*) and after they were dissolved, they are nothing
at all.

16\. (*Love and Hate*): As they were formerly, so also will they be, and
never, I think, shall infinite Time be emptied of these two.

17\. I shall tell of a double (*process*): at one time it increased so
as to be a single One out of Many; at another time again it grew apart
so as to be Many out of One. There is a double creation of mortals and a
double decline: the union of all things causes the birth and destruction
of the one (*race of mortals*), the other is reared as the elements grow
apart, and then flies asunder. And these (*elements*) never cease their
continuous exchange, sometimes uniting under the influence of Love, so
that all become One, at other times again each moving apart through the
hostile force of Hate. Thus in so far as they have the power to grow
into One out of Many, and again, when the One grows apart and Many are
formed, in this sense they come into being and have no stable life; but
in so far as they never cease their continuous exchange, in this sense
they remain always unmoved (*unaltered*) as they follow the cyclic
process.

But come, listen to my discourse! For be assured, learning will increase
your understanding. As I said before, revealing the aims of my
discourse, I shall tell you of a double process. At one time it
increased so as to be a single One out of Many; at another time it grew
apart so as to be Many out of One—Fire and Water and Earth and the
boundless height of Air, and also execrable Hate apart from these, of
equal weight in all directions, <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_32) and
Love in their midst, their equal in length and breadth. Observe her with
your mind, and do not sit with

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

wondering eyes! She it is who is believed to be implanted in mortal
limbs also; through her they think friendly thoughts and perform
harmonious actions, calling her Joy and Aphrodite. No mortal man has
perceived her as she moves in and out among them. But *you* must listen
to the undeceitful progress of my argument.

All these (*Elements*) are equal and of the same age in their creation;
but each presides over its own office, and each has its own character,
and they prevail in turn in the course of Time. And besides these,
nothing else comes into being, nor does anything cease. For if they had
been perishing continuously, they would Be no more; and what could
increase the Whole? And whence could it have come? In what direction
could it perish, since nothing is empty of these things? No, but these
things alone exist, and running through one another they become
different things at different times, and are ever continuously the same.

18\. Love (*Philia*). <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_33)

19\. Adhesive Love (*Philotês*). <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_33)

20\. This process is clearly to be seen throughout the mass of mortal
limbs: sometimes through Love all the limbs which the body has as its
lot come together into One, in the prime of flourishing life; at another
time again, sundered by evil feuds, they wander severally by the
breakers of the shore of life. Likewise too with shrub-plants and fish
in their watery dwelling, and beasts with mountain lairs and diver-birds
that travel on wings.

21\. But come, observe the following witness to my previous discourse,
lest in my former statements there was any substance of which the form
was missing. Observe the sun, bright to see and hot everywhere, and all
the immortal things (*heavenly bodies*) drenched with its heat and
brilliant light; and (*observe*) the rain, dark and chill over
everything; and from the Earth issue forth things based on the soil and
solid. But in (*the reign of*) Wrath they are all different in form and
separate, while in (*the reign of*) Love they come together and long for
one another. For from these (*Elements*) come all things that were

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

and are and will be; and trees spring up, and men and women, and beasts
and birds and water-nurtured fish, and even the long-lived gods who are
highest in honour. For these (*Elements*) alone exist, but by running
through one another they become different; to such a degree does mixing
change them.

22\. For all these things—beaming Sun and Earth and Heaven and Sea—are
connected in harmony with their own parts: all those (*parts*) which
have been sundered from them and exist in mortal limbs. Similarly all
those things which are more suitable for mixture are made like one
another and united in affection by Aphrodite. But those things which
differ most from one another in origin and mixture and the forms in
which they are moulded are completely unaccustomed to combine, and are
very baneful <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_34) because of the commands
of Hate, in that Hate has wrought their origin.

23\. As when painters decorate temple-offerings with colours—men who,
following their intelligence, are well-skilled in their craft—these,
when they take many-coloured pigments in their hands, and have mixed
them in a harmony, taking more of some, less of another, create from
them forms like to all things, making trees and men and women and
animals and birds and fish nurtured in water, and even long-lived gods,
who are highest in honour; so let not Deception compel your mind (*to
believe*) that there is any other source for mortals, as many as are to
be seen existing in countless numbers. But know this for certain, since
you have the account from a divinity. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_35)

24\. . . . Touching on summit after summit, not to follow a single path
of discourse to the end.

25\. For what is right can well be uttered even twice.

26\. In turn they get the upper hand in the revolving cycle, and perish
into one another and increase in the turn appointed by Fate. For they
alone exist, but running through one another they become men and the
tribes of other animals, sometimes uniting under the influence of Love
into one ordered Whole, at other times again each moving apart through
the hostile

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

force of Hate, until growing together into the Whole which is One, they
are quelled. Thus in so far as they have the power to grow into One out
of Many, and again, when the One grows apart and Many are formed, in
this sense they come into being and have no stable life; but in so far
as they never cease their continuous exchange, in this sense they remain
always unmoved (*unaltered*) as they follow the cyclic process. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_36)

27\. (*The Sphere under the dominion of Love*): Therein are articulated
neither the swift limbs of the sun, nor the shaggy might of Earth, nor
the sea: so firmly is it (*the Whole*) fixed in a close-set secrecy, a
rounded Sphere enjoying a circular solitude. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_37)

27a. There is no strife nor unseemly war in his limbs.

28\. But he (*God*) is equal in all directions to himself and altogether
eternal, a rounded Sphere enjoying a circular solitude.

29\. For there do not start two branches from his back; (he has) no
feet, no swift knees, no organs of reproduction; but he was a Sphere,
and in all directions equal to himself.

30\. But when great Hate had been nourished in its limbs, and had rushed
up into honour, when the time was fulfilled which, alternating, is fixed
for them (*Love and Hate*) by a broad oath. . .

31\. For all the limbs of the god trembled in succession.

32\. The joint connects two things.

33\. As when fig juice binds white milk . . .

34\. Having kneaded together barley-meal with water . . .

35\. But I will go back to the path of song which I formerly laid down,
drawing one argument from another: that (*path which shows how*) when
Hate has reached the bottommost abyss of the eddy, and when Love reaches
the middle of the whirl, then in it (*the whirl*) all these things come
together so as to be One—not all at once, but voluntarily uniting, some
from one quarter, others from another. And as they mixed,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

there poured forth countless races of mortals. But many things stand
unmixed side by side with the things mixing—all those which Hate
(*still*) aloft <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_38) checked, since it
had not yet faultlessly <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_39) withdrawn
from the Whole to the outermost limits of the circle, but was remaining
in some places, and in other places departing from the limbs (*of the
Sphere*). But in so far as it went on quietly streaming out, to the same
extent there was entering a benevolent immortal inrush of faultless
Love. And swiftly those things became mortal which previously had
experienced immortality, and things formerly unmixed became mixed,
changing their paths. And as they mixed, there poured forth countless
races of mortals, equipped with forms of every sort, a marvel to behold.

36\. As they came together, Hate returned to the outermost (*bound*).

37\. (*Fire increases Fire*), Earth increases its own substance, Aether
(*increases*) Aether.

38\. Come now, I will first tell you of (*the sun*) <span
id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_40) the beginning, (*the Elements*) from which
all the things we now look upon came forth into view: Earth, and the sea
with many waves, and damp Air, and the Titan Aether which clasps the
circle all round.

39\. If the depths of the earth were unlimited, and also the vast
Aether, a doctrine which has foolishly issued forth off the tongues of
many, and has been spread abroad out of their mouths, since they have
seen only a little of the Whole . . .

40\. Sharp-shooting sun and gracious moon.

41\. But (*the sun*) collected in a ball travels round the great sky.

42\. (*The moon*) cuts off his (*the sun's*) rays, whenever she goes
below him, and she throws a shadow on as much of the Earth as is the
breadth of the bright-eyed moon.

43\. Thus the ray (*of sunshine*) having struck the broad surface of the
moon (*returns at once in order that, running, it may reach the
heavens*).

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

44\. (*The Sun, having been round the Earth, by reflection from the
heavenly light*) flashes back to Olympus with serene countenance.

45\. There whirls round the Earth a circular borrowed light.

46\. As the nave of the chariot (-*wheel*) whirls round the goal, (*so
does the moon circle closely round the Earth*).

47\. She gazes at the sacred circle of her lord (*the sun*) opposite.

48\. It is the Earth that makes night by coming in the way of the
(*sun's*) rays.

49\. Of night, lonely, blind-eyed.

50\. Iris brings from the sea a wind or a great rain-storm.

51\. Mightily upwards (*rushes Fire*).

52\. Many fires burn below the surface (*of the Earth*).

53\. For so (*the Aether*) chanced to be running at that time, though
often differently.

54\. (*Fire by nature rose upwards*), but Aether sank down with long
roots upon the Earth.

55\. Sea, the sweat of Earth.

56\. Salt was solidified, pressed by the forceful rays (*of the sun*).

57\. On it (*Earth*) many foreheads without necks sprang forth, and arms
wandered unattached, bereft of shoulders, and eyes strayed about alone,
needing brows.

58\. Limbs wandered alone.

59\. But as the one divinity became more and more mingled with the other
(*i.e.* *Love and Hate*), these things fell together as each chanced,
and many other things in addition to these were continuously produced.

60\. Creatures with rolling gait and innumerable hands.

61\. Many creatures were created with a face and breast on both sides;
offspring of cattle with the fronts of men, and again

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

there arose offspring of men with heads of cattle; and (*creatures made
of elements*) mixed in part from men, in part of female sex, furnished
with hairy limbs. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_41)

62\. Come now, hear how the Fire as it was separated sent up the
night-produced shoots of men and much-lamenting women; for my tale is
not wide of the mark nor ill-informed. At first, undifferentiated shapes
of earth arose, having a share of both elements Water and Heat. These
the Fire sent up, wishing to reach its like, but they did not yet
exhibit a lovely body with limbs, nor the voice and organ such as is
proper to men.

63\. But the substance of (*the child's*) limbs is divided (*between
them*), part in the man's (*body and part in the woman's*).

64\. Upon him comes Desire also, reminding <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_42) him through sight.

65\. And they (*male and female seed*) were poured into the pure parts.
Some of it forms women, (*namely*) that which has encountered Cold,
(*and conversely that which encounters Hot produces males*).

66\. The divided meadows of Aphrodite.

67\. For in the warmer part the stomach (*i.e.* *the womb*) is
productive of the male, and for this reason men are swarthy and more
powerfully built <span id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_43) and more shaggy.

68\. On the tenth day of the eighth month (*the blood*) becomes a white
putrefaction (*milk*).

69\. Double-bearing: (*women, as bearing in both the seventh and the
ninth months*).

70\. Sheepskin: (*the membrane, or caul, round the unborn child*).

71\. But if your belief concerning these matters was at all lacking—how
from the mixture of Water, Earth, Aether and Sun (*Fire*) there came
into being the forms and colours of mortal things in such numbers as now
exist fitted together by Aphrodite . . .

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

72\. How also tall trees and fish of the sea . . .

73\. And as at that time Cypris, when she had drenched earth with
rain-water, busying herself in preparation of the forms, <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_44) gave them to swift Fire to strengthen them
. . .

74\. (*Aphrodite*): bringing the tuneless tribe of prolific fish.

75\. Of (*the animals*), those that are of dense composition on the
outside and rare within, having received this flabbiness under the hands
of Cypris . . .

76\. This is (*found*) in the hard-backed shells of the sea-dwellers,
especially the sea-snails and the stone-skinned turtles. There you will
see earth dwelling on the surface of the flesh.

77, 78. (*Trees*) retentive of their leaves and retentive of their
fruit, flourish with abundance of fruit all the year round, in
accordance with the Air (*i.e.* *Vapour, Moisture, in their
composition*).

79\. Thus eggs are borne, first by the tall olive trees . . .

80\. . . .Which is the reason why pomegranates are late-ripening and
apples remain juicy for so long(?). <span id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_45)

81\. Wine is the water from the bark, after it has fermented in the
wood.

82\. Hair, and leaves, and the close feathers of birds, and the scales
that grow on stout limbs, are the same thing.

83\. But hedgehogs have sharp-shooting hairs that bristle on their
backs.

84\. As when a man, thinking to make an excursion through a stormy
night, prepares a lantern, a flame of burning fire, fitting
lantern-plates to keep out every sort of winds, and these plates
disperse the breath of the blowing winds; but the light leaps out
through them, in so far as it is finer, and shines across the threshold
with unwearying beams: so at that time did the aboriginal Fire, confined
in membranes and in fine

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

tissues, hide itself <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_46) in the round
pupils; and these (*tissues*) were pierced throughout with marvellous
passages. They kept out the deep reservoir of water surrounding the
pupil, but let the Fire through (*from within*) outwards, since it was
so much finer.

85\. But the benevolent flame (*of the eye*) happened to obtain only a
slight admixture of Earth.

86\. . . . Out of which (*Elements*) divine Aphrodite built tireless
eyes.

87\. Aphrodite, having fastened them (*eyes*) together with clamps of
affection . . .

88\. One vision is produced by both (*eyes*).

89\. Realising that from all created things there are effluences . . .

90\. Thus sweet seized on sweet, bitter rushed towards bitter, sour
moved towards sour, and hot settled upon hot.

91\. (*Water is*) more able to agree with wine, but unwilling (to mix)
with oil.

92\. (*The sterility of mules is due to the quality of their seed: both
the male and female seed are soft substances which when mixed produce a
hard substance, as when*) brass is mixed with tin.

93\. The berry of the grey elder mingles with the linen. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_47)

94\. And the black colour in the bottom of a river arises from the
shadow, and the same thing is seen in deep caves.

95\. When first they (*the eyes*) grew together in the hands of Cypris .
. . (*explanation of why some creatures see better by day, others by
night*).

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

96\. But the Earth obligingly in its broad vessels received two parts
out of the eight of shining Nêstis, four of Hephaestus. And these became
the white bones fitted together by the cementing of Harmony, divinely
originated.

97\. The spine (*acquired its present form by being broken when the
animal turned its neck*).

98\. The Earth, having been finally moored in the harbours of Love,
joined with these in about equal proportions: with Hephaestus, with
moisture, and with all-shining Aether, either a little more (*of Earth*)
or a little less to their more. And from these came blood and the forms
of other flesh.

99\. (*The ear is a kind of*) bell. (*It is*) a fleshy shoot.

100\. The way everything breathes in and out is as follows: all
(*creatures*) have tubes of flesh, empty of blood, which extend over the
surface of the body; and at the mouths of these tubes the outermost
surface of the skin is perforated with frequent pores, so as to keep in
the blood while a free way is cut for the passage of the air. Thus, when
the thin blood flows back from here, the air, bubbling, rushes in in a
mighty wave; and when the blood leaps up (*to the surface*), there is an
expiration of air. As when a girl, playing with a water-catcher <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_48) of shining brass—when, having placed the
mouth of the pipe on her well-shaped hand she dips the vessel into the
yielding substance of silvery water, still the volume of air pressing
from inside on the many holes keeps out the water, until she uncovers
the condensed stream (*of air*). Then at once when the air flows out,
the water flows in in an equal quantity. Similarly, when water occupies
the depths of the brazen vessel, and the opening or passage is stopped
by the human flesh (*hand*), and the air outside, striving to get in,
checks the water, by controlling the surface at the entrance of the
noisy strainer <span id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_49) until she lets go
with her hand:

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

then again, in exactly the opposite way from what happened before, as
the air rushes in, the water flows out in equal volume. Similarly when
the thin blood, rushing through the limbs, flows back into the interior,
straightway a stream of air flows in with a rush; and when the blood
flows up again, again there is a breathing-out in equal volume.

101\. . . . Tracking down with its nostrils the portions of animal
limbs, all those (*portions*) that, when living, they left behind from
their feet on the tender grass. <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_50)

102\. Thus all (*creatures*) have a share of breathing and smell.

103\. Thus all (*creatures*) have intelligence, by the will of Fortune.

104\. And in so far as the rarest things came together in their fall . .
.

105\. (*The heart*) nourished in the seas of blood which courses in two
opposite directions: this is the place where is found for

the most part what men call Thought; for the blood round the heart is
Thought in mankind.

106\. The intelligence of Man grows towards the material that is
present.

107\. For from these (*Elements*) are all things fitted and fixed
together, and by means of these do men think, and feel pleasure and
sorrow.

108\. In so far as their natures have changed (*during the day*), so
does it befall men to think changed thoughts (*in their dreams*).

109\. We see Earth by means of Earth, Water by means of Water, divine
Air by means of Air, and destructive Fire by means of Fire; Affection by
means of Affection, Hate by means of baneful Hate.

109a. (*Reflections are emanations on to the mirror from the objects
mirrored*).

110\. If you press them (*these truths?*) deep into your firm

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

mind, and contemplate them with good will and a studious care that is
pure, these things will all assuredly remain with you throughout your
life; and you will obtain many other things from them; for these things
of themselves cause each (*element*) to increase in the character,
according to the way of each man's nature. But if you intend to grasp
after different things such as dwell among men in countless numbers and
blunt their thoughts, miserable (*trifles*), certainly these things will
quickly desert you in the course of time, longing to return to their own
original kind. For all things, be assured, have intelligence and a
portion of Thought.

111\. You shall learn all the drugs that exist as a defence against
illness and old age; for you alone will I accomplish all this. You shall
check the force of the unwearying winds which rush upon the earth with
their blasts and lay waste the cultivated fields. And again, if you
wish, you shall conduct the breezes back again. You shall create a
seasonable dryness after the dark rain for mankind, and again you shall
create after summer drought the streams that nourish the trees and
\[which will flow in the sky\]. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_51) And
you shall bring out of Hades a dead man restored to strength.

#### KATHARMOI (PURIFICATIONS)

112\. Friends, who dwell in the great town on the city's heights,
looking down on yellow Acragas, you who are occupied with good deeds,
who are harbours (of refuge) treating foreigners with respect, and who
are unacquainted with wickedness: greeting! I go about among you as an
immortal god, no longer a mortal, held in honour by all, as I seem (to
them to deserve), <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_52) crowned with
fillets and flowing garlands. When I come to them in their flourishing
towns, to men and women, I am honoured; and they follow me in thousands,
to inquire where is the path of advantage, some desiring oracles, while
others ask to hear a word of healing for their manifold diseases, since
they have long been pierced with cruel pains.

113\. But why do I lay stress on these things, as if I were achieving
something great in that I surpass mortal men who are liable to many
forms of destruction?

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

114\. Friends, I know that Truth is present in the story that I shall
tell; but it is actually very difficult for men, and the impact of
conviction on their minds is unwelcome.

115\. There is an oracle of Necessity, an ancient decree of the gods,
eternal, sealed fast with broad oaths, that when one of the divine
spirits whose portion is long life sinfully stains his own limbs with
bloodshed, and following Hate has sworn a false oath—these must wander
for thrice ten thousand seasons far from the company of the blessed,
being born throughout the period into all kinds of mortal shapes, which
exchange one hard way of life for another. For the mighty Air chases
them into the Sea, and the Sea spews them forth on to the dry land, and
the Earth (*drives them*) towards the rays of the blazing Sun; and the
Sun hurls them into the eddies of the Aether. One (*Element*) receives
them from the other, and all loathe them. Of this number am I too now, a
fugitive from heaven and a wanderer, because I trusted in raging Hate.

116\. (*The Grace*) loathes intolerable Necessity.

117\. For by now I have been born as boy, girl, plant, bird, and dumb
sea-fish.

118\. I wept and wailed when I saw the unfamiliar land (*at birth*).

119\. How great the honour, how deep the happiness from which (*I am
exiled*)!

120\. 'We have come into this roofed cavern.' (*Spoken by those who
escort the souls to Earth*).

121\. . . . The joyless land where are Murder and Wrath and the tribes
of other Dooms, and Wasting Diseases and Corruptions and the Works of
Dissolution <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_53) wander over the Meadow
of Disaster in the darkness.

122\. Here were the Earth-Mother (Chthoniê) and the farseeing
Sunshine-Nymph (Hêliopê), bloody Discord, and Harmony with her serious
mien, Beauty and Ugliness, the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Speed-Nymph and
the Nymph of Delay; and lovely Infallibility and dark-eyed Uncertainty.

123\. (*The female figures*) Growth and Decay, Rest and Waking, Movement
and Immobility, much-crowned Majesty, and Defilement, Silence and Voice.

124\. Alas, oh wretched race of mortals, direly unblessed! Such are the
conflicts and groanings from which you have been born!

125\. For from living creatures he made them dead, changing their forms,
(*and from dead, living*).

126\. (*A female divinity*) clothing (*the soul*) in the unfamiliar
tunic of flesh.

127\. In the (*realm of*) animals they become lions that have their lair
in the mountains, and their bed on the ground; and in (the realm of)
fair-tressed trees, (*they become*) laurels.

128\. And for them there was no god Ares, nor Battle-Din, nor Zeus the
King, nor Cronos nor Poseidon, but only Cypris the Queen. These men
sought to please her with pious gifts—with painted animals and perfumes
of cunningly-devised smell, with sacrifice of unmixed myrrh and of
fragrant incense, and by casting libations of yellow honey on the
ground. And the altar was not drenched with the unmixed blood of bulls,
but this was the greatest pollution among men, to devour the goodly
limbs (*of animals*) whose life they had reft from them.

129\. There was living among them a man of surpassing knowledge, who had
acquired the extremest wealth of the intellect, one expert in every kind
of skilled activity. For whenever he reached out with his whole
intellect, he easily discerned each one of existing things, in ten and
even twenty lifetimes of mankind.

130\. And all creatures, both animals and birds, were tame and gentle
towards men, and friendliness glowed between them.

131\. If for the sake of any mortal, immortal Muse, it has pleased thee
that my poetic endeavours should be of concern

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

to thee, now once again, in answer to my prayer, stand beside me,
Calliopeia, as I expound a good theory concerning the blessed gods!

132\. Happy is he who has acquired the riches of divine thoughts, but
wretched the man in whose mind dwells an obscure opinion about the gods!

133\. It is not possible to bring God near within reach of our eyes, nor
to grasp him with our hands, by which route the broadest road of
Persuasion runs into the human mind.

134\. For he is not equipped with a human head on his body, nor from his
back do two branches start; (*he has*) no feet, no swift knees, <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_54) no hairy genital organs; but he is Mind,
holy and ineffable, and only Mind, which darts through the whole
universe with its swift thoughts.

135\. But that which is lawful for all extends continuously through the
broad-ruling Air and through the boundless Light. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_55)

136\. Will ye not cease from this harsh-sounding slaughter? Do you not
see that you are devouring one another in the thoughtlessness of your
minds?

137\. The father having lifted up the son slaughters him with a prayer,
in his great folly. But they are troubled <span
id="fr_61"></span>[3](#fn_56) at sacrificing one who begs for mercy. But
he, on the other hand, deaf to (*the victim's*) cries, slaughters him in
his halls and prepares the evil feast. Likewise son takes father, and
children their mother, and tearing out the life, eat the flesh of their
own kin.

138\. Having drained off their life with bronze . . .

139\. (*Hymn of repentance for sins of diet*): 'Alas that a pitiless day
did not destroy me before I planned evil deeds of eating with my lips!'

140\. Keep entirely away from laurel-leaves!

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

141\. Wretches, utter wretches, keep your hands off beans!

142\. Him will the roofed palace of aegis-bearing Zeus never receive,
nor yet the roof of Hades and of the piteous voice. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_57)

143\. (*Wash the hands*) cutting off (*water*) from five springs into
(*a vessel of*) enduring bronze.

144\. To fast from sin.

145\. Therefore you are distraught with dire sins, and shall never ease
your heart of your grievous sorrows!

146\. And at the last they become seers, and bards, and physicians, and
princes among earth-dwelling men, from which (*state*) they blossom
forth as gods highest in honour.

147\. Sharing the hearth of the other immortals, sharing the same table,
freed from the lot of human griefs, indestructible.

148\. Earth that envelops mortals (*the body*).

149\. Cloud-gathering Air.

150\. Full-blooded liver. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_58)

151\. Life-giving Aphrodite.

152\. (*Old age, the evening of life; evening, the old age of the day: a
similar metaphor in Empedocles*)

153\. Baubô. <span id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_59)

153a. In seven times seven days (*the unborn child is formed*).

*Doubtful fragments*

154\. (*Plutarch, 'On Eating Flesh', has a passage in defence of those
who began the practice: they did not do it out of lawless
self-indulgence, but from dire need. He imagines them addressing the men
of today and saying: ‘You have plenty of everything; but for us life was
hard. It was a time before*) the sun had settled in his unchanging
course, so as to divide morning and evening; before his path turned back
again, crowning him with the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

fruit-bearing, flower-garlanded seasons; when the Earth was overwhelmed
with the unregulated outpourings of rivers, and vast areas were deserts,
formless because of lakes, deep mud-pits, barren scrub and woodland.’

154a. A potion of birth-pangs, pains, disappointments and lamentations .
. .

154b. (<span class="smallcaps">Aratus</span>, *Phaenomena*, 131 *sqq*.)

154c. It is immediately clear which plants are going to be fruitful.

*Spurious fragments*

155\. Têlaugês, famous son of Theanô and Pythagoras!

156\. (*Elegiac verses on Pausanias, the pupil to whom the poem 'On
Nature' is addressed*).

157\. (*Punning elegiac couplet on Acrôn, a physician of Acragas*).

158\. Bereaved of the happy life.

159\. The accumulated bulk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[51:1](app26.htm#fr_34) Others translate: 'Muse
of such things as it is lawful for mortals to hear, escort me from the
realms of Piety, driving my well-harnessed car!'

Here there is probably a gap, where Empedocles takes up his address to
Pausanias again.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[52:1](app26.htm#fr_35) διασηθέντος (Diels),
from διασήθω, 'sift'; but he translates: 'when my speech has passed
through the sieve of your inward parts.' Clement read διατμηθέντος,
which gives: 'when my argument has been analysed in your inner parts', a
perfectly sound meaning.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[53:1](app26.htm#fr_36) ἁπάντῃ (Sextus);
Simplicius read ἑκαστον, which has been emended to ἑκάστῳ
(Panzerbieter): 'equal in weight to each' (of the Elements).

<span id="fn_33"></span>[54:1](app26.htm#fr_38) Empedocles probably used
*Philotês*, not *Philia*; both words mean Love in the widest sense, not
merely *Eros*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[55:1](app26.htm#fr_39) λυγρά is usually
translated 'sorry', 'grieved'; but cp. Odyssey IV. 230: φάρμακα λυγρά.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[55:2](app26.htm#fr_40) The Muse.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[56:1](app26.htm#fr_41) Of this fragment, v. 3=
B17, v. 34 and B21, v. 13; vv. 5, 6 = B17, vv. 7, 8; vv. 8-12 = B17, vv.
9-13.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[56:2](app26.htm#fr_42) *i.e.*, content with
these conditions, self-sufficient.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[57:1](app26.htm#fr_43) *i.e.*, not yet fallen
to the bottom.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[57:2](app26.htm#fr_44) *i.e.*, 'completely', so
that no fault could be found with the mixture.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[57:3](app26.htm#fr_45) ἥλιον Clem.; corrupt.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[59:1](app26.htm#fr_46) σκιεροῖς (Kranz); Diels
read στείροις ('sterile').

<span id="fn_42"></span>[59:2](app26.htm#fr_47) ἀναμιμνήσκων, a dubious
emendation by Diels for ἀμμίσγων, 'mingling' (male and female).

<span id="fn_43"></span>[59:3](app26.htm#fr_48) ἁδρομελέστεροι: Karsten
for MSS. ἀνδρωδέστεροι.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[60:1](app26.htm#fr_49) εἴδεα. Diels read ἴδεα
from ἴδος (damp heat).

<span id="fn_45"></span>[60:2](app26.htm#fr_50) Plutarch, who quotes
this, did not know the meaning of ὑπέρφλοιον, but was told by scholars
that φλοίειν is used to mean 'to be in its prime', 'to flourish', and as
the apple is the fruit which best preserves its prime, the poet called
it 'of surpassing or enduring ripeness'. Empedocles is explaining the
effect of the sun on various fruits.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[61:1](app26.htm#fr_51) λοχάζετο here is
intransitive. Burnet wrongly takes it as transitive and supplies 'she
(Love)' as the subject. For the accusative κούρην cp. Hdt. v. 121,
ἐλόχησαν ὁδόν 'occupied the road with an ambuscade'.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[61:2](app26.htm#fr_52) This fragment concerns
dyeing, as illustrative of the power of assimilation of one substance by
another. The MSS. read κρόκου or κρόκον, for which Diels substituted
κόκκος, 'berry'; and ἀκρίς, for which Wilamowitz suggested ἀκτῆς, from
ἀκτέα, 'elder'. If the MSS. readings κρόκου and ἀκτίς be retained, the
fragment can be more plausibly translated: 'The ray of bright(?) saffron
mingles with the linen.' The emendations are ingenious but improbable.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[62:1](app26.htm#fr_53) *Klepsydra:* not here
the water-clock, but a domestic vessel for picking up small quantities
of liquid out of a larger vessel. See Hugh Last, *Class. Q.* XVIII
(1924), pp. 169 *sqq*. for description and illustration.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[62:2](app26.htm#fr_54) ἠθμοῖο, the base of the
water-catcher, pierced with holes through which the liquid enters. This,
the reading of a few less good MSS., is probably correct. Burnet prefers
the commoner ἰσθμοῖο (the control-pipe at the top of the vessel),
because of δυσηχέος ('noisy'), which he thinks means 'gurgling', as when
a bottle full of water is turned upside down; such an experiment is
described in Aristotle, *Probl*. 943. But this is not to the point here:
the water-catcher was not turned upside down, but the flow of liquid was
regulated by opening and shutting the upper entrance with the hand.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[63:1](app26.htm#fr_55) The hunting-dog is
referred to. Smell, an emanation from the animal, is given off only when
it is alive; hence, when dead, it does not leave traces of interest to
other animals.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[64:1](app26.htm#fr_56) Reading corrupt.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[64:2](app26.htm#fr_57) ὤσπερ ἔοικα. Diels
translated this 'as I deserve', which, as Kranz says, is impossible.
Another reading is ἔοικε, 'as is proper'. See *Companion*, p. 178, note.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[65:1](app26.htm#fr_58) ἔργα τε ῥευστά. Diels
(followed by Burnet) thought that this referred to floods; but bodily
ailments are here in question. Bignone suggested 'works of dissolution'.
Kranz translates 'the work of Rheuma', *i.e.* of diseases due to excess
of the moist element, as opposed to fevers ('wasting diseases').

<span id="fn_54"></span>[67:1](app26.htm#fr_59) vv. 1, 2, = B29, vv. 1,
2.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[67:2](app26.htm#fr_60) Divine law as opposed to
human law; said to refer in particular to the prohibition of
animal-slaughter.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[67:3](app26.htm#fr_61) οἱ δ᾽ ἀπορεῦνται,
emendation of Diels, who takes 'they' as 'the attendants at the
sacrifice'. If the MSS. reading of δὲ πορεῦνται λισσόεμνοι be retained,
the meaning is: 'they (the victims) come up to beg for mercy'.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[68:1](app26.htm#fr_62) An uncertain restoration
by Diels of a passage quoted for grammatical reasons, from the
Herculanean MSS.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[68:2](app26.htm#fr_63) Quoted by Plutarch to
show that Empedocles does not use epithets idly for the sake of fine
writing, but in order to bring out the exact nature or function of
something.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[68:3](app26.htm#fr_64) Connected with Demeter
in Orphic mythology; said to have been used by Empedocles to mean
'belly'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 32. Menestôr of Sybaris](app27)
