[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app31)  [Next](app33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 37. DAMÔN OF ATHENS

<span class="smallcaps">Damôn</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Athens</span> was in his prime about 460 B.C.

His teaching seems to have been mainly oral, but he is said to have
incorporated his doctrines in an *Areopagiticus* (speech purporting to
be written for delivery to the Areopagus).

1\. (<span class="smallcaps">Cicero</span>: Damon treated music in a way
that embraced not merely the particular but the universal).

2\. (<span class="smallcaps">Philodemus</span>: If Damon addressed the
actual, and not a fictitious Areopagus, he deceived them in saying that
men of taste should take up music).

3\. Those who practise the licentious sport . . .

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

4\. (<span class="smallcaps">Philodemus</span>: *If anyone inquires
whether music advances one in all the virtues or only in some, the
answer is given that Damon thinks that it is in all, for he says*): in
singing and playing the lyre, a boy will be likely to reveal not only
Courage and Moderation, but also Justice.

S. (<span class="smallcaps">Ps.-Plutarch</span>: *The relaxed Lydian
mode was discovered by Damon*).

6\. Song and dance necessarily arise when the soul is in some way moved;
liberal and beautiful songs and dances create a similar soul, and the
reverse kind create a reverse kind of soul.

7\. (<span class="smallcaps">Aristeides Quintilianus</span>: *Through
similarity, the notes of a continuous melody create a character that did
not exist in boys and in those more advanced in years, and also bring
out the latent character. This was the doctrine of Damon's school also.
In the harmonies handed down by him it is possible to find in the
sequences of notes that sometimes the female notes, sometimes the male,
either predominate or diminish or are completely absent, obviously
because a different harmony was serviceable according to the character
of each particular soul*).

8\. (<span class="smallcaps">Socrates</span> *in the 'Laches' of* Plato:
*Damon has much in common with Prodicus, who excelled in the science of
nomenclature*).

9\. (<span class="smallcaps">Socrates</span> *in the 'Republic' of*
Plato: *Socrates pretends to have an uncertain recollection of Damon's
teaching, in which Damon analysed metres and their feet, using terms
such as 'martial', 'dactylic', 'heroic', and described the iambus and
the trochee; he assigned praise and blame not only to the rhythms for
moral quality, but also to the feet, or to both together*).

10\. Musical modes are nowhere altered without (*changes in*) the most
important laws of the State.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 38. Hippôn of Samos](app33.md)
