[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app58)  [Next](app60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 64. DIOGENES OF APOLLÔNIA

<span class="smallcaps">Diogenes</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Apollônia</span> (probably on the Black Sea), lived in
the later half of the fifth century B.C.

His longest surviving work was that *On Natural Science*; he also wrote,
and mentioned in his main work, separate treatises on Meteorology, and
On the Nature of Man; and an attack on the Natural Scientists, whom he
called Sophists.

1\. In starting any thesis, it seems to me, one should put forward as
one's point of departure something incontrovertible; the expression
should be simple and dignified.

2\. It seems to me, to sum up the whole matter, that all existing things
are created by the alteration of the same thing, and are the same thing.
This is very obvious. For if the things now existing in this
universe—earth and water and air and fire and all the other things which
are seen to exist in this world: if any one of these were different in
its own (*essential*) nature, and were not the same thing which was
transformed in many ways and changed, in no way could things mix with
one another, nor could there be any profit or damage which accrued from
one thing to another, nor could any plant grow out of the earth, nor any
animal or any other thing come into being, unless it were so compounded
as to be the same. But all these things come into being in different
forms at different times by changes of the same (*substance*), and they
return to the same.

3\. Such a distribution would not have been possible without
Intelligence, (*namely*) that all things should have their measure:

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

winter and summer and night and day and rains and winds and periods of
fine weather; other things also, if one will study them closely, will be
found to have the best possible arrangement.

4\. Further, in addition to these, there are also the following
important indications: men and all other animals live by means of Air,
which they breathe in, and this for them is both Soul (Life) and
Intelligence, as had been clearly demonstrated in this treatise; and if
this is taken from (*them*), Intelligence also leaves them.

5\. And it seems to me that that which has Intelligence is that which is
called Air by mankind; and further, that by this, all creatures are
guided, and that it rules everything; for this in itself seems to me to
be God and to reach everywhere and to arrange everything and to be in
everything. And there is nothing which has no share of it; but the share
of each thing is not the same as that of any other, but on the contrary
there are many forms both of the Air itself and of Intelligence; for it
is manifold in form: hotter and colder and dryer and wetter and more
stationary or having a swifter motion; and there are many other
differences inherent in it and infinite (*forms*) of savour and colour.
Also in all animals the Soul is the same thing, (*namely*) Air, warmer
than that outside in which we are, but much colder than that nearer the
sun. This degree of warmth is not the same in any of the animals (and
indeed, it is not the same among different human beings), but it
differs, not greatly, but so as to be similar. But in fact, no one thing
among things subject to change can possibly be exactly like any other
thing, without becoming the same thing. Since therefore change is
manifold, animals also are manifold and many, and not like one another
either in form or in way of life or in intelligence, because of the
large number of (*the results of*) changes. Nevertheless, all things
live, see and hear by the same thing (*Air*), and all have the rest of
Intelligence also from the same.

6\. The blood-vessels in man are as follows: there are two main
blood-vessels; these extend from the abdomen along the spinal column,
one to the right, one to the left, going (*down*) to each of the legs
correspondingly, and up to the head past the collar-bone through the
throat. From these, blood-vessels

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

extend throughout the whole body: from the right-hand one to the right
side, from the left-hand one to the left side; the two biggest to the
heart along the spine, and others a little higher through the chest
below the armpit to each of the corresponding arms. And the one is
called splenetic (*after the spleen*), the other (*after the liver*)
hepatic. The extreme end of each of them divides, one branch going to
the thumb, the other to the wrist, and from these go fine and
many-branched veins to the rest of the hand and the fingers. (*Two*)
other finer blood-vessels lead from the original (*main*) blood-vessels
on the right to the liver, and on the left to the spleen and the
kidneys. Those extending to the legs divide at the point of attachment
(*to the body*) and extend throughout the thigh; the largest of them
goes behind the thigh and is thick where it emerges; a second goes
inside the thigh and is a little less thick. Then they travel past the
knee to the shin and the foot, as in the hands; and they descend into
the ankle and thence to the toes.

From the chief blood-vessels, many fine veins divide off also to the
abdomen and the sides. Those which extend to the head through the throat
come into view as large blood-vessels in the neck; and from each of
these, at its extremity, many divide off to the head, those on the right
going to the left, those on the left going to the right; and they each
end at the ear.

There is another blood-vessel on each side of the neck parallel to the
large one, a little smaller than the latter; into this the majority of
those from the head itself unite. These extend through the throat
inside, and from each of them (*blood-vessels*) travel below the
shoulder-blade and to the arms. And beside the splenetic and hepatic
blood-vessels others a little smaller appear: these are opened when
there is any pain under the skin, but if the pain is in the abdomen, the
hepatic and splenetic vessels are bled. There are others also leading
from these below the breasts. There are other fine ones again which lead
from each (*of the main vessels*) through the spinal marrow to the
testicles in men, and in women to the womb. (The main blood-vessels,
which come from the abdomen, are broader, and then become finer, until
they change over from right to left and from left to right). These are
called after the semen. The thickest blood is swallowed up by the fleshy
parts; but if any is left over after passing through these parts, it
becomes fine and warm and foamlike.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

7\. And this (*Element*) itself is a body both everlasting and immortal;
whereas of other things, some come into being and others pass away.

8\. But this seems to me to be clear, that it is great and strong,
everlasting and immortal and manifold in form.

9\. (GALEN, *quoting* Rufus of Ephesus: *All medical men agree that the
male foetus is formed sooner and moves sooner than the female; Diogenes
alone says the contrary*).

10\. (*Contracted form of the word 'full'*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 65. Cratylus of Athens](app60)
