[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app67)  [Next](app69.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 73. HECATAEUS OF ABDÊRA

<span class="smallcaps">Hecataeus</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Abdêra</span> lived at the end of the fourth and the
beginning of the third centuries B.C.

He was credited with books *On the Hyperboreans* and *On the Philosophy
of the Egyptians*. A work *On the Jews* was also attributed to him.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

(*From 'On the Hyperboreans'*).

1\. (*Elixoia, island of the Hyperboreans, lies beyond the river
Karambyka; the islanders are named Karambykae from the river*).

2\. (*Hecataeus calls the Northern Ocean 'Amalchius' from the River
Parapanisus onward, which river irrigates Scythia: the name 'Amalchius'
in Scythian means frozen'*).

3\. (*He celebrated the Hyperboreans and their worship of Apollo*).

4\. (*Hecataeus says that the Hyperboreans survived to his day. They
worship Apollo, who has been seen visiting them. There are three
branches of Hyperboreans*).

5\. (*Hecataeus and others say that in the place opposite the Celtic
land, in the ocean, is an island not smaller than Sicily; this belongs
to the north, and is inhabited by the so-called Hyperboreans. It is
fertile and productive and of fine climate, and has two crops a year.*

*They say that the moon, being only a short distance away, can be
completely seen, and has several earthy projections clearly visible. It
is said that Apollo visits the island every 19th year, and this is
called by the Greeks a Great Year, when all the constellations are
completing their journeys. On his appearance, the god plays the harp and
dances all night long, from the spring equinox to the rise of the
Pleiades, enjoying his own fine weather. This State is ruled by the
Boreadae, who are descendants of Boreas; and the offices are
hereditary*).

(*From the work 'On the Philosophy of the Egyptians'*).

6\. (*The Egyptians speak riddlingly of their gods in the form of
beetle, serpent, hawk etc., as Manetho and Hecataeus say. Hecataeus says
that the Magi say that the gods 'come into being'. The Magi preach
immortality for men*).

7\. (*Diodorus’ account of Egyptian theology, thought to be partly drawn
from Hecataeus*).

8\. (*Hecataeus says that 'Ammon' is not a particular name given to
Zeus, but a way of calling the premier god and summoning him to
appear*).

9\. (*Heracleitus and Hecataeus say that the sun is a wet flame from the
sea*).

10\. (*Tnephachthos while on a campaign, being obliged to eat with* 

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

*ordinary men, enjoyed the fare so much that ever afterwards he was
hostile to luxury and cursed the King who had introduced it. The curse
was written up on the Temple of Zeus at Thebes in hieroglyphics*).

11\. (*The ministrants at Heliopolis do not take wine into the temple.
Others use it, but sparingly. There are many wineless rites. The
Pharaohs, being priests, used to drink an amount specified in the holy
writings*).

12\. (*Diodorus states that Hecataeus is one of those Greeks who have
written a History of Egypt, and who agree with his account of the Theban
dynasty*).

13\. (*Photius says that Diodorus’ account of the history, laws and
customs of the Jews are false, but that he hides behind Hecataeus*).

13a. (*The greatness of Egyptian Thebes before its destruction by
Persia: figures of Hecataeus are quoted. The Thebaid contained* 13,030
*villages,* 7 *million men, etc. There were four other small 'cities of
Zeus', in one of which they kept crocodiles in caves and wells, and
never tasted the water of the river whatever their need*).

(*From a grammatical work, which Diodorus also quotes*)

14\. (*Kyrbasiê, the so-called tiara: Hecataeus says that the comic
poets call it a 'barbarian cap'*).

*Forged writings*

15\. (*Titles given by Josephus: 'On the Jews' or 'On Abraham'*).

16\. (<span class="smallcaps">Origen</span>: *A book on the Jews under
the name of Hecataeus is in circulation, in which he insists so much on
the wisdom of the race that Philo doubts if the treatise is by
Hecataeus, or, if it is his, says that he must have been captivated by
Jewish persuasiveness and have accepted their arguments*).

17\. (*The references in Agatharchus the historian to Hecataeus of
Abdera belong to Hecataeus of Miletus*). <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_96.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[123:1](app68.htm#fr_103.md) Müller, F.H.G. I., 14,
1, 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 74. Apollodôrus of Cyzicus](app69.md)
