[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app76)  [Next](app78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 82. GORGIAS OF LEONTÎNI

<span class="smallcaps">Gorgias</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Leontîni</span>: latter half of fifth century B.C.

He wrote one of the earliest Handbooks on Rhetoric; an essay *On Being*
or *On Nature*; and a number of model orations, of which parts have
survived: from the Olympian Oration, the *Encomium on Helen*, and the
*Defence of Palamêdês*.

1\. (<span class="smallcaps">Isocrates</span>: *Gorgias had the
hardihood to say that nothing whatever exists*).

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

2\. (<span class="smallcaps">Olympiodorus</span>: *Gorgias wrote a
treatise 'On Nature', not without skill, in the* 84*th Olympiad*). <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_97)

3\. (<span class="smallcaps">Sextus</span>, from '*On Being*' or '*On
Nature*'):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I. Nothing exists.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

(*a*) Not-Being does not exist.

(*b*) Being does not exist.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

i\. as everlasting.

ii\. as created.

iii\. as both.

iv\. as One.

v\. as Many.

</div>

(*c*) A mixture of Being and Not-Being does not exist.

</div>

II\. If anything exists, it is incomprehensible.

III\. If it is comprehensible, it is incommunicable.

I. Nothing exists.

If anything exists, it must be either Being or Not-Being, or both Being
and Not-Being.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

(*a*) It cannot be Not-Being, for Not-Being does not exist; if it did,
it would be at the same time Being and Not-Being, which is impossible.

(*b*) It cannot be Being, for Being does not exist. If Being exists, it
must be either everlasting, or created, or both.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

i\. It cannot be everlasting; if it were, it would have no beginning,
and therefore would be boundless; if it is boundless, then it has no
position, for if it had position it would be contained in something, and
so it would no longer be boundless; for that which contains is greater
than that which is contained, and nothing is greater than the boundless.
It cannot be contained by itself, for then the thing containing and the
thing contained would be the same, and Being would become two
things—both position and body—which is absurd. Hence if Being is
everlasting, it is boundless; if boundless, it has no position ('is
nowhere'); if without position, it does not exist.

ii\. Similarly, Being cannot be created; if it were, it must come from
something, either Being or Not-Being, both of which are impossible.

iii\. Similarly, Being cannot be both everlasting and created, since
they are opposite. Therefore Being does not exist.

iv\. Being cannot be One, because if it exists it has size, and is
therefore infinitely divisible; at least it is threefold, having length,
breadth and depth.

v\. It cannot be Many, because the Many is made up of an addition of
Ones, so that since the One does not exist, the Many do not exist
either.

</div>

(*c*) A mixture of Being and Not-Being is impossible. Therefore since
Being does not exist, nothing exists.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

II\. If anything exists, it is incomprehensible.

If the concepts of the mind are not realities, reality cannot be
thought: if the thing thought is white, then white is thought about; if
the thing thought is non-existent, then non-existence is thought about;
this is equivalent to saying that 'existence, reality, is not thought
about, cannot be thought'. Many things thought about are not realities:
we can conceive of a chariot running on the sea, or a winged man. Also,
since things seen are the objects of sight, and things heard are the
objects of hearing, and we accept as real things seen without their
being heard, and vice versa; so we would have to accept things thought
without their being seen or heard; but this would mean believing in
things like the chariot racing on the sea.

Therefore reality is not the object of thought, and cannot be
comprehended by it. Pure mind, as opposed to sense-perception, or even
as an equally valid criterion, is a myth.

III\. If anything is comprehensible, it is incommunicable.

The things which exist are perceptibles; the objects of sight are
apprehended by sight, the objects of hearing by hearing, and there is no
interchange; so that these sense-perceptions cannot communicate with one
another. Further, that with which we communicate is speech, and speech
is not the same thing as the things that exist, the perceptibles; so
that we communicate not the things which exist, but only speech; just as
that which is seen cannot become that which is heard, so our speech
cannot be equated with that which exists, since it is outside us.
Further, speech is composed from the percepts which we receive from
without, that is, from perceptibles; so that it is not speech which
communicates perceptibles, but perceptibles which create speech.
Further, speech can never exactly represent perceptibles, since it is
different from them, and perceptibles are apprehended each by the one
kind of organ, speech by another. Hence, since the objects of sight
cannot be presented to any other organ but sight, and the different
sense-organs cannot give their information to one another, similarly
speech cannot give any information about perceptibles.

Therefore, if anything exists and is comprehended, it is incommunicable.

</div>

4\. (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span> *in the* '*Meno*', 76A
*sqq*.*: colour is an effluence from objects, fitting the passages of
the eyes*).

5\. (*Explanation of the power of the burning-glass*): The fire goes out
through the pores.

5a. (*From the 'Funeral Oration'. Extravagant expressions*):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Xerxes, the Persian Zeus.

Vultures, living tombs.

</div>

5b. (*From the 'Funeral Oration'*). Trophies (*victories*) against

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

barbarians demand hymns of praise, but those against Greeks,
lamentations.

6\. (*From the 'Funeral Oration': typical passage of antitheses*): For
what did these men lack that men should have? What did they have that
men should not have? Would that I could express what I wish, and may I
wish what I ought, avoiding divine wrath, shunning human envy! For the
courage these men possessed was divine, and the mortal part (*alone*)
was human. Often, indeed, they preferred mild reasonableness to harsh
justice, often also correctness of speech to exactitude of law, holding
that the most divine and most generally applicable law was to say or
keep silent, do or not do, the necessary thing at the necessary moment.
They doubly exercised, above all, as was right, mind and body, the one
in counsel, the other in action; helpers of those in undeserved
adversity, chastisers of those in undeserved prosperity; bold for the
common good, quick to feel for the right cause, checking with the
prudence of the mind the imprudence of the body; violent towards the
violent, restrained towards the restrained, fearless towards the
fearless, terrifying among the terrifying. As evidence of these things,
they have set up trophies over the enemy, an honour to Zeus, a
dedication of themselves: men not unacquainted with the inborn spirit of
the warrior, with love such as the law allows, with rivalry under arms,
with peace, friend of the arts; men showing reverence towards the gods
by their justice, piety towards their parents by their care, justice
towards their fellow-citizens by their fair dealing, respect towards
their friends by keeping faith with them. Therefore, although they are
dead, the longing for them has not died with them, but immortal though
in mortal bodies, it lives on for those who live no more.

(*From the 'Olympian Oration'*)

7\. (*The Conveners of the Festival*) deserve admiration from many, men
of Hellas!

8\. Our struggle demands two virtues, courage and wisdom: to courage
belongs endurance of danger, and to wisdom, the knowledge of (*the right
way to tackle it*). <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_98)

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

8a. (*Gorgias advised the Greeks on Concord in his 'Olympian Oration,'
but could not bring about concord between himself, his wife and his
maid*).

9\. (*'Pythian Oration': no remains*).

10\. (*Opening sentence of the 'Encomium on the Eleans'*): Elis is a
fortunate city.

11\. (*'Encomium on Helen': summary*)

\(1\) The glory (*cosmos*) of a city is courage, of a body, beauty, of a
soul, wisdom, of action, virtue, of speech, truth; it is right in all
circumstances to praise what is praiseworthy and blame what is
blameworthy.

\(2\) It belongs to the same man both to speak the truth and to refute
falsehood. Helen is universally condemned and regarded as the symbol of
disasters; I wish to subject her story to critical examination, and so
rescue her from ignorant calumny.

\(3\) She was of the highest parentage: her reputed father Tyndareus was
the most powerful of men; her real father, Zeus, was king of all.

\(4\) From these origins she obtained her divine beauty, by the display
of which she inspired love in countless men, and caused the assemblage
of a great number of ambitious suitors, some endowed with wealth, others
with ancestral fame, others with personal prowess, others with
accumulated wisdom.

\(5\) I shall not relate the story of who won Helen or how: to tell an
audience what it knows wins belief but gives no pleasure. I shall pass
over this period and come to the beginning of my defence, setting out
the probable reasons for her journey to Troy.

\(6\) She acted as she did either through Fate and the will of the gods
and the decrees of Necessity, or because she was seized by force, or won
over by persuasion (*or captivated by love*). If the first, it is her
accuser who deserves blame; for no human foresight can hinder the will
of God: the stronger cannot be hindered by the weaker, and God is
stronger than man in every way. Therefore if the cause was Fate, Helen
cannot be blamed.

\(7\) If she was carried off by force, clearly her abductor wronged her
and she was unfortunate. He, a barbarian, committed

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

an act of barbarism, and should receive blame, disgrace and punishment;
she, being robbed of her country and friends, deserves pity rather than
obloquy.

\(8\) If it was speech that persuaded her and deceived her soul, her
defence remains easy. Speech is a great power, which achieves the most
divine works by means of the smallest and least visible form; for it can
even put a stop to fear, remove grief, create joy, and increase pity.
This I shall now prove:

\(9\) All poetry can be called speech in metre. Its hearers shudder with
terror, shed tears of pity, and yearn with sad longing; the soul,
affected by the words, feels as its own an emotion aroused by the good
and ill fortunes of other people's actions and lives.

\(10\) The inspired incantations of words can induce pleasure and avert
grief; for the power of the incantations, uniting with the feeling in
the soul, soothes and persuades and transports by means of its wizardry.
Two types of wizardry and magic have been invented, which are errors in
the soul and deceptions in the mind.

\(11\) Their persuasions by means of fictions are innumerable; for if
everyone had recollection of the past, knowledge of the present, and
foreknowledge of the future, the power of speech would not be so great.
But as it is, when men can neither remember the past nor observe the
present nor prophesy the future, deception is easy; so that most men
offer opinion as advice to the soul. But opinion, being unreliable,
involves those who accept it in equally uncertain fortunes.

\(12\) (*Text corrupt*) Thus, persuasion by speech is equivalent to
abduction by force, as she was compelled to agree to what was said, and
consent to what was done. It was therefore the persuader, not Helen, who
did wrong and should be blamed.

\(13\) That Persuasion, when added to speech, can also make any
impression it wishes on the soul, can be shown, firstly, from the
arguments of the meteorologists, who by removing one opinion and
implanting another, cause what is incredible and invisible to appear
before the eyes of the mind; secondly, from legal contests, in which a
speech can sway and persuade a crowd, by the skill of its composition,
not by the truth of its statements; thirdly, from the philosophical
debates, in which quickness of thought is shown easily altering opinion.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

\(14\) The power of speech over the constitution of the soul can be
compared with the effect of drugs on the bodily state: just as drugs by
driving out different humours from the body can put an end either to the
disease or to life, so with speech: different words can induce grief,
pleasure or fear; or again, by means of a harmful kind of persuasion,
words can drug and bewitch the soul.

\(15\) If Helen was persuaded by love, defence is equally easy. What we
see has its own nature, not chosen by us; and the soul is impressed
through sight.

\(16\) For instance, in war, the sight of enemy forms wearing hostile
array is so disturbing to the soul that often men flee in terror as if
the coming danger were already present. The powerful habit induced by
custom is displaced by the fear aroused by sight, which causes oblivion
of what custom judges honourable and of the advantage derived from
victory.

\(17\) People who have seen a frightful sight have been driven out of
their minds, so great is the power of fear; while many have fallen
victims to useless toils, dreadful diseases and incurable insanity, so
vivid are the images of the things seen which vision engraves on the
mind.

\(18\) Painters, however, when they create one shape from many colours,
give pleasure to sight; and the pleasure afforded by sculpture to the
eyes is divine; many objects engender in many people a love of many
actions and forms.

\(19\) If therefore Helen's eye, delighted with Paris's form, engendered
the passion of love in her soul, this is not remarkable; for if a god is
at work with divine power, how can the weaker person resist him? And if
the disease is human, due to the soul's ignorance, it must not be
condemned as a crime but pitied as a misfortune, for it came about
through the snares of Fate, not the choice of the will; by the
compulsion of love, not by the plottings of art.

\(20\) Therefore, whichever of the four reasons caused Helen's action,
she is innocent.

\(21\) I have expunged by my discourse this woman's ill fame, and have
fulfilled the object set forth at the outset. I have tried to destroy
the unjust blame and the ignorant opinion, and have chosen to write this
speech as an Encomium on Helen and an amusement for myself.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

11a. (*The 'Defence of Palamêdês': summary*). <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_99)

\(1\) This trial is concerned not with death, which comes to all, but
with honour: whether I am to die justly or unjustly, under a load of
disgrace.

\(2\) You have the power to decide the issue; you can kill me easily if
you wish, whereas I am powerless.

\(3\) If the accuser Odysseus were bringing the charge because he knew
or believed me to be betraying Greece to the barbarians, he would be the
best of men, as ensuring the safety of his country, his parents and all
Greece, as well as the punishment of the traitor; but if he has
concocted this charge through malice, he is equally the worst of men.

\(4\) Where shall I begin my defence? A cause unsupported by proof
engenders fear, and fear makes speech difficult, unless truth and
necessity instruct me—teachers more productive of risk than of the means
of help.

\(s\) The accuser cannot know for certain that I committed the crime,
because I know for certain that I did not. But if he is acting on
conjecture, I can prove in two ways that he is wrong.

\(6\) First, I cannot have committed the crime. Treasonable action must
begin with discussion; but discussion implies a meeting, which was
impossible since no one could come to me and I could not go to anyone,
nor could a written message be sent.

\(7\) Nor was direct communication possible between myself, a Greek, and
the enemy, a barbarian, since we did not understand each other's
language, and an interpreter would have meant having an accomplice.

\(8\) But even supposing communication could have been arranged, it
would have been necessary to exchange pledges, such as hostages (which
was impossible),

\(9\) or perhaps money. A small sum would not have sufficed in such a
great undertaking; a large sum could not have been transported without
the help of many confederates.

\(10\) Conveyance of money would have been impossible at night because
of the guards, and by daylight because all could see. Nor could I have
gone out, or the enemy have come into the camp. Nor could I have
concealed any money received.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

\(11\) But suppose all this achieved—communication established and
pledges exchanged—action had then to follow. This had to be done with or
without confederates. If with confederates, were they free or slaves? If
any free man has information, let him speak. Slaves are always
untrustworthy: they accuse voluntarily to win freedom, and also under
compulsion when tortured.

\(12\) Nor could the enemy have entered by my help, either by the gates
or over the walls, because of the guards; nor could I have breached the
walls, as in camp everybody sees everything. Therefore all such action
was completely impossible for me.

\(13\) What motive could I have had? Absolute power over yourselves or
the barbarians? The former is impossible in view of your courage,
wealth, prowess of body and mind, control of cities.

\(14\) Rulership over the barbarian is equally impossible. I could not
have seized it or won it by persuasion, nor would they have handed it to
me voluntarily: no one would choose slavery instead of kingship, the
worst instead of the best.

\(15\) Nor was wealth my motive. I have moderate means, and do not need
more. Wealth is needed by those who spend much; not by those who are
masters of their natural pleasures, but by those who are enslaved by
pleasures, or wish to buy honour with riches. I call you to witness that
my past life proves me not to be one of these.

\(16\) My motive cannot have been ambition: honour accrues to virtue,
not to a betrayer of Greece. Besides, I had honour already, from you for
my wisdom.

\(17\) Safety cannot have been the motive. The traitor is the enemy of
all: law, justice, the gods, his fellow-men.

\(18\) Another motive could be the desire to help friends and injure
enemies; but I would have been doing the reverse.

\(19\) The remaining possibility would be a wish to avoid trouble or
danger. But if I betrayed Greece, I should have betrayed myself and all
that I had.

\(20\) My life would have been unbearable in Greece; and if I stayed
among the barbarians, I would have thrown away all the rewards of my
past labours, through my own action, which is worst.

\(21\) The barbarians too would have distrusted me; and if

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

one loses credit, life is intolerable. The loss of money or throne or
country can be retrieved; but the loss of credit is irretrievable. It is
thus proved that I neither could nor would have betrayed Greece.

\(22\) I now address my accuser: do you base your accusation on
knowledge or conjecture? If on knowledge, either this is your own or
hearsay. If it is your own, give exact details of time, place, method;
if hearsay, produce your witness.

\(23\) It is your place to produce witnesses, not mine: no witness can
be produced for what did not happen; but for what did happen, it is easy
and essential to produce witnesses. But you cannot produce even false
witnesses.

\(24\) That you have no knowledge of your accusations is clear. Hence
they must be conjectural, and you are the most villainous of men, to
bring a capital charge relying on opinion—which is a most unreliable
thing—and not knowing the truth. Conjecture is open to all in
everything, and you are no wiser than anyone else in this. One must
believe, not conjecture, but truth.

\(25\) You are accusing me of two opposites, wisdom and madness: wisdom
in that I am crafty, clever, resourceful; madness in that I wished to
betray Greece. It is madness to attempt what is impossible,
disadvantageous, disgraceful, injurious to friends and helpful to
enemies, and likely to make one's life intolerable. But how can one
believe a man who in the same speech, to the same audience, says the
exact opposite about the same things?

\(26\) Do you consider the wise to be foolish or sensible? If you say
'foolish', this is original but untrue. If 'sensible', then sensible men
do not commit the greatest crimes, or prefer evil to the good they have.
If I am wise, I did not err. If I erred, I am not wise. Therefore you
are proved a liar on both counts.

\(27\) I could bring counter-accusations, but I will not. I would rather
seek acquittal through my virtues than your vices.

\(28\) (*To the jury*): I must now speak of myself, in a way that would
not be suitable except to one accused. I submit my past life to your
scrutiny. If I mention my good deeds, I pray that no one will resent
this: it is necessary in order that I may refute serious charges with a
true statement of merits known to you.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

\(29\) Above all, my past life has been blameless. My accuser can bring
no proof of this charge, so that his speech is unsubstantiated obloquy.

\(30\) I claim also to be a benefactor of Greece, present and future, by
reason of my inventions, in tactics, law, letters (the tool of memory),
measures (arbiters of business dealings), number (the guardian of
property), beacon-fires (the best and swiftest messengers), and the game
of draughts as a pastime.

\(31\) I mention these things to show that in devoting my thoughts to
them I am bound to abstain from wicked deeds.

\(32\) I deserve no punishment from young or old. I have been
considerate to the old, helpful to the young, without envy of the
prosperous, merciful to the distressed; not despising poverty, nor
preferring wealth to virtue; useful in counsel, active in war,
fulfilling commands, obeying the rulers. But it is not for me to praise
myself; I do so under the compulsion of self-defence.

\(33\) Lastly I shall speak of you to you. Lamentations, prayers, and
the petitions of friends are useful when judgement depends on the mob;
but before you, the foremost of the Greeks, I need not use these
devices, but only justice and truth.

\(34\) You must not heed words rather than facts, nor prefer accusations
to proof, nor regard a brief period as more instructive than a long one,
nor consider calumny more trustworthy than experience. Good men avoid
all wrong-doing, but above all what cannot be mended; things can be
righted by forethought, but are irrevocable by afterthought. This
happens when men are trying a fellow-man on a capital charge, as you now
are.

\(35\) If words could bring the truth of deeds clearly and certainly
before their hearers, judgement would be easy; since this is not so, I
ask you to preserve my life, await the passage of time, and pass your
judgement with truth. You run the great risk of a reputation for
injustice; to good men, death is preferable to a bad reputation: one is
the end of life, the other is a disease in life.

\(36\) If you put me to death unjustly, you will bear the blame in the
eyes of all Greece, as I am not unknown and you are famous. The blame
will be yours, not my accuser's, because the issue is in your hands.
There could be no greater

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

crime than if you as Greeks put to death a Greek, an ally, a benefactor
of yours and of Greece, when you can show no cause.

\(37\) Here I stop. A summary of a long speech is worth while when one
is speaking to a jury of inferiors; but before the leaders of Greece it
is uncalled-for, as is the exhortation to pay attention or to remember
what has been said.

12\. One must destroy one's adversaries’ seriousness with laughter, and
their laughter with seriousness.

13\. (*No one, not even Gorgias who first wrote on the subject, has
defined the art of 'the right moment'*).

14\. (*Gorgias gave his pupils model speeches to learn by heart*).

*From unspecified writings*

15\. Beggarly toadying bards, who swear a false oath and swear it well.

16\. Affairs are pale, tremulous and anaemic; you have sown in this a
shameful seed, and will reap an evil harvest.

17\. (*My*) matter never fails (*in speaking*).

18\. (*Gorgias enumerated the virtues instead of defining them*).

19\. (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, *Meno* 71E: *examples of
enumeration of virtues after the teaching of Gorgias*).

20\. Cimon acquired money in order to use it, and used it to acquire
honour.

21\. A friend will expect his friend to do only just actions in helping
him; but he himself will serve his friend with many actions that belong
to the category of unjust also.

22\. Not the looks of a woman, but her good reputation should be known
to many.

23\. Tragedy, by means of legends and emotions, creates a deception in
which the deceiver is more honest than the non-deceiver, and the
deceived is wiser than the non-deceived.

24\. (*The 'Seven against Thebes' of Aeschylus*): Full of Ares.

25\. (*Homer's descent traced to Musaeus*).

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

26\. Being is unrecognisable unless it succeeds in seeming, and seeming
is weak unless it succeeds in being.

27\. Threats were mixed with supplications, and lamentations with
prayers.

*Doubtful*

28\. (*Graeco-Syrian Maxims: Gor*(*gon*)*ias said*): The surpassing
beauty of something hidden is shown when skilled painters cannot depict
it with their tried colours. Their work and their effort affords a
wonderful proof of the hidden magnificence. And when the separate stages
of their work come to an end, they give to it the crown of victory in
that they are silent. But that which no hand grasps and no eye sees, how
can the tongue express it or the ear of the hearer receive it?

29\. Those who neglect philosophy and spend their time on ordinary
studies are like the Suitors who desired Penelope but slept with her
maids.

30\. Orators are like frogs: the latter sing in the water, the former to
the water-clock.

31\. The sun is a molten mass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[128:1](app77.htm#fr_104) 444-441 B.C.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[130:1](app77.htm#fr_105) πλίγμα 'hold in
wrestling', emendation of Diels from MSS. αἴνιγμα, 'riddle'.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[134:1](app77.htm#fr_106) This speech has at
first sight little philosophical interest; but its influence on forensic
oratory, and therefore doubtless on education, cannot be over-estimated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 83. Lycophrôn 'The Sophist'](app78)
