[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](str00)  [Next](str02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Stonehenge, A Temple Restor'd to the British Druids*, by William
Stukeley, \[1740\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_d1">p. d1</span>

##### To His GRACE

# PEREGRINE

Duke of Ancaster and Kesteven,

Hereditary Lord Great Chamberlain of

ENG LAND, *&c*. *&c*.

*May it please your* GRACE,

TO accept of this attempt to illustrate one of the noblest antiquities
now left upon earth. I am confident your Grace will not dislike it,
either because it is a religious antiquity, or because it belongs to our
own country.

<span id="page_d2">p. d2</span>

Your Grace best shews your regard to religion, by a constant attendance
on its duties, in the service of the church; and by a regular practice
of its precepts, in their whole extent. And as you are justly sensible,
the foundation of religion rests on a careful observance of the sabbath:
you not only study to encourage it, by your own great example; but
likewise discountenance, that too fashionable custom of travelling on
sundays, and other profanations thereof: which are the sure root of
national corruption, the sure presage of national ruin.

Nor are your Grace's virtues more conspicuous, in your religious and
moral character, than in the love of your country. This you inherit with
the blood that runs in your veins; this you derive from an immemorial
series of noble ancestors, renowned in our annals, for their ready
allegiance to the sovereign power; for their vigor in support of the
constitution both in church and state; that have often

<span id="page_d3">p. d3</span>

hazarded and ruined their fortunes, and poured out their blood, in its
defence. I might instance particularly, the great part they bore in the
Reformation, the Restoration and the Revolution.

After the honour I have enjoyed of having been long known to your Grace:
I could enlarge upon the amiable qualities of your private life, your
domestic and social virtues, your humane and beneficent disposition to
all around you, friends or dependants, or those of your own family. With
truth I might say, that you never refused to serve any person that
applied to you, where it was in your power: that you never knowingly did
an unkind, an injurious thing to any person: that no one ever withdrew
griev’d from your presence. I can safely affirm, and fear no
contradiction, that justice, honour and honesty are some of the real
jewels, that adorn your Grace's coronet. And they, at this time of day,
receive a seasonable lustre, from your high nation, and illustrious
birth.

<span id="page_d4">p. d4</span>

But the agreeableness of the subject insensibly drew me from my main
purpose, which was to make this publick acknowledgment, of the great
favours your Grace has confer’d upon me: and to beg leave to profess
myself,

*May it please your* GRACE,             

*Your* GRACE'S *most humble*,     

*And most devoted servant*,

*Jan*. 1. 1739-40.

William Stukeley.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](str02)
