[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](str01)  [Next](str03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Stonehenge, A Temple Restor'd to the British Druids*, by William
Stukeley, \[1740\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_p1">p. p1</span>

# PREFACE.

A f*ew years ago I spent some time every summer in viewing, measuring,
and considering the works of the ancient Druids in our Island; I mean; I
mean those remarkable circles of Stones which we find all over the
kingdom, many of which I have seen, but of many more I have had
accounts. Their greatness and number astonish’d me, nor need I be afraid
to say, their beauty and design, as well as antiquity, drew my
particular attention. I could not help carrying my inquiries about them
as far as I was able. My studies this way have produc’d a vast quantity
of drawings and writing, which consider’d as an intire work, may thus be
intitled*,

## Patriarchal CHRISTIANITY:

###### OR,

### A Chronological HISTORY

###### OF THE

##### Origin and Progress of true Religion, and of Idolatry.

*The parts of which the whole is compos’d are these:*

I. Canon Mosaicæ Chronologiæ, *or the year of* Moses *settled, by which
he reckons time in the history of the old world; the time of the year
fix’d when creation was begun. This is done in a new manner, and becomes
an intire system of chronology from the creation to the* Exodus, *and is
exemplified by many particular Kalendars of the most remarkable
transactions; which are proofs of the truth of the Canon. There are
interspersed a great many astronomical and historical illustrations of
the sacred pages, particularly* Sanchoniathon's *genealogies, and*
Manethon's Egyptian Dynasties, *are applied in a new Method to the
history and chronology of the Scriptures*.

II\. Melchisedec, *or a delineation of the first and patriarchal
religion, from the best light we can gather in the sacred history; and
from the most ancient heathen customs, which were remains of that
religion. In this Treatise it is shewn, that the first religion was no
other than Christianity, the Mosaic dispensation, as a veil,
intervening; that all mankind from the creation had a knowledge of the
plurality of persons in the Deity*.

III\. *Of the mysteries of the ancients, one of the first deviations
from true religion, to idolatry; this is chiefly pursu’d in an
explication of the famous table of* Isis, *or* Bembin-table, *publish’d
by* Pignorius, Kircher, *&c*. *wherein that knowledge which the ancients
had concerning the true nature of the Deity, is further explain’d*.

<span id="page_p2">p. p2</span>

IV\. *A discourse on the hieroglyphic learning of the ancients, and of
the origin of the alphabet of letters. Very many hieroglyphic monuments
of the* Egyptians *are explain’d, more especially those that relate to
their true notions of the persons in the Deity. The time and rise of the
alphabet of letters is deduc’d from a new foundation. The present
square* Hebrew *characters are shewn to be the primitive idea of
letters, from whence all others are deriv’d. Whence the idea of every
letter was taken? an explanation of all the old* Hebrew *coins with*
Samaritan *characters*.

V. *The patriarchal history, particularly of* Abraham*, is largely
pursu’d; and the deduction of the* Phœnician *colony into the Island of*
Britain*, about or soon after his time; whence the origin of the*
Druids*, of their Religion and writing; they brought the patriarchal
Religion along with them, and same knowledge of symbols or
hieroglyphics, like those of the ancient* Egyptians; *they had the
notion and expectation of the Messiah, and of the time of the year when
he was to be born, of his office and death*.

VI\. *Of the Temples of the Druids in Britain, their religious rites,
orders, sacrifices, groves, tombs, their* cursus's*, places of forts and
exercises, &c. particularly an ample and accurate description of that
stupendous temple of theirs at* Abury *in* North Wiltshire*, the most
august work at this day upon the globe of the earth; with many prints of
ground plots, views and admeasurements of all its parts; of their manner
of sepulture; an account of my digging into many of their barrows and*
tumuli*, with drawings of them*, *&c*.

VII\. *Of the celebrated* Stonehenge*, another Temple of theirs, with
prints of that work; an account of the barrows I dug up, and what was
discover’d in then; of the knowledge the Druids had of the magnetical
compass, and conjectures of the particular times when these works were
made, long before Cæsar arriv’d in* Britain*.*

*I propose to publish these two first, and proceed to the speculative
parts afterwards; reserving them, God willing, to the maturer time of my
life*.

*My intent is (besides preserving the memory of these extraordinary
monuments, so much to the honour of our country, now in great danger of
ruin) to promote, as much as I am able, the knowledge and practice of
ancient and true Religion; to revive in the minds of the learned the
spirit of Christianity, nearly as old as the Creation, which is now
languishing among us; to restore the first and great Idea of the Deity,
who has carry’d on the same regular and golden chain of Religion from
the beginning to this day; to warm our hearts into that true sense of
Religion, which keeps the medium between ignorant superstition and
learned free-thinking, between slovenly fanaticism and popish pageantry,
between enthusiasm and the rational worship of God, which is no where
upon earth done, in my judgment, better than in the Church of* England*.
And feeing a spirit of Scepticism has of late become so fashionable and
audacious as to strike at the fundamentals of all revelation, I have
endeavoured to trace it back to the fountain of Divinity, whence it
flows; and shew that Religion is one system as old as the world, and
that is the Christian Religion; that God did not leave the rational part
of his creation, like the colony of an ant-hill, with no other guide
than instinct, but proportion’d his discoveries to the age of the world,
to the learning, wisdom, and experience of it; as a wise parent does now
to his children. I shall shew likewise, that our predecessors, the
Druids of* Britain*, tho’ left in the extremest west to the improvement
of their own thoughts, yet advanc’d their inquiries, under all
disadvantages, to such heights, as should make our moderns asham’d, to
wink in the sunshine of learning and religion. And we may with reason
conclude, there was somewhat very extraordinary in those principles,
which prompted them to such a noble spirit as produced these works,
still visible with us, which for grandeur, simplicity and antiquity,
exceed any of the* European *wonders*.

<span id="page_p3">p. p3</span>

*That the doctrines and works of the Druids have hitherto been so little
considered (since authors only transcribe from one to another, the few
remaining scraps to be found in classic writers) was an incentive to me
likewise in the following attempt, and at the same time it pleads for
me, and bespeaks the reader's favour. I want likewise the great
advantages to be had from a knowledge of the remaining* Celtic
*languages, books, manuscripts, and history, the* Cornish*,* Welsh*,*
Irish*,* Highland*, &c. the chief  repository now of their doctrines and
customs; so that in my own opinion I may very well say with the poet*,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Interea Dryadum silvas & saxa sequamur  
Intactas, tua Mecænas haud mollia jussa.    *Virgil*.

</div>

*And tho’ there has been of late a large volume publish'd on the subject
of Stonehenge, yet we may well say there has nothing been wrote upon the
subject. Nor have I any other notion of this performance, than that it
is as a first attempt to say something upon those famous philosophers
and priests the Druids, who are never spoken of in antiquity but with a
note of admiration; and are always rank’d with the Magi of the*
Persians*, the gymnosophists of the* Indians*, the prophets and
hierophants of the* Egyptians*, and those sort of patriarchal priests,
whose orders commenc’d before idolatry began; from whom the*
Pythagoreans*,* Platonists*, and* Greek *philosophers learn’d the best
things they knew. To clear away rubbish, and lay a foundation only, in
this difficult and obscure work, is doing somewhat. The method of
writing which I have chose is a diffusive one, not pretending to a
formal and stiff scholastic proof of every thing I say, which would be
odious and irksome to the reader, as well as myself. The knowledge I
have acquired in these matters, was from examining and studying their
works; the proofs are deriv’d from distant and different topicks, and it
would be very inconvenient to marshal them syllogistically in a work of
this nature; the proof results from the intire work; in all matters of
so great antiquity it must be found out by the reader; and to one that
has proper sagacity and judgment, conviction will steal upon him
insensibly, if I am not mistaken; and he will own the evidence in
general, is as strong as the nature of the subject will bear, or
requires*.

*It was very disagreeable to me that I was forc’d to combat against a
book publish’d in the name of the celebrated* Inigo Jones*, for whose
memory I have the greatest regard. I wonder the publisher of that work
did not think of a very easy method to convince himself that he was in
an error. If* Stonehenge *is a* Roman *work, it was certainly built by
the* Roman *scale; had he reduc’d his own measures to that standard, he
would have seen the absurdity of his opinion; for we cannot think that a
temple, or elegant building, as he would have it, should not shew its
founders by the scale on which it is form’d; they are all fractions in
the Roman scale, undoubted evidence that the* Romans *had no hand in it.
For there is no meaning, no design in the choice of the measures,
neither in general nor particular; a thing unworthy of a great
architect, or a great design. But it appears very evident to me, that*
Inigo Jones *had little or no part in that work, especially as it is
moulded at present; and I think I have reason to be of opinion that he
never drew the designs therein published, because I should be unwilling
to say he knowingly falsified them. I have very much shortened what I
had to say against that book, because I have no love for wrangling, and
barely mention’d what was necessary, that the reader may have a true
notion of this noble antiquity*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](str03)
