[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040641)  [Next](1040643.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xlv"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xlv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 45.—</span>54.  But that neither he
nor any one of you might say that, when any one of concealed bad
character is the baptizer, then he whom he baptizes is not his fruit,
but the fruit of Christ, I went on immediately to point out what a
foolish error is consequent also on that opinion; and I repeated, though
in other words, what I had said shortly before:  If, when the quality of
the tree is concealed, but evil, any one who may have been baptized by
it is born, not of it but of Christ, then they are justified with
greater holiness who are baptized by wicked men, whose wickedness is
concealed, than they who are baptized by men that are genuinely and
manifestly good. <span id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415.md)   Petilianus
then, being hemmed in by these embarrassing straits, said nothing about
the earlier part on which these remarks depended, and in his answer so
quoted his absurd consequence of his error as though I had stated it as
my own opinion, whereas it was really stated in order that he might
perceive the amount of evil consequent on his opinion, and so be forced
to alter it.  Imposing, therefore, this deceit on those who hear and
read his words, and never for a moment supposing that what we have
written could be read, he begins a vehement and petulant invective
against me, as though I had thought that all who are baptized ought to
wish that they might have as their baptizers men who are faithless,
without knowing this themselves, since, however good the men might be
whom they had to baptize them, Christ is incomparably better, who will
then be the head of the person baptized, if the faithless baptizer
conceal his true character.  As though, too, I had thought that those
were justified with greater holiness who are baptized by evil men, whose
character is concealed, than those who are baptized by men that are
genuinely and manifestly good; when this marvellous piece of madness was
only mentioned by me as following necessarily on the opinion of those
who think with Petilianus, that a man, when baptized, bears the same
relation to his baptizer as fruit does to the tree from which it
springs,—good fruit springing from a good tree, evil fruit from an evil
tree,—seeing that <span id="page_619">p. 619</span> <span
id="v.v.v.xlv-Page_619"></span>they, when they are bidden by me to
answer whose fruit they think a man that is baptized to be when he is
baptized by one of secretly bad character, since they do not venture to
rebaptize him, are compelled to answer, that then he is not the fruit of
that man of secretly bad character, but that he is the fruit of Christ. 
And so they are followed by a consequence contrary to their inclination,
which none but a madman would entertain,—that if a man is the fruit of
his baptizer when he is baptized by one that is genuinely and manifestly
good, but when he is baptized by one of secretly bad character, he is
then not his fruit, but the fruit of Christ,—it cannot but follow that
they are justified with greater holiness who are baptized by men of
secretly bad character, than those who are baptized by men who are
genuinely and manifestly good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[618:2416](1040642.htm#fr_2415.md) <span
id="v.v.v.xlv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xlv-p2"></span> See Book I. cc. 7, 8, 8, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](1040643.md)
