[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040179)  [Next](1040181.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Book XXXII.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p2"></span>Faustus fails to understand why he
should be required either to accept or reject the New Testament as a
whole, while the Catholics accept or reject the various parts of the Old
Testament at pleasure.  Augustin denies that the Catholics treat the Old
Testament arbitrarily, and explains their attitude towards it.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  You say, that if we
believe the Gospel, we must believe everything that is written in it. 
Why, then, since you believe the Old Testament, do you not believe all
that is found in any part of it?  Instead of that, you cull out only the
prophecies telling of a future King of the Jews, for you suppose this to
be Jesus, along with a few precepts of common morality, such as, Thou
shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery; and all the rest you
pass over, thinking of the other things as Paul thought of the things
which he held to be dung. <span id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028.md)  
Why, then, should it seem strange or singular in me that I select from
the New Testament whatever is purest, and helpful for my salvation,
while I set aside the interpolations of your predecessors, which impair
its dignity and grace?

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p5"></span> 2.  If there are parts of the
Testament of <span id="page_333">p. 333</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-Page_333"></span>the Father which we are not bound to
observe (for you attribute the Jewish law to the Father, and it is well
known that many things in it shock you, and make you ashamed, so that in
heart you no longer regard it as free from corruption, though, as you
believe, the Father Himself partly wrote it for you with His own finger
while part was written by Moses, who was faithful and trustworthy), the
Testament of the Son must be equally liable to corruption, and may
equally well contain objectionable things; especially as it is allowed
not to have been written by the Son Himself, nor by His apostles, but
long after, by some unknown men, who, lest they should be suspected of
writing of things they knew nothing of, gave to their books the names of
the apostles, or of those who were thought to have followed the
apostles, declaring the contents to be according to these originals.  In
this, I think, they do grievous wrong to the disciples of Christ, by
quoting their authority for the discordant and contradictory statements
in these writings, saying that it was according to them that they wrote
the Gospels, which are so full of errors and discrepancies, both in
facts and in opinions, that they can be harmonized neither with
themselves nor with one another.  This is nothing else than to slander
good men, and to bring the charge of dissension on the brotherhood of
the disciples.  In reading the Gospels, the clear intention of our heart
perceives the errors, and, to avoid all injustice, we accept whatever is
useful, in the way of building up our faith, and promoting the glory of
the Lord Christ, and of the Almighty God, His Father, while we reject
the rest as unbecoming the majesty of God and Christ, and inconsistent
with our belief.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p6"></span>3.  To return to what I said of your
not accepting everything in the Old Testament.  You do not admit carnal
circumcision, though that is what is written; <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029.md) nor resting from all occupation on
the Sabbath, though that is enjoined; <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030.md) and instead of propitiating God, as
Moses recommends, by offerings and sacrifices, you cast these things
aside as utterly out of keeping with Christian worship, and as having
nothing at all to recommend them.  In some cases, however, you make a
division, and while you accept one part, you reject the other.  Thus, in
the Passover, which is also the annual feast of the Old Testament, while
it is written that in this observance you must slay a lamb to be eaten
in the evening, and that you must abstain from leaven for seven days,
and be content with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, <span
id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031.md) you accept the feast, but pay no
attention to the rules for its observance.  It is the same with the
feast of Pentecost, or seven weeks, and the accompaniment of a certain
kind and number of sacrifices which Moses enjoins: <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032.md)   you observe the feast, but you
condemn the propitiatory rites, which are part of it, because they are
not in harmony with Christianity.  As regards the command to abstain
from Gentile food, you are zealous believers in the uncleanness of
things offered to idols, and of what has died of itself; but you are not
so ready to believe the prohibition of swine’s flesh, and hares, and
conies, and mullets, and cuttle-fish, and all the fish that you have a
relish for, although Moses pronounces them all unclean.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p11"></span>4.  I do not suppose that you will
consent, or even listen, to such things as that a father-in-law should
lie with his daughter-in-law, as Judah did; or a father with his
daughters, like Lot; or prophets with harlots, like Hosea; or that a
husband should sell his wife for a night to her lover, like Abraham; or
that a man should marry two sisters, like Jacob; or that the rulers of
the people and the men you consider as most inspired should keep their
mistresses by hundreds and thousands; or, according to the provision
made in Deuteronomy about wives, that the wife of one brother, if he
dies without children, should marry the surviving brother, and that he
should raise up seed from her instead of his brother; and that if the
man refuses to do this, the fair plaintiff should bring her case before
the elders, that the brother may be called and admonished to perform
this religious duty; and that, if he persists in his refusal, he must
not go unpunished, but the woman must loose his shoe from his right
foot, and strike him in the face, and send him away, spat upon and
accursed, to perpetuate the reproach in his family. <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033.md)   These, and such as these, are the
examples and precepts of the Old Testament.  If they are good, why do
you not practise them?  If they are bad, why do you not condemn the Old
Testament, in which they are found?  But if you think that these are
spurious interpolations, that is precisely what we think of the New
Testament.  You have no right to claim from us an acknowledgment for the
New Testament which you yourselves do not make for the Old.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p13"></span>5.  Since you hold to the divine
authorship of the Old as well as of the New Testament, it would surely
be more consistent and more becoming, as you do not obey its precepts,
to <span id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-Page_334"></span>confess that it has been corrupted by
improper additions, than to treat it so contemptuously, if it is genuine
and uncorrupted.  Accordingly, my explanation of your neglect of the
requirements of the Old Testament has always been, and still is, that
you are either wise enough to reject them as spurious, or that you have
the boldness and irreverence to disregard them if they are true.  At any
rate, when you would oblige me to believe everything contained in the
documents of the New Testament because I receive the Testament itself,
you should consider that, though you profess to receive the Old
Testament, you in your heart disbelieve many things in it.  Thus, you do
not admit as true or authoritative the declaration of the Old Testament,
that every one that hangeth on a tree is accursed, <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034.md) for this would apply to Jesus; or
that every man is accursed who does not raise up seed in Israel, <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035.md) for that would include all of both
sexes devoted to God; or that whoever is not circumcised in the flesh of
his foreskin will be cut off from among his people, <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036.md) for that would apply to all
Christians; or that whoever breaks the Sabbath must be stoned to
death; <span id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037.md) or that no mercy
should be shown to the man who breaks a single precept of the Old
Testament.  If you really believe these things as certainly enjoined by
God, you would, in the time of Christ, have been the first to assail
Him, and you would now have no quarrel with the Jews, who, in
persecuting Christ with heart and soul, acted in obedience to their own
God.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p18"></span>6.  I am aware that instead of boldly
pronouncing these passages spurious, you make out that these things were
required of the Jews till the coming of Jesus; and that now that He is
come, according, as you say, to the predictions of this Old Testament,
He Himself teaches what we should receive, and what we should set aside
as obsolete.  Whether the prophets predicted the coming of Jesus we
shall see presently.  Meanwhile, I need say no more than that if Jesus,
after being predicted in the Old Testament, now subjects it to this
sweeping criticism, and teaches us to receive a few things and to throw
over many things, in the same way the Paraclete who is promised in the
New Testament teaches us what part of it to receive, and what to reject;
as Jesus Himself says in the Gospel, when promising the Paraclete, "He
shall guide you into all truth, and shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance." <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038.md)   So then, with the help of the
Paraclete, we may take the same liberties with the New Testament as
Jesus enables you to take with the Old, unless you suppose that the
Testament of the Son is of greater value than that of the Father, if it
is really the Father’s; so that while many parts of the one are to be
condemned, the other must be exempted from all disapproval; and that,
too, when we know, as I said before, that it was not written by Christ
or by His apostles.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p20"></span>7.  Hence, as you receive nothing in
the Old Testament except the prophecies and the common precepts of
practical morality, which we quoted above, while you set aside
circumcision, and sacrifices, and the Sabbath and its observance, and
the feast of unleavened bread, why should not we receive nothing in the
New Testament but what we find said in honor and praise of the majesty
of the Son, either by Himself or by His apostles, with the proviso, in
the case of the apostles, that it was said by them after reaching
perfection, and when no longer in unbelief; while we take no notice of
the rest, which, if said at the time, was the utterance of ignorance or
inexperience, or, if not, was added by crafty opponents with a malicious
intention, or was stated by the writers without due consideration, and
so handed down as authentic?  Take as examples, the shameful birth of
Jesus from a woman, His being circumcised like the Jews, His offering
sacrifice like the Gentiles, His being baptized in a humiliating manner,
His being led about by the devil in the wilderness, and His being
tempted by him in the most distressing way.  With these exceptions,
besides whatever has been inserted under the pretence of being a
quotation from the Old Testament, we believe the whole, especially the
mystic nailing to the cross, emblematic of the wounds of the soul in its
passion; as also the sound moral precepts of Jesus, and His parables,
and the whole of His immortal discourse, which sets forth especially the
distinction of the two natures, and therefore must undoubtedly be His. 
There is, then, no reason for your thinking it obligatory in me to
believe all the contents of the Gospels; for you, as has been proved,
take so dainty a sip from the Old Testament, that you hardly, so to
speak, wet your lips with it.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p21"></span>8.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p21.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  We give to the
whole Old Testament Scriptures their due praise as true and divine; you
impugn the Scriptures of the New Testament as having been tampered with
and corrupted.  Those things in the Old Testament which we do not
observe we hold to have been suitable appointments for the time and the
people of that dispensation, besides being symbolical to us of truths in
which they have still a spiritual use, though <span id="page_335">p.
335</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-Page_335"></span>the outward observance
is abolished; and this opinion is proved to be the doctrine of the
apostolic writings.  You, on the other hand, find fault with everything
in the New Testament which you do not receive, and assert that these
passages were not spoken or written by Christ or His apostles.  In these
respects there is a manifest difference between us.  When, therefore,
you are asked why you do not receive all the contents of the New
Testament, but, while you approve of some things, reject a great many in
the very same books as false and spurious interpolations, you must not
pretend to imitate us in the distinction which we make, reverently and
in faith, but must give account of your own presumption.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p22"></span>9.  If we are asked why we do not
worship God as the Hebrew fathers of the Old Testament worshipped Him,
we reply that God has taught us differently by the New Testament
fathers, and yet in no opposition to the Old Testament, but as that
Testament itself predicted.  For it is thus foretold by the prophet: 
"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant
with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according to
the covenant which I made with their fathers when I took them by the
hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt." <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039.md)   Thus it was foretold that that
covenant would not continue, but that there would be a new one.  And to
the objection that we do not belong to the house of Israel or to the
house of Judah, we answer according to the teaching of the apostle, who
calls Christ the seed of Abraham, and says to us, as belonging to
Christ’s body, "Therefore ye are Abraham’s seed." <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040.md)   Again, if we are asked why we
regard that Testament as authoritative when we do not observe its
ordinances, we find the answer to this also in the apostolic writings;
for the apostle says, "Let no man judge you in meat or drink, or in
respect of a holiday, or a new moon, or of Sabbaths, which are a shadow
of things to come." <span id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041.md)   Here we
learn both that we ought to read of these observances, and acknowledge
them to be of divine institution, in order to preserve the memory of the
prophecy, for they were shadows of things to come; and also that we need
pay no regard to those who would judge us for not continuing the outward
observance; as the apostle says elsewhere to the same purpose, "These
things happened to them for an example; and they are written for our
admonition, on whom the end of the ages are come." <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042.md)   So, when we read anything in the
books of the Old Testament which we are not required to observe in the
New Testament, or which is even forbidden, instead of finding fault with
it, we should ask what it means; for the very discontinuance of the
observance proves it to be, not condemned, but fulfilled.  On this head
we have already spoken repeatedly.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p27"></span>10.  To take, for example, this
requirement on which Faustus ignorantly grounds his charge against the
Old Testament, that a man should take his brother’s wife to raise up
seed for his brother, to be called by his name; what does this
prefigure, but that every preacher of the gospel should so labor in the
Church as to raise up seed to his deceased brother, that is, Christ, who
died for us, and that this seed should bear His name?  Moreover, the
apostle fulfills this requirement not now in the typical observance, but
in the spiritual reality, when he reproves those of whom he says that he
had begotten them in Christ Jesus by the gospel, <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043.md) and points out to them their error
in wishing to be of Paul.  "Was Paul," he says, "crucified for you?  Or
were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044.md)   As if he should say, I have
begotten you for my deceased brother; your name is Christian, not
Paulian.  Then, too, whoever refuses the ministry of the gospel when
chosen by the Church, justly deserves the contempt of the Church.  So we
see that the spitting in the face is accompanied with a sign of reproach
in loosing a shoe from one foot, to exclude the man from the company of
those to whom the apostle says, "Let your feet be shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace;" <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045.md) and of whom the prophet thus
speaks, "How beautiful are the feet of them who publish peace, who bring
good tidings of good!" <span id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046.md)   The
man who holds the faith of the gospel so as both to profit himself and
to be ready when called to serve the Church, is properly represented as
shod on both feet.  But the man who thinks it enough to secure his own
safety by believing, and shirks the duty of benefiting others, has the
reproach of being unshod, not in type, but in reality.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p32"></span>11.  Faustus needlessly objects to our
observance of the passover, taunting us with differing from the Jewish
observance:  for in the gospel we have the true Lamb, not in shadow, but
in substance; and instead of prefiguring the death, we commemorate it
daily, and especially in the yearly festival.  Thus also the day of our
paschal feast does not correspond with the Jewish observance, for we
take in the Lord’s day, on which Christ rose.  And as to the feast of
unleavened bread, all <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-Page_336"></span>Christians sound in the faith keep it,
not in the leaven of the old life, that is, of wickedness, but in the
truth and sincerity of the faith; <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047.md) not for seven days, but always, as
was typified by the number seven, for days are always counted by
sevens.  And if this observance is somewhat difficult in this world
since the way which leads to life is strait and narrow, <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048.md) the future reward is sure; and this
difficulty is typified in the bitter herbs, which are a little
distasteful.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p35"></span>12.  The Pentecost, too, we observe,
that is, the fiftieth day from the passion and resurrection of the Lord,
for on that day He sent to us the Holy Paraclete whom He had promised;
as was prefigured in the Jewish passover, for on the fiftieth day after
the slaying of the lamb, Moses on the mount received the law written
with the finger of God. <span id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049.md)   If
you read the Gospel, you will see that the Spirit is there called the
finger of God. <span id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050.md)   Remarkable
events which happened on certain days are annually commemorated in the
Church, that the recurrence of this festival may preserve the
recollection of things so important and salutary.  If you ask, then, why
we keep the passover, it is because Christ was then sacrificed for us. 
If you ask why we do not retain the Jewish ceremonies, it is because
they prefigured future realities which we commemorate as past; and the
difference between the future and the past is seen in the different
words we use for them.  Of this we have already said enough.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p38"></span>13.  Again, if you ask why, of all the
kinds of food prohibited in the former typical dispensation, we abstain
only from food offered to idols and from what dies of itself, you shall
hear, if for once you will prefer the truth to idle calumnies.  The
reason why it is not expedient for a Christian to eat food offered to
idols is given by the apostle:  "I would not," he says, "that ye should
have fellowship with demons."  Not that he finds fault with sacrifice
itself, as offered by the fathers to typify the blood of the sacrifice
with which Christ has redeemed us.  For he first says, "The things which
the Gentiles offer, they offer to demons, and not to God;" and then adds
these words:  "I would not that ye should have fellowship with
demons." <span id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051.md)   If the uncleanness
were in the nature of sacrificial flesh, it would necessarily pollute
even when eaten in ignorance.  But the reason for not partaking
knowingly is not in the nature of the food, but, for conscience sake,
not to seem to have fellowship with demons.  As regards what dies of
itself, I suppose the reason why such food was prohibited was that the
flesh of animals which have died of themselves is diseased, and is not
likely to be wholesome, which is the chief thing in food.  The
observance of pouring out the blood which was enjoined in ancient times
upon Noah himself after the deluge, <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052.md) the meaning of which we have
already explained, is thought by many to be what is meant in the Acts of
the Apostles, where we read that the Gentiles were required to abstain
from fornication, and from things sacrificed, and from blood, <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053.md) that is, from flesh of which the
blood has not been poured out.  Others give a different meaning to the
words, and think that to abstain from blood means not to be polluted
with the crime of murder.  It would take too long to settle this
question, and it is not necessary.  For, allowing that the apostles did
on that occasion require Christians to abstain from the blood of
animals, and not to eat of things strangled, they seem to me to have
consulted the time in choosing an easy observance that could not be
burdensome to any one, and which the Gentiles might have in common with
the Israelities, for the sake of the Corner-stone, who makes both one in
Himself; <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054.md) while at the same
time they would be reminded how the Church of all nations was prefigured
by the ark of Noah, when God gave this command,—a type which began to be
fulfilled in the time of the apostles by the accession of the Gentiles
to the faith.  But since the close of that period during which the two
walls of the circumcision and the uncircumcision, although united in the
Corner-stone, still retained some distinctive peculiarities, and now
that the Church has become so entirely Gentile that none who are
outwardly Israelites are to be found in it, no Christian feels bound to
abstain from thrushes or small birds because their blood has not been
poured out, or from hares because they are killed by a stroke on the
neck without shedding their blood.  Any who still are afraid to touch
these things are laughed at by the rest:  so general is the conviction
of the truth, that "not what entereth into the mouth defileth you, but
what cometh out of it;"  <span id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055.md) that
evil lies in the commission of sin, and not in the nature of any food in
ordinary use.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p44"></span>14.  As regards the deeds of the
ancients, both those which seem sinful to foolish and ignorant people,
when they are not so, and those which really are sinful, we have already
explained why they have been written, and how this rather adds to than
impairs the dignity of Scripture.  So, too, about the curse <span
id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-Page_337"></span>on
him who hangeth on a tree, and on him who raises not up seed in Israel,
our reply has already been given in the proper place, when meeting
Faustus’ objections. <span id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056.md)   And in
reply to all objections whatsoever, whether we have already answered
them separately, or whether they are contained in the remarks of Faustus
which we are now considering, we appeal to our established principles,
on which we maintain the authority of sacred Scripture.  The principle
is this, that all things written in the books of the Old Testament are
to be received with approval and admiration, as most true and most
profitable to eternal life; and that those precepts which are no longer
observed outwardly are to be understood as having been most suitable in
those times, and are to be viewed as having been shadows of things to
come, of which we may now perceive the fulfillments.  Accordingly,
whoever in those times neglected the observance of these symbolical
precepts was righteously condemned to suffer the punishment required by
the divine statute, as any one would be now if he were impiously to
profane the sacraments of the New Testament, which differ from the old
observances only as this time differs from that.  For as praise is due
to the righteous men of old who refused not to die for the Old Testament
sacraments, so it is due to the martyrs of the New Testament.  And as a
sick man should not find fault with the medical treatment, because one
thing is prescribed to-day and another to-morrow, and what was at first
required is afterwards forbidden, since the method of cure depends on
this; so the human race, sick and sore as it is from Adam to the end of
the world, as long as the corrupted body weighs down the mind, <span
id="fr_1057"></span>[1058](#fn_1057.md) should not find fault with the
divine prescriptions, if sometimes the same observances are enjoined,
and sometimes an old observance is exchanged for one of a different
kind; especially as there was a promise of a change in the appointments.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p47"></span>15.  Hence there is no force in the
analogy which Faustus institutes between Christ’s pointing out to us
what to believe and what to reject in the Old Testament, in which He
Himself is predicted, and the Paraclete’s doing the same to you as
regards the New Testament, where there is a similar prediction of Him. 
There might have been some plausibility in this, had there been anything
in the Old Testament which we denounced as a mistake, or as not of
divine authority, or as untrue.  We do nothing of the kind; we receive
everything, both what we observe as rules of conduct, and what we no
longer observe, but still recognize as having been prophetical
observances, once enjoined and now fulfilled.  And besides, the promise
of the Paraclete is found in those books, all the contents of which you
do not accept; and His mission is recorded in the book which you shrink
from even naming.  For, as is stated above, and has been said
repeatedly, there is a distinct narrative in the Acts of the Apostles of
the mission of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, and the effect
produced showed who it was.  For all who first received Him spoke with
tongues; <span id="fr_1058"></span>[1059](#fn_1058.md) and in this sign
there was a promise that in all tongues, or in all nations, the Church
of after times would faithfully proclaim the doctrine of the Spirit as
well as of the Father and of the Son.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p49"></span>16.  Why, then, do you not accept
everything in the New Testament?  Is it because the books have not the
authority of Christ’s apostles, or because the apostles taught what was
wrong?  You reply that the books have not the authority of the
apostles.  That the apostles were wrong in their teaching is what Pagans
say.  But what can you say to prove that the publication of these books
cannot be traced to the apostles?  You reply that in many things they
contradict themselves and one another.  Nothing could be more untrue;
the fact is, you do not understand.  In every case where Faustus has
brought forward what you think a discrepancy, we have shown that there
was none; and we will do the same in every other case.  It is
intolerable that the reader or learner should dare to lay the blame on
Scriptures of such high authority, instead of confessing his own
stupidity.  Did the Paraclete teach you that these writings are not of
the apostles’ authorship, but written by others under their names?  But
where is the proof that it was the Paraclete from whom you learned
this?  If you say that the Paraclete was promised and sent by Christ, we
reply that your Paraclete was neither promised nor sent by Christ; and
we also show you when He sent the Paraclete whom He promised.  What
proof have you that Christ sent your Paraclete?  Where do you get the
evidence in support of your informant, or rather misinformant?  You
reply that you find the proof in the Gospel.  In what Gospel?  You do
not accept all the Gospel, and you say that it has been tampered with. 
Will you first accuse your witness of corruption, and then call for his
evidence?  To believe him when you wish it, and then disbelieve him when
you wish it, is to believe nobody but yourself.  If we were prepared to
believe you, there would <span id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-Page_338"></span>be no need of a witness at all. 
Moreover, in the promise of the Holy Spirit as the Paraclete, it is
said, "He shall lead you into all truth;" <span
id="fr_1059"></span>[1060](#fn_1059.md) but how can you be led into all
truth by one who teaches you that Christ was a deceiver?  And again, if
you were to prove that all that is said in the Gospel of the promise of
the Paraclete could apply to no one but Manichæus, as the predictions of
the prophets are applicable to Christ; and if you quoted passages from
those manuscripts which you say are genuine, we might say that on this
very point, as proving Manichæus to be the only person intended, the
passages have been altered in the interest of your sect.  Your only
answer to this would be, that you could not possibly alter documents
already in the possession of all Christians; for at the very outset of
such an attempt, it would be met by an appeal to older copies.  But if
this proves that the books could not be corrupted by you, it also proves
that they could not be corrupted by any one.  The first person who
ventured to do such a thing would be convicted by a comparison of older
manuscripts; especially as the Scripture is to be found not in one
language only, but in many.  As it is, false readings are sometimes
corrected by comparing older copies or the original language.  Hence you
must either acknowledge these documents as genuine, and then your heresy
cannot stand a moment; or if they are spurious, you cannot use their
authority in support of your doctrine of the Paraclete, and so you
refute yourselves.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p51"></span>17.  Further, what is said in the
promise of the Paraclete shows that it cannot possibly refer to
Manichæus, who came so many years after.  For it is distinctly said by
John, that the Holy Spirit was to come immediately after the
resurrection and ascension of the Lord:  "For the Spirit was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified." <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[1061](#fn_1060.md)   Now, if the reason why the Spirit
was not given was, that Jesus was not glorified, He would necessarily be
given immediately on the glorification of Jesus.  In the same way, the
Cataphrygians <span id="fr_1061"></span>[1062](#fn_1061.md) said that they
had received the promised Paraclete; and so they fell away from the
Catholic faith, forbidding what Paul allowed, and condemning second
marriages, which he made lawful.  They turned to their own use the words
spoken of the Spirit, "He shall lead you into all truth," as if,
forsooth, Paul and the other apostles had not taught all the truth, but
had left room for the Paraclete of the Cataphrygians.  The same meaning
they forced from the words of Paul:  "We know in part, and we prophesy
in part; but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away;" <span id="fr_1062"></span>[1063](#fn_1062.md)
making out that the apostle knew and prophesied in part, when he said,
"Let him do what he will; if he marries, he sinneth not," <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[1064](#fn_1063.md) and that this is done away by the
perfection of the Phrygian Paraclete. <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064.md)   And if they are told that they
are condemned by the authority of the Church, which is the subject of
such ancient promises, and is spread all over the world, they reply that
this is in exact fulfillment of what is said of the Paraclete, that the
world cannot receive Him. <span id="fr_1065"></span>[1066](#fn_1065.md)  
And are not those passages, "He shall lead you into all truth," and,
"When that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done
away," and, "The world cannot receive Him," precisely those in which you
find a prediction of Manichæus?  And so every heresy arising under the
name of the Paraclete will have the boldness to make an equally
plausible application to itself of such texts.  For there is no heresy
but will call itself the truth; and the prouder it is, the more likely
it will be to call itself perfect truth:  and so it will profess to lead
into all truth; and since that which is perfect has come by it, it will
try to do away with the doctrine of the apostles, to which its own
errors are opposed.  And as the Church holds by the earnest admonition
of the apostle, that "whoever preaches another gospel to you than that
which ye have received, let him be accursed;" <span
id="fr_1066"></span>[1067](#fn_1066.md) when the heretical preacher begins
to be pronounced accursed by all the world, will he not forthwith
exclaim, This is what is written, "The world cannot receive Him"?

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p59"></span>18.  Where, then, will you find the
proof required to show that it is from the Paraclete that you have
learned that the Gospels were not written by the apostles?  On the other
hand, we have proof that the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, came
immediately after the glorification of Jesus.  For "He was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified."  We have proof also
that He leads into all truth, for the only way to truth is by love, and
"the love of God," says the apostle, "is shed abroad in our hearts by
the Holy Ghost who is given unto us." <span
id="fr_1067"></span>[1068](#fn_1067.md)   We show, too, that in the words,
"when that which is perfect is come," Paul spoke of the perfection in
the enjoyment of eternal life.  For in the same place he says:  "Now we
see through a glass darkly, but then face to face." <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[1069](#fn_1068.md)   You <span id="page_339">p.
339</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-Page_339"></span>cannot reasonably
maintain that we see God face to face here.  Therefore that which is
perfect has not come to you.  It is thus clear what the apostle thought
on this subject.  This perfection will not come to the saints till the
accomplishment of what John speaks of:  "Now we are the sons of God, and
it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when it shall
appear we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is."  <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[1070](#fn_1069.md)   Then we shall be led into all
truth by the Holy Spirit, of which we have now received the pledge. 
Again, the words, "The world cannot receive Him," plainly point to those
who are usually called the world in Scripture—the lovers of the world,
the wicked, or carnal; of whom the apostle says:  "The natural man
perceiveth not the things which are of the Spirit of God." <span
id="fr_1070"></span>[1071](#fn_1070.md)   Those are said to be of this
world who can understand nothing beyond material things, which are the
objects of sense in this world; as is the case with you, when, in your
admiration of the sun and moon, you suppose all divine things to
resemble them.  Deceivers, and being deceived, you call the author of
this silly theory the Paraclete.  But as you have no proof of his being
the Paraclete, you have no reliable ground for the statement that the
Gospel writings, which you receive only in part, are not of apostolic
authorship.  Thus your only remaining argument is, that these writings
contain things disparaging to the glory of Christ; such as, that He was
born of a virgin, that He was circumcised, that the customary sacrifice
was offered for Him, that He was baptized, that He was tempted of the
devil.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p64"></span>19.  With those exceptions, including
also the testimonies quoted from the Old Testament, you profess, to use
the words of Faustus, to receive all the rest, especially the mystic
nailing to the cross, emblematic of the wounds of the soul in its
passion; as also the sound moral precepts of Jesus, and the whole of His
immortal discourse, which sets forth especially the distinction of the
two natures, and therefore must undoubtedly be His.  Your design clearly
is to deprive Scripture of all authority, and to make every man’s mind
the judge what passage of Scripture he is to approve of, and what to
disapprove of.  This is not to be subject to Scripture in matters of
faith, but to make Scripture subject to you.  Instead of making the high
authority of Scripture the reason of approval, every man makes his
approval the reason for thinking a passage correct.  If, then, you
discard authority, to what, poor feeble soul, darkened by the mists of
carnality, to what, I beseech you, will you betake yourself?  Set aside
authority, and let us hear the reason of your beliefs.  Is it by a
logical process that your long story about the nature of God concludes
necessarily with this startling announcement, that this nature is
subject to injury and corruption?  And how do you know that there are
eight continents and ten heavens, and that Atlas bears up the world, and
that it hangs from the great world-holder, and innumerable things of the
same kind?  Who is your authority?  Manichæus, of course, you will say. 
But, unhappy being, this is not sight, but faith.  If, then, you submit
to receive a load of endless fictions at the bidding of an obscure and
irrational authority, so that you believe all those things because they
are written in the books which your misguided judgment pronounces
trustworthy, though there is no evidence of their truth, why not rather
submit to the authority of the Gospel, which is so well founded, so
confirmed, so generally acknowledged and admired, and which has an
unbroken series of testimonies from the apostles down to our own day,
that so you may have an intelligent belief, and may come to know that
all your objections are the fruit of folly and perversity; and that
there is more truth in the opinion that the unchangeable nature of God
should take part of mortality, so as, without injury to itself from this
union, to do and to suffer not feignedly, but really, whatever it
behoved the mortal nature to do and to suffer for the salvation of the
human race from which it was taken, than in the belief that the nature
of God is subject to injury and corruption, and that, after suffering
pollution and captivity, it cannot be wholly freed and purified, but is
condemned by a supreme divine necessity to eternal punishment in the
mass of darkness?

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p65"></span>20.  You say, in reply, that you
believe in what Manichæus has not proved, because he has so clearly
proved the existence of two natures, good and evil, in this world.  But
here is the very source of your unhappy delusion; for as in the Gospels,
so in the world, your idea of what is evil is derived entirely from the
effect on your senses of such disagreeable things as serpents, fire,
poison, and so on; and the only good you know of is what has an
agreeable effect on your senses, as pleasant flavors, and sweet smells,
and sunlight, and whatever else recommends itself strongly to your eyes,
or your nostrils, or your palate, or any other organ of sensation.  But
had you begun with looking on the book of nature as the production of
the Creator of all, and had you believed that your own finite <span
id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-Page_340"></span>understanding might be at fault
wherever anything seemed to be amiss, instead of venturing to find fault
with the works of God, you would not have been led into these impious
follies and blasphemous fancies with which, in your ignorance of what
evil really is, you heap all evils upon God.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p66"></span>21.  We can now answer the question,
how we know that these books were written by the apostles.  In a word,
we know this in the same way that you know that the books whose
authority you are so deluded as to prefer were written by Manichæus. 
For, suppose some one should raise a question on this point, and should
contend, in arguing with you, that the books which you attribute to
Manichæus are not of his authorship; your only reply would be, to
ridicule the absurdity of thus gratuitously calling in question a matter
confirmed by successive testimonies of such wide extent.  As, then, it
is certain that these books are the production of Manichæus, and as it
is ridiculous in one born so many years after to start objections of his
own, and so raise a discussion on the point; with equal certainty may we
pronounce it absurd, or rather pitiable, in Manichæus or his followers
to bring such objections against writings originally well authenticated,
and carefully handed down from the times of the apostles to our own day
through a constant succession of custodians.

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p67"></span>22.  We have now only to compare the
authority of Manichæus with that of the apostles.  The genuineness of
the writings is equally certain in both cases.  But no one will compare
Manichæus to the apostles, unless he ceases to be a follower of Christ,
who sent the apostles.  Who that did not misunderstand Christ’s words
ever found in them the doctrine of two natures opposed to one another,
and having each its own principle?  Again, the apostles, as becomes the
disciples of truth, declare the birth and passion of Christ to have been
real events; while Manichæus, who boasts that he leads into all truth,
would lead us to a Christ whose very passion he declares to have been an
illusion.  The apostles say that Christ was circumcised in the flesh
which He took of the seed of Abraham; Manichæus says that God, in his
own nature, was cut in pieces by the race of darkness.  The apostles say
that a sacrifice was offered for Christ as an infant in our nature,
according to the institutions of the time; Manichæus, that a member, not
of humanity, but of the divine substance itself, must be sacrificed to
the whole host of demons by being introduced into the nature of the
hostile race.  The apostles say that Christ, to set us an example, was
baptized in the Jordan; Manichæus, that God immersed himself in the
pollution of darkness, and that he will never wholly emerge, but that
the part which cannot be purified will be condemned to eternal
punishment.  The apostles say that Christ, in our nature, was tempted by
the chief of the demons; Manichæus, that part of God was taken captive
by the race of demons.  And in the temptation of Christ He resists the
tempter; while in the captivity of God, the part taken captive cannot be
restored to its origin even after victory.  To conclude, Manichæus,
under the guise of an improvement, preaches another gospel, which is the
doctrine of devils; and the apostles, after the doctrine of Christ,
enjoin that whoever preaches another gospel shall be accursed. <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[1072](#fn_1071.md)

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p69"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[332:1029](1040180.htm#fr_1028.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p4"></span> [Phil. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[333:1030](1040180.htm#fr_1029.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p7"></span> [Gen. xvii.
9-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[333:1031](1040180.htm#fr_1030.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p8"></span> [Ex. xxxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[333:1032](1040180.htm#fr_1031.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p9"></span> [Ex.
xii](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[333:1033](1040180.htm#fr_1032.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p10"></span> [Lev.
xxiii](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[333:1034](1040180.htm#fr_1033.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p12"></span> [Deut. xxv.
5-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[334:1035](1040180.htm#fr_1034.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p14"></span> [Deut. xxi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[334:1036](1040180.htm#fr_1035.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p15"></span> [Deut. xxv.
5-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[334:1037](1040180.htm#fr_1036.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p16"></span> [Gen. xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[334:1038](1040180.htm#fr_1037.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p17"></span> [Num. xv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[334:1039](1040180.htm#fr_1038.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p19"></span> [John
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013.md), [John
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[335:1040](1040180.htm#fr_1039.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p23"></span> [Jer.
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[335:1041](1040180.htm#fr_1040.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p24"></span> [Gal. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[335:1042](1040180.htm#fr_1041.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p25"></span> [Col.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[335:1043](1040180.htm#fr_1042.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p26"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[335:1044](1040180.htm#fr_1043.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p28"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[335:1045](1040180.htm#fr_1044.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p29"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[335:1046](1040180.htm#fr_1045.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p30"></span> [Eph. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[335:1047](1040180.htm#fr_1046.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p31"></span> [Isa. lii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[336:1048](1040180.htm#fr_1047.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p33"></span> [1 Cor. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[336:1049](1040180.htm#fr_1048.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p34"></span> [Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[336:1050](1040180.htm#fr_1049.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p36"></span> [Ex.
19-31](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[336:1051](1040180.htm#fr_1050.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p37"></span> [Luke xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[336:1052](1040180.htm#fr_1051.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p39"></span> [1 Cor. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[336:1053](1040180.htm#fr_1052.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p40"></span> [Gen. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[336:1054](1040180.htm#fr_1053.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p41"></span> [Acts xv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[336:1055](1040180.htm#fr_1054.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p42"></span> [Eph. ii.
11-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[336:1056](1040180.htm#fr_1055.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p43"></span> [Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[337:1057](1040180.htm#fr_1056.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p45"></span> Book XXII.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[337:1058](1040180.htm#fr_1057.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p46"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[337:1059](1040180.htm#fr_1058.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p48"></span> [Acts
ii](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[338:1060](1040180.htm#fr_1059.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p50"></span> [John xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[338:1061](1040180.htm#fr_1060.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p52"></span> [John vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[338:1062](1040180.htm#fr_1061.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p53"></span> \[Another name for the Montanists,
who arose in Phrygia shortly after the middle of the second
century.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[338:1063](1040180.htm#fr_1062.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p54"></span> [1 Cor.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[338:1064](1040180.htm#fr_1063.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p55"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#036.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[338:1065](1040180.htm#fr_1064.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p56"></span> Montanus.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[338:1066](1040180.htm#fr_1065.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p57"></span> [John xiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[338:1067](1040180.htm#fr_1066.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p58"></span> [Gal. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[338:1068](1040180.htm#fr_1067.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p60"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[338:1069](1040180.htm#fr_1068.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p61"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[339:1070](1040180.htm#fr_1069.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p62"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[339:1071](1040180.htm#fr_1070.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p63"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[340:1072](1040180.htm#fr_1071.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p68"></span> [Gal. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.xxxiv-p68.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXXIII](1040181.md)
