[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040668)  [Next](1040670) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—</span>43.  But this, they say, is
the very thing which disquiets us,—If we are unrighteous, wherefore do
you seek our company?  To which question we answer, We seek the company
of you who are unrighteous, that you may not remain unrighteous; we seek
for you who are lost, that we may rejoice over you as soon as you are
found, saying, This our brother was dead, and is alive again; and was
lost, and is found.  <span id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549)   Why,
then, he says, do you not baptize me, that you might wash me from my
sins?  I reply:  Because I do not do despite to the stamp of the
monarch, when I correct the ill-doing of a deserter.  Why, he says, do I
not even do penance in your body?  Nay truly, except you have done
penance, you cannot be saved; for how shall you rejoice that you have
been reformed, unless you first grieve that you had been astray?  What,
then, he says, do we receive with you, when we come over to your side? 
I answer, You do not indeed receive baptism, which was able to exist in
you outside the framework of the body of Christ, although it could not
profit you; but you receive the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace <span id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550) without which no one
can see God; and you receive charity, which, as it is written, "shall
cover the multitude of sins." <span id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551)
  And in regard to this great blessing, without which we have the
apostle’s testimony that neither the tongues of men or of angels, nor
the understanding of all mysteries, nor the gift of prophecy, nor faith
so great as to be able to remove mountains, nor the bestowal of all
one’s goods to feed the poor, nor giving one’s body to be burned, can
profit anything; <span id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552) if, I say,
you think this mighty blessing to be worthless or of trifling value, you
are deservedly but miserably astray; and deservedly you must necessarily
perish, unless you come over to Catholic unity.

<span id="v.vi.xii-p6"></span>44.  If, then, they say, it is necessary
that we should repent of having been outside, and hostile to the Church,
if we would gain salvation, how comes it that after the repentance which
you exact from us we still continue to be clergy, or it may be even
bishops in your body?  This would not be the case, as indeed, in simple
truth, we must confess it should not be the case, were it not that the
evil is cured by the compensating power of peace itself.  But let them
give themselves this lesson, and most especially let those feel sorrow
in their hearts, who are lying in this deep death of severance from the
Church, that they may recover their life even by this sort of wound
inflicted on our Catholic mother Church.  For when the bough that has
been cut off is grafted in, a new wound is made in the tree, to admit of
its reception, that life may be given to the branch which was perishing
for lack of the life that is furnished by the root.  But when the
newly-received branch has become identified with the stock in which it
is received, the result is both vigor and fruit; but if they do not
become identified, the engrafted bough withers, but the life of <span
id="page_649">p. 649</span> <span id="v.vi.xii-Page_649"></span>the tree
continues unimpaired.  For there is further a mode of grafting of such a
kind, that without cutting away any branch that is within, the branch
that is foreign to the tree is inserted, not indeed without a wound, but
with the slightest possible wound inflicted on the tree.  In like
manner, then, when they come to the root which exists in the Catholic
Church, without being deprived of any position which belongs to them as
clergy or bishops after ever so deep repentance of their error, there is
a kind of wound inflicted as it were upon the bark of the mother tree,
breaking in upon the strictness of her discipline; but since neither he
that planteth is anything, neither he that watereth, <span
id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553) so soon as by prayers poured forth
to the mercy of God peace is secured through the union of the engrafted
boughs with the parent stock, charity then covers the multitude of sins.

<span id="v.vi.xii-p8"></span>45.  For although it was made an ordinance
in the Church, that no one who had been called upon to do penance for
any offense should be admired into holy orders, or return to or continue
in the body of the clergy, <span id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554)
this was done not to cause despair of any indulgence being granted, but
merely to maintain a rigorous discipline; otherwise an argument will be
raised against the keys that were given to the Church, of which we have
the testimony of Scripture:  "Whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven." <span id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555)   But
lest it should so happen that, after the detection of offenses, a heart
swelling with the hope of ecclesiastical preferment might do penance in
a spirit of pride, it was determined, with great severity, that after
doing penance for any mortal sin, no one should be admitted to the
number of the clergy, in order that, when all hope of temporal
preferment was done away, the medicine of humility might be endowed with
greater strength and truth.  For even the holy David did penance for
deadly sin, and yet was not degraded from his office.  And we know that
the blessed Peter, after shedding the bitterest of tears, repented that
he had denied his Lord, and yet remained an apostle.  But we must not
therefore be induced to think that the care of those in later times was
in any way superfluous, who, when there was no risk of endangering
salvation, added something to humiliation, in order that the salvation
might be more thoroughly protected,—having, I suppose, experienced a
feigned repentance on the part of some who were influenced by the desire
of the power attaching to office.  For experience in many diseases
necessarily brings in the invention of many remedies.  But in cases of
this kind, when, owing to the serious ruptures of dissensions in the
Church, it is no longer a question of danger to this or that particular
individual, but whole nations are lying in ruin, it is right to yield a
little from our severity, that true charity may give her aid in healing
the more serious evils.

<span id="v.vi.xii-p11"></span>46.  Let them therefore feel bitter grief
for their detestable error of the past, as Peter did for his fear that
led him into falsehood, and let them come to the true Church of Christ,
that is, to the Catholic Church our mother; let them be in it clergy,
let them be bishops unto its profit, as they have been hitherto in
enmity against it.  We feel no jealousy towards them, nay, we embrace
them; we wish, we advise, we even compel those to come in whom we find
in the highways and hedges, although we fail as yet in persuading some
of them that we are seeking not their property, but themselves.  The
Apostle Peter, when he denied his Savior, and wept, and did not cease to
be an apostle, had not as yet received the Holy Spirit that was
promised; but much more have these men not received Him, when, being
severed from the framework of the body, which is alone enlivened by the
Holy Spirit, they have usurped the sacraments of the Church outside the
Church and in hostility to the Church, and have fought against us in a
kind of civil war, with our own arms and our own standards raised in
opposition to us.  Let them come; let peace be concluded in the virtue
of Jerusalem, which virtue is Christian charity,—to which holy city it
is said, "Peace be in thy virtue, and plenteousness within thy
palaces." <span id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556)   Let them not
exalt themselves against the solicitude of their mother, which she both
has entertained and does entertain with the object of gathering within
her bosom themselves, and all the mighty nations whom they are, or
recently were, deceiving; at them not be puffed up with pride, that she
receives them in such wise; let them not attribute to the evil of their
own exaltation the good which she on her part does in order to make
peace.

<span id="v.vi.xii-p13"></span>47.  So it has been her wont to come to
the aid of multitudes who were perishing through schisms and heresies. 
This displeased Lucifer, <span id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557) when
it was carried out in receiving and healing those who had perished
beneath the poison of the Arian heresy; and, being displeased at it, he
fell into the darkness of <span id="page_650">p. 650</span> <span
id="v.vi.xii-Page_650"></span>schism, losing the light of Christian
charity.  In accordance with this principle the Church of Africa has
recognized the Donatists from the very beginning, obeying herein the
decree of the bishops who gave sentence in the Church at Rome between
Cæcilianus and the party of Donatus; and having condemned one bishop
named Donatus, <span id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558) who was proved
to have been the author of the schism, they determined that the others
should be received, after correction, with full recognition of their
orders even if they had been ordained outside the Church,—not that they
could have the Holy Spirit even outside the unity of the body of Christ,
but, in the first place, for the sake of those whom it was possible they
might deceive while they remained outside, and prevent from obtaining
that gift; and, secondly, that their own weakness also being mercifully
received within, might thus be rendered capable of cure, no obstinacy
any longer standing in the way to close their eyes against the evidence
of truth.  For what other intention could have given rise to their own
conduct, when they received with full recognition of their orders the
followers of Maximianus, whom they had condemned as guilty of
sacrilegious schism, as their council <span
id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559) shows, and to fill whose places
they had already ordained other men, when they saw that the people did
not depart from their company, that all might not be involved in ruin? 
And on what other ground did they neither speak against nor question the
validity of the baptism which had been administered outside by men whom
they had condemned?  Why, then, do they wonder, why do they complain,
and make it the subject of their calumnies, that we receive them in such
wise to promote the true peace of Christ, while yet they do not remember
what they themselves have done to promote the false peace of Donatus,
which is opposed to Christ?  For if this act of theirs be borne in mind,
and intelligently used in argument against them, they will have no
answer whatsoever that they can make.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[648:2550](1040669.htm#fr_2549) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p2"></span> [Luke xv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#032)<span id="v.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[648:2551](1040669.htm#fr_2550) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p3"></span> [Eph. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span id="v.vi.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[648:2552](1040669.htm#fr_2551) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p4"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008)<span id="v.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[648:2553](1040669.htm#fr_2552) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="v.vi.xii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[649:2554](1040669.htm#fr_2553) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="v.vi.xii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[649:2555](1040669.htm#fr_2554) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p9"></span> Pope Innocent I., in his 6th Epistle to
Agapitus, Macedonius, and Maurianus, bishops of Apulia, writes to the
effect that "canons had been passed at Nicæa, excluding penitents from
even the lowest orders of the ministry" (can. 10).

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[649:2556](1040669.htm#fr_2555) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p10"></span> [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="v.vi.xii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[649:2557](1040669.htm#fr_2556) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p12"></span> [Ps. cxxii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007)<span id="v.vi.xii-p12.1"></span>;
cp. Hieron.

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[649:2558](1040669.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p14"></span> Bishop of Calaris.  Cp. *De Agone
Christiano*, c. xxx. 32.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[650:2559](1040669.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p15"></span> The Bishop of Casæ Nigræ.

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[650:2560](1040669.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="v.vi.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xii-p16"></span> The Council of Bagai.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1040670)
