[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040280)  [Next](1040282) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—</span>4.  Let us therefore,
seeing that we adhere to the example of Cyprian, go on now to consider
Cyprian’s Council.  What says Cyprian?  "Ye have heard," he says, "most
beloved colleagues, what Jubaianus our fellow-bishop has written to me,
consulting my moderate ability concerning the unlawful and profane
baptism of heretics, and what answer I gave him,—giving a judgment which
we have once and again and often given, that heretics coming to the
Church ought to be baptized and sanctified with the baptism of the
Church.  Another letter of Jubaianus has likewise been read to you, in
which, agreeably to his sincere and religious devotion, in answer to our
epistle, he not only expressed his assent, but returned thanks also,
acknowledging that he had received instruction." <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264)   In these words of the blessed
Cyprian, we find that he had been consulted by Jubaianus, and what
answer he had given to his questions, and how Jubaianus acknowledged
with gratitude that he had received instruction.  Ought we then to be
thought unreasonably persistent if we desire to consider this same
epistle by which Jubaianus was convinced?  For till such time as we are
also convinced (if there are any arguments of truth whereby this can be
done), Cyprian himself has established our security by the right of
Catholic communion.

<span id="v.iv.v.iii-p3"></span>5.  For he goes on to say:  "It remains
that we severally declare our opinion on this same subject, judging no
one, nor depriving any one of the right of communion if he differ from
us." <span id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265)   He allows me,
therefore, without losing the right of communion, not only to continue
inquiring into the truth, but even to hold opinions differing from his
own.  "For no one of us," he says, "setteth himself up as a bishop of
bishops, or by tyrannical terror forces his colleagues to a necessity of
obeying."  What could be more kind? what more humble?  Surely there is
here no authority restraining us from inquiry into what is truth. 
"Inasmuch as every bishop," he says, "in the free use of his liberty and
power, has the right of forming his own judgment, and can no more be
judged by another than he can himself judge another,"—that is, I
suppose, in those questions which have not yet been brought to perfect
clearness of solution; for he knew what a deep question about the
sacrament was then occupying the whole Church with every kind of
disputation, and gave free liberty of inquiry to every man, that the
truth might be made known by investigation.  For he was surely not
uttering what was false, and trying to catch his simpler colleagues in
their <span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.iii-Page_438"></span>speech, so that, when they should have
betrayed that they held opinions at variance with his, he might then
propose, in violation of his promise, that they should be
excommunicated.  Far be it from a soul so holy to entertain such
accursed treachery; indeed, they who hold such a view about such a man,
thinking that it conduces to his praise, do but show that it would be in
accordance with their own nature.  I for my part will in no wise believe
that Cyprian, a Catholic bishop, a Catholic martyr, whose greatness only
made him proportionately humble in all things, so as to find favor
before the Lord, <span id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) should ever,
especially in the sacred Council of his colleagues, have uttered with
his mouth what was not echoed in his heart, especially as he further
adds, "But we must all await the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
alone has the power both of setting us in the government of His Church,
and of judging of our acts therein." <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267)   When, then, he called to their
remembrance so solemn a judgment, hoping to hear the truth from his
colleagues, would he first set them the example of lying?  May God avert
such madness from every Christian man, and how much more from Cyprian! 
We have therefore the free liberty of inquiry granted to us by the most
moderate and most truthful speech of Cyprian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[437:1265](1040281.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="v.iv.v.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.iii-p2"></span> See above, II. ii. 3.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[437:1266](1040281.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="v.iv.v.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.iii-p4"></span> See above, II. ii. 3.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[438:1267](1040281.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="v.iv.v.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.iii-p5"></span> [Ecclus. iii.
18](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.v.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[438:1268](1040281.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="v.iv.v.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.iii-p6"></span> See above, II. ii. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040282)
