[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040137)  [Next](1040139.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 36.—The Source of Evil or of
Corruption of Good.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxvii-p2"></span>41.  After thus inquiring what evil
is, and learning that it is not nature, but against nature, we must next
inquire whence it is.  If Manichæus had done this, he might have escaped
falling into the snare of these serious errors.  Out of time and out of
order, he began with inquiring into the origin of evil, without first
asking what evil was; and so his inquiry led him only to the reception
of foolish fancies, of which the mind, much fed by the bodily senses,
with difficulty rids itself.  Perhaps, then, some one, desiring no
longer argument, but delivery from error, will ask, Whence is this
corruption which we find to be the common evil of good things which are
not incorruptible?  Such an inquirer will soon find the answer if he
seeks for truth with great earnestness, and knocks reverently with
sustained assiduity.  For while man can use words as a kind of sign for
the expression of his thoughts, teaching is the work of the
incorruptible Truth itself, who is the one true, the one internal
Teacher.  He became ex<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xxxvii-Page_148"></span>ternal also, that He might recall us
from the external to the internal; and taking on Himself the form of a
servant, that He might bring down His height to the knowledge of those
rising up to Him, He condescended to appear in lowliness to the low.  In
His name let us ask, and through Him let us seek mercy of the Father
while making this inquiry.  For to answer in a word the question, Whence
is corruption? it is hence, because these natures that are capable of
corruption were not begotten by God, but made by Him out of nothing; and
as we already proved that those natures are good, no one can say with
propriety that they were not good as made by God.  If it is said that
God made them perfectly good, it must be remembered that the only
perfect good is God Himself, the maker of those good things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 37](1040139.md)
