[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040169)  [Next](1040171) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Book XXII.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p2"></span>Faustus states his objections to the
morality of the law and the prophets, and Augustin seeks by the
application of the type and the allegory to explain away the moral
difficulties of the Old Testament.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  You ask why we
blaspheme the law and the prophets.  We are so far from professing or
feeling any hostility to the law and the prophets, that we are ready, if
you will allow us, to declare the falsehood of all the writings which
make the law and the prophets appear objectionable.  But this you refuse
to admit, and by maintaining the authority of your writers, you bring a
perhaps unmerited reproach upon the prophets; you slander the
patriarchs, and dishonor the law.  You are so unreasonable as to deny
that your writers are false, while you uphold the piety and sanctity of
those who are described in these writings as guilty of the worst crimes,
and as leading wicked lives.  These opinions are inconsistent; for
either these were bad characters, or the writers were untruthful.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p4"></span>2.  Supposing, then, that we agree in
condemning the writers, we may succeed in vindicating the law and the
prophets.  By the law must be understood not circumcision, or Sabbaths,
or sacrifices, or the other Jewish observances, but the true law, viz.,
Thou shall not kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not bear
false witness, and so on.  To this law, promulgated throughout the
world, that is, at the commencement of the present constitution of the
world, the Hebrew writers did violence, by infecting it with the
pollution of their disgusting precepts about circumcision and
sacrifice.  As a friend of <span id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_273"></span>the law, you should join with me in
condemning the Jews for injuring the law by this mixture of unsuitable
precepts.  Plainly, you must be aware that these precepts are not the
law, or any part of the law, since you claim to be righteous, though you
make no attempt to keep the precepts.  In seeking to lead a righteous
life, you pay great regard to the commandments which forbid sinful
actions, while you take no notice of the Jewish observances; which would
be unjustifiable if they were one and the same law.  You resent as a
foul reproach being called negligent of the precept, "Thou shalt not
kill," or "Thou shall not commit adultery."  And if you showed the same
resentment at being called uncircumcised, or negligent of the Sabbath,
it would be evident that you considered both to be the law and the
commandment of God.  In fact, however, you consider the honor and glory
of keeping the one no way endangered by disregard of the other.  It is
plain, as I have said, that these observances are not the law, but a
disfigurement of the law.  If we condemn them, it is not as being
genuine, but as spurious.  In this condemnation there is no reproach of
the law, or of God its author, but only of those who published their
shocking superstitions under these names.  If we sometimes abuse the
venerable name of law in attacking the Jewish precepts, the fault is
yours, for refusing to distinguish between Hebrew observances and the
law.  Only restore to the law its proper dignity, by removing these foul
Israelitish blots; grant that these writers are guilty of disfiguring
the law, and you will see at once that we are the enemies not of the
law, but of Judaism.  You are misled by the word law; for you do not
know to what that name properly belongs.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p5"></span>3.  For my part, I see no reason for
your thinking that we blaspheme your prophets and patriarchs.  There
would indeed be some ground for the charge, if we had been directly or
remotely the authors of the account given of their actions.  But as this
account is written either by themselves, in a criminal desire to be
famous for their misdeeds, or by their companions and coevals, why
should you blame us?  You condemn them in abhorrence of the wicked
actions of which they have voluntarily declared themselves guilty,
though there was no occasion for such a confession.  Or if the narrative
is only a malicious fiction, let its authors be punished, let the books
be condemned, let the prophetic name be cleared from this foul reproach,
let the patriarchs recover the respect due to their simplicity and
purity of managers.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p6"></span>4.  These books, moreover, contain
shocking calumnies against God himself.  We are told that he existed
from eternity in darkness, and admired the light when he saw it; that he
was so ignorant of the future, that he gave Adam a command, not
foreseeing that it would be broken; that his perception was so limited
that he could not see Adam when, from the knowledge of his nakedness, he
hid himself in a corner of Paradise; that envy made him afraid lest his
creature man should taste of the tree of life, and live for ever; that
afterwards he was greedy for blood, and fat from all kinds of
sacrifices, and jealous if they were offered to any one but himself;
that he was enraged sometimes against his enemies, sometimes against his
friends; that he destroyed thousands of men for a slight offense, or for
nothing; that he threatened to come with a sword and spare nobody,
righteous or wicked.  The authors of such bold libels against God might
very well slander the men of God.  You must join with us in laying the
blame on the writers if you wish to vindicate the prophets.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p7"></span>5.  Again, we are not responsible for
what is said of Abraham, that in his irrational craving to have
children, and not believing God, who promised that his wife Sara should
have a son, he defiled himself with a mistress, with the knowledge of
his wife, which only made it worse; <span
id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780) or that, in sacrilegious profanation
of his marriage, he on different occasions, from avarice and greed, sold
his wife Sara for the gratification of the kings Abimelech and Pharas,
telling them that she was his sister, because she was very fair. <span
id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781)   The narrative is not ours, which
tells how Lot, Abraham’s brother, after his escape from Sodom, lay with
his two daughters on the mountain <span
id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) (better for him to have perished in
the conflagration of Sodom, than to have burned with incestuous
passion); or how Isaac imitated his father’s conduct, and called his
wife Rebecca his sister, that he might gain a shameful livelihood by
her; <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) or how his son Jacob,
husband of four wives—two full sisters, Rachel and Leah, and their
handmaids—led the life of a goat among them, so that there was a daily
strife among his women who should be the first to lay hold of him when
he came from the field, ending sometimes in their hiring him from one
another for the night; <span id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) or,
again, how his son Judah slept with his daughter-in-law Tamar, after she
had been married to two of his sons, deceived, we are told, by the
harlot’s dress which Tamar put on, knowing that her father-in-law was in
the <span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_274"></span>habit of associating with such
characters; <span id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) or how David, after
having a number of wives, seduced the wife of his soldier Uriah, and
caused Uriah himself to be killed in the battle; <span
id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) or how his son Solomon had three
hundred wives, and seven hundred concubines, and princesses without
number; <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) or how the first prophet
Hosea got children from a prostitute, and, what is worse, it is said
that this disgraceful conduct was enjoined by God; <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) or how Moses committed murder, <span
id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789) and plundered Egypt, <span
id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) and waged wars, and commanded, or
himself perpetrated, many cruelties. <span
id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791)   And he too was not content with one
wife.  We are neither directly nor remotely the authors of these and
similar narratives, which are found in the books of the patriarchs and
the prophets.  Either your writers forged these things, or the fathers
are really guilty.  Choose which you please; the crime in either case is
detestable, for vicious conduct and falsehood are equally hateful.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p20"></span>6.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p20.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  You understand
neither the symbols of the law nor the acts of the prophets, because you
do not know what holiness or righteousness means.  We have repeatedly
shown at great length, that the precepts and symbols of the Old
Testament contained both what was to be fulfilled in obedience through
the grace bestowed in the New Testament, and what was to be set aside as
a proof of its having been fulfilled in the truth now made manifest. 
For in the love of God and of our neighbor is secured the accomplishment
of the precepts of the law, while the accomplishment of its promises is
shown in the abolition of circumcision, and of other typical observances
formerly practised.  By the precept men were led, through a sense of
guilt to desire salvation; by the promise they were led to find in the
typical observances the assurance that the Saviour would come.  The
salvation desired was to be obtained through the grace bestowed on the
appearance of the New Testament; and the fulfillment of the expectation
rendered the types no longer necessary.  The same law that was given by
Moses became grace and truth in Jesus Christ.  By the grace in the
pardon of sin, the precept is kept in force in the case of those
supported by divine help.  By the truth the symbolic rites are set
aside, that the promise might, in those who trust in the divine
faithfulness, be brought to pass.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p21"></span>7.  Those, accordingly, who, finding
fault with what they do not understand, call the typical institutions of
the law disfigurements and excrescences, are like men displeased with
things of which they do not know the use.  As if a deaf man, seeing
others move their lips in speaking, were to find fault with the motion
of the mouth as needless and unsightly; or as if a blind man, on hearing
a house commended, were to test the truth of what he heard by passing
his hand over the surface of the wall, and on coming to the windows were
to cry out against them as flaws in the level, or were to suppose that
the wall had fallen in.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p22"></span>8.  How shall I make those whose minds
are full of vanity understand that the actions of the prophets were also
mystical and prophetic?  The vanity of their minds is shown in their
thinking that we believe God to have once existed in darkness, because
it is written, "Darkness was over the deep." <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792)   As if we called the deep God, where
there was darkness, because the light did not exist there before God
made it by His word.  From their not distinguishing between the light
which is God, and the light which God made, they imagine that God must
have been in darkness before He made light, because darkness was over
the deep before God said, "Let there be light, and there was light."  In
the New Testament both these things are ascribed to God.  For we read,
"God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all;" <span
id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) and again, "God, who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts." <span
id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794)   So also, in the Old Testament, the
name "Brightness of eternal light" <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) is given to the wisdom of God, which
certainly was not created, for by it all things were made; and of the
light which exists only as the production of this wisdom it is said,
"Thou wilt light my candle, O Lord; my God, Thou wilt enlighten my
darkness." <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796)   In the same way, in
the beginning, when darkness was over the deep, God said, "Let there be
light, and there was light," which only the light-giving light, which is
God Himself, could have made.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p28"></span>9.  For as God is His own eternal
happiness, and is besides the bestower of happiness, so He is His own
eternal light, and is also the bestower of light.  He envies the good of
none, for He is Himself the source of happiness to all good beings; He
fears the evil of none, for the loss of all evil beings is in their
being abandoned by Him.  He can neither be benefited by those on whom He
Himself bestows happiness, nor is He afraid of those whose misery is the
doom awarded by His own judgment.  Very different, O Manichæus, is the
object of your worship. <span id="page_275">p. 275</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_275"></span>You have departed from God in the
pursuit of your own fancies, which of all kinds have increased and
multiplied in your foolish roving hearts, drinking in through the sense
of sight the light of the heavenly bodies.  This light, though it too is
made by God, is not to be compared to the light created in the minds of
the pious, whom God brings out of darkness into light, as He brings them
out of sinfulness into righteousness.  Still less can it be compared to
that inaccessible light from which all kinds of light are derived.  Nor
is this light inaccessible to all; for "blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God." <span id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797)   "God
is light, and in Him is no darkness at all;" but the wicked shall not
see light, as is said in Isaiah. <span id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798)
  To them the light-giving light is inaccessible.  From the light comes
not only the spiritual light in the minds of the pious, but also the
material light, which is not denied to the wicked, but is made to rise
on the evil and on the good.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p31"></span>10.  So, when darkness was over the
deep, He who was light said, "Let there be light."  From what light this
light came is clear; for the words are, "God said."  What light is that
which was made, is not so clear.  For there has been a friendly
discussion among students of the sacred Scriptures, whether God then
made the light in the minds of the angels, or, in other words, these
rational spirits themselves, or some material light which exists in the
higher regions of the universe beyond our ken.  For on the fourth day He
made the visible luminaries of heaven.  And it is also a question
whether these bodies were made at the same time as their light, or were
somehow kindled from the light made already.  But whoever reads the
sacred writings in the pious spirit which is required to understand
them, must be convinced that whatever the light was which was made when,
at the time that darkness was over the deep, God said, "Let there be
light," it was created light, and the creating Light was the maker of
it.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p32"></span>11.  Nor does it follow that God,
before He made light, abode in darkness, because it is said that
darkness was over the deep, and then that the Spirit of God moved on the
waters.  The deep is the unfathomable abyss of the waters.  And the
carnal mind might suppose that the Spirit abode in the darkness which
was over the deep, because it is said that He moved on the waters.  This
is from not understanding how the light shineth in darkness, and the
darkness comprehendeth it not, till by the word of God those who were
darkness are made light, and it is said to them, "Ye were once darkness,
but now are ye light in the Lord." <span
id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799)   But if rational minds which are in
darkness through a sinful will cannot comprehend the light of the wisdom
of God, though it is present everywhere, because they are separated from
it not in place, but in disposition:  why may not the Spirit of God have
moved on the darkness of the waters, when He moved on the waters, though
at an immeasurable distance from it, not in place, but in nature?

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p34"></span>12.  In all this I know I am singing to
deaf ears; but the Lord, from whom is the truth which we speak, can open
some ears to catch the strain.  But what shall we say of those critics
of the Holy Scriptures who object to God’s being pleased with His own
works, and find fault with the words, "God saw the light that it was
good," as if this meant that God admired the light as something new? 
God’s seeing His works that they were good, means that the Creator
approved of His own works as pleasing to Himself.  For God cannot be
forced to do anything against His will, so that He should not be pleased
with His own work; nor can He do anything by mistake, so that He should
regret having done it.  Why should the Manichæans object to our God
seeing His work that it was good, when their god placed a covering
before himself when he mingled his own members with the darkness?  For
instead of seeing his work that it is good, he refuses to look at it
because it is evil.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p35"></span>13.  Faustus speaks of our God as
astonished, which is not said in Scripture; nor does it follow that one
must be astonished when he sees anything to be good.  There are many
good things which we see without being astonished, as if they were
better than we expected; we merely approve of them as being what they
ought to be.  We can, however, give an instance of God being astonished,
not from the Old Testament, which the Manichæans assail with undeserved
reproach, but from the New Testament, which they profess to believe in
order to entrap the unwary.  For they acknowledge Christ as God, and use
this as a bait to entice Christ’s followers into their snares.  God,
then, was astonished when Christ was astonished.  For we read in the
Gospel, that when Christ heard the faith of a certain centurion, He was
astonished, and said to His disciples, "Verily I have not found so great
faith, no, not in Israel." <span id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800)   We
have already given our explanation of the words, "God saw that it was
good."  Better men may give a better explanation.  Mean<span
id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_276"></span>while
let the Manichæans explain Christ’s being astonished at what He foresaw
before it happened, and knew before He heard it.  For though seeing a
thing to be good is quite different from being astonished at it, in this
case there is some resemblance, for Jesus was astonished at the light of
faith which He Himself had created in the heart of the centurion; for
Jesus is the true light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh into
the world.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p37"></span>14.  Thus an irreligious Pagan might
bring the same reproaches against Christ in the Gospel, as Faustus
brings against God in the Old Testament.  He might say that Christ
lacked foresight, not only because He was astonished at the faith of the
centurion, but because He chose Judas as a disciple who proved
disobedient to His commands; as Faustus objects to the precept given in
Paradise, which, as it turned out, was not obeyed.  He might also cavil
at Christ’s not knowing who touched Him, when the woman suffering from
an issue of blood touched the hem of His garment; as Faustus blames God
for not knowing where Adam had hid himself.  If this ignorance is
implied in God’s saying, "Where art thou, Adam?" <span
id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) the same may be said of Christ’s
asking, "Who touched me?" <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802)   The
Pagans also might call Christ timid and envious, in not wishing five of
the ten virgins to gain eternal life by entering into His kingdom, and
in shutting them out, so that they knocked in vain in their entreaty to
have the door opened, as if forgetful of His own promise, "Knock, and it
shall be opened unto you;" <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) as
Faustus charges God with fear and envy in not admitting man after his
sin to eternal life.  Again, he might call Christ greedy of the blood,
not of beasts, but of men, because he said, "He that loseth his life for
my sake, shall keep it unto life eternal;" <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) as Faustus reproaches God in reference
to those animal sacrifices which prefigured the sacrifice of
blood-shedding by which we are redeemed.  He might also accuse Christ of
jealousy, because in narrating His driving the buyers and sellers out of
the temple, the evangelist quotes as applicable to Him the words, "The
jealousy of Thine house hath eaten me up;" <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) as Faustus accuses God of jealousy in
forbidding sacrifices to be offered to other gods.  He might say that
Christ was angry with both His friends and His enemies:  with His
friends, because He said, "The servant that knows his lord’s will, and
doeth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes;" and with His enemies,
because He said, "If any one shall not receive you, shake off against
him the dust of your shoes; verily I say unto you, that it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom in the day of judgment than for that city;" <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) as Faustus accuses God of being angry
at one time with His friends, and at another with His enemies; both of
whom are spoken of thus by the apostle:  "They that have sinned without
law shall perish without law, and they that have sinned in the law shall
be judged by the law." <span id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807)   Or he
might say that Christ shed the blood of many without mercy, for a slight
offense or for nothing.  For to a Pagan there would appear to be little
or no harm in not having a wedding garment at the marriage feast, for
which our King in the Gospel commanded a man to be bound hand and foot,
and cast into outer darkness; <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) or
in not wishing to have Christ for a king, which is the sin of which
Christ says, "Those that would not have me to reign over them, bring
hither and slay before me;" <span id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) as
Faustus blames God in the Old Testament for slaughtering thousands of
human beings for slight offenses, as Faustus calls them, or for
nothing.  Again, if Faustus finds fault with God’s threatening to come
with the sword, and to spare neither the righteous nor the wicked, might
not the Pagan find as much fault with the words of the Apostle Paul,
when he says of our God," He spared not His own Son, but gave Him up for
us all;" <span id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) or of Peter, when, in
exhorting the saints to be patient in the midst of persecution and
slaughter, he says, "It is time that judgment begin from the house of
God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that
believe not the gospel of the Lord?  And if the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?" <span
id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811)   What can be more righteous than the
Only-Begotten, whom nevertheless the Father did not spare?  And what can
be plainer than that the righteous also are not spared, but chastised
with manifold afflictions, as is clearly implied in the words, "If the
righteous scarcely are saved"?  As it is said in the Old Testament,
"Whom the Lord loveth He correcteth, and chastiseth every son whom He
receiveth;" <span id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) and, "If we receive
good at the hand of the Lord, shall we not also receive evil?" <span
id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813)   So we read also in the New
Testament, "Whom I love I rebuke and chasten;" <span
id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) and, "If we judge ourselves, we shall
not be judged of the Lord; but when we are judged, we are corrected of
the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world." <span
id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815)   If a Pagan were <span
id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_277"></span>to
make such objections to the New Testament, would not the Manichæans try
to answer them, though they themselves make similar objections to the
Old Testament?  But supposing them able to answer the Pagan, how absurd
it would be to defend in the one Testament what they find fault with in
the other!  But if they could not answer the objections of the Pagan,
why should they not allow in both Testaments, instead of in one only,
that what appears wrong to unbelievers, from their ignorance, should be
believed to be right by pious readers even when they also are ignorant?

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p53"></span>15.  Perhaps our opponents will
maintain that these parallel passages quoted from the New Testament are
themselves neither authoritative nor true:  for they claim the impious
liberty of holding and teaching, that whatever they deem favorable to
their heresy was said by Christ and the apostles; while they have the
profane boldness to say, that whatever in the same writings is
unfavorable to them is a spurious interpolation.  I have already at some
length, as far as the intention of the present work required, exposed
the unreasonableness of this assault upon the authority of the whole of
Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p54"></span>16.  At present I would call attention
to the fact, that when the Manichæans, although they disguise their
blasphemous absurdities under the name of Christianity, bring such
objections against the Christian Scriptures, we have to defend the
authority of the divine record in both Testaments against the Manichæans
as much as against the Pagans.  A Pagan might find fault with passages
in the New Testament in the same way as Faustus does with what he calls
unworthy representations of God in the Old Testament; and the Pagan
might be answered by the quotation of similar passages from his own
authors, as in Paul’s speech at Athens. <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816)   Even in Pagan writings we might find
the doctrine that God created and constructed the world, and that He is
the giver of light, which does not imply that before light was made He
abode in darkness; and that when His work was finished He was elated
with joy, which is more than saying that He saw that it was good; and
that He made a law with rewards for obedience, and punishments for
disobedience, by which they do not mean to say that God was ignorant of
the future, because He gave a law to those by whom it was to be broken. 
Nor could they make asking questions a proof of a want of foresight even
in a human being; for in their books many questions are asked only for
the purpose of using the answers for the conviction of the persons
addressed:  for the questioner knows not only what answer he desires,
but what will actually be given.  Again, if the Pagan tried to make out
God to be envious of any one, because He will not give happiness to the
wicked, he would find many passages in the writings of his own authors
in support of this principle of the divine government.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p56"></span>17.  The only objection that a Pagan
would make on the subject of sacrifice would refer to our reason for
finding fault with Pagan sacrifices, when in the Old Testament God is
described as requiring men to offer sacrifice to Him.  If I were to
reply at length on this subject, I might prove to him that sacrifice is
due only to the one true God, and that this sacrifice was offered by the
one true Priest, the Mediator of God and man; and that it was proper
that this sacrifice should be pre-figured by animal sacrifices, in order
to foreshadow the flesh and blood of the one sacrifice for the remission
of sins contracted by flesh and blood, which shall not inherit the
kingdom of God:  for the natural body will be endowed with heavenly
attributes, as the fire in the sacrifice typified the swallowing up of
death in victory.  Those observances properly belonged to the people
whose kingdom and priesthood were prophetic of the King and Priest who
should come to govern and to consecrate believers in all nations, and to
lead them into the kingdom of heaven, and the holy society of angels and
eternal life.  And as this true sacrifice was piously set forth in the
Hebrew observances, so it was impiously caricatured by the Pagans,
because, as the apostle says, what they offer they offer to devils, and
not to God. <span id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817)   The typical rite
of blood-shedding in sacrifice dates from the earliest ages, pointing
forward from the outset of human history to the passion of the
Mediator.  For Abel is mentioned in the sacred Scripture as the first
who offered such sacrifices. <span id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818)  
We need not therefore wonder that fallen angels who occupy the air, and
whose chief sins are pride and falsehood, should demand from their
worshippers by whom they wished to be considered as gods what they knew
to be due to God only.  This deception was favored by the folly of the
human heart, especially when regret for the dead led to the making of
likenesses, and so to the use of images. <span
id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819)   By the increase of this homage,
divine honors came to be paid to the dead as dwelling in heaven, while
devils took their place on earth as the objects of worship, <span
id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_278"></span>and
required that their deluded and degraded votaries should present
sacrifices to them.  Thus the nature of sacrifice as due only to God
appears not only when God righteously claims it, but also when a false
god proudly arrogates it.  If the Pagan was slow to believe these
things, I should argue from the prophecies, and point out that, though
uttered long ago, they are now fulfilled.  If he still remained in
unbelief, this is rather to be expected than to be wondered at; for the
prophecy itself intimates that all would not believe.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p60"></span>18.  If the Pagan, in the next place,
were to find fault with both Testaments as attributing jealousy to God
and Christ, he would only show his own ignorance of literature, or his
forgetfulness.  For though their philosophers distinguish between desire
and passion, joy and gratification, caution and fear, gentleness and
tender-heartedness, prudence and cunning, boldness and daring, and so
on, giving the first name in each pair to what is good, and the second
to what is bad, their books are notwithstanding full of instances in
which, by the abuse of these words, virtues are called by the names
which properly belong to vices; as passion is used for desire,
gratification for joy, fear for caution, tender-heartedness for
gentleness, cunning for prudence, daring for boldness.  The cases are
innumerable in which speech exhibits similar inaccuracies.  Moreover,
each language has its own idioms.  For in religious writings I remember
no instance of the word tender-heartedness being used in a bad sense. 
And common usage affords examples of similar peculiarities in the use of
words.  In Greek, one word stands for two distinct things, labor and
pain; while we have a separate name for each.  Again, we use the word in
two senses, as when we say of what is not dead, that it has life; and
again, of any one that he is a man of good life, whereas in Greek each
of these meanings has a word of its own.  So that, apart from the abuse
of words which prevails in all languages, it may be an Hebrew idiom to
use jealousy in two senses, as a man is called jealous when he suffers
from a diseased state of mind caused by distress on account of the
faithlessness of his wife, in which sense the word cannot be applied to
God; or as when diligence is manifested in guarding conjugal chastity,
in which sense it is profitable for us not only unhesitatingly to admit,
but thankfully to assert, that God is jealous of His people when He
calls them His wife, and warns them against committing adultery with a
multitude of false gods.  The same may be said of the anger of God.  For
God does not suffer perturbation when He visits men in anger; but either
by an abuse of the word, or by a peculiarity of idiom, anger is used in
the sense of punishment.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p61"></span>19.  The slaughter of multitudes would
not seem strange to the Pagan, unless he denied the judgment of God,
which Pagans do not; for they allow that all things in the universe,
from the highest to the lowest, are governed by God’s providence.  But
if he would not allow this, he would be convinced either by the
authority of Pagan writers, or by the more tedious method of
demonstration; and if still obstinate and perverse, he would be left to
the judgment which he denies.  Then, if he were to give instances of the
destruction of men for no offense, or for a very slight one, we should
show that these were offenses, and that they were not slight.  For
instance, to take the case already referred to of the wedding garment,
we should prove that it was a great crime in a man to attend the sacred
feast, seeking not the bridegroom’s glory, but his own, or whatever the
garment may be found on better interpretation to signify.  And in the
case of the slaughter before the king of those who would not have him to
reign over them, we might perhaps easily prove that, though it may be no
sin in a man to refuse to obey his fellow-man, it is both a fault and a
great one to reject the reign of Him in whose reign alone is there
righteousness, and happiness, and continuance.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p62"></span>20.  Lastly, as regards Faustus’ crafty
insinuation, that the Old Testament misrepresents God as threatening to
come with a sword which will spare neither the righteous nor the wicked,
if the words were explained to the Pagan, he would perhaps disagree
neither with the Old Testament nor with the New; and he might see the
beauty of the parable in the Gospel, which people who pretend to be
Christians either misunderstand from their blindness, or reject from
their perversity.  The great husbandman of the vine uses his
pruning-hook differently in the fruitful and in the unfruitful branches;
yet he spares neither good nor bad, pruning one and cutting off the
other. <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820)   There is no man so just
as not to require to be tried by affliction to advance, or to establish,
or to prove his virtue.  Do the Manichæans not reckon Paul as righteous,
who, while confessing humbly and honestly his past sins, still gives
thanks for being justified by faith in Jesus Christ?  Was Paul then
spared by Him whom fools misunderstand, when He says, "I will spare
neither the righteous nor the sinner"?  Hear the <span id="page_279">p.
279</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_279"></span>apostle himself:  "Lest
I should be exalted above measure by the abundance of the revelation,
there was given me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet
me.  For this I besought the Lord thrice, that He would remove it from
me; and He said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee:  for strength
is perfected in weakness." <span id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821)  
Here a just man is not spared that his strength might be perfected in
weakness by Him who had given him an angel of Satan to buffet him.  If
you say that the devil gave this angel, it follows that the devil sought
to prevent Paul’s being exalted above measure by the abundance of the
revelation, and to perfect his strength.  This is impossible.  Therefore
He who gave up this righteous man to be buffeted by the messenger of
Satan, is the same as He who, through Paul, gave up to Satan himself the
wicked persons of whom Paul says:  "I have delivered them to Satan, that
they may learn not to blaspheme." <span
id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822)   Do you see now how the Most High
spares neither the righteous nor the wicked?  Or is it the sword that
frightens you?  For to be buffeted is not so bad as to be put to death. 
But did not the thousands of martyrs suffer death in various forms?  And
could their persecutors have had this power against them except it had
been given them by God, who thus spared neither the righteous nor the
wicked?  For the Lord Himself, the chief martyr, says expressly to
Pilate:  "Thou couldst have no power at all against me, except it were
given thee from above." <span id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823)   Paul
also, besides recording his own experience, says that the afflictions
and persecutions of the righteous exhibit the judgment of God. <span
id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824)   This truth is set forth at length by
the Apostle Peter in the passage already quoted, where he says:  "It is
time that judgment should begin at the house of the Lord.  And if it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of those that believe not the
gospel of God?  And if the righteous scarcely are saved, where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear?" <span id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825)
  Peter also explains how the wicked are not spared, for they are
branches broken off to be burnt; while the righteous are not spared,
because their purification is to be brought to perfection.  He ascribes
these things to the will of Him who says in the Old Testament, I will
spare neither the righteous nor the wicked; for he says:  "It is better,
if the will of the Spirit of God be so, that we suffer for well-doing
than for evil-doing." <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826)   So, when
by the will of the Spirit of God men suffer for well-doing, the
righteous are not spared; when they suffer for evil-doing, the wicked
are not spared.  In both cases it is according to the will of Him who
says:  I will spare neither the righteous nor the wicked; correcting the
one as a son, and punishing the other as a transgressor.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p70"></span>21.  I have thus shown, to the best of
my power, that the God we worship did not abide from eternity in
darkness, but is Himself light, and in Him is no darkness at all; and in
Himself dwells in light inaccessible; and the brightness of this light
is His coeternal wisdom.  From what we have said, it appears that God
was not taken by surprise by the unexpected appearance of light, but
that light owes its existence to Him as its Creator, as its owes its
continued existence to His approval.  Neither was God ignorant of the
future, but the author of the precept as well as the punisher of
disobedience; that by showing His righteous anger against transgression,
He might provide a restraint for the time, and a warning for the
future.  Nor does He ask questions from ignorance, but by His very
inquiry declares His judgment.  Nor is He curious or timid, but excludes
the transgressor from eternal life, which is the just reward of
obedience.  Nor is He greedy for blood and fat; but by requiring from a
carnal people sacrifices, suited to their character, He by certain types
prefigures the true sacrifice.  Nor is His jealousy an emotion of pale
anxiety, but of quiet benevolence, in desire to keep the soul, which
owes chastity to the one true God, from being defiled and prostituted by
serving many false gods.  Nor is He enraged with a passion similar to
human anger, but is angry, not in the sense of desiring vengeance, but
in the peculiar sense of giving full effect to the sentence of a
righteous retribution.  Nor does He destroy thousands of men for
trifling offenses, or for nothing, but manifests to the world the
benefit to be obtained from fearing Him, by the temporal death of those
already mortal.  Nor does He punish the righteous and sinners
indiscriminately, but chastises the righteous for their good, in order
to perfect them, and gives to sinners the punishment justly due to
them.  Thus, ye Manichæans, do your suspicions lead you astray, when, by
misunderstanding our Scriptures, or by hearing bad interpreters, you
form a mistaken judgment of Catholics.  Hence you leave sound doctrine,
and turn to impious fables; and in your perversity and estrangement from
the society of saints, you reject the instruction of the New Testament,
which, as we have shown, contains statements similar to those which you
condemn in the Old Testament.  So we are <span id="page_280">p.
280</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_280"></span>obliged to defend both
Testaments against you as well as against the Pagans.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p71"></span>22.  But supposing that there is some
one so deluded by carnality as to worship not the God whom we worship,
who is one and true, but the fiction of your suspicions or your
slanders, whom you say we worship, is not even this god better than
yours?  Observe, I beseech you, what must be plain to the feeblest
understanding; for here there is no need of great perspicacity.  I
address all, wise and unwise.  I appeal to the common sense and judgment
of all alike.  Hear, consider, judge.  Would it not have been better for
your god to have remained in darkness from eternity, than to have
plunged the light coeternal with him and cognate to him into darkness? 
Would it not have been better to have expressed admiration in surprise
at the appearance of a new light coming to scatter the darkness, than to
have been unable to baffle the assault of darkness except by the
concession of his own light?  Unhappy if he did this in alarm, and cruel
if there was no need of it.  Surely it would have been better to see
light, made by himself, and to admire it as good, than to make the light
begotten by himself evil; better than that his own light should become
hostile to himself in repelling the forces of darkness.  For this will
be the accusation against those who will be condemned for ever to the
mass of darkness, that they suffered themselves to lose their original
brightness, and became the enemies of sacred light.  If they did not
know from eternity that they would be thus condemned, they must have
suffered the darkness of eternal ignorance; or if they did know, the
darkness of eternal fear.  Thus part of the substance of your god really
did remain from eternity in its own darkness; and instead of admiring
new light on its appearance, it only met with another and a hostile
darkness, of which it had always been in fear.  Indeed, God himself must
have been in the darkness of fear for this part of himself, if he was
dreading the evil coming upon it.  If he did not foresee the evil, he
must have been in the darkness of ignorance.  If he foresaw it, and was
not in fear, the darkness of such cruelty is worse than the darkness
either of ignorance or of fear.  Your god appears to be destitute of the
quality which the apostle commends in the body, which you insanely
believe to be made not by God, but by *Hyle*:  "If one member suffers,
all the members suffer with it." <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827)
  But suppose he did suffer; he foresaw, he feared, he suffered, but he
could not help himself.  Thus he remained from eternity in the darkness
of his own misery; and then, instead of admiring a new light which was
to drive away the darkness, he came in contact, to the injury of his own
light, with another darkness which he had always dreaded.  Again, would
it not have been much better, I say, not to have given a commandment
like God, but even to have received a commandment like Adam, which he
would be rewarded for keeping and punished for breaking, acting either
way by his own free-will, than to be forced by inevitable necessity to
admit darkness into his light in spite of himself?  Surely it would have
been better to have given a precept to human nature, not knowing that it
would become sinful, than to have been driven by necessity to sin
contrary to his own divine nature.  Think for a moment, and say how
darkness could be conquered by one who was himself conquered by
necessity.  Conquered already by this greater enemy, he fought under his
conqueror’s orders against a less formidable opponent.  Would it not
have been better not to know where Adam had hid himself, than to have
been himself destitute of any means of escape, first from a hard and
hateful necessity, and then from a dissimilar and hostile race?  Would
it not have been better to grudge eternal life to human nature, than to
consign to misery the divine nature; to desire the blood and fat of
sacrifices, than to be himself slaughtered in so many forms, on account
of his mixture with the blood and fat of every victim; to be disturbed
by jealousy at these sacrifices being offered to other gods as well as
to himself, than to be himself offered on all altars to all devils, as
mixed up not only with all fruits, but also with all animals?  Would it
not have been much better to be affected even with human anger, so as to
be enraged against both his friends and his enemies for their sins, than
to be himself influenced by fear as well as by anger wherever these
passions exist, or than to share in all the sin that is committed, and
in all punishment that is suffered?  For this is the doom of that part
of your god which is in confinement everywhere, condemned to this by
himself, not as guilty, but in order to conquer his dreaded enemy. 
Doomed himself to such a fatal necessity, the part of himself which he
has given over to condemnation might pardon him, if he were as humble as
he is miserable.  But how can you pretend to find fault with God for His
anger against both friends and enemies when they sin, when the god of
your fancies first under compulsion compels his own members to go to be
devoured by sin, and then condemns them to remain in dark<span
id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_281"></span>ness? 
Though he does this, you say that it will not be in anger.  But will he
not be ashamed to punish, or to appear to punish, those from whom he
should ask pardon in words such as these:  "Forgive me, I beseech you. 
You are my members; could I treat you thus, except from necessity?  You
know yourselves, that you were sent here because a formidable enemy had
arisen; and now you must remain here to prevent his rising again"? 
Again, is it not better to slay thousands of men for trifling faults, or
for nothing, than to cast into the abyss of sin, and to condemn to the
punishment of eternal imprisonment, God’s own members, his substance—in
fact, God himself?  It cannot properly be said of the real substance of
God that it has the choice of sinning or not sinning, for God’s
substance is absolutely unchangeable.  God cannot sin, as He cannot deny
Himself.  Man, on the contrary, can sin and deny God, or he can choose
not to do so.  But suppose the members of your god had, like a rational
human soul, the choice of sinning or not sinning; they might perhaps be
justly punished for heinous offenses by confinement in the mass of
darkness.  But you cannot attribute to these parts a liberty which you
deny to God himself.  For if God had not given them up to sin, he would
have been forced to sin himself, by the prevalence of the race of
darkness.  But if there was no danger of being thus forced, it was a sin
to send these parts to a place where they incurred this danger.  To do
so, indeed, from free choice is a crime deserving the torment which your
god unnaturally inflicts upon his own parts, more than the conduct of
these parts in going by his command to a place where they lost the power
of living in righteousness.  But if God himself was in danger of being
forced to sin by invasion and capture, unless he had secured himself
first by the misconduct and then by the punishment of his own parts,
there can have been no free-will either in your god or in his parts. 
Let him not set himself up as judge, but confess himself a criminal. 
For though he was forced against his own will, he professes to pass a
righteous sentence in condemning those whom he knows to have suffered
evil rather than done it; making this profession that he may not be
thought of as having been conquered; as if it could do a beggar any good
to be called prosperous and happy.  Surely it would have been better for
your god to have spared neither righteous nor wicked in indiscriminate
punishment (which is Faustus’ last charge against our God), than to have
been so cruel to his own members,—first giving them up to incurable
contamination, and then, as if that was not enough, accusing them
falsely of misconduct.  Faustus declares that they justly suffer this
severe and eternal punishment, because they allowed themselves to be led
astray from their original brightness, and became hostile to sacred
light.  But the reason of this, as Faustus says, was that they were so
greedily devoured in the first assault of the princes of darkness, that
they were unable to recover themselves, or to separate themselves from
the hostile principle.  These souls, therefore, did no evil themselves,
but in all this were innocent sufferers.  The real agent was he who sent
them away from himself into this wretchedness.  They suffered more from
their father than from their enemy.  Their father sent them into all
this misery; while their enemy desired them as something good, wishing
not to hurt them, but to enjoy them.  The one injured them knowingly,
the other in ignorance.  This god was so weak and helpless that he could
not otherwise secure himself first against an enemy threatening attack,
and then against the same enemy in confinement.  Let him, then, not
condemn those parts whose obedience defended him, and whose death
secures his safety.  If he could not avoid the conflict, why slander his
defenders?  When these parts allowed themselves to be led astray from
their original brightness, and became hostile to sacred light, this must
have been from the force of the enemy; and if they were forced against
their will, they are innocent; while, if they could have resisted had
they chosen, there is no need of the origin of evil in an imaginary evil
nature, since it is to be found in free-will.  Their not resisting, when
they could have done so, is plainly their own fault, and not owing to
any force from without.  For, supposing them able to do a thing, to do
which is right, while not to do it is great and heinous sin, their not
doing it is their own choice.  So, then, if they choose not to do it,
the fault is in their will not in necessity.  The origin of sin is in
the will; therefore in the will is also the origin of evil, both in the
sense of acting against a just precept, and in the sense of suffering
under a just sentence.  There is thus no reason why, in your search for
the origin of evil, you should fall into so great an evil as that of
calling a nature so rich in good things the nature of evil, and of
attributing the terrible evil of necessity to the nature of perfect
good, before any commixture with evil.  The cause of this erroneous
belief is your pride, which you need not have unless you choose; but in
your wish to defend at all hazards the error into which you have fallen,
<span id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_282"></span>you take away the origin of evil from
free-will, and place it in a fabulous nature of evil.  And thus you come
at last to say, that the souls which are to be doomed to eternal
confinement in the mass of darkness became enemies to sacred light not
from choice, but by necessity; and to make your god a judge with whom it
is of no use to prove, in behalf of your clients. that they were under
compulsion, and a king who will make no allowance for your brethren, his
own sons and members, whose hostility against you and against himself
you ascribe not to choice, but to necessity.  What shocking cruelty!
unless you proceed in the next place to defend your god, as also acting
not from choice, but by necessity.  So, if there could be found another
judge free from necessity, who could decide the question on the
principles of equity, he would sentence your god to be bound to this
mass, not by being fastened on the outside, but by being shut up inside
along with the formidable enemy.  The first in the guilt of necessity
ought to be first in the sentence of condemnation.  Would it not be much
better, then, in comparison with such a god as this, to choose the god
whom we indeed do not worship, but whom you think or pretend to think we
worship?  Though he spares not his servants, whether righteous or
sinful, making no proper separation, and not distinguishing between
punishment and discipline, is he not better than the god who spares not
his own members though innocent, if necessity is no crime, or guilty
from their obedience to him, if necessity itself is criminal; so that
they are condemned eternally by him, along with whom they should have
been released, if any liberty was recovered by the victory, while he
should have been condemned along with them if the victory reduced the
force of necessity even so far as to give this small amount of force to
justice?  Thus the god whom you represent us as worshipping, though he
is not the one true God whom we really worship, is far better than your
god.  Neither, indeed, has any existence; but both are the creatures of
your imaginations.  But, according to your own representations, the one
whom you call ours, and find fault with, is better than the one whom you
call your own, and whom you worship.  <span
id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p74"></span>23.  So also the patriarchs and
prophets whom you cry out against are not the men whom we honor, but men
whose characters are drawn from your fancy, prompted by ill-will.  And
yet even thus as you paint them, I will not be content with showing them
to be superior to your elect, who keep all the precepts of Manichæus,
but will prove their superiority to your god himself.  Before proving
this, however, I must, with the help of God, defend our holy fathers the
patriarchs and prophets against your accusations, by a clear exposition
of the truth as opposed to the carnality of your hearts.  As for you
Manichæans, it would be enough to say that the faults you impute to our
fathers are preferable to what you praise in your own, and to complete
your shame by adding that your god can be proved far inferior to our
fathers as you describe them.  This would be a sufficient reply for
you.  But as, even apart from your perversities, some minds are of
themselves disturbed when comparing the life of the prophets in the Old
Testament with that of the apostles in the New,—not discerning between
the manner of the time when the promise was under a veil, and that of
the time when the promise is revealed,—I must first of all reply to
those who either have the boldness to pride themselves as superior in
temperance to the prophets, or quote the prophets in defence of their
own bad conduct.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p75"></span>24.  First of all, then, not only the
speech of these men, but their life also, was prophetic; and the whole
kingdom of the Hebrews was like a great prophet, corresponding to the
greatness of the Person prophesied.  So, as regards those Hebrews who
were made wise in heart by divine instruction, we may discover a
prophecy of the coming of Christ and of the Church, both in what they
said and in what they did; and the same is true as regards the divine
procedure towards the whole nation as a body.  For, as the apostle says,
"all these things were our examples."

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p76"></span>25.  Those who find fault with the
prophets, accusing them of adultery for instance, in actions which are
above their comprehension, are like those Pagans who profanely charge
Christ with folly or madness because He looked for fruit from a tree out
of the season; <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) or with
childishness, because He stooped down and wrote on the ground, and,
after answering the people who were questioning Him, began writing
again. <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830)   Such critics are
incapable of understanding that certain virtues in great minds resemble
closely the vices of little minds, not in reality, but in appearance. 
Such criticism of the great is like that of boys at school, whose
learning consists in the important rule, that if the nominative is in
the singular, the verb must also be in the singular; and so they find
fault with the best Latin <span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_283"></span>author, because he says, *Pars in frusta
secant*.  <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831)   He should have
written, say they, *secat*.  And again, knowing that *religio* is spelt
with one *l*, they blame him for writing *relligio*, when he says,
*Relligione patrum*. <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832)   Hence it
may with reason be said, that as the poetical usage of words differs
from the solecisms and barbarisms of the unlearned, so, in their own
way, the figurative actions of the prophets differ from the impure
actions of the vicious.  Accordingly, as a boy guilty of a barbarism
would be whipped if he pled the usage of Virgil; so any one quoting the
example of Abraham begetting a son from Hagar, in defence of his own
sinful passion for his wife’s handmaid, ought to be corrected not by
caning only, but by severe scourging, that he may not suffer the doom of
adulterers in eternal punishment.  This indeed is a comparison of great
and important subjects with trifles; and it is not intended that a
peculiar usage in speech should be put on a level with a sacrament, or a
solecism with adultery.  Still, allowing for the difference in the
character of the subjects, what is called learning or ignorance in the
proprieties and improprieties of speech, resembles wisdom or the want of
it in reference to the grand moral distinction between virtue and
vice. <span id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p82"></span>26.  Instead of entering on the
distinctions between the praiseworthy and the blameworthy, the criminal
and the innocent, the dangerous and the harmless, the guilty and the
guiltless, the desirable and the undesirable, which are all
illustrations of the distinction between sin and righteousness, we must
first consider what sin is, and then examine the actions of the saints
as recorded in the holy books, that, if we find these saints described
as sinning, we may if possible discover the true reason for keeping
these sins in memory by putting them on record.  Again, if we find
things recorded which, though they are not sins, appear so to the
foolish and the malevolent, and in fact do not exhibit any virtues, here
also we have to see why these things are put into the Scriptures which
we believe to contain wholesome doctrine as a guide in the present life,
and a title to the inheritance of the future.  As regards the examples
of righteousness found among the acts of the saints, the propriety of
recording these must be plain even to the ignorant.  The question is
about those actions the mention of which may seem useless if they are
neither righteous nor sinful, or even dangerous if the actions are
really sinful, as leading people to imitate them, because they are not
condemned in these books, and so may be supposed not to be sinful, or
because, though they are condemned, men may copy them from the idea that
they must be venial if saints did them.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p83"></span>27.  Sin, then, is any transgression in
deed, or word, or desire, of the eternal law.  And the eternal law is
the divine order or will of God, which requires the preservation of
natural order, and forbids the breach of it.  But what is this natural
order in man?  Man, we know, consists of soul and body; but so does a
beast.  Again, it is plain that in the order of nature the soul is
superior to the body.  Moreover, in the soul of man there is reason,
which is not in a beast.  Therefore, as the soul is superior to the
body, so in the soul itself the reason is superior by the law of nature
to the other parts which are found also in beasts; and in reason itself,
which is partly contemplation and partly action, contemplation is
unquestionably the superior part.  The object of contemplation is the
image of God, by which we are renewed through faith to sight.  Rational
action ought therefore to be subject to the control of contemplation,
which is exercised through faith while we are absent from the Lord, as
it will be hereafter through sight, when we shall be like Him, for we
shall see Him as He is. <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834)   Then
in a spiritual body we shall by His grace be made equal to angels, when
we put on the garment of immortality and incorruption, with which this
mortal and corruptible shall be clothed, that death may be swallowed up
of victory, when righteousness is perfected through grace.  For the holy
and lofty angels have also their contemplation and action.  They require
of themselves the performance of the commands of Him whom they
contemplate, whose eternal government they freely because sweetly obey. 
We, on the other hand, whose body is dead because of sin, till God
quicken also our mortal bodies by His Spirit dwelling in us, live
righteously in our feeble measure, according to the eternal law in which
the law of nature is preserved, when we live by that faith unfeigned
which works by love, having in a good conscience a hope of immortality
and incorruption laid up in heaven, and of the perfecting of
righteousness to the measure of an inexpressible satisfaction, for which
in our pilgrimage we must hunger and thirst, while we walk by faith and
not by sight.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p85"></span>28.  A man, therefore, who acts in
obedience to the faith which obeys God, restrains all mortal affections,
and keeps them within the natural limit, regulating his desires so as to
<span id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_284"></span>put the higher before the lower.  If
there was no pleasure in what is unlawful, no one would sin.  To sin is
to indulge this pleasure instead of restraining it.  And by unlawful is
meant what is forbidden by the law in which the order of nature is
preserved.  It is a great question whether there is any rational
creature for which there is no pleasure in what is unlawful.  If there
is such a class of creatures, it does not include man, nor that angelic
nature which abode not in the truth.  These rational creatures were so
made, that they had the potentiality of restraining their desires from
the unlawful; and in not doing this they sinned.  Great, then, is the
creature man, for he is restored by this potentiality, by which, if he
had so chosen, he would not have fallen.  And great is the Lord, and
greatly to be praised, who created man.  For He created also inferior
natures which cannot sin, and superior natures which will not sin. 
Beasts do not sin, for their nature agrees with the eternal law from
being subject to it, without being in possession of it.  And again,
angels do not sin, because their heavenly nature is so in possession of
the eternal law that God is the only object of its desire, and they obey
His will without any experience of temptation.  But man, whose life on
this earth is a trial on account of sin, subdues to himself what he has
in common with beasts, and subdues to God what he has in common with
angels; till, when righteousness is perfected and immortality attained,
he shall be raised from among beasts and ranked with angels.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p86"></span>29.  The exercise or indulgence of the
bodily appetites is intended to secure the continued existence and the
invigoration of the individual or of the species.  If the appetites go
beyond this, and carry the man, no longer master of himself, beyond the
limits of temperance, they become unlawful and shameful lusts, which
severe discipline must subdue.  But if this unbridled course ends in
plunging the man into such a depth of evil habits that he supposes that
there will be no punishment of his sinful passions, and so refuses the
wholesome discipline of confession and repentance by which he might be
rescued; or, from a still worse insensibility, justifies his own
indulgences in profane opposition to the eternal law of Providence; and
if he dies in this state, that unerring law sentences him now not to
correction, but to damnation.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p87"></span>30.  Referring, then, to the eternal
law which enjoins the preservation of natural order and forbids the
breach of it, let us see how our father Abraham sinned, that is, how he
broke this law, in the things which Faustus has charged him with as
highly criminal.  In his irrational craving to have children, says
Faustus, and not believing God, who promised that his wife Sara should
have a son, he defiled himself with a mistress.  But here Faustus, in
his irrational desire to find fault, both discloses the impiety of his
heresy, and in his error and ignorance praises Abraham’s intercourse
with the handmaid.  For as the eternal law—that is, the will of God the
Creator of all—for the preservation of the natural order, permits the
indulgence of the bodily appetite under the guidance of reason in sexual
intercourse, not for the gratification of passion, but for the
continuance of the race through the procreation of children; so, on the
contrary, the unrighteous law of the Manichæans, in order to prevent
their god, whom they bewail as confined in all seeds, from suffering
still closer confinement in the womb, requires married people not on any
account to have children, their great desire being to liberate their
god.  Instead, therefore, of an irrational craving in Abraham to have
children, we find in Manichæus an irrational fancy against having
children.  So the one preserved the natural order by seeking in marriage
only the production of a child; while the other, influenced by his
heretical notions, thought no evil could be greater than the confinement
of his god.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p88"></span>31.  So, again, when Faustus says that
the wife’s being privy to her husband’s conduct made the matter worse,
while he is prompted only by the uncharitable wish to reproach Abraham
and his wife, he really, without intending it, speaks in praise of
both.  For Sara did not connive at any criminal action in her husband
for the gratification of his unlawful passions; but from the same
natural desire for children that he had, and knowing her own barrenness,
she warrantably claimed as her own the fertility of her handmaid; not
consenting with sinful desires in her husband, but requesting of him
what it was proper in him to grant.  Nor was it the request of proud
assumption; for every one knows that the duty of a wife is to obey her
husband.  But in reference to the body, we are told by the apostle that
the wife has power over her husband’s body, as he has over hers; <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) so that, while in all other social
matters the wife ought to obey her husband, in this one matter of their
bodily connection as man and wife their power over one another is
mutual,—the man over the woman, and the woman over the man.  So, when
Sara could not have children of her own, she wished to have them by her
handmaid, and of the same seed from <span id="page_285">p. 285</span>
<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_285"></span>which she herself would have had
them, if that had been possible.  No woman would do this if her love for
her husband were merely an animal passion; she would rather be jealous
of a mistress than make her a mother.  So here the pious desire for the
procreation of children was an indication of the absence of criminal
indulgence.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p90"></span>32.  Abraham, indeed, cannot be
defended, if, as Faustus says, he wished to get children by Hagar,
because he had no faith in God, who promised that he should have
children by Sara.  But this is an entire mistake:  this promise had not
yet been made.  Any one who reads the preceding chapters will find that
Abraham had already got the promise of the land with a countless number
of inhabitants, <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) but that it had
not yet been made known to him how the seed spoken of was to be
produced, whether by generation from his own body, or from his choice in
the adoption of a son, or, in the case of its being from his own body,
whether it would be by Sara or another.  Whoever examines into this will
find that Faustus has made either an imprudent mistake or an impudent
misrepresentation.  Abraham, then, when he saw that he had no children,
though the promise was to his seed, thought first of adoption.  This
appears from his saying of his slave, when speaking to God, "This is
mine heir;" as much as to say, As Thou hast not given me a seed of my
own, fulfill Thy promise in this man.  For the word seed may be applied
to what has not come out of a man’s own body, else the apostle could not
call us the seed of Abraham:  for we certainly are not his descendants
in the flesh; but we are his seed in following his faith, by believing
in Christ, whose flesh did spring from the flesh of Abraham.  Then
Abraham was told by the Lord "This shall not be thine heir; but he that
cometh out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir." <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837)   The thought of adoption was thus
removed; but it still remained uncertain whether the seed which was to
come from himself would be by Sara or another.  And this God was pleased
to keep concealed, till a figure of the Old Testament had been supplied
in the handmaid.  We may thus easily understand how Abraham, seeing that
his wife was barren, and that she desired to obtain from her husband and
her handmaid the offspring which she herself could not produce, acted
not in compliance with carnal appetite, but in obedience to conjugal
authority, believing that Sara had the sanction of God for her wish;
because God had already promised him an heir from his own body, but had
not foretold who was to be the mother.  Thus, when Faustus shows his own
infidelity in accusing Abraham of unbelief, his groundless accusation
only proves the madness of the assailant.  In other cases, Faustus’
infidelity has prevented him from understanding; but here, in his love
of slander, he has not even taken time to read.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p93"></span>33.  Again, when Faustus accuses a
righteous and faithful man of a shameless profanation of his marriage
from avarice and greed, by selling his wife Sara at different times to
the two kings Abimelech and Pharaoh, telling them that she was his
sister, because she was very fair, he does not distinguish justly
between right and wrong, but unjustly condemns the whole transaction. 
Those who think that Abraham sold his wife cannot discern in the light
of the eternal law the difference between sin and righteousness; and so
they call perseverance obstinacy, and confidence presumption, as in
these and similar cases men of wrong judgment are wont to blame what
they suppose to be wrong actions.  Abraham did not become partner in
crime with his wife by selling her to others:  but as she gave her
handmaid to her husband, not to gratify his passion, but for the sake of
offspring, in the authority she had consistently with the order of
nature, requiring the performance of a duty, not complying with a sinful
desire; so in this case, the husband, in perfect assurance of the chaste
attachment of his wife to himself, and knowing her mind to be the abode
of modest and virtuous affection, called her his sister, without saying
that she was his wife, lest he himself should be killed, and his wife
fall into the hands of strangers and evil-doers:  for he was assured by
his God that He would not allow her to suffer violence or disgrace.  Nor
was he disappointed in his faith and hope; for Pharaoh, terrified by
strange occurrences, and after enduring many evils on account of her,
when he was informed by God that Sara was Abraham’s wife, restored her
with honor uninjured.  Abimelech also did the same, after learning the
truth in a dream.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p94"></span>34.  Some people, not scoffers and
evil-speakers like Faustus, but men who pay due honor to the Scriptures,
which Faustus finds fault with because he does not understand them, or
which he fails to understand because of his fault-finding, in commenting
on this act of Abraham, are of opinion that he stumbled from weakness of
faith, and denied his wife from fear of death, as Peter denied the
Lord.  If this is the correct view, we must allow that Abraham sinned;
but the sin should <span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_286"></span>not cancel or obliterate all his merits,
any more than in the case of the apostle.  Besides, to deny his wife is
not the same as to deny the Saviour.  But when there is another
explanation, why not abide by it, instead of giving blame without cause,
since there is no proof that Abraham told a lie from fear?  He did not
deny that Sara was his wife in answer to any question on the subject;
but when asked who she was, he said she was his sister, without denying
her to be his wife:  he concealed part of the truth, but said nothing
false.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p95"></span>35.  It is waste of time to observe
Faustus’ remark, that Abraham falsely called Sara his sister; as if
Faustus had discovered the family of Sara, though it is not mentioned in
Scripture.  In a matter which Abraham knew, and we do not, it is surely
better to believe the patriarch when he says what he knows, than to
believe Manichæus when he finds fault with what he knows nothing about. 
Since, then, Abraham lived at that period in human history, when, though
marriage had become unlawful between children of the same parents, or of
the same father or mother, no law or authority interfered with the
custom of marriage between the children of brothers, or any less degree
of consanguinity, why should he not have had as wife his sister, that
is, a woman descended from his father?  For he himself told the king,
when he restored Sara, that she was his sister by his father, and not by
his mother.  And on this occasion he could not have been led to tell a
falsehood from fear, for the king knew that she was his wife, and was
restoring her with honor, because he had been warned by God.  We learn
from Scripture that, among the ancients, it was customary to call
cousins brothers and sisters.  Thus Tobias says in his prayer to God,
before having intercourse with his wife, "And now, O Lord, Thou knowest
that not in wantonness I take to wife my sister;" <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) though she was not sprung immediately
from the same father or the same mother, but only belonged to the same
family.  And Lot is called the brother of Abraham, though Abraham was
his uncle. <span id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839)   And, by the same
use of the word, those called in the Gospel the Lord’s brothers are
certainly not children of the Virgin Mary, but all the blood relations
of the Lord. <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p99"></span>36.  Some may say, Why did not
Abraham’s confidence in God prevent his being afraid to confess his
wife?  God could have warded off from him the death which he feared, and
could have protected both him and his wife while among strangers, so
that Sara, although very fair, should not have been desired by any one,
nor Abraham killed on account of her.  Of course, God could have done
this; it would be absurd to deny it.  But if, in reply to the people,
Abraham had told them that Sara was his wife, his trust in God would
have included both his own life and the chastity of Sara.  Now it is
part of sound doctrine, that when a man has any means in his power, he
should not tempt the Lord his God.  So it was not because the Saviour
was unable to protect His disciples that He told them, "When ye are
persecuted in one city, flee to another." <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841)  And He Himself set the example.  For
though He had the power of laying down His own life, and did not lay it
down till He chose to do so, still when an infant He fled to Egypt,
carried by His parents; <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) and when
He went up to the feast, He went not openly, but secretly, though at
other times He spoke openly to the Jews, who in spite of their rage and
hostility could not lay hands on Him, because His hour was not
come, <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) —not the hour when He
would be obliged to die, but the hour when He would consider it
seasonable to be put to death.  Thus He who displayed divine power by
teaching and reproving openly, without allowing the rage of his enemies
to hurt Him, did also, by escaping and concealing Himself, exhibit the
conduct becoming the feebleness of men, that they should not tempt God
when they have any means in their power of escaping threatened danger. 
So also in the apostle, it was not from despair of divine assistance and
protection, or from loss of faith, that he was let down over the wall in
a basket, in order to escape being taken by his enemies: <span
id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844)   not from want of faith in God did he
thus escape, but because not to escape, when this escape was possible,
would have been tempting God.  Accordingly, when Abraham was among
strangers, and when, on account of the remarkable beauty of Sara, both
his life and her chastity were in danger, since it was in his power to
protect not both of these, but one only,—his life, namely,—to avoid
tempting God he did what he could; and in what he could not do, he
trusted to God.  Unable to conceal his being a man, he concealed his
being a husband, lest he should be put to death; trusting to God to
preserve his wife’s purity.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p104"></span>37.  There might also be a difference
of opinion on the nice point whether Sara’s chastity would have been
violated even if some one had intercourse with her, since she submitted
to this to save her husband’s life, <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>
<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_287"></span>both with his knowledge and by his
authority.  In this there would be no desertion of conjugal fidelity or
rebellion against her husband’s authority; in the same way as Abraham
was not an adulterer, when, in submission to the lawful authority of his
wife, he consented to be made a father by his wife’s handmaid.  But,
from the nature of the relationship, for a wife to have two husbands,
both in life, is not the same thing as for a man to have two wives:  so
that we regard the explanation already given of Abraham’s conduct as the
most correct and unobjectionable; that our father Abraham avoided
tempting God by taking what measures he could for the preservation of
his own life, and that he showed his hope in God by entrusting to Him
the chastity of his wife.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p105"></span>38.  But a pleasure which all must
feel is obtained from this narrative so faithfully recorded in the Holy
Scriptures, when we examine into the prophetic character of the action,
and knock with pious faith and diligence at the door of the mystery,
that the Lord may open, and show us who was prefigured in the ancient
personage, and whose wife this is, who, while in a foreign land and
among strangers, is not allowed to be stained or defiled, that she may
be brought to her own husband without spot or wrinkle.  Thus we find
that the righteous life of the Church is for the glory of Christ, that
her beauty may bring honor to her husband, as Abraham was honored on
account of the beauty of Sara among the inhabitants of that foreign
land.  To the Church, to whom it is said in the Song of Songs, "O thou
fairest among women," <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) kings
offer gifts in acknowledgment of her beauty; as king Abimelech offered
gifts to Sara, admiring the grace of her appearance; all the more that,
while he loved, he was not allowed to profane it.  The holy Church, too
is in secret the spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ.  For it is secretly,
and in the hidden depths of the Spirit, that the soul of man is joined
to the word of God, so that they two are one flesh; of which the apostle
speaks as a great mystery in marriage, as referring to Christ and the
Church. <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846)   Again, the earthly
kingdom of this world, typified by the kings which were not allowed to
defile Sara, had no knowledge or experience of the Church as the spouse
of Christ, that is, of how faithfully she maintained her relation to her
Husband, till it tried to violate her, and was compelled to yield to the
divine testimony borne by the faith of the martyrs, and in the person of
later monarchs was brought humbly to honor with gifts the Bride whom
their predecessors had not been able to humble by subduing her to
themselves.  What, in the type, happened in the reign of one and the
same king, is fulfilled in the earlier monarchs of this era and their
successors.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p108"></span>39.  Again, when it is said that the
Church is the sister of Christ, not by the mother but by the father, we
learn the excellence of the relation, which is not of the temporary
nature of earthly descent, but of divine grace, which is everlasting. 
By this grace we shall no longer be a race of mortals when we receive
power to be called and to become sons of God.  This grace we obtain not
from the synagogue, which is the mother of Christ after the flesh, but
from God the Father.  And when Christ calls us into another life where
there is no death, He teaches us, instead of acknowledging, to deny the
earthly relationship, where death soon follows upon birth; for He says
to His disciples, "Call no man your father upon earth; for you have one
Father, who is in heaven." <span id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847)   And
He set us an example of this when He said, "Who is my mother, and who
are my brethren?  And stretching forth His hand to His disciples, He
said, These are my brethren."  And lest any one should think that He
referred to an earthly relationship, He added, "Whosoever shall do the
will of my Father, the same is my brother, and sister, and
mother;" <span id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) as much as to say, I
derive this relationship from God my Father, not from the Synagogue my
mother; I call you to eternal life, where I have an immortal birth, not
to earthly life, for to call you away from this life I have taken
mortality.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p111"></span>40.  As for the reason why, though it
is concealed among strangers whose wife the Church is, it is not hidden
whose sister she is, it is plainly because it is obscure and hard to
understand how the human soul and the Word of God are united or mingled,
or whatever word may be used to express this connection between God and
the creature.  It is from this connection that Christ and the Church are
called bridegroom and bride, or husband and wife.  The other
relationship, in which Christ and all the saints are brethren by divine
grace and not by earthly consanguinity, or by the father and not by the
mother, is more easily expressed in words, and more easily understood. 
For the same grace makes all the saints to be also brethren of one
another; while in their society no one is the bridegroom of all the
rest.  So also, notwithstanding the surpassing justice and wisdom <span
id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_288"></span>of
Christ, His manhood was much more plainly and readily recognized by
strangers, who, indeed, were not wrong in believing Him to be man, but
they did not understand His being God as well as man.  Hence Jeremiah
says:  "He is both a man, and who shall know Him?" <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849)   He is a man, for it is made manifest
that He is a brother.  And who shall know Him? for it is concealed that
He is a husband.  This must suffice as a defense of our father Abraham
against Faustus’ impudence and ignorance and malice.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p113"></span>41.  Lot also, the brother of Abraham,
was just and hospitable in Sodom, and was found worthy to escape the
conflagration which prefigured the future judgment; for he was free from
all participation in the corruption of the people of Sodom.  He was a
type of the body of Christ, which in the person of all the saints both
groans now among the ungodly and wicked, to whose evil deeds it does not
consent, and will at the end of the world be rescued from their society,
when they are doomed to the punishment of eternal fire.  Lot’s wife was
the type of a different class of men,—of those, namely, who, when called
by the grace of God, look back, instead of, like Paul, forgetting the
things that are behind, and looking forward to the things that are
before. <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850)   The Lord Himself
says:  "No man that putteth his hand to the plough, and looketh back, is
fit for the kingdom of Heaven." <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851)
  Nor did He omit to mention the case of Lot’s wife; for she, for our
warning, was turned into a pillar of salt, that being thus seasoned we
might not trifle thoughtlessly with this danger, but be on our guard
against it.  So, when the Lord was admonishing every one to get rid of
the things that are behind by the most strenuous endeavor to reach the
things that are before, He said, "Remember Lot’s wife." <span
id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852)   And, in addition to these, there is
still a third type in Lot, when his daughters lay with him.  For here
Lot seems to prefigure the future law; for those who spring from the
law, and are placed under the law, by misunderstanding it, stupefy it,
as it were, and bring forth the works of unbelief by an unlawful use of
the law.  "The law is good" says the apostle, "if a man use it
lawfully." <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p118"></span>42.  It is no excuse for this action
of Lot or of his daughters that it represented the perversity which was
afterwards in certain cases to be displayed.  The purpose of Lot’s
daughters is one thing, and the purpose of God is another, in allowing
this to happen that He might make some truth manifest; for God both
pronounces judgment on the actions of the people of those times, and
arranges in His providence for the prefigurement of the future.  As a
part of Scripture, this action is a prophecy; as part of the history of
those concerned, it is a crime.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p119"></span>43.  At the same time there is in this
transaction no reason for the torrent of abuse which Faustus’ blind
hostility discharges on it.  By the eternal law which requires the
preservation of the order of nature and condemns its violation, the
judgment in this case is not what it would have been if Lot had been
prompted by a criminal passion to commit incest with his daughters, or
if they had been inflamed with unnatural desires.  In justice, we must
ask not only what was done, but with what motive, in order to obtain a
fair view of the action as the effect of that motive.  The resolution of
Lot’s daughters to lie with their father was the effect of the natural
desire for offspring in order to preserve the race; for they supposed
that there were no other men to be found, thinking that the whole world
had been consumed in that conflagration, which, for all they knew, had
left no one alive but themselves.  It would have been better for them
never to have been mothers, than to have become mothers by their own
father.  But still, the fulfillment of a desire like this is very
different from the accursed gratification of lust.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p120"></span>44.  Knowing that their father would
condemn their design, Lot’s daughters thought it necessary to fulfill it
without his knowledge.  We are told that they made him drunk, so that he
was unaware of what happened.  His guilt therefore is not that of
incest, but of drunkenness.  This, too, is condemned by the eternal law,
which allows meat and drink only as required by nature for the
preservation of health.  There is, indeed, a great difference between a
drunk man and an habitual drunkard; for the drunkard is not always
drunk, and a man may be drunk on one occasion without being a drunkard. 
However, in the case of a righteous man, we require to account for even
one instance of drunkenness.  What can have made Lot consent to receive
from his daughters all the cups of wine which they went on mixing for
him, or perhaps giving him unmixed?  Did they feign excessive grief, and
did he resort to this consolation in their loneliness, and in the loss
of their mother, thinking that they were drinking too, while they only
pretended to drink?  But this does not seem a proper method for a
righteous man to take in consoling his friends when in trouble.  Had the
daughters learned in Sodom some vile art which enabled them to
intoxicate their father <span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_289"></span>with a few cups, so that in his
ignorance he might sin, or rather be sinned against?  But it is not
likely that the Scripture would have omitted all notice of this, or that
God would have allowed His servant to be thus abused without any fault
of his own.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p121"></span>45.  But we are defending the sacred
Scriptures, not man’s sins.  Nor are we concerned to justify this
action, as if our God had either commanded it or approved of it; or as
if, when men are called just in Scripture, it meant that they could not
sin if they chose.  And as, in the books which those critics find fault
with, God nowhere expresses approval of this action, what thoughtless
folly it is to bring a charge from this narrative against these
writings, when in other places such actions are condemned by express
prohibitions!  In the story of Lot’s daughters the action is related,
not commended.  And it is proper that the judgment of God should be
declared in some cases, and concealed in others, that by its
manifestation our ignorance may be enlightened, and that by its
concealment our minds may be improved by the exercise of recalling what
we already know, or our indolence stimulated to seek for an
explanation.  Here, then, God, who can bring good out of evil, made
nations arise from this origin, as He saw good, but did not bring upon
His own Scriptures the guilt of man’s sin.  It is God’s writing, but not
His doing; He does not propose these things for our imitation, but holds
them up for our warning.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p122"></span>46.  Faustus’ effrontery appears
notably in his accusing Isaac also, the son of Abraham of pretending
that his wife Rebecca was his sister. <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854)   For as regards the family of Rebecca
Scripture is not silent, and it appears that she was his sister in the
well-known sense of the word.  His concealing that she was his wife is
not surprising, nor is it insignificant, if he did it in imitation of
his father, so that he can be justified on the same grounds.  We need
only refer to the answer already given to Faustus’ charge against
Abraham, as being equally applicable to Isaac.  Perhaps, however some
inquirer will ask what typical significance there is in the foreign king
discovering Rebecca to be the wife of Isaac by seeing him playing with
her; for he would not have known, had he not seen Isaac playing with
Rebecca as it would have been improper to do with a woman not his wife. 
When holy men act thus as husbands, they do it not foolishly, but
designedly:  for they accommodate themselves to the nature of the weaker
sex in words and actions of gentle playfulness; not in effeminacy, but
in subdued manliness.  But such behavior towards any woman except a wife
would be disgraceful.  This is a question in good manners, which is
referred to only in case some stern advocate of insensibility should
find fault with the holy man even for playing with his wife.  For if
these men without humanity see a sedate man chatting playfully with
children that he may adapt himself to the childish understanding with
kindly sympathy, they think that he is insane; forgetting that they
themselves were once children, or unthankful for their maturity.  The
typical meaning, as regards Christ and His Church, which is to be found
in this great patriarch playing with his wife, and in the conjugal
relation being thus discovered, will be seen by every one who, to avoid
offending the Church by erroneous doctrine, carefully studies in
Scripture the secret of the Church’s Bridegroom.  He will find that the
Husband of the Church concealed for a time in the form of a servant the
majesty in which He was equal to the Father, as being in the form of
God, that feeble humanity might be capable of union with Him, and that
so He might accommodate Himself to His spouse.  So far from being
absurd, it has a symbolic suitableness that the prophet of God should
use a playfulness which is of the flesh to meet the affection of his
wife, as the Word of God Himself became flesh that He might dwell among
us.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p124"></span>47.  Again, Jacob the son of Isaac is
charged with having committed a great crime because he had four wives. 
But here there is no ground for a criminal accusation:  for a plurality
of wives was no crime when it was the custom; and it is a crime now,
because it is no longer the custom.  There are sins against nature, and
sins against custom, and sins against the laws.  In which, then, of
these senses did Jacob sin in having a plurality of wives?  As regards
nature, he used the women not for sensual gratification, but for the
procreation of children.  For custom, this was the common practice at
that time in those countries.  And for the laws, no prohibition
existed.  The only reason of its being a crime now to do this, is
because custom and the laws forbid it.  Whoever despises these
restraints, even though he uses his wives only to get children, still
commits sin, and does an injury to human society itself, for the sake of
which it is that the procreation of children is required.  In the
present altered state of customs and laws, men can have no pleasure in a
plurality of wives, except from an excess of lust; and so the mistake
arises of supposing that no one could ever have had many <span
id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_290"></span>wives
but from sensuality and the vehemence of sinful desires.  Unable to form
an idea of men whose force of mind is beyond their conception, they
compare themselves with themselves, as the apostle says, <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) and so make mistakes.  Conscious that,
in their intercourse though with one wife only, they are often
influenced by mere animal passion instead of an intelligent motive, they
think it an obvious inference that, if the limits of moderation are not
observed where there is only one wife, the infirmity must be aggravated
where there are more than one.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p126"></span>48.  But those who have not the
virtues of temperance must not be allowed to judge of the conduct of
holy men, any more than those in fever of the sweetness and
wholesomeness of food.  Nourishment must be provided not by the dictates
of the sickly taste, but rather by the judgment and direction of health,
so as to cure the sickness.  If our critics, then, wish to attain not a
spurious and affected, but a genuine and sound moral health, let them
find a cure in believing the Scripture record, that the honorable name
of saint is given not without reason to men who had several wives; and
that the reason is this, that the mind can exercise such control over
the flesh as not to allow the appetite implanted in our nature by
Providence to go beyond the limits of deliberate intention.  By a
similar misunderstanding, this criticism, which consists rather in
dishonest slander than in honest judgment, might accuse the holy
apostles too of preaching the gospel to so many people, not from the
desire of begetting children to eternal life, but from the love of human
praise.  There was no lack of renown to these our fathers in the gospel,
for their praise was spread in numerous tongues through the churches of
Christ.  In fact, no greater honor and glory could have been paid by men
to their fellow-creatures.  It was the sinful desire for this glory in
the Church which led the reprobate Simon in his blindness to wish to
purchase for money what was freely bestowed on the apostles by divine
grace. <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856)   There must have been
this desire of glory in the man whom the Lord in the Gospel checks in
his desire to follow Him, saying, "The foxes have holes, and the birds
of the air have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay His
Head." <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857)   The Lord saw that his
mind was darkened by false appearances and elated by sudden emotion, and
that there was no ground of faith to afford a lodging to the Teacher of
humility; for in Christ’s discipleship the man sought not Christ’s
grace, but his own glory.  By this love of glory those were led away
whom the Apostle Paul characterizes as preaching Christ not sincerely,
but of contention and envy; and yet the apostle rejoices in their
preaching, knowing that it might happen that, while the preachers
gratified their desire for human praise, believers might be born among
their hearers,—not as the result of the envious feeling which made them
wish to rival or surpass the fame of the apostles, but by means of the
gospel which they preached, though not sincerely; so that God might
bring good out of their evil.  So a man may be induced to marry by
sensual desire, and not to beget children; and yet a child may be born,
a good work of God, due to the natural power, not to the misconduct of
the parent.  As, therefore, the holy apostles were gratified when their
doctrine met with acceptance from their hearers, not because they were
greedy for praise, but because they desired to spread the truth; so the
holy patriarchs in their conjugal intercourse were actuated not by the
love of pleasure, but by the intelligent desire for the continuance of
their family.  Thus the number of their hearers did not make the
apostles ambitious; nor did the number of their wives make the
patriarchs licentious.  But why defend the husbands, to whose character
the divine word bears the highest testimony, when it appears that the
wives themselves looked upon their connection with their husbands only
as a means of getting sons?  So, when they found themselves barren, they
gave their handmaids to their husbands; so that while the handmaids had
the fleshly motherhood, the wives were mothers in intention.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p129"></span>49.  Faustus makes a most groundless
statement when he accuses the four women of quarreling like abandoned
characters for the possession of their husband.  Where Faustus read this
I know not, unless it was in his own heart, as in a book of impious
delusions, in which Faustus himself is seduced by that serpent with
regard to whom the apostle feared for the Church, which he desired to
present as a chaste virgin to Christ; lest, as the serpent had deceived
Eve by his subtlety, so he should also corrupt their minds by turning
them away from the simplicity of Christ. <span
id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858)   The Manichæans are so fond of this
serpent, that they assert that he did more good than harm.  From him
Faustus must have got his mind corrupted with the lies instilled into
it, which he now reproduces in these infamous calumnies, and is even
bold enough to put <span id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_291"></span>down in writing.  It is not true that
one of the handmaids carried off Jacob from the other, or that they
quarreled about possessing him.  There was arrangement, because there
was no licentious passion; and the law of conjugal authority was all the
stronger that there was none of the lawlessness of fleshly desire.  His
being hired by one of his wives proves what is here said, in plain
opposition to the libels of the Manichæans.  Why should one have hired
him, unless by the arrangement he was to have gone in to the other?  It
does not follow that he would never have gone in to Leah unless she had
hired him.  He must have gone to her always in her turn, for he had many
children by her; and in obedience to her he had children by her
hand-maid, and afterwards, without any hiring, by herself.  On this
occasion it was Rachel’s turn, so that she had the power so expressly
mentioned in the New Testament by the apostle, "The husband hath not
power over his own body, but the wife." <span
id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859)   Rachel had a bargain with her
sister, and, being in her sister’s debt, she referred her to Jacob, her
own debtor.  For the apostle uses this figure when he says, "Let the
husband render unto the wife what is due." <span
id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860)   Rachel gave what was in her power as
due from her husband, in return for what she had chosen to take from her
sister.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p133"></span>50.  If Jacob had been of such a
character as Faustus in his incurable blindness supposes, and not a
servant of righteousness rather than of concupiscence, would he not have
been looking forward eagerly all day to the pleasure of passing the
night with the more beautiful of his wives, whom he certainly loved more
than the other, and for whom he paid the price of twice seven years of
gratuitous service?  How, then, at the close of the day, on his way to
his beloved, could he have consented to be turned aside, if he had been
such as the ignorant Manichæans represent him?  Would he not have
disregarded the wish of the women, and insisted upon going to the fair
Rachel, who belonged to him that night not only as his lawful wife, but
also as coming in regular order?  He would thus have used his power as a
husband, for the wife also has not power over her own body, but the
husband; and having on this occasion the arrangement in their obedience
in favor of the gratification of his love of beauty, he might have
enforced his authority the more successfully.  In that case it would be
to the credit of the women, that while he thought of his own pleasure
they contended about having a son.  As it was, this virtuous man, in
manly control of sensual appetite, thought more of what was due from him
than to him, and instead of using his power for his own pleasure,
consented to be only the debtor in this mutual obligation.  So he
consented to pay the debt to the person to whom she to whom it was due
wished him to pay it.  When, by this private bargain of his wives, Jacob
was suddenly and unexpectedly forced to turn from the beautiful wife to
the plain one, he did not give way either to anger or to disappointment,
nor did he try to persuade his wives to let him have his own way; but,
like a just husband and an intelligent parent, seeing his wives
concerned about the production of children, which was all he himself
desired in marriage, he thought it best to yield to their authority, in
desiring that each should have a child:  for, since all the children
were his, his own authority was not impaired.  As if he had said to
them:  Arrange as you please among yourselves which is to be the mother;
it matters not to me, since in any case I am the father.  This control
over the appetites, and simple desire to beget children, Faustus would
have been clever enough to see and approve, unless his mind had been
corrupted by the shocking tenets of his sect, which lead him to find
fault with everything in the Scripture, and, moreover, teach him to
condemn as the greatest crime the procreation of children, which is the
proper design of marriage.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p134"></span>51.  Now, having defended the
character of the patriarch, and refuted an accusation arising from these
detestable errors, let us avail ourselves of the opportunity of
searching out the symbolical meaning, and let us knock with the
reverence of faith, that the Lord may open to us the typical
significance of the four wives of Jacob, of whom two were free, and two
slaves.  We see that, in the wife and bond-slaves of Abraham, the
apostle understands the two Testaments. <span
id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861)   But there, one represents each;
here, the application does not suit so well, as there are two and two. 
There, also, the son of the bond-slave is disinherited; but here the
sons of the slaves receive the land of promise along with the sons of
the free women:  so that this type must have a different meaning.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p136"></span>52.  Supposing that the two free wives
point to the New Testament, by which we are called to liberty, what is
the meaning of there being two?  Perhaps because in Scripture, as the
attentive reader will find, we are said to have two lives in the body of
Christ,—one <span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_292"></span>temporal, in which we suffer pain, and
one eternal, in which we shall behold the blessedness of God.  We see
the one in the Lord’s passion, and the other in His resurrection.  The
names of the women point to this meaning:  It is said that Leah means
Suffering, and Rachel the First Principle made visible, or the Word
which makes the First Principle visible.  The action, then, of our
mortal human life, in which we live by faith, doing many painful tasks
without knowing what benefit may result from them to those in whom we
are interested, is Leah, Jacob’s first wife.  And thus she is said to
have had weak eyes.  For the purposes of mortals are timid, and our
plans uncertain.  Again, the hope of the eternal contemplation of God,
accompanied with a sure and delightful perception of truth, is Rachel. 
And on this account she is described as fair and well-formed.  This is
the beloved of every pious student, and for this he serves the grace of
God, by which our sins, though like scarlet, are made white as
snow. <span id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862)   For Laban means making
white; and we read that Jacob served Laban for Rachel. <span
id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863)   No man turns to serve righteousness,
in subjection to the grace of forgiveness, but that he may live in peace
in the Word which makes visible the First Principle, or God; that is, he
serves for Rachel, not for Leah.  For what a man loves in the works of
righteousness is not the toil of doing and suffering.  No one desires
this life for its own sake; as Jacob desired not Leah, who yet was
brought to him, and became his wife, and the mother of children.  Though
she could not be loved of herself, the Lord made her be borne with as a
step to Rachel; and then she came to be approved of on account of her
children.  Thus every useful servant of God, brought into His grace by
which his sins are made white, has in his mind, and heart, and
affection, when he thus turns to God, nothing but the knowledge of
wisdom.  This we often expect to attain as a reward for practising the
seven precepts of the law which concern the love of our neighbor, that
we injure no one:  namely, Honor thy father and mother; Thou shall not
commit adultery; Thou shall not kill; Thou shalt not steal; Thou shall
not bear false witness; Thou shalt not desire thy neighbor’s wife; Thou
shall not covet thy neighbor’s property.  When a man has obeyed these to
the best of his ability, and, instead of the bright joys of truth which
he desired and hoped for, finds in the darkness of the manifold trials
of this world that he is bound to painful endurance, or has embraced
Leah instead of Rachel, if there is perseverance in his love, he bears
with the one in order to attain the other; and as if it were said to
him, Serve seven other years for Rachel, he hears seven new commands,—to
be poor in spirit, to be meek, to be a mourner, to hunger and thirst
after righteousness, to be merciful, pure, and a peacemaker. <span
id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864)   A man would desire, if it were
possible, to obtain at once the joys of lovely and perfect wisdom,
without the endurance of toil in action and suffering; but this is
impossible in mortal life.  This seems to be meant, when it is said to
Jacob:  "It is not the custom in our country to marry the younger before
the elder." <span id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865)   The elder may very
well mean the first in order of time.  So, in the discipline of man, the
toil of doing the work of righteousness precedes the delight of
understanding the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p141"></span>53.  To this purpose it is written: 
"Thou hast desired wisdom; keep the commandments, and the Lord shall
give it thee." <span id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866)   The
commandments are those concerning righteousness, and the righteousness
is that which is by faith, surrounded with the uncertainty of
temptations; so that understanding is the reward of a pious belief of
what is not yet understood.  The meaning I have given to these words,
"Thou hast desired wisdom; keep the commandments, and the Lord shall
give it thee," I find also in the passage, "Unless ye believe, ye shall
not understand;" <span id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867) showing that as
righteousness is by faith, understanding comes by wisdom.  Accordingly,
in the case of those who eagerly demand evident truth, we must not
condemn the desire, but regulate it, so that beginning with faith it may
proceed to the desired end through good works.  The life of virtue is
one of toil; the end desired is unclouded wisdom.  Why should I believe,
says one, what is not clearly proved?  Let me hear some word which will
disclose the first principle of all things.  This is the one great
craving of the rational soul in the pursuit of truth.  And the answer
is, What you desire is excellent, and well worthy of your love; but Leah
is to be married first, and then Rachel.  The proper effect of your
eagerness is to lead you to submit to the right method, instead of
rebelling against it; for without this method you cannot attain what you
so eagerly long for.  And when it is attained, the possession of the
lovely form of knowledge will be in this world accompanied with the
toils of righteousness.  For however clear and true our perception in
this life may be of the unchangeable good, <span id="page_293">p.
293</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_293"></span>the mortal body is
still a weight on the mind and the earthly tabernacle is a clog on the
intellect in its manifold activity.  The end then, is one, but many
things must be gone through for the sake of it.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p144"></span>54.  Thus Jacob has two free wives;
for both are daughters of the remission of sins, or of whitening, that
is, of Laban.  One is loved, the other is borne.  But she that is borne
is the most and the soonest fruitful, that she may be loved, if not for
herself, at least for her children.  For the toil of the righteous is
specially fruitful in those whom they beget for the kingdom of God, by
preaching the gospel amid many trials and temptations; and they call
those their joy and crown <span id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868) for
whom they are in labors more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in
deaths often, <span id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) —for whom they
have fightings without and fears within. <span
id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870)   Such births result most easily and
plentifully from the word of faith, the preaching of Christ crucified,
which speaks also of His human nature as far as it can be easily
understood, so as not to hurt the weak eyes of Leah.  Rachel, again,
with clear eye, is beside herself to God, <span
id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) and sees in the beginning the Word of
God with God, and wishes to bring forth, but cannot; for who shall
declare His generation?  So the life devoted to contemplation, in order
to see with no feeble mental eye things invisible to flesh, but
understood by the things that are made, and to discern the ineffable
manifestation of the eternal power and divinity of God, seeks leisure
from all occupation, and is therefore barren.  In this habit of
retirement, where the fire of meditation burns bright, there is a want
of sympathy with human weakness, and with the need men have of our help
in their calamities.  This life also burns with the desire for children
(for it wishes to teach what it knows, and not to go with the corruption
of envy <span id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) ), and sees its
sister-life fully occupied with work and with bringing forth; and it
grieves that men run after that virtue which cares for their wants and
weaknesses, instead of that which has a divine imperishable lesson to
impart.  This is what is meant when it is said, "Rachel envied her
sister." <span id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873)   Moreover, as the pure
intellectual perception of that which is not matter, and so is not the
object of the bodliy sense, cannot be expressed in words which spring
from the flesh, the doctrine of wisdom prefers to get some lodging for
divine truth in the mind by whatever material figures and illustrations
occur, rather than to give up teaching these things; and thus Rachel
preferred that her husband should have children by her handmaid, rather
than that she should be without any children.  Bilhah, the name of her
handmaid, is said to mean old; and so, even when we speak of the
spiritual and unchangeable nature of God, ideas are suggested relating
to the old life of the bodily senses.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p151"></span>55.  Leah, too, got children by her
handmaid, from the desire of having a numerous family.  Zilpah, her
handmaid, is, interpreted, an open mouth.  So Leah’s handmaid represents
those who are spoken of in Scripture as engaging in the preaching of the
gospel with open mouth, but not with open heart.  Thus it is written of
some:  "This people honor me with their lips, but their heart is far
from me." <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874)   To such the apostle
says:  "Thou that preachest that a man should not steal, dost thou
steal?  Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou
commit adultery?" <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875)   But that
even by this arrangement the free wife of Jacob, the type of labor or
endurance, might obtain children to be heirs of the kingdom, the Lord
says:  "What they say, do; but do not after their works." <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876)   And again, the apostolic life, when
enduring imprisonment, says:  "Whether Christ is preached in pretence or
in truth, I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice." <span
id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877)   It is the joy of the mother over her
numerous family, though born of her handmaid.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p156"></span>56.  In one instance Leah owed her
becoming a mother to Rachel, who, in return for some mandrakes, allowed
her husband to give her night to her sister.  Some, I know, think that
eating this fruit has the effect of making barren women productive, and
that Rachel, from her desire for children, was thus bent on getting the
fruit from her sister.  But I should not agree to this, even had Rachel
conceived at the time.  As Leah then conceived, and, besides, had two
other children before God opened Rachel’s womb, there is no reason for
supposing any such quality in the mandrake, without any experience to
prove it.  I will give my explanation; those better able than I may give
a better.  Though this fruit is not often met with, I had once, to my
great satisfaction, on account of its connection with this passage of
Scripture, an opportunity of seeing it.  I examined the fruit as
carefully as I could, not with the help of any recondite knowledge of
the nature of roots or the virtues of plants, but only as to what I or
any one might learn from the sight, and smell, and taste.  I thought it
a nice-looking fruit, and sweet-smelling, but in<span id="page_294">p.
294</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_294"></span>sipid; and I confess it
is hard to say why Rachel desired it so much, unless it was for its
rarity and its sweet smell.  Why the incident should be narrated in
Scripture, in which the fancies of women would not be mentioned as
important unless it was intended that we should learn some important
lesson from them, the only thing I can think of is the very simple idea
that the fruit represents a good character; not the praise given a man
by a few just and wise people, but popular report, which bestows
greatness and renown on a man, and which is not desirable for its own
sake, but is essential to the success of good men in their endeavors to
benefit their fellow-men.  So the apostle says, that it is proper to
have a good report of those that are without; <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) for though they are not infallible,
the lustre of their praise and the odor of their good opinion are a
great help to the efforts of those who seek to benefit them.  And this
popular renown is not obtained by those that are highest in the Church,
unless they expose themselves to the toils and hazards of an active
life.  Thus the son of Leah found the mandrakes when he went out into
the field, that is, when walking honestly towards those that are
without.  The pursuit of wisdom, on the other hand, retired from the
busy crowd, and lost in calm meditation, could never obtain a particle
of this public approval, except through those who take the management of
public business, not for the sake of being leaders, but in order to be
useful.  These men of action and business exert themselves for the
public benefit, and by a popular use of their influence gain the
approval of the people even for the quiet life of the student and
inquirer after truth; and thus through Leah the mandrakes come into the
hands of Rachel.  Leah herself got them from her first-born son, that
is, in honor of her fertility, which represents all the useful result of
a laborious life exposed to the common vicissitudes; a life which many
avoid on account of its troublesome engagements, because, although they
might be able to take the lead, they are bent on study, and devote all
their powers to the quiet pursuit of knowledge, in love with the beauty
of Rachel.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p158"></span>57.  But as it is right that this
studious life should gain public approval by letting itself be known,
while it cannot rightly gain this approval if it keeps its follower in
retirement, instead of using his powers for the management of
ecclesiastical affairs, and so prevents his being generally useful; to
this purpose Leah says to her sister, "Is it a small matter that thou
hast taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son’s mandrakes
also?"  <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879)   The husband represents
all those who, though fit for active life, and able to govern the
Church, in administering to believers the mystery of the faith, from
their love of learning and of the pursuit of wisdom, desire to
relinquish all troublesome occupations, and to bury themselves in the
classroom.  Thus the words, "Is it a small matter that thou hast taken
my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son’s mandrakes also?" mean,
"Is it a small matter that the life of study keeps in retirement men
required for the toils of public life? and does it ask for popular
renown as well?"

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p160"></span>58.  To get this renown justly, Rachel
gives her husband to her sister for the night; that is, those who, by a
talent for business, are fitted for government, must for the public
benefit consent to bear the burden and suffer the hardships of public
life; lest the pursuit of wisdom, to which their leisure is devoted,
should be evil spoken of, and should not gain from the multitude the
good opinion, represented by the fruit, which is necessary for the
encouragement of their pupils.  But the life of business must be forced
upon them.  This is clearly shown by Leah’s meeting Jacob when coming
from the field, and laying hold of him, saying, "Thou shalt come in to
me; for I have hired thee with my son’s mandrakes." <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880)   As if she said, Dost thou wish the
knowledge which thou lovest to be well thought of?  Do not shirk the
toil of business.  The same thing happens constantly in the Church. 
What we read is explained by what we meet with in our own experience. 
Do we not everywhere see men coming from secular employments, to seek
leisure for the study and contemplation of truth, their beloved Rachel,
and intercepted mid-way by ecclesiastical affairs, which require them to
be set to work, as if Leah said to them, You must come in to me?  When
such men minister in sincerity the mystery of God, so as in the night of
this world to beget sons in the faith, popular approval is gained also
for that life, in love for which they were led to abandon worldly
pursuits, and from the adoption of which they were called away to
undertake the benevolent task of government.  In all their labors they
aim chiefly at this, that their chosen way of life may have greater and
wider renown, as having supplied the people with such leaders; as Jacob
consents to go with Leah, that Rachel may obtain the sweet-smelling and
good-looking fruit.  Rachel, <span id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_295"></span>too, in course of time, by the mercy of
God, brings forth a child herself, but not till after some time; for it
seldom happens that there is a sound, though only partial, apprehension,
without fleshly ideas, of such sacred lessons of wisdom as this:  "In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God." <span id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p163"></span>59.  This must suffice as a reply to
the false accusations brought by Faustus against the three fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, from whom the God whom the Catholic Church
worship was pleased to take His name.  This is not the place to
discourse on the merits and piety of these three men, or on the dignity
of their prophetic character, which is beyond the comprehension of
carnal minds.  It is enough in this treatise to defend them against the
calumnious attacks of malevolence and falsehood, in case those who read
the Scriptures in a carping and hostile spirit should fancy that they
have proved anything against the sacredness and the profitableness of
these books, by their attempts to blacken the character of men who are
there mentioned so honorably.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p164"></span>60.  It should be added that Lot, the
brother, that is the blood relation, of Abraham, is not to be ranked as
equal to those of whom God says, "I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacob;" nor does he belong to those testified to in Scripture as
having continued righteous to the end, although in Sodom he lived a
pious and virtuous life, and showed a praiseworthy hospitality, so that
he was rescued from the fire, and a land was given by God to his seed to
dwell in, for the sake of his uncle Abraham.  On these accounts he is
commended in Scripture—not for intemperance or incest.  But when we find
bad and good actions recorded of the same person, we must take warning
from the one, and example from the other.  As, then, the sin of Lot, of
whom we are told that he was righteous previous to this sin, instead of
bringing a stain on the character of God, or the truth of Scripture,
rather calls on us to approve and admire the record in its resemblance
to a faithful mirror, which reflects not only the beauties and
perfections, but also the faults and deformities, of those who approach
it; still more, in the case of Judah, who lay with his daughter-in-law,
we may see how groundless are the reproaches cast on the narrative.  The
sacred record has an authority which raises it far above not merely the
cavils of a handful of Manichæans, but the determined enmity of the
whole Gentile world; for, in confirmation of its claims, we see that
already it has brought nearly all people from their idolatrous
superstitions to the worship of one God, according to the rule of
Christianity.  It has conquered the world, not by violence and warfare,
but by the resistless force of truth.  Where, then, is Judah praised in
Scripture?  Where is anything good said of him, except that in the
blessing pronounced by his father he is distinguished above the rest,
because of the prophecy that Christ would come in the flesh from his
tribe?  <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p166"></span>61.  Judah, as Faustus says, committed
fornication; and besides that, we can accuse him of selling his brother
into Egypt.  Is it any disparagement to light, that in revealing all
things it discloses what is unsightly?  So neither is the character of
Scripture affected by the evil deeds of which we are informed by the
record itself.  Undoubtedly, by the eternal law, which requires the
preservation of natural order, and forbids the transgression of it,
conjugal intercourse should take place only for the procreation of
children, and after the celebration of marriage, so as to maintain the
bond of peace.  Therefore, the prostitution of women, merely for the
gratification of sinful passion, is condemned by the divine and eternal
law.  To purchase the degradation of another, disgraces the purchaser;
so that, though the sin would have been greater if Judah had knowingly
lain with his daughter-in-law (for if, as the Lord says, man and wife
are no more two, but one flesh, <span id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883)
a daughter-in-law is the same as a daughter); still, it is plain that,
as regards his own intention, he was disgraced by his intercourse with
an harlot.  The woman, on the other hand, who deceived her
father-in-law, sinned not from wantonness, or because she loved the
gains of iniquity, but from her desire to have children of this
particular family.  So, being disappointed in two of the brothers, and
not obtaining the third, she succeeded by craft in getting a child by
their father; and the reward which she got was kept, not as an ornament,
but as a pledge.  It would certainly have been better to have remained
childless than to become a mother without marriage.  Still, her desire
to have her father-in-law as the father of her children was very
different from having a criminal affection for him.  And when, by his
order, she was brought out to be killed, on her producing the staff and
necklace and ring, saying that the father of the child was the man who
had given her those pledges, Judah acknowledged them, and said, "She
hath been more righteous than I"<span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_296"></span>—not praising her, but condemning
himself.  He blamed her desire to have children less than his own
unlawful passion, which had led him to one whom he thought to be an
harlot.  In a similar sense, it is said of some that they justified
Sodom; <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) that is, their sin was so
great, that Sodom seemed righteous in comparison.  And even allowing
that this woman is not spoken of as comparatively less guilty, but is
actually praised by her father-in-law, while, on account of her not
observing the established rites of marriage, she is a criminal in the
eye of the eternal law of right, which forbids the transgression of
natural order, both as regards the body, and first and chiefly as
regards the mind, what wonder though one sinner should praise another?

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p169"></span>62.  The mistake of Faustus and of
Manichæism generally, is in supposing that these objections prove
anything against us, as if our reverence for Scripture, and our
profession of regard for its authority, bound us to approve of all the
evil actions mentioned in it; whereas the greater our homage for the
Scripture, the more decided must be our condemnation of what the truth
of Scripture itself teaches us to condemn.  In Scripture, all
fornication and adultery are condemned by the divine law; accordingly,
when actions of this kind are narrated, without being expressly
condemned, it is intended not that we should praise them, but that we
should pass judgment on them ourselves.  Every one execrates the cruelty
of Herod in the Gospel, when, in his uneasiness on hearing of the birth
of Christ, he commanded the slaughter of so many infants. <span
id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885)   But this is merely narrated without
being condemned.  Or if Manichæan absurdity is bold enough to deny the
truth of this narrative, since they do not admit the birth of Christ,
which was what troubled Herod, let them read the account of the blind
fury of the Jews, which is related without any expression of reproach,
although the feeling of abhorrence is the same in all.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p171"></span>63.  But, it is said, Judah, who lay
with his daughter-in-law, is reckoned as one of the twelve patriarchs. 
And was not Judas, who betrayed the Lord, reckoned among the twelve
apostles?  And was not this one of them, who was a devil, sent along
with them to preach the gospel? <span id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886)
  In reply to this, it will be said that after his crime Judas hanged
himself, and was removed from the number of the apostles; while Judah,
after his evil conduct, was not only blessed along with his brethren,
but got special honor and approval from his father, who is so highly
spoken of in Scripture.  But the main lesson to be learned from this is,
that this prophecy refers not to Judah, but to Christ, who was foretold
as to come in the flesh from his tribe; and the very reason for the
mention of this crime of Judah is to be found in the desirableness of
teaching us to look for another meaning in the words of his father,
which are seen not to be applicable to him in his misconduct, from the
praise which they express.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p173"></span>64.  Doubtless, the intention of
Faustus’ calumnies is to damage this very assertion, that Christ was
born of the tribe of Judah.  Especially, as in the genealogy given by
Matthew we find the name of Zara, whom this woman Tamar bore to Judah. 
Had Faustus wished to reproach Jacob’s family merely, and not Christ’s
birth, he might have taken the case of Reuben the first-born, who
committed the unnatural crime of defiling his father’s bed, of which
fornication the apostle says, that it was not so much as named among the
Gentiles. <span id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887)   Jacob also mentions
this in his blessing, charging his son with the infamous deed.  Faustus
might have brought up this, as Reuben seems to have been guilty of
deliberate incest, and there was no harlot’s disguise in this case, were
it not that Tamar’s conduct in desiring nothing but to have children is
more odious to Faustus than if she had acted from criminal passion, and
did he not wish to discredit the incarnation, by bringing reproach on
Christ’s progenitors.  Faustus unhappily is not aware that the most true
and truthful Saviour is a teacher, not only in His words, but also in
His birth.  In His fleshly origin there is this lesson for those who
should believe on Him from all nations, that the sins of their fathers
need be no hindrance to them.  Besides, the Bridegroom, who was to call
good and bad to His marriage, <span id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888)
was pleased to assimilate Himself to His guests, in being born of good
and bad.  He thus confirms as typical of Himself the symbol of the
Passover, in which it was commanded that the lamb to be eaten should be
taken from the sheep or from the goats—that is, from the righteous or
the wicked. <span id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889)   Preserving
throughout the indication of divinity and humanity, as man He consented
to have both bad and good as His parents, while as God He chose the
miraculous birth from a virgin.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p177"></span>65.  The impiety, therefore, of
Faustus’ attacks on Scripture can injure no one but himself; for what he
thus assails is now deservedly the object of universal reverence.  As
has been said already, the sacred record, like a faithful mirror, has no
flattery in its <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_297"></span>portraits, and either itself passes
sentence upon human actions as worthy of approval or disapproval, or
leaves the reader to do so.  And not only does it distinguish men as
blameworthy or praiseworthy, but it also takes notice of cases where the
blameworthy deserve praise, and the praiseworthy blame.  Thus, although
Saul was blameworthy, it was not the less praiseworthy in him to examine
so carefully who had eaten food during the curse, and to pronounce the
stern sentence in obedience to the commandment of God. <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890)   So, too, he was right in banishing
those that had familiar spirits and wizards out of the land. <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891)   And although David was praiseworthy,
we are not called on to approve or imitate his sins, which God rebukes
by the prophet.  And so Pontius Pilate was not wrong in pronouncing the
Lord innocent, in spite of the accusations of the Jews; <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) nor was it praiseworthy in Peter to
deny the Lord thrice; nor, again, was he praiseworthy on that occasion
when Christ called him Satan because, not understanding the things of
God, he wished to withhold Christ from his passion, that is, from our
salvation.  Here Peter, immediately after being called blessed, is
called Satan. <span id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893)   Which character
most truly belonged to him, we may see from his apostleship, and from
his crown of martyrdom.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p182"></span>66.  In the case of David also, we
read of both good and bad actions.  But where David’s strength lay, and
what was the secret of his success, is sufficiently plain, not to the
blind malevolence with which Faustus assails holy writings and holy men,
but to pious discernment, which bows to the divine authority, and at the
same time judges correctly of human conduct.  The Manichæans will find,
if they read the Scriptures, that God rebukes David more than Faustus
does. <span id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894)   But they will read also
of the sacrifice of his penitence, of his surpassing gentleness to his
merciless and bloodthirsty enemy, whom David, pious as he was brave,
dismissed unhurt when now and again he fell into his hands. <span
id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895)   They will read of his memorable
humility under divine chastisement, when the kingly neck was so bowed
under the Master’s yoke, that he bore with perfect patience bitter
taunts from his enemy, though he was armed, and had armed men with him. 
And when his companion was enraged at such things being said to the
king, and was on the point of requiting the insult on the head of the
scoffer, he mildly restrained him, appealing to the fear of God in
support of his own royal order, and saying that this bad happened to him
as a punishment from God, who had sent the man to curse him. <span
id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896)   They will read how, with the love of
a shepherd for the flock entrusted to him, he was willing to die for
them, when, after he had numbered the people, God saw good to punish his
sinful pride by lessening the number he boasted of.  In this
destruction, God, with whom there is no iniquity, in His secret
judgment, both took away the lives of those whom He knew to be unworthy
of life, and by this diminution cured the vainglory which had prided
itself on the number of the people.  They will read of that scrupulous
fear of God in his regard for the emblem of Christ in the sacred
anointing, which made David’s heart smite him with regret for having
secretly cut off a small piece of Saul’s garment, that he might prove to
him that he had no wish to kill him, when he might have done it.  They
will read of his judicious behavior as regards his children, and also of
his tenderness toward them—how, when one was sick, he entreated the Lord
for him with many tears and with much self-abasement, but when he died,
an innocent child, he did not mourn for him; and again, how, when his
youthful son was carried away with unnatural hostility to an infamous
violation of his father’s bed, and in a parricidal war, he wished him to
live, and wept for him when he was killed; for he thought of the eternal
doom of a soul guilty of such crimes, and desired that he should live to
escape this doom by being brought to submission and repentance.  These,
and many other praiseworthy and exemplary things, may be seen in this
holy man by a candid examination of the Scripture narrative, especially
if in humble piety and unfeigned faith we regard the judgment of God,
who knew the secrets of David’s heart, and who, in His infallible
inspection, so approves of David as to commend him as a pattern to his
sons.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p186"></span>67.  It must have been on account of
this inspection of the depths of David’s heart by the Spirit of God
that, when on being reproved by the prophet, he said, I have sinned, he
was considered worthy to be told, immediately after this brief
confession, that he was pardoned—that is, that he was admitted to
eternal salvation.  For he did not escape the correction of the fatherly
rod, of which God spoke in His threatening, that, while by his
confession he obtained eternal exemption, he might be tried by temporal
chastisement.  And it is a remarkable evidence of the strength of
David’s faith, and of his meek and submissive spirit, that, when <span
id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_298"></span>he had
been told by the prophet that God had forgiven him, although the
threatened consequences were still permitted to follow, he did not
accuse the prophet of having deluded him, or murmur against God as
having mocked him with a declaration of forgiveness.  This deeply holy
man, whose soul was lifted up unto God, and not against God, knew that
had not the Lord mercifully accepted his confession and repentance, his
sins would have deserved eternal punishment.  So when, instead of this,
he was made to smart under temporal correction, he saw that, while the
pardon remained good, wholesome discipline was also provided.  Saul,
too, when he was reproved by Samuel, said, I have sinned. <span
id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897)   Why, then, was he not considered fit
to be told, as David was, that the Lord had pardoned his sin?  Is there
acceptance of persons with God?  Far from it.  While to the human ear
the words were the same, the divine eye saw a difference in the heart. 
The lesson for us to learn from these things is, that the kingdom of
heaven is within us, <span id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) and that we
must worship God from our inmost feelings, that out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth may speak, instead of honoring Him with our lips,
like the people of old, while our hearts are far from Him.  We may learn
also to judge of men, whose hearts we cannot see, only as God judges,
who sees what we cannot, and who cannot be biased or misled.  Having, on
the high authority of sacred Scripture, the plainest announcement of
God’s opinion of David, we may regard as absurd or deplorable the
rashness of men who hold a different opinion.  The authority of
Scripture, as regards the character of these men of ancient times, is
supported by the evidence from the prophecies which they contain, and
which are now receiving their fulfillment.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p189"></span>68.  We see the same thing in the
Gospel, where the devils confess that Christ is the Son of God in the
words used by Peter, but with a very different heart.  So, though the
words were the same, Peter is praised for his faith, while the impiety
of the devils is checked.  For Christ, not by human sense, but by divine
knowledge, could inspect and infallibly discriminate the sources from
which the words came.  Besides, there are multitudes who confess that
Christ is the Son of the living God, without meriting the same approval
as Peter—not only of those who shall say in that day, "Lord, Lord," and
shall receive the sentence, "Depart from me," but also of those who
shall be placed on the right hand.  They may probably never have denied
Christ even once; they may never have opposed His suffering for our
salvation; they may never have forced the Gentiles to do as the
Jews; <span id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) and yet they shall not be
honored equally with Peter, who, though he did all these things, will
sit on one of the twelve thrones, and judge not only the twelve tribes,
but the angels.  So, again, many who have never desired another man’s
wife, or procured the death of the husband, as David did, will never
reach the place which David nevertheless held in the divine favor. 
There is a vast difference between what is in itself so undesirable that
it must be utterly rejected, and the rich and plenteous harvest which
may afterwards appear.  For farmers are best pleased with the fields
from which, after weeding them, it may be, of great thistles, they
receive an hundred-fold; not with fields which have never had any
thistles, and hardly bear thirty-fold.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p191"></span>69.  So Moses, too, who was so
faithful a servant of God in all his house; the minister of the holy,
just, and good law; of whose character the apostle speaks in the words
here quoted; <span id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900) the minister also
of the symbols which, though not conferring salvation, promised the
Saviour, as the Saviour Himself shows, when He says, "If ye believed
Moses, ye would also believe me, for he wrote of me,"—from which passage
we have already sufficiently answered the presumptuous cavils of the
Manichæans;—this Moses, the servant of the living, the true, the most
high God, that made heaven and earth, not of a foreign substance, but of
nothing—not from the pressure of necessity, but from plenitude of
goodness—not by the suffering of His members, but by the power of His
word;—this Moses, who humbly put from him this high ministry, but
obediently accepted it, and faithfully kept it, and diligently fulfilled
it; who ruled the people with vigilance, reproved them with vehemence,
loved them with fervor, and bore with them in patience, standing for his
subjects before God to receive His counsel, and to appease His
wrath;—this great and good man is not to be judged of from Faustus’
malicious representations, but from what is said by God, whose word is a
true expression of His true opinion of this man, whom He knew because He
made him.  For the sins of men are also known to God, though He is not
their author; but He takes notice of them as a judge in those who refuse
to own them, and pardons them as a father in those who make confession. 
His servant Moses, as thus described, we love and ad<span
id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_299"></span>mire
and to the best of our power imitate, coming indeed far short of his
merits, though we have killed no Egyptian, nor plundered any one, nor
carried on any war; which actions of Moses were in one case prompted by
the zeal of the future champion of his people, and in the other cases
commanded by God.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p193"></span>70.  It might be shown that, though
Moses slew the Egyptian, without being commanded by God, the action was
divinely permitted, as, from the prophetic character of Moses, it
prefigured something in the future.  Now however, I do not use this
argument, but view the action as having no symbolical meaning.  In the
light, then, of the eternal law, it was wrong for one who had no legal
authority to kill the man, even though he was a bad character, besides
being the aggressor.  But in minds where great virtue is to come, there
is often an early crop of vices, in which we may still discern a
disposition for some particular virtue, which will come when the mind is
duly cultivated.  For as farmers, when they see land bringing forth huge
crops, though of weeds, pronounce it good for corn; or when they see
wild creepers, which have to be rooted out, still consider the land good
for useful vines; and when they see a hill covered with wild olives,
conclude that with culture it will produce good fruit:  so the
disposition of mind which led Moses to take the law into his own hands,
to prevent the wrong done to his brother, living among strangers, by a
wicked citizen of the country from being unrequited, was not unfit for
the production of virtue, but from want of culture gave signs of its
productiveness in an unjustifiable manner.  He who afterwards, by His
angel, called Moses on Mount Sinai, with the divine commission to
liberate the people of Israel from Egypt, and who trained him to
obedience by the miraculous appearance in the bush burning but not
consumed, and by instructing him in his ministry, was the same who, by
the call addressed from heaven to Saul when persecuting the Church,
humbled him, raised him up, and animated him; or in figurative words, by
this stroke He cut off the branch, grafted it, and made it fruitful. 
For the fierce energy of Paul, when in his zeal for hereditary
traditions he persecuted the Church, thinking that he was doing God
service, was like a crop of weeds showing great signs of
productiveness.  It was the same in Peter, when he took his sword out of
its sheath to defend the Lord, and cut off the right ear of an
assailant, when the Lord rebuked him with something like a threat,
saying, "Put up thy sword into its sheath; for he that taketh the sword
shall perish by the sword." <span id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901)   To
take the sword is to use weapons against a man’s life, without the
sanction of the constituted authority.  The Lord, indeed, had told His
disciples to carry a sword; but He did not tell them to use it.  But
that after this sin Peter should become a pastor of the Church was no
more improper than that Moses, after smiting the Egyptian, should become
the leader of the congregation.  In both cases the trespass originated
not in inveterate cruelty, but in a hasty zeal which admitted of
correction.  In both cases there was resentment against injury,
accompanied in one case by love for a brother, and in the other by love,
though still carnal, of the Lord.  Here was evil to be subdued or rooted
out; but the heart with such capacities needed only, like good soil, to
be cultivated to make it fruitful in virtue.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p195"></span>71.  Then, as for Faustus’ objection
to the spoiling of the Egyptians, he knows not what he says.  In this
Moses not only did not sin, but it would have been sin not to do it.  It
was by the command of God, <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902) who,
from His knowledge both of the actions and of the hearts of men, can
decide on what every one should be made to suffer, and through whose
agency.  The people at that time were still carnal, and engrossed with
earthly affections; while the Egyptians were in open rebellion against
God, for they used the gold, God’s creature, in the service of idols, to
the dishonor of the Creator, and they had grievously oppressed strangers
by making them work without pay.  Thus the Egyptians deserved the
punishment, and the Israelites were suitably employed in inflicting it. 
Perhaps, indeed, it was not so much a command as a permission to the
Hebrews to act in the matter according to their own inclinations; and
God, in sending the message by Moses, only wished that they should thus
be informed of His permission.  There may also have been mysterious
reasons for what God said to the people on this matter.  At any rate,
God’s commands are to be submissively received, not to be argued
against.  The apostle says, "Who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who
hath been His counsellor?" <span id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903)  
Whether, then, the reason was what I have said, or whether in the secret
appointment of God, there was some unknown reason for His telling the
people by Moses to borrow things from the Egyptians, and to take them
away with them, this remains certain, that this was said for some good
reason, and that Moses could not lawfully have done otherwise than God
told <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_300"></span>him, leaving to God the reason of the
command, while the servant’s duty is to obey.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p198"></span>72.  But, says Faustus, it cannot be
admitted that the true God, who is also good, ever gave such a command. 
I answer, such a command can be rightly given by no other than the true
and good God, who alone knows the suitable command in every case, and
who alone is incapable of inflicting unmerited suffering on any one. 
This ignorant and spurious goodness of the human heart may as well deny
what Christ says, and object to the wicked being made to suffer by the
good God, when He shall say to the angels, "Gather first the tares into
bundles to burn them."  The servants, however, were stopped when they
wished to do this prematurely:  "Lest by chance, when ye would gather
the tares, ye root up the wheat also with them." <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904)   Thus the true and good God alone
knows when, to whom, and by whom to order anything, or to permit
anything.  In the same way, this human goodness, or folly rather, might
object to the Lord’s permitting the devils to enter the swine, which
they asked to be allowed to do with a mischievous intent, <span
id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905) especially as the Manichæans believe
that not only pigs, but the vilest insects, have human souls.  But
setting aside these absurd notions, this is undeniable, that our Lord
Jesus Christ, the only son of God, and therefore the true and good God,
permitted the destruction of swine belonging to strangers, implying loss
of life and of a great amount of property, at the request of devils.  No
one can be so insane as to suppose that Christ could not have driven the
devils out of the men without gratifying their malice by the destruction
of the swine.  If, then, the Creator and Governor of all natures, in His
superintendence, which, though mysterious, is ever just, indulged the
violent and unjust inclination of those lost spirits already doomed to
eternal fire, why should not the Egyptians, who were unrighteous
oppressors, be spoiled by the Hebrews, a free people, who would claim
payment for their enforced and painful toil, especially as the earthly
possessions which they thus lost were used by the Egyptians in their
impious rites, to the dishonor of the Creator?  Still, if Moses had
originated this order, or if the people had done it spontaneously,
undoubtedly it would have been sinful; and perhaps the people did sin,
not in doing what God commanded or permitted, but in some desire of
their own for what they took.  The permission given to this action by
divine authority was in accordance with the just and good counsel of Him
who uses punishments both to restrain the wicked and to educate His own
people; who knows also how to give more advanced precepts to those able
to bear them, while He begins on a lower scale in the treatment of the
feeble.  As for Moses, he can be blamed neither for coveting the
property, nor for disputing, in any instance, the divine authority.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p201"></span>73.  According to the eternal law,
which requires the preservation of natural order, and forbids the
transgression of it, some actions have an indifferent character, so that
men are blamed for presumption if they do them without being called
upon, while they are deservedly praised for doing them when required. 
The act, the agent, and the authority for the action are all of great
importance in the order of nature.  For Abraham to sacrifice his son of
his own accord is shocking madness.  His doing so at the command of God
proves him faithful and submissive.  This is so loudly proclaimed by the
very voice of truth, that Faustus, eagerly rummaging for some fault, and
reduced at last to slanderous charges, has not the boldness to attack
this action.  It is scarcely possible that he can have forgotten a deed
so famous, that it recurs to the mind of itself without any study or
reflection, and is in fact repeated by so many tongues, and portrayed in
so many places, that no one can pretend to shut his eyes or his ears to
it.  If, therefore, while Abraham’s killing his son of his own accord
would have been unnatural, his doing it at the command of God shows not
only guiltless but praiseworthy compliance, why does Faustus blame Moses
for spoiling the Egyptians?  Your feeling of disapproval for the mere
human action should be restrained by a regard for the divine sanction. 
Will you venture to blame God Himself for desiring such actions?  Then
"Get thee behind me, Satan, for thou understandest not the things which
be of God, but those which be of men."  Would that this rebuke might
accomplish in you what it did in Peter, and that you might hereafter
preach the truth concerning God, which you now, judging by feeble sense,
find fault with! as Peter became a zealous messenger to announce to the
Gentiles what he objected to at first, when the Lord spoke of it as His
intention.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p202"></span>74.  Now, if this explanation suffices
to satisfy human obstinacy and perverse misinterpretation of right
actions of the vast difference between the indulgence of passion and
presumption on the part of men, and obedience to the command of God, who
knows what to permit or to order, and also the time and the persons, and
the due action or suffering in <span id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_301"></span>each case, the account of the wars of
Moses will not excite surprise or abhorrence, for in wars carried on by
divine command, he showed not ferocity but obedience; and God in giving
the command, acted not in cruelty, but in righteous retribution, giving
to all what they deserved, and warning those who needed warning.  What
is the evil in war?  Is it the death of some who will soon die in any
case, that others may live in peaceful subjection?  This is mere
cowardly dislike, not any religious feeling.  The real evils in war are
love of violence, revengeful cruelty, fierce and implacable enmity, wild
resistance, and the lust of power, and such like; and it is generally to
punish these things, when force is required to inflict the punishment,
that, in obedience to God or some lawful authority, good men undertake
wars, when they find themselves in such a position as regards the
conduct of human affairs, that right conduct requires them to act, or to
make others act in this way.  Otherwise John, when the soldiers who came
to be baptized asked, What shall we do? would have replied, Throw away
your arms; give up the service; never strike, or wound, or disable any
one.  But knowing that such actions in battle were not murderous but
authorized by law, and that the soldiers did not thus avenge themselves,
but defend the public safety, he replied, "Do violence to no man, accuse
no man falsely, and be content with your wages." <span
id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906)   But as the Manichæans are in the
habit of speaking evil of John, let them hear the Lord Jesus Christ
Himself ordering this money to be given to Cæsar, which John tells the
soldiers to be content with.  "Give," He says, "to Cæsar the things that
are Cæsar’s." <span id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907)   For
tribute-money is given on purpose to pay the soldiers for war.  Again,
in the case of the centurion who said, "I am a man under authority, and
have soldiers under me:  and I say to one, Go, and he goeth; and to
another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth
it," Christ gave due praise to his faith; <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908) He did not tell him to leave the
service.  But there is no need here to enter on the long discussion of
just and unjust ways.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p206"></span>75.  A great deal depends on the
causes for which men undertake wars, and on the authority they have for
doing so; for the natural order which seeks the peace of mankind,
ordains that the monarch should have the power of undertaking war if he
thinks it advisable, and that the soldiers should perform their military
duties in behalf of the peace and safety of the community.  When war is
undertaken in obedience to God, who would rebuke, or humble, or crush
the pride of man, it must be allowed to be a righteous war; for even the
wars which arise from human passion cannot harm the eternal well-being
of God, nor even hurt His saints; for in the trial of their patience,
and the chastening of their spirit, and in bearing fatherly correction,
they are rather benefited than injured.  No one can have any power
against them but what is given him from above.  For there is no power
but of God, <span id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909) who either orders or
permits.  Since, therefore, a righteous man, serving it may be under an
ungodly king, may do the duty belonging to his position in the State in
fighting by the order of his sovereign,—for in some cases it is plainly
the will of God that he should fight, and in others, where this is not
so plain, it may be an unrighteous command on the part of the king,
while the soldier is innocent, because his position makes obedience a
duty,—how much more must the man be blameless who carries on war on the
authority of God, of whom every one who serves Him knows that He can
never require what is wrong?

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p208"></span>76.  If it is supposed that God could
not enjoin warfare, because in after times it was said by the Lord Jesus
Christ, "I say unto you, That ye resist not evil:  but if any one strike
thee on the right cheek, turn to him the left also," <span
id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910) the answer is, that what is here
required is not a bodily action, but an inward disposition.  The sacred
seat of virtue is the heart, and such were the hearts of our fathers,
the righteous men of old.  But order required such a regulation of
events, and such a distinction of times, as to show first of all that
even earthly blessings (for so temporal kingdoms and victory over
enemies are considered to be, and these are the things which the
community of the ungodly all over the world are continually begging from
idols and devils) are entirely under the control and at the disposal of
the one true God.  Thus, under the Old Testament, the secret of the
kingdom of heaven, which was to be disclosed in due time, was veiled,
and so far obscured, in the disguise of earthly promises.  But when the
fullness of time came for the revelation of the New Testament, which was
hidden under the types of the Old, clear testimony was to be borne to
the truth, that there is another life for which this life ought to be
disregarded, and another kingdom for which the opposition of all earthly
kingdoms should be patiently borne.  Thus the name martyrs, <span
id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_302"></span>which
means witnesses, was given to those who, by the will of God, bore this
testimony, by their confessions, their sufferings, and their death.  The
number of such witnesses is so great, that if it pleased Christ—who
called Saul by a voice from heaven, and having changed him from a wolf
to a sheep, sent him into the midst of wolves—to unite them all in one
army, and to give them success in battle, as He gave to the Hebrews,
what nation could withstand them? what kingdom would remain unsubdued? 
But as the doctrine of the New Testament is, that we must serve God not
for temporal happiness in this life, but for eternal felicity hereafter,
this truth was most strikingly confirmed by the patient endurance of
what is commonly called adversity for the sake of that felicity.  So in
fullness of time the Son of God, made of a woman, made under the law,
that He might redeem them that were under the law, made of the seed of
David according to the flesh sends His disciples as sheep into the midst
of wolves, and bids them not fear those that can kill the body, but
cannot kill the soul, and promises that even the body will be entirely
restored, so that not a hair shall be lost. <span
id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911)   Peter’s sword He orders back into
its sheath, restoring as it was before the ear of His enemy that had
been cut off.  He says that He could obtain legions of angels to destroy
His enemies, but that He must drink the cup which His Father’s will had
given Him. <span id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912)   He sets the example
of drinking this cup, then hands it to His followers, manifesting thus,
both in word and deed, the grace of patience.  Therefore God raised Him
from the dead, and has given Him a name which is above every name; that
in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and of
things in earth, and of things under the earth; and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. <span
id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913)   The patriarchs and prophets, then,
have a kingdom in this world, to show that these kingdoms, too, are
given and taken away by God:  the apostles and martyrs had no kingdom
here, to show the superior desirableness of the kingdom of heaven.  The
prophets, however, could even in those times die for the truth, as the
Lord Himself says, "From the blood of Abel to the blood of
Zacharia; <span id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914) and in these days,
since the commencement of the fulfillment of what is prophesied in the
psalm of Christ, under the figure of Solomon, which means the
peacemaker, as Christ is our peace, <span
id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915) "All kings of the earth shall bow to
Him, all nations shall serve Him," <span
id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916) we have seen Christian emperors, who
have put all their confidence in Christ, gaining splendid victories over
ungodly enemies, whose hope was in the rites of idolatry and
devil-worship.  There are public and undeniable proofs of the fact, that
on one side the prognostications of devils were found to be fallacious,
and on the other, the predictions of saints were a means of support; and
we have now writings in which those facts are recorded.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p216"></span>77.  If our foolish opponents are
surprised at the difference between the precepts given by God to the
ministers of the Old Testament, at a time when the grace of the New was
still undisclosed, and those given to the preachers of the New
Testament, now that the obscurity of the Old is removed, they will find
Christ Himself saying one thing at one time, and another at another. 
"When I sent you," He says, "without scrip, or purse, or shoes, did ye
lack anything?  And they said, Nothing.  Then saith He to them, But now,
he that hath a scrip, let him take it, and also a purse; and he that
hath not a sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one."  If the
Manichæans found passages in the Old and New Testaments differing in
this way, they would proclaim it as a proof that the Testaments are
opposed to each other.  But here the difference is in the utterances of
one and the same person.  At one time He says, "I sent you without
scrip, or purse, or shoes, and ye lacked nothing;" at another, "Now let
him that hath a scrip take it, and also a purse; and he that hath a
tunic, let him sell it and buy a sword."  Does not this show how,
without any inconsistency, precepts and counsels and permissions may be
changed, as different times require different arrangements?  If it is
said that there was a symbolical meaning in the command to take a scrip
and purse, and to buy a sword, why may there not be a symbolical meaning
in the fact, that one and the same God commanded the prophets in old
times to make war, and forbade the apostles?  And we find in the passage
that we have quoted from the Gospel, that the words spoken by the Lord
were carried into effect by His disciples.  For, besides going at first
without scrip or purse, and yet lacking nothing, as from the Lord’s
question and their answer it is plain they did, now that He speaks of
buying a sword, they say, "Lo, here are two swords;" and He replied, "It
is enough."  Hence we find Peter with a weapon when he cut off the
assailant’s ear, on which occasion <span id="page_303">p. 303</span>
<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_303"></span>his spontaneous boldness was
checked, because, although he had been told to take a sword, he had not
been told to use it. <span id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917)  
Doubtless, it was mysterious that the Lord should require them to carry
weapons, and forbid the use of them.  But it was His part to give the
suitable precepts, and it was their part to obey without reserve.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p218"></span>78.  It is therefore mere groundless
calumny to charge Moses with making war, for there would have been less
harm in making war of his own accord, than in not doing it when God
commanded him.  And to dare to find fault with God Himself for giving
such a command, or not to believe it possible that a just and good God
did so, shows, to say the least, an inability to consider that in the
view of divine providence, which pervades all things from the highest to
the lowest, time can neither add anything nor take away; but all things
go, or come, or remain according to the order of nature or desert in
each separate case, while in men a right will is in union with the
divine law, and ungoverned passion is restrained by the order of divine
law; so that a good man wills only what is commanded, and a bad man can
do only what he is permitted, at the same time that he is punished for
what he wills to do unjustly.  Thus, in all the things which appear
shocking and terrible to human feebleness, the real evil is the
injustice; the rest is only the result of natural properties or of moral
demerit.  This injustice is seen in every case where a man loves for
their own sake things which are desirable only as means to an end, and
seeks for the sake of something else things which ought to be loved for
themselves.  For thus, as far as he can, he disturbs in himself the
natural order which the eternal law requires us to observe.  Again, a
man is just when he seeks to use things only for the end for which God
appointed them, and to enjoy God as the end of all, while he enjoys
himself and his friend in God and for God.  For to love in a friend the
love of God is to love the friend for God.  Now both justice and
injustice, to be acts at all, must be voluntary; otherwise, there can be
no just rewards or punishments; which no man in his senses will assert. 
The ignorance and infirmity which prevent a man from knowing his duty,
or from doing all he wishes to do, belong to God’s secret penal
arrangement, and to His unfathomable judgments, for with Him there is no
iniquity.  Thus we are informed by the sure word of God of Adam’s sin;
and Scripture truly declares that in him all die, and that by him sin
entered into the world, and death by sin. <span
id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918)   And our experience gives abundant
evidence, that in punishment for this sin our body is corrupted, and
weighs down the soul, and the clay tabernacle clogs the mind in its
manifold activity; <span id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) and we know
that we can be freed from this punishment only by gracious
interposition.  So the apostle cries out in distress, "O wretched man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?  The grace
of God through Jesus Christ our Lord." <span
id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920)   So much we know; but the reasons for
the distribution of divine judgment and mercy, why one is in this
condition, and another in that, though just, are unknown.  Still, we are
sure that all these things are due either to the mercy or the judgment
of God, while the measures and numbers and weights by which the Creator
of all natural productions arranges all things are concealed from our
view.  For God is not the author, but He is the controller of sin; so
that sinful actions, which are sinful because they are against nature,
are judged and controlled, and assigned to their proper place and
condition, in order that they may not bring discord and disgrace on
universal nature.  This being the case, and as the judgments of God and
the movements of man’s will contain the hidden reason why the same
prosperous circumstances which some make a right use of are the ruin of
others, and the same afflictions under which some give way are
profitable to others, and since the whole mortal life of man upon earth
is a trial, <span id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921) who can tell whether
it may be good or bad in any particular case—in time of peace, to reign
or to serve, or to be at ease or to die—or in time of war, to command or
to fight, or to conquer or to be killed?  At the same time, it remains
true, that whatever is good is so by the divine blessing, and whatever
is bad is so by the divine judgment.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p223"></span>79.  Let no one, then, be so daring as
to make rash charges against men, not to say against God.  If the
service of the ministers of the Old Testament, who were also heralds of
the New, consisted in putting sinners to death, and that of the
ministers of the New Testament, who are also interpreters of the Old, in
being put to death by sinners, the service in both cases is rendered to
one God, who, varying the lesson to suit the times, teaches both that
temporal blessings are to be sought from Him, and that they are to be
forsaken for Him, and that temporal distress is both sent by Him and
should be endured for Him.  There was, therefore, no cruelty in the
command, or in the action of Moses, <span id="page_304">p. 304</span>
<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_304"></span>when, in his holy jealousy for his
people, whom he wished to be subject to the one true God, on learning
that they had fallen away to the worship of an idol made by their own
hands, he impressed their minds at the time with a wholesome fear, and
gave them a warning for the future, by using the sword in the punishment
of a few, whose just punishment God, against whom they had sinned,
appointed in the depth of His secret judgment to be immediately
inflicted.  That Moses acted as he did, not in cruelty, but in great
love, may be seen from the words in which he prayed for the sins of the
people:  "If Thou wilt forgive their sin, forgive it; and if not, blot
me out of Thy book." <span id="fr_922"></span>[923](#fn_922)   The pious
inquirer who compares the slaughter with the prayer will find in this
the clearest evidence of the awful nature of the injury done to the soul
by prostitution to the images of devils, since such love is roused to
such anger.  We see the same in the apostle, who, not in cruelty, but in
love, delivered a man up to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. <span
id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923)   Others, too, he delivered up, that
they might learn not to blaspheme. <span
id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924)   In the apocryphal books of the
Manichæans there is a collection of fables, published by some unknown
authors under the name of the apostles.  The books would no doubt have
been sanctioned by the Church at the time of their publication, if holy
and learned men then in life, and competent to determine the matter, had
thought the contents to be true.  One of the stories is, that the
Apostle Thomas was once at a marriage feast in a country where he was
unknown, when one of the servants struck him, and that he forthwith by
his curse brought a terrible punishment on this man.  For when he went
out to the fountain to provide water for the guests, a lion fell on him
and killed him, and the hand with which he had given a slight blow to
the apostle was torn off, in fulfillment of the imprecation, and brought
by a dog to the table at which the apostle was reclining.  What could be
more cruel than this?  And yet, if I mistake not, the story goes on to
say, that the apostle made up for the cruelty by obtaining for the man
the blessing of pardon in the next world; so that, while the people of
this strange country learned to fear the apostle as being so dear to
God, the man’s eternal welfare was secured in exchange for the loss of
this mortal life.  It matters not whether the story is true or false. 
At any rate, the Manichæans, who regard as genuine and authentic books
which the canon of the Church rejects, must allow, as shown in the
story, that the virtue of patience, which the Lord enjoins when He says,
"If any one smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him thy left also,"
may be in the inward disposition, though it is not exhibited in bodily
action or in words.  For when the apostle was struck, instead of turning
his other side to the man, or telling him to repeat the blow, he prayed
to God to pardon his assailant in the next world, but not to leave the
injury unpunished at the time.  Inwardly he preserved a kindly feeling,
while outwardly he wished the man to be punished as an example.  As the
Manichæans believe this, rightly or wrongly, they may also believe that
such was the intention of Moses, the servant of God, when he cut down
with the sword the makers and worshippers of the idol; for his own words
show that he so entreated for pardon for their sin of idolatry as to ask
to be blotted out of God’s book if his prayer was not heard.  There is
no comparison between a stranger being struck with the hand, and the
dishonor done to God by forsaking Him for an idol, when He had brought
the people out of the bondage of Egypt, had led them through the sea,
and had covered with the waters the enemy pursuing them.  Nor, as
regards the punishment, is there any comparison between being killed
with the sword and being torn in pieces by wild beasts.  For judges in
administering the law condemn to exposure to wild beasts worse criminals
than are condemned to be put to death by the sword.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p227"></span>80.  Another of Faustus’ malicious and
impious charges which has to be answered, is about the Lord’s saying to
the prophet Hosea, "Take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of
whoredoms." <span id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925)   As regards this
passage, the impure mind of our adversaries is so blinded that they do
not understand the plain words of the Lord in His gospel, when He says
to the Jews, "The publicans and harlots shall go into the kingdom of
heaven before you." <span id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926)   There is
nothing contrary to the mercifulness of truth, or inconsistent with
Christian faith, in a harlot leaving fornication, and becoming a chaste
wife.  Indeed, nothing could be more unbecoming in one professing to be
a prophet than not to believe that all the sins of the fallen woman were
pardoned when she changed for the better.  So when the prophet took the
harlot as his wife, it was both good for the woman to have her life
amended, and the action symbolized a truth of which we shall speak <span
id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_305"></span>presently.  But it is plain what offends
the Manichæans in this case; for their great anxiety is to prevent
harlots from being with child.  It would have pleased them better that
the woman should continue a prostitute, so as not to bring their god
into confinement, than that she should become the wife of one man, and
have children.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p230"></span>81.  As regards Solomon, it need only
be said that the condemnation of his conduct in the faithful narrative
of holy Scripture is much more serious than the childish vehemence of
Faustus’ attacks.  The Scripture tells us with faithful accuracy both
the good that Solomon had at first, and the evil actions by which he
lost the good he began with; while Faustus, in his attacks, like a man
closing his eyes, or with no eyes at all, seeks no guidance from the
light, but is prompted only by violent animosity.  To pious and
discerning readers of the sacred Scriptures evidence of the chastity of
the holy men who are said to have had several wives is found in this,
that Solomon, who by his polygamy gratified his passions, instead of
seeking for offspring, is expressly noted as chargeable with being a
lover of women.  This, as we are informed by the truth which accepts no
man’s person, led him down into the abyss of idolatry.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p231"></span>82.  Having now gone over all the
cases in which Faustus finds fault with the Old Testament, and having
attended to the merit of each, either defending men of God against the
calumnies of carnal heretics, or, where the men were at fault, showing
the excellence and the majesty of Scripture, let us again take the cases
in the order of Faustus’ accusations, and see the meaning of the actions
recorded, what they typify, and what they foretell.  This we have
already done in the case of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of whom God said
that He was their God, as if the God of universal nature were the God of
none besides them; not honoring them with an unmeaning title, but
because He, who could alone have a full and perfect knowledge, knew the
sincere and remarkable charity of these men; and because these three
patriarchs united formed a notable type of the future people of God, in
not only having free children by free women, as by Sarah, and Rebecca,
and Leah, and Rachel, but also bond children, as of this same Rebecca
was born Esau, to whom it was said, "Thou shalt serve thy
brother;" <span id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927) and in having by bond
women not only bond children, as by Hagar, but also free children, as by
Bilhah and Zilphah.  Thus also in the people of God, those spiritually
free not only have children born into the enjoyment of liberty, like
those to whom it is said, "Be ye followers of me, as I also am of
Christ," <span id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928) but they have also
children born into guilty bondage, as Simon was born of Philip. <span
id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929)   Again, from carnal bondmen are born
not only children of guilty bondage, who imitate them, but also children
of happy liberty, to whom it is said, "What they say, do; but do not
after their works." <span id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930)   Whoever
rightly observes the fulfillment of this type in the people of God,
keeps the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, by continuing to the
end in union with some, and in patient endurance of others.  Of Lot,
also, we have already spoken, and have shown what the Scripture mentions
as praiseworthy in him, and what as blameworthy and the meaning of the
whole narrative.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p236"></span>83.  We have next to consider the
prophetic significance of the action of Judah in lying with his
daughter-in-law.  But, for the sake of those whose understanding is
feeble, we shall begin with observing, that in sacred Scripture evil
actions are sometimes prophetic not of evil, but of good.  Divine
providence preserves throughout its essential goodness, so that, as in
the example given above, from adulterous intercourse a man-child is
born, a good work of God from the evil of man, by the power of nature,
and not due to the misconduct of the parents; so in the prophetic
Scriptures, where both good and evil actions are recorded, the narrative
being itself prophetic, foretells something good even by the record of
what is evil, the credit being due not to the evil-doer, but to the
writer.  Judah, when, to gratify his sinful passion, he went in to
Tamar, had no intention by his licentious conduct to typify anything
connected with the salvation of men, any more than Judas, who betrayed
the Lord, intended to produce any result connected with the salvation of
men.  So then if from the evil deed of Judas the Lord brought the good
work of our redemption by His own passion, why should not His prophet,
of whom He Himself says "He wrote of me," for the sake of instructing us
make the evil action of Judah significant of something good?  Under the
guidance and inspiration of the Holy Spirit, the prophet has compiled a
narrative of actions so as to make a continuous prophecy of the things
he designed to foretell.  In foretelling good, it is of no consequence
whether the typical actions are good or bad.  If it is written in red
ink that the Ethiopians are black, or in black ink that the Gauls are
white, this circumstance does <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_306"></span>not affect the information which the
writing conveys.  No doubt, if it was a painting instead of a writing,
the wrong color would be a fault; so when human actions are represented
for example or for warning much depends on whether they are good or
bad.  But when actions are related or recorded as types, the merit or
demerit of the agents is a matter of no importance, as long as there is
a true typical relation between the action and the thing signified.  So
in the case of Caiaphas in the Gospel as regards his iniquitous and
mischievous intention, and even as regards his words in the sense in
which he used them, that a just man should be put to death unjustly,
assuredly they were bad; and yet there was a good meaning in his words
which he did not know of when he said, "It is expedient that one man
should die for the people and that the whole nation perish not."  So it
is written of Him, "This he spake not of himself; but being the high
priest, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the people." <span
id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931)   In the same way the action of Judah
was bad as regards his sinful passion, but it typified a great good he
knew nothing of.  Of himself he did evil while it was not of himself
that he typified good.  These introductory remarks apply not only to
Judah, but also to all the other cases where in the narrative of bad
actions is contained a prophecy of good.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p238"></span>84.  In Tamar, then, the
daughter-in-law of Judah, we see the people of the kingdom of Judah,
whose kings, answering to Tamar’s husbands, were taken from this tribe. 
Tamar means bitterness; and the meaning is suitable, for this people
gave the cup of gall to the Lord. <span
id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932)   The two sons of Judah represent two
classes of kings who governed ill—those who did harm and those who did
no good.  One of these sons was evil or cruel before the Lord; the other
spilled the seed on the ground that Tamar might not become a mother. 
There are only those two kinds of useless people in the world—the
injurious and those who will not give the good they have but lose it or
spill it on the ground.  And as injury is worse than not doing good, the
evil-doer is called the elder and the other the younger.  Er, the name
of the elder, means a preparer of skins, which were the coats given to
our first parents when they were punished with expulsion from
paradise. <span id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933)   Onan, the name of
the younger, means, their grief; that is, the grief of those to whom he
does no good, wasting the good he has on the earth.  The loss of life
implied in the name of the elder is a greater evil than the want of help
implied in the name of the younger.  Both being killed by God typifies
the removal of the kingdom from men of this character.  The meaning of
the third son of Judah not being joined to the woman, is that for a time
the kings of Judah were not of that tribe.  So this third son did not
become the husband of Tamar; as Tamar represents the tribe of Judah,
which continued to exist, although the people received no king from it. 
Hence the name of this son, Selom, means, his dismission.  None of those
types apply to the holy and righteous men who, like David, though they
lived in those times, belong properly to the New Testament, which they
served by their enlightened predictions.  Again, in the time when Judah
ceased to have a king of its own tribe, the elder Herod does not count
as one of the kings typified by the husbands of Tamar; for he was a
foreigner, and his union with the people was never consecrated with the
holy oil.  His was the power of a stranger, given him by the Romans and
by Cæsar.  And it was the same with his sons, the tetrarchs, one of
whom, called Herod, like his father, agreed with Pilate at the time of
the Lord’s passion. <span id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934)   So plainly
were these foreigners considered as distinct from the sacred monarchy of
Judah, that the Jews themselves, when raging against Christ, exclaimed
openly, "We have no king but Cæsar." <span
id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935)   Nor was Cæsar properly their king,
except in the sense that all the world was subject to Rome.  The Jews
thus condemned themselves, only to express their rejection of Christ,
and to flatter Cæsar.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p243"></span>85.  The time when the kingdom was
removed from the tribe of Judah was the time appointed for the coming of
Christ our Lord, the true Saviour, who should come not for harm, but for
great good.  Thus was it prophesied, "A prince shall not fail from
Judah, nor a leader from his loins, till He come for whom it is
reserved:  He is the desire of nations." <span
id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936)   Not only the kingdom, but all
government, of the Jews had ceased, and also, as prophesied by Daniel,
the sacred anointing from which the name Christ or Anointed is derived. 
Then came He for whom it was reserved, the desire of nations; and the
holy of holies was anointed with the oil of gladness above His
fellows. <span id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937)   Christ was born in
the time of the elder Herod, and suffered in the time of Herod the
tetrarch.  He who thus came to the lost sheep of the house of Israel was
typified by Judah when he went to shear his sheep in Thamna, which
means, failing.  For then the prince had failed from Judah, <span
id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_307"></span>with
all the government and anointing of the Jews, that He might come for
whom it was reserved.  Judah, we are told, came with his Adullamite
shepherd, whose name was Iras; and Adullamite means, a testimony in
water.  So it was with this testimony that the Lord came, having indeed
greater testimony than that of John; <span
id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938) but for the sake of his feeble sheep
he made use of the testimony in water.  The name Iras, too, means,
vision of my brother.  So John saw his brother, a brother in the family
of Abraham, and from the relationship of Mary and Elisabeth; and the
same person he recognised as his Lord and his God, for, as he himself
says, he received of His fullness. <span
id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939)   On account of this vision, among
those born of woman, there has arisen no greater than he; <span
id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940) because, of all who foretold Christ,
he alone saw what many righteous men and prophets desired to see and saw
not.  He saluted Christ from the womb; <span
id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941) he knew Him more certainly from seeing
the dove; and therefore, as the Adullamite, he gave testimony by water. 
The Lord came to shear His sheep, in releasing them from painful
burdens, as it is said in praise of the Church in the Song of Songs,
that her teeth are like a flock of sheep after shearing. <span
id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p251"></span>86.  Next, we have Tamar changing her
dress; for Tamar also means changing.  Still, the name of bitterness
must be retained—not that bitterness in which gall was given to the
Lord, but that in which Peter wept bitterly. <span
id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943)   For Judah means confession; and
bitterness is mingled with confession as a type of true repentance.  It
is this repentance which gives fruitfulness to the Church established
among all nations.  For "it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from
the dead, and that repentance and the remission of sins be preached
among all nations in His name, beginning at Jerusalem." <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944)   In the dress Tamar put on there is a
confession of sins; and Tamar sitting in this dress at the gate of Ænan
or Ænaim, which means fountain, is a type of the Church called from
among the nations.  She ran as a hart to the springs of water, to meet
with the seed of Abraham; and there she is made fruitful by one who
knows her not, as it is foretold, "A people whom I have not known shall
serve me." <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945)   Tamar received
under her disguise a ring, a bracelet, a staff; she is sealed in her
calling, adorned in her justification, raised in her glorification.  For
"whom He predestinated, them He also called: and whom He called, them He
also justified:  and whom He justified, them He also glorified." <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946)   This was while she was still
disguised, as I have said; and in the same state she conceives, and
becomes fruitful in holiness.  Also the kid promised is sent to her as
to a harlot.  The kid represents rebuke for sin, and it is sent by the
Adullamite already mentioned, who, as it were, uses the reproachful
words, "O generation of vipers!" <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947)
  But this rebuke for sin does not reach her, for she has been changed
by the bitterness of confession.  Afterwards, by exhibiting the pledges
of the ring and bracelet and staff, she prevails over the Jews, in their
hasty judgment of her, who are now represented by Judah himself; as at
this day we hear the Jews saying that we are not the people of Christ,
and have not the seed of Abraham.  But when we exhibit the sure tokens
of our calling and justification and glorification, they will
immediately be confounded, and will acknowledge that we are justified
rather than they.  I should enter into this more particularly, taking,
as it were, each limb and joint separately, as the Lord might enable me,
were it not that such minute inquiry is prevented by the necessity of
bringing this work to a close, for it is already longer than is
desirable.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p257"></span>87.  As regards the prophetic
significance of David’s sin, a single word must suffice.  The names
occurring in the narrative show what it typifies.  David means, strong
of hand, or desirable; and what can be stronger than the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, who has conquered the world, or more desirable than He
of whom the prophet says, "The desire of all nations shall come?" <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948)   Bersabee means, well of
satisfaction, or seventh well:  either of these interpretations will
suit our purpose.  So, in the Song of Songs, the spouse, who is the
Church, is called a well of living water; <span
id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949) or again, the number seven represents
the Holy Spirit, as in the number of days in Pentecost, when the Holy
Spirit came from heaven.  We learn also from the book of Tobit, that
Pentecost was the feast of seven weeks. <span
id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950)   To forty-nine, which is seven times
seven, one is added to denote unity.  To this effect is the saying of
the apostle:  "Bearing with one another in love, endeavoring to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace." <span
id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951)   The Church becomes a well of
satisfaction by this gift of the Spirit, the number seven denoting its
spirituality; for it is in her a fountain of living water springing up
unto everlasting life, and he who has it shall never thirst. <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952)   Uriah, Bersabee’s husband, must,
<span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_308"></span>from the meaning of his name, be
understood as representing the devil.  It is in union to the devil that
all are bound whom the grace of God sets free, that the Church without
spot or wrinkle may be married to her true Saviour.  Uriah means, my
light of God; and Hittite means, cut off, referring either to his not
abiding in the truth, when he was cut off on account of his pride from
the celestial light which he had of God, or to his transforming himself
into an angel of light, because after losing his real strength by his
fall, he still dares to say, My light is of God.  The literal David,
then, was guilty of a heinous crime, which God by the prophet condemned
in the rebuke addressed to David, and which David atoned for by his
repentance.  On the other hand, He who is the desire of all nations
loved the Church when washing herself on the roof, that is, when
cleansing herself from the pollution of the world, and in spiritual
contemplation mounting above her house of clay, and trampling upon it;
and after commencing an acquaintance, He puts to death the devil, whom
He first entirely removes from her, and joins her to Himself in
perpetual union.  While we hate the sin, we must not overlook the
prophetical significance; and while we love, as is His due, that David
who in His mercy has freed us from the devil, we may also love the David
who by the humility of his repentance healed the wound made by his
transgression.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p263"></span>88.  Little need be said of Solomon,
who is spoken of in Holy Scripture in terms of the strongest disapproval
and condemnation, while nothing is said of his repentance and
restoration to the divine favor.  Nor can I find in his lamentable fall
even a symbolical connection with anything good.  Perhaps the strange
women he lusted after may be thought to represent the Churches chosen
from among the Gentiles.  This idea might have been admissible, if the
women had left their gods for Solomon’s sake to worship his God.  But as
he for their sakes offended his God and worshipped their gods, it seems
impossible to think of any good meaning.  Doubtless, something is
typified, but it is something bad, as in the case already explained of
Lot’s wife and daughters.  We see in Solomon a notable pre-eminence and
a notable fall.  Now, this good and evil which we see in him at
different periods, first good and then evil, are in our day found
together in the Church.  What is good in Solomon represents, I think,
the good members of the Church; and what was bad in him represents the
bad members.  Both are in one man, as the bad and the good are in the
chaff and grain of one floor, or in the tares and wheat of one field.  A
closer inquiry into what is said of Solomon in Scripture might disclose,
either to me or to others of greater learning and greater worth, some
more probable interpretation.  But as we are now engaged on a different
subject, we must not allow this matter to break the connection of our
discourse.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p264"></span>89.  As regards the prophet Hosea, it
is unnecessary for me to explain the meaning of the command, or of the
prophet’s conduct, when God said to him, "Go and take unto thee a wife
of whoredoms and produce children of whoredoms," for the Scripture
itself informs us of the origin and purpose of this direction.  It
proceeds thus:  "For the land hath committed great whoredom, departing
from the Lord.  So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; which
conceived, and bare him a son.  And the Lord said unto him, Call his
name Jezreel; for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of
Jezreel upon the house of Judah, and will cause to cease the kingdom of
the house of Israel.  And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will
break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.  And she conceived
again, and bare a daughter.  And God said unto him, Call her name
No-mercy:  for I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I
will utterly take them away.  But I will have mercy upon the house of
Judah, and will save them by the Lord their God, and will not save them
by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.  Now
when she had weaned No-mercy, she conceived, and bare a son.  Then said
God, Call his name Not-my-people:  for ye are not my people, and I will
not be your God.  Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as
the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured for multitude; and it
shall come to pass that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are
not my people, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the
living God.  Then shall the children of Israel and the children of Judah
be gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall
come up out of the land:  for great shall be the day of Jezreel.  Say ye
unto your brethren, My people; and to your sister, She hath found
mercy." <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953)   Since the typical
meaning of the command and of the prophet’s conduct is thus explained in
the same book by the Lord Himself, and since the writings of the
apostles declare the fulfillment of this prophecy in the preaching of
the New Testament, every one must accept the explanation thus given of
the command <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_309"></span>and of the action of the prophet as the
true explanation.  Thus it is said by the Apostle Paul, "That He might
make known the riches of His glory on the vessels of mercy, which He had
afore prepared unto glory, even us, whom He hath called, not of the Jews
only, but also of the Gentiles.  As He saith also in Hosea, I will call
them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved, which was not
beloved.  And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said
unto them, Ye are not my people, there shall they be called the children
of the living God." <span id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954)   Here Paul
applies the prophecy to the Gentiles.  So also Peter, writing to the
Gentiles, without naming the prophet, borrows his expressions when he
says, "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy
nation, a peculiar people; that ye might show forth the praises of Him
who has called you out of darkness into His marvellous light; which in
time past were not a people, but are now the people of God:  which had
not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy."  <span
id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955)   From this it is plain that the words
of the prophet, "And the number of the children of Israel shall be as
the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured for multitude," and the
words immediately following, "And it shall be that in the place where it
was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there they shall be called the
children of the living God," do not apply to that Israel which is after
the flesh, but to that of which the apostle says to the Gentiles, "Ye
therefore are the seed of Abraham, and heirs according to the
promise." <span id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956)   But, as many Jews
who were of the Israel after the flesh have believed, and will yet
believe; for of these were the apostles, and all the thousands in
Jerusalem of the company of the apostles, as also the churches of which
Paul speaks, when he says to the Galatians, "I was unknown by face to
the churches of Judæa which were in Christ;" <span
id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957) and again, he explains the passage in
the Psalms, where the Lord is called the cornerstone, <span
id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958) as referring to His uniting in Himself
the two walls of circumcision and uncircumcision, "that He might make in
Himself of twain one new man, so making peace; and that He might
reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the
enmity thereby:  and that He might come and preach peace to them that
are far off, and to them that are nigh," that is, to the Gentiles and to
the Jews; "for He is our peace, who hath made of both one;" <span
id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959) to the same purpose we find the
prophet speaking of the Jews as the children of Judah, and of the
Gentiles as children of Israel, where he says, "The children of Judah
and the children of Israel shall be gathered together, and shall make to
themselves one head, and shall go up from the land."  Therefore, to
speak against a prophecy thus confirmed by actual events, is to speak
against the writings of the apostles as well as those of the prophets;
and not only to speak against writings, but to impugn in the most
reckless manner the evidence clear as noonday of established facts.  In
the case of the narrative of Judah, it is perhaps not so easy to
recognize, under the disguise of the woman called Tamar, the harlot
representing the Church gathered from among the corruption of Gentile
superstition; but here, where Scripture explains itself, and where the
explanation is confirmed by the writings of the apostles, instead of
dwelling longer on this, we may proceed at once to inquire into the
meaning of the very things to which Faustus objects in Moses the servant
of God.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p272"></span>90.  Moses killing the Egyptian in
defending one of his brethren reminds us naturally of the destruction of
the devil, our assailant in this land of strangers, by our defender the
Lord Christ.  And as Moses hid the dead body in the sand, even so the
devil, though slain, remains concealed in those who are not firmly
settled.  The Lord, we know, builds the Church on a rock; and those who
hear His word and do it, He compares to a wise man who builds his house
upon a rock, and who does not yield or give way before temptation; and
those who hear and do not, He compares to a foolish man who builds on
the sand, and when his house is tried its ruin is great. <span
id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p274"></span>91.  Of the prophetic significance of
the spoiling of the Egyptians, which was done by Moses at the command of
the Lord his God, who commands nothing but what is most just, I remember
to have set down what occurred to me at the time in my book entitled On
Christian Doctrine; <span id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) to the
effect that the gold and silver and garments of the Egyptians typified
certain branches of learning which may be profitably learned or taught
among the Gentiles.  This may be the true explanation; or we may suppose
that the vessels of gold and silver represent the precious souls, and
the garments the bodies, of those from among the Gentiles who join
themselves to the people of God, that along with them they may be freed
from the Egypt of this world.  Whatever the true interpretation may be,
the pious student of the Scriptures will feel certain <span
id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_310"></span>that
in the command, in the action, and in the narrative there is a purpose
and a symbolic meaning.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p276"></span>92.  It would take too long to go
through all the wars of Moses.  It is enough to refer to what has
already been said, as sufficient for the purpose in this reply to
Faustus of the prophetic and symbolic character of the war with
Amalek. <span id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962)   There is also the
charge of cruelty made against Moses by the enemies of Scriptures, or by
those who have never read anything.  Faustus does not make any specific
charge, but speaks of Moses as commanding and doing many cruel things. 
But, knowing the things they are in the habit of bringing forward and of
misrepresenting, I have already taken a particular case and have
defended it, so that any Manichæans who are willing to be corrected, and
all other ignorant and irreligious people, may see that there is no
ground for their accusations.  We must now inquire into the prophetic
significance of the command, that many of those who, while Moses was
absent, made an idol for themselves should be slain without regard to
relationship.  It is easy to see that the slaughter of these men
represents the warfare against the evil principles which led the people
into the same idolatry.  Against such evil we are commanded to wage war
in the words of the psalm, "Be ye angry and sin not." <span
id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963)   And a similar command is given by
the apostle, when he says, "Mortify your members which are on earth
fornication, uncleanness, luxury, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry." <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p280"></span>93.  It requires closer examination to
see the meaning of the first action of Moses in burning the calf in
fire, and grinding it to powder, and sprinkling it in the water for the
people to drink.  The tables given to him, written with the finger of
God, that is, by the agency of the Holy Spirit, he may have broken,
because he judged the people unworthy of having them read to them; and
he may have burned the calf, and ground it, and scattered it so as to be
carried away by the water, in order to let nothing of it remain among
the people.  But why should he have made them drink it?  Every one must
feel anxious to discover the typical significance of this action. 
Pursuing the inquiry, we may find that in the calf there was an
embodiment of the devil, as there is in men of all nations who have the
devil as their head or leader in their impious rites.  The calf is gold,
because there is a semblance of wisdom in the institution of idolatrous
worship.  Of this the apostle says, "Knowing God, they glorified Him not
as God, nor were thankful; but they became vain in their imaginations,
and their foolish heart was darkened.  Professing themselves to be wise
they became foolish, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into
the likeness of corruptible man, and of birds, and of four-footed
beasts, and of creeping things." <span id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965)
  From this so-called wisdom came the golden calf, which was one of the
forms of idolatry among the chief men and professed sages of Egypt.  The
calf, then, represents every body or society of Gentile idolaters.  This
impious society the Lord Christ burns with that fire of which He says in
the Gospel, "I am come to send fire on the earth;" <span
id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) for, as there is nothing hid from His
heat, <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) when the Gentiles believe
in Him they lose the form of the devil in the fire of divine influence. 
Then all the body is ground, that is, after the dissolution of the
combination in the membership of iniquity comes humiliation under the
word of truth.  Then the dust is sprinkled in the water, that the
Israelites, that is, the preachers of the gospel, may in baptism admit
those formerly idolaters into their own body, that is, the body of
Christ.  To Peter, who was one of those Israelites, it was said of the
Gentiles, "Kill, and eat." <span id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968)   To
kill and eat is much the same as to grind and drink.  So this calf, by
the fire of zeal, and the keen penetration of the word, and the water of
baptism, was swallowed up by the people, instead of their being
swallowed up by it.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p285"></span>94.  Thus, when the very passages on
which the heretics found their objections to the Scriptures are studied
and examined, the more obscure they are the more wonderful are the
secrets which we discover in reply to our questions; so that the mouths
of blasphemers are completely stopped, and the evidence of the truth so
stifles them that they cannot even utter a sound.  The unhappy men who
will not receive into their hearts the sweetness of the truth must feel
its force as a gag in their mouths.  All those passages speak of
Christ.  The head now ascended into heaven along with the body still
suffering on earth is the full development of the whole purpose of the
authors of Scripture, which is well called Sacred Scripture.  Every part
of the narrative in the prophetical books should be viewed as having a
figurative meaning, except what serves merely as a framework for the
literal or figurative predictions of this king and of his people.  For
as in harps and other musical instruments the musical sound does not
come from all parts of the instrument, but from the strings, and the
rest is <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_311"></span>only for fastening and stretching the
strings so as to tune them, that when they are struck by the musician
they may give a pleasant sound; so in these prophetical narratives the
circumstances selected by the prophetic spirit either predict some
future event, or if they have no voice of their own, they serve to
connect together other significant utterances.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p286"></span>95.  Should the heretics reject our
exposition of those allegorical narratives, or even insist on
understanding them only in a literal sense, to dispute about such a
difference of understanding would be as useless as to dispute about a
difference of taste.  Only, the fact that the divine precepts have
either a moral and religious character or a prophetic meaning must be
believed, whether intelligently or not.  Moreover, the figurative
interpretations must all be in the interest of morality and religion. 
So, if the Manichæans or any others disagree with our interpretation, or
differ from us in method or in any particular opinion, suffice it that
the character of the fathers whom God commends for their conduct and
obedience to His precepts is vindicated on a principle which all but
those inveterate in their hostility will acknowledge to be true; and
that the purity and dignity of the Scriptures are maintained in
reference to those passages which the enemies of the truth find fault
with, where certain actions are either praised or blamed, or merely
narrated for us to form a judgment of them.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p287"></span>96.  In fact, nothing could have been
devised more likely to instruct and benefit the pious reader of sacred
Scripture than that, besides describing praiseworthy characters as
examples, and blameworthy characters as warnings, it should also narrate
cases where good men have gone back and fallen into evil, whether they
are restored to the right path or continue irreclaimable; and also where
bad men have changed, and have attained to goodness, whether they
persevere in it or relapse into evil; in order that the righteous may be
not lifted up in the pride of security, nor the wicked hardened in
despair of cure.  And even those passages in Scripture which contain no
examples or warnings are either required for connection, so as to pass
on to essential matters, or, from their very appearance of superfluity,
indicate the presence of some secret symbolical meaning.  For in the
books we speak of, so far from there being a want or a scarcity of
prophetical announcements, such announcements are numerous and distinct;
and now that the fulfillment has actually taken place, the testimony
thus borne to the divine authority of the books is irresistibly strong,
so that it is mere madness to suppose that there can be any useless or
unmeaning passages in books to which all classes of men and of minds do
homage, and which themselves predict what we see thus actually coming to
pass.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p288"></span>97.  If, then, any one reading of the
action of David, of which he repented when the Lord rebuked and
threatened him, find in the narrative an encouragement to sin, is
Scripture to be blamed for this?  Is not the man’s own guilt in
proportion to the abuse which he makes for his own injury or destruction
of what was written for his recovery and release?  David is set forth as
a great example of repentance, because men who fall into sin either
proudly disregard the cure of repentance, or lose themselves in despair
of obtaining salvation or of meriting pardon.  The example is for the
benefit of the sick, not for the injury of those in health.  If madmen
destroy themselves, or if evil-doers destroy others, with surgical
instruments, it is not the fault of surgery.

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p289"></span>98.  Even supposing that our fathers
the patriarchs and prophets, of whose devout and religious habits so
good a report is given in that Scripture which every one who knows it,
and has not lost entirely the use of his reason, must admit to have been
provided by God for the salvation of men, were as lustful and cruel as
the Manichæans falsely and fanatically allege, they might still be shown
to be superior not only to those whom the Manichæans call the Elect, but
also to their god himself.  Is there in the licentious intercourse of
man with woman anything so bad as the self-abasement of unclouded light
by mixture with darkness?  Here, is a man prompted by avarice and greed
to pass off his wife as his sister and sell her to her lover; but worse
still and more shocking, that one should disguise his own nature to
gratify criminal passion, and submit gratuitously to pollution and
degradation.  Why, even one who knowingly lies with his own daughters is
not equally criminal with one who lets his members share in the
defilement of all sensuality as gross as this, or grosser.  And is not
the Manichæan god a partaker in the contamination of the most atrocious
acts of uncleanness?  Again, if it were true, as Faustus says, that
Jacob went from one to another of his four wives, not desiring
offspring, but resembling a he-goat in licentiousness, he would still
not be sunk so low as your god, who must not only have shared in this
degradation, from his being confined in the bodies of Jacob and his
wives so as to be mixed up with all their movements, but also, in union
with this very he-goat of Faustus’ coarse comparison, must have endured
all the pains of animal appetite, <span id="page_312">p. 312</span>
<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-Page_312"></span>incurring fresh defilement at
every step, as partaking in the passion of the male, the conception of
the female, and the birth of the kid.  And, in the same way, supposing
Judah to have been guilty not only of fornication, but of incest, a
share in the heats and impurities of this incestuous passion would also
belong to your god.  David repented of his sin in loving the wife of
another, and in ordering the death of her husband; but when will your
god repent of giving up his members to the wanton passion of the male
and female chiefs of the race of darkness, and of putting to death not
the husband of his mistress, but his own children, whom he confines in
the members of the very demons who were his own lovers?  Even if David
had not repented, nor been thus restored to righteousness, he would
still have been better than your god.  David may have been defiled by
this one act, or to the extent to which one man is capable of such
defilement; but your god suffers the pollution of his members in all
such actions by whomsoever committed.  The prophet Hosea, too, is
accused by Faustus:  and, supposing him to have taken the harlot to wife
because he had a criminal affection for her, if he is licentious and she
a prostitute, their souls, according to your own assertion, are parts
and members of your god and of his nature.  In plain language, the
harlot herself must be your god.  You cannot pretend that your god is
not confined in the contaminated body, or that he is only present, while
preserving entire the purity of his own nature; and you acknowledge that
the members of your god are so defiled as to require a special
purification.  This harlot, then, for whom you venture to find fault
with the man of God, even if she had not been changed for the better by
becoming a chaste wife, would still have been your god; at least you
must admit her soul to have been a part, however small, of your god. 
But one single harlot is not so bad as your god, for he on account of
his mixture with the race of darkness shares in every act of
prostitution; and wherever such impurities are perpetrated, he goes
through the corresponding experiences of abandonment, of release, and of
confinement, and this from generation to generation, till this most
corrupt part reaches its final state in the mass of darkness, like an
irreclaimable harlot.  Such are the evils and such the shameful
abominations which your god could not ward off from his members, and to
which he was brought irresistibly by his merciless enemy; for only by
the sacrifice of his own subjects, or rather his own parts, could he
effect the destruction of his formidable assailant.  Surely, there was
nothing so bad as this in killing an Egyptian so as to preserve
uninjured a fellow-countryman.  Yet Faustus finds fault with this most
absurdly, while with amazing infatuation he overlooks the case of his
own god.  Would it not have been better for him to have carried off the
gold and silver vessels of the Egyptians, than to let his members be
carried off by the race of darkness?  And yet the worshippers of this
unfortunate god find fault with the servant of our God for carrying on
wars, in which he with his followers were always victorious, so that,
under the leadership of Moses, the children of Israel carried captive
their enemies, men and women, as your god would have done too, if he had
been able.  You profess to accuse Moses of doing wrong, while in fact
you envy his success.  There was no cruelty in punishing with the sword
those who had sinned grievously against God.  Indeed, Moses entreated
pardon for this sin, even offering to bear himself in their stead the
divine anger.  But even had he been cruel instead of compassionate, he
would still have been better than your god.  For if any of his followers
had been sent to break the force of the enemy and had been taken
captive, he would never, if victorious, have condemned him when he had
done no wrong, but acted in obedience to orders.  And yet this is what
your god is to do with the part of himself which is to be fastened in
the mass of darkness, because it obeyed orders, and advanced at the risk
of its own life in defence of his kingdom against the body of the
enemy.  But, says the Manichæan, this part, after mixture and
combination with evil during the course of ages, has not been obedient. 
But why?  If the obedience was voluntary, the guilt is real, and the
punishment just.  But from this it would follow that there is no nature
opposed to sin; otherwise it would not sin voluntarily; and so the whole
system of Manichæism falls at once.  If, again, this part suffers from
the power of this enemy against whom it was sent, and is subdued by a
force it was unable to resist, the punishment is unjust, and flagrantly
cruel.  The god who is defended on the plea of necessity is a fit object
of worship to those who refuse to worship the one true God.  Still, it
must be allowed that, however debasing the worship of this god may be,
the worshippers are so far better than their deity, that they have an
existence, while he is nothing more than a fabulous invention.  Proceed
we now to the rest of Faustus’ vagaries.  <span
id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969)

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p291"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_780"></span>[273:781](1040170.htm#fr_780) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p8"></span> [Gen. xvi.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[273:782](1040170.htm#fr_781) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p9"></span> [Gen.
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#013), [Gen.
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[273:783](1040170.htm#fr_782) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p10"></span> [Gen.
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#033),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#035)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[273:784](1040170.htm#fr_783) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p11"></span> [Gen. xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[273:785](1040170.htm#fr_784) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p12"></span> [Gen.
29--30](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[274:786](1040170.htm#fr_785) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p13"></span> [Gen.
xxxviii](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[274:787](1040170.htm#fr_786) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p14"></span> [2 Sam.
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#004),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[274:788](1040170.htm#fr_787) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p15"></span> [1 Kings xi.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[274:789](1040170.htm#fr_788) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p16"></span> [Hos.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[274:790](1040170.htm#fr_789) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p17"></span> [Ex. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[274:791](1040170.htm#fr_790) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p18"></span> [Exod.
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[274:792](1040170.htm#fr_791) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p19"></span> [Ex. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[274:793](1040170.htm#fr_792) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p23"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[274:794](1040170.htm#fr_793) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p24"></span> [1 John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[274:795](1040170.htm#fr_794) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p25"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[274:796](1040170.htm#fr_795) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p26"></span> [Wisd. vii.
26](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#026)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[274:797](1040170.htm#fr_796) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p27"></span> [Ps. xviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[275:798](1040170.htm#fr_797) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p29"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[275:799](1040170.htm#fr_798) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p30"></span> [Isa. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[275:800](1040170.htm#fr_799) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p33"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[275:801](1040170.htm#fr_800) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p36"></span> [Matt. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[276:802](1040170.htm#fr_801) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p38"></span> [Gen. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[276:803](1040170.htm#fr_802) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p39"></span> [Luke
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#045)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[276:804](1040170.htm#fr_803) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p40"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[276:805](1040170.htm#fr_804) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p41"></span> [Matt. x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[276:806](1040170.htm#fr_805) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p42"></span> [John ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[276:807](1040170.htm#fr_806) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p43"></span> [Matt.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[276:808](1040170.htm#fr_807) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p44"></span> [Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[276:809](1040170.htm#fr_808) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p45"></span> [Matt.
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#011),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[276:810](1040170.htm#fr_809) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p46"></span> [Luke xix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[276:811](1040170.htm#fr_810) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p47"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[276:812](1040170.htm#fr_811) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p48"></span> [1 Pet.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[276:813](1040170.htm#fr_812) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p49"></span> [Prov. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[276:814](1040170.htm#fr_813) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p50"></span> [Job ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[276:815](1040170.htm#fr_814) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p51"></span> [Rev. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[276:816](1040170.htm#fr_815) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p52"></span> [1 Cor.
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[277:817](1040170.htm#fr_816) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p55"></span> [Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[277:818](1040170.htm#fr_817) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p57"></span> [1 Cor. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[277:819](1040170.htm#fr_818) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p58"></span> [Gen. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[277:820](1040170.htm#fr_819) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p59"></span> [Wisd. xiv.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis014.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[278:821](1040170.htm#fr_820) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p63"></span> [John xv.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[279:822](1040170.htm#fr_821) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p64"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[279:823](1040170.htm#fr_822) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p65"></span> [1 Tim. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[279:824](1040170.htm#fr_823) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p66"></span> [John xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[279:825](1040170.htm#fr_824) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p67"></span> [2 Thess. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[279:826](1040170.htm#fr_825) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p68"></span> [1 Pet.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[279:827](1040170.htm#fr_826) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p69"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[280:828](1040170.htm#fr_827) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p72"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[282:829](1040170.htm#fr_828) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p73"></span> \[Augustin certainly makes it appear
that the God in the Old Testament is not so bad as the God of the
Manichæans, yet he cannot be said to reach a complete theodicy.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_829"></span>[282:830](1040170.htm#fr_829) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p77"></span> [Matt. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[282:831](1040170.htm#fr_830) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p78"></span> [John viii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[283:832](1040170.htm#fr_831) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p79"></span> *Æn*. i. 212.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[283:833](1040170.htm#fr_832) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p80"></span> *Æn*. ii. 715.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[283:834](1040170.htm#fr_833) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p81"></span> \[This comparison of the objectors to
the Old Testament to blundering school-boys is very fine.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_834"></span>[283:835](1040170.htm#fr_834) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p84"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[284:836](1040170.htm#fr_835) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p89"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[285:837](1040170.htm#fr_836) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p91"></span> [Gen. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[285:838](1040170.htm#fr_837) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p92"></span> [Gen.
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[286:839](1040170.htm#fr_838) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p96"></span> [Tob. viii.
9](../../../bib/apo/tob008.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[286:840](1040170.htm#fr_839) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p97"></span> [Gen.
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#008), [Gen.
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[286:841](1040170.htm#fr_840) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p98"></span> [Matt. xii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[286:842](1040170.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p100"></span> [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[286:843](1040170.htm#fr_842) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p100.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p101"></span> [Matt. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[286:844](1040170.htm#fr_843) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p101.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p102"></span> [John
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[286:845](1040170.htm#fr_844) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p102.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p103"></span> [Acts ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[287:846](1040170.htm#fr_845) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p106"></span> [Cant. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[287:847](1040170.htm#fr_846) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p106.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p107"></span> [Eph.
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[287:848](1040170.htm#fr_847) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p109"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[287:849](1040170.htm#fr_848) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p109.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p110"></span> [Matt. xii.
48-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[288:850](1040170.htm#fr_849) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p112"></span> [Jer. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[288:851](1040170.htm#fr_850) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p113.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p114"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[288:852](1040170.htm#fr_851) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p114.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p115"></span> [Luke ix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[288:853](1040170.htm#fr_852) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p115.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p116"></span> [Luke xvii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[288:854](1040170.htm#fr_853) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p116.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p117"></span> [1 Tim. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[289:855](1040170.htm#fr_854) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p123"></span> [Gen. xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[290:856](1040170.htm#fr_855) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p125"></span> [2 Cor. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[290:857](1040170.htm#fr_856) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p127"></span> [Acts viii.
18-20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[290:858](1040170.htm#fr_857) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p127.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p128"></span> [Matt. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[290:859](1040170.htm#fr_858) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p130"></span> [2 Cor.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[291:860](1040170.htm#fr_859) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p130.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p131"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[291:861](1040170.htm#fr_860) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p131.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p132"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p132.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[291:862](1040170.htm#fr_861) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p134.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p135"></span> [Gal. iv.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[292:863](1040170.htm#fr_862) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p136.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p137"></span> [Isa. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[292:864](1040170.htm#fr_863) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p137.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p138"></span> [Gen. xxix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[292:865](1040170.htm#fr_864) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p138.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p139"></span> [Matt. v.
3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[292:866](1040170.htm#fr_865) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p139.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p140"></span> [Gen. xxix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[292:867](1040170.htm#fr_866) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p141.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p142"></span> [Ecclus. i.
33](../../../bib/apo/sir001.htm#033)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[292:868](1040170.htm#fr_867) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p142.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p143"></span> [Isa. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p143.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[293:869](1040170.htm#fr_868) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p144.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p145"></span> [Phil. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[293:870](1040170.htm#fr_869) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p145.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p146"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[293:871](1040170.htm#fr_870) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p146.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p147"></span> [2 Cor. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[293:872](1040170.htm#fr_871) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p147.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p148"></span> [2 Cor. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[293:873](1040170.htm#fr_872) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p148.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p149"></span> [Wisd. vi.
23](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[293:874](1040170.htm#fr_873) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p149.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p150"></span> [Gen. xxx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[293:875](1040170.htm#fr_874) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p151.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p152"></span> [Isa. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[293:876](1040170.htm#fr_875) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p152.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p153"></span> [Rom.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[293:877](1040170.htm#fr_876) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p153.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p154"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[293:878](1040170.htm#fr_877) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p154.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p155"></span> [Phil. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[294:879](1040170.htm#fr_878) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p156.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p157"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[294:880](1040170.htm#fr_879) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p158.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p159"></span> [Gen. xxx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[294:881](1040170.htm#fr_880) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p160.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p161"></span> [Gen. xxx.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[295:882](1040170.htm#fr_881) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p161.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p162"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[295:883](1040170.htm#fr_882) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p164.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p165"></span> [Gen. xlix.
8-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[295:884](1040170.htm#fr_883) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p166.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p167"></span> [Matt. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[296:885](1040170.htm#fr_884) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p167.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p168"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[296:886](1040170.htm#fr_885) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p169.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p170"></span> [Matt. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[296:887](1040170.htm#fr_886) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p171.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p172"></span> [John
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070),
[71](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#071)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[296:888](1040170.htm#fr_887) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p173.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p174"></span> [1 Cor. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[296:889](1040170.htm#fr_888) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p174.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p175"></span> [Matt. xxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[296:890](1040170.htm#fr_889) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p175.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p176"></span> [Ex. xii.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[297:891](1040170.htm#fr_890) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p177.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p178"></span> [1 Sam.
xiv](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p178.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[297:892](1040170.htm#fr_891) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p178.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p179"></span> [1 Sam. xxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[297:893](1040170.htm#fr_892) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p179.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p180"></span> [John
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[297:894](1040170.htm#fr_893) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p180.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p181"></span> [Matt.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[297:895](1040170.htm#fr_894) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p182.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p183"></span> [2 Sam.
xii](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[297:896](1040170.htm#fr_895) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p183.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p184"></span> [1 Sam.
24:0](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#000), [1 Sam.
26:0](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[297:897](1040170.htm#fr_896) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p184.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p185"></span> [2 Sam.
xvi](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[298:898](1040170.htm#fr_897) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p186.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p187"></span> [1 Sam. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p187.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[298:899](1040170.htm#fr_898) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p187.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p188"></span> [Luke xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[298:900](1040170.htm#fr_899) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p189.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p190"></span> [Gal. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[298:901](1040170.htm#fr_900) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p191.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p192"></span> [Heb. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[299:902](1040170.htm#fr_901) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p193.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p194"></span> [Matt.
26:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#051),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[299:903](1040170.htm#fr_902) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p195.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p196"></span> [Exod.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022), [Exod.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#002), [Exod.
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[299:904](1040170.htm#fr_903) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p196.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p197"></span> [Rom. xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p197.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[300:905](1040170.htm#fr_904) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p198.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p199"></span> [Matt.
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[300:906](1040170.htm#fr_905) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p199.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p200"></span> [Matt.
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p200.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[301:907](1040170.htm#fr_906) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p202.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p203"></span> [Luke iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p203.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[301:908](1040170.htm#fr_907) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p203.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p204"></span> [Matt. xxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p204.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[301:909](1040170.htm#fr_908) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p204.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p205"></span> [Matt.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p205.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[301:910](1040170.htm#fr_909) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p206.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p207"></span> [Rom. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p207.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[301:911](1040170.htm#fr_910) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p208.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p209"></span> [Matt. v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[302:912](1040170.htm#fr_911) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p209.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p210"></span> [Matt.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p210.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[302:913](1040170.htm#fr_912) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p210.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p211"></span> [Matt.
26:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052),
[53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053), [Luke
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#042),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#051), [John
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p211.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[302:914](1040170.htm#fr_913) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p211.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p212"></span> [Phil. ii.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[302:915](1040170.htm#fr_914) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p212.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p213"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p213.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[302:916](1040170.htm#fr_915) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p213.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p214"></span> [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p214.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[302:917](1040170.htm#fr_916) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p214.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p215"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p215.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[303:918](1040170.htm#fr_917) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p216.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p217"></span> [Luke
22:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035),
[50](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#050),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#051)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p217.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[303:919](1040170.htm#fr_918) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p218.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p219"></span> [Rom.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p219.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[303:920](1040170.htm#fr_919) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p219.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p220"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p220.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[303:921](1040170.htm#fr_920) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p220.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p221"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p221.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[303:922](1040170.htm#fr_921) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p221.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p222"></span> [Job vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p222.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[304:923](1040170.htm#fr_922) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p223.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p224"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[304:924](1040170.htm#fr_923) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p224.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p225"></span> [1 Cor. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p225.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[304:925](1040170.htm#fr_924) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p225.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p226"></span> [1 Tim. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p226.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[304:926](1040170.htm#fr_925) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p227.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p228"></span> [Hos. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p228.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[304:927](1040170.htm#fr_926) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p228.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p229"></span> [Matt. xxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#031)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p229.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[305:928](1040170.htm#fr_927) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p231.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p232"></span> [Gen. xxvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#040)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p232.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[305:929](1040170.htm#fr_928) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p232.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p233"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p233.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[305:930](1040170.htm#fr_929) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p233.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p234"></span> [Acts viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p234.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[305:931](1040170.htm#fr_930) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p234.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p235"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p235.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[306:932](1040170.htm#fr_931) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p236.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p237"></span> [John
11:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#050),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p237.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[306:933](1040170.htm#fr_932) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p238.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p239"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p239.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[306:934](1040170.htm#fr_933) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p239.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p240"></span> [Gen. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p240.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[306:935](1040170.htm#fr_934) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p240.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p241"></span> [Luke xxiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[306:936](1040170.htm#fr_935) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p241.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p242"></span> [John xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p242.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[306:937](1040170.htm#fr_936) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p243.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p244"></span> [Gen. xlix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p244.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[306:938](1040170.htm#fr_937) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p244.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p245"></span> [Dan.
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), [Ps.
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p245.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[307:939](1040170.htm#fr_938) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p245.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p246"></span> [John v.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p246.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[307:940](1040170.htm#fr_939) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p246.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p247"></span> [John i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p247.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[307:941](1040170.htm#fr_940) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p247.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p248"></span> [Matt. xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p248.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[307:942](1040170.htm#fr_941) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p248.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p249"></span> [Luke i.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#044)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p249.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[307:943](1040170.htm#fr_942) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p249.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p250"></span> [Cant. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p250.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[307:944](1040170.htm#fr_943) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p251.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p252"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#075)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p252.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[307:945](1040170.htm#fr_944) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p252.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p253"></span> [Luke
24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046),
[47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p253.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[307:946](1040170.htm#fr_945) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p253.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p254"></span> [Ps. xviii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p254.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[307:947](1040170.htm#fr_946) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p254.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p255"></span> [Rom. viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p255.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[307:948](1040170.htm#fr_947) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p255.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p256"></span> [Matt. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p256.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[307:949](1040170.htm#fr_948) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p257.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p258"></span> [Hag. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p258.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[307:950](1040170.htm#fr_949) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p258.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p259"></span> [Cant. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p259.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[307:951](1040170.htm#fr_950) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p259.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p260"></span> [Tob. ii.
1](../../../bib/apo/tob002.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p260.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[307:952](1040170.htm#fr_951) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p260.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p261"></span> [Eph.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p261.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[307:953](1040170.htm#fr_952) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p261.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p262"></span> [John
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p262.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[308:954](1040170.htm#fr_953) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p264.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p265"></span> [Hos.
1.2-2.1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p265.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[309:955](1040170.htm#fr_954) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p265.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p266"></span> [Rom. ix.
23-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p266.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[309:956](1040170.htm#fr_955) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p266.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p267"></span> [1 Pet.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p267.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[309:957](1040170.htm#fr_956) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p267.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p268"></span> [Gal. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p268.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[309:958](1040170.htm#fr_957) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p268.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p269"></span> [Gal. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p269.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[309:959](1040170.htm#fr_958) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p269.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p270"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p270.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[309:960](1040170.htm#fr_959) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p270.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p271"></span> [Eph. ii.
11-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p271.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[309:961](1040170.htm#fr_960) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p272.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p273"></span> [Matt. vii.
24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p273.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[309:962](1040170.htm#fr_961) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p274.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p275"></span> ii. sec. 40.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[310:963](1040170.htm#fr_962) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p276.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p277"></span> L. xii. sec. 30.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[310:964](1040170.htm#fr_963) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p277.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p278"></span> [Ps. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p278.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[310:965](1040170.htm#fr_964) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p278.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p279"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p279.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[310:966](1040170.htm#fr_965) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p280.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p281"></span> [Rom. i.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p281.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[310:967](1040170.htm#fr_966) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p281.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p282"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p282.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[310:968](1040170.htm#fr_967) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p282.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p283"></span> [Ps. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p283.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[310:969](1040170.htm#fr_968) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p283.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p284"></span> [Acts x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p284.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[312:970](1040170.htm#fr_969) <span
id="iv.ix.xxiv-p289.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxiv-p290"></span> \[This book is one of the most
unsatisfactory parts of the entire treatise.  We have here some of the
worst specimens of perverse Scripture interpretation.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXIII](1040171)
