[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040500)  [Next](1040502.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—</span>31.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"In the third place, also, He calls the madness of persecutors in like
manner by this name, ‘Ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of hell?  Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and
wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and
some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them
from city to city:  that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed
upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of
Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the
altar.’ <span id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999.md)   Are they then
really the sons of vipers according to the flesh, and not rather
serpents in mind, and three-tongued malice, and deadliness of touch, and
burning with the spirit of poison?  They have truly become vipers, who
by their bites have vomited forth death against the innocent people."

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p3"></span>32.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  If I were to say
that this is said of men of character like unto yourselves, you would
reply, "Prove it."  What then, have you proved it?  Or if you think that
it is proved by the mere fact of its being uttered, there is no need to
repeat the same words.  Pronounce the same judgment against yourselves
as coming from us to you.  See you not that I too have proved it, if
this amounts to proof?  And yet I would have you learn what is really
meant by proof.  For indeed I do not even seek for evidence from without
to enable me to prove you vipers.  For be well assured that this very
fact marks in you the nature of vipers, that you have not in your mouth
the foundation of truth, but the poison of slanderous abuse, as it is
written, "The poison of asps is under their lips." <span
id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000.md)   And because this might be said
indiscriminately by any one against any one, as though it were asked,
Under whose lips? he immediately adds, "Their mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness." <span id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001.md)   When,
therefore, you say such things as this against men dispersed throughout
the whole world, of whom you know nothing whatsoever, and many of whom
have never heard the name either of Cæcilianus or of Donatus, and when
you do not hear them answering amid silence, Nothing of what you say has
reference to us; we never saw it; we never did it; we are totally at a
loss to understand what you are saying,—seeing that you desire nothing
else than to say what you are entirely powerless to prove, how can you
help allowing that your mouth is full of cursing and bitterness?  See,
therefore, whether you can possibly show that you are not vipers, <span
id="fr_2002"></span>[2003](#fn_2002.md) unless you show that all Christians
throughout all nations of the world are *traditors*, and murderers, and
anything but Christians.  Nay, in very truth, even though you should be
able to know and set before us the lives and deeds of every individual
man throughout the world, yet before you can do that, seeing that you
act as you do without any consideration, your mouth is that of a viper,
your mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.  Show to us now, if you
can, what prophet, what wise man, what scribe we have slain, or
crucified, or scourged in our synagogues.  Look how much labor you have
expended without in any way being able to prove that Donatus and
Marculus <span id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003.md) were prophets, or
wise men, or scribes, because, in fact, they were nothing of the sort. 
But even if you could prove as much as this, what progress would you
have made towards proving that they had been killed by us, when even we
ourselves did not so much as know them? and how much less the whole
world, whom you calumniate with poisonous mouth? <span
id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004.md)   Or whence will you be able to
prove that we have a spirit like that of those who murdered them, when
you actually cannot show that <span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-Page_537"></span>they were murdered by any one at all? 
Look carefully to all these points, see whether you can prove any single
one of them either about the whole world, or to the satisfaction of the
whole world,—in your persevering calumnies against which you show that
the charges are true in you, which you falsely propagate against the
world.

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p9"></span>33.  Further, even if we should desire
to prove you to be slayers of the prophets, it would be too long a task
to collect the evidence through all the several instances of the
slaughter which your infuriated leaders of the Circumcelliones, and the
actual crowd of men inflamed by wine and madness, not only have
committed since the beginning of your schism, but even continue to
commit at the present time.  To take the case nearest at hand.  Let the
divine utterances be produced, which are commonly in the hands of both
of us.  Let us consider those to be murderers of the prophets whom we
find contradicting the words of the prophets.  What more learned
definition could be given?  What could admit of speedier proof?  You
would be acting less cruelly in piercing the bodies of the prophets with
a sword, than in endeavoring to destroy the words of the prophets with
your tongue. The prophet says, "All the ends of the world shall remember
and turn unto the Lord." <span id="fr_2005"></span>[2006](#fn_2005.md)  
Behold and see how this is being done, how it is being fulfilled.  But
you not only close your ears in disbelief against what is said, but you
even thrust out your tongues in madness to speak against what is already
being done.  Abraham heard the promise, "In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed," <span
id="fr_2006"></span>[2007](#fn_2006.md) and "he believed, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness." <span
id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007.md)   You see the fact accomplished,
and you cry out against it; and you will not that it should be counted
unto you for unrighteousness, as it fairly would be counted, even if
your refusal to believe was not on the accomplishment, but only on the
utterance of the prophecy.  Nay, not only are you not willing that it
should be counted unto you for unrighteousness, but even what you suffer
as the punishment of this impiety you would fain have counted unto you
for righteousness.  Or if your conduct is not a persecution of the
prophets, because your instrument is not the sword but the tongue, what
was the reason of its being said under divine inspiration, "The sons of
men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
sword"? <span id="fr_2008"></span>[2009](#fn_2008.md)   But what time would
suffice me to collect from all the prophets all the testimonies to the
Church dispersed throughout the world, all of which you endeavor to
destroy and render nought by contradicting them?  But you are caught;
for "their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words to the end
of the world." <span id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009.md)   I will,
however, advance this one saying from the mouth of the Lord, who is the
Witness of witnesses.  "All things must be fulfilled," He says, "which
were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the
Psalms, concerning me."  And what these were let us hear from Himself: 
"Then opened He their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:  and that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in His name among
all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." <span
id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010.md)   See what it is that is written in
the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning the
Lord.  See what the Lord Himself revealed about Himself and about the
Church, making Himself manifest, uttering promises about the Church. 
But for you, see that you resist such manifest proofs as these, and as
you cannot destroy them, endeavor to pervert them, what would you do, if
you were to come across the bodies of the prophets, when you rage so
madly against the utterances of the prophets, as not even to hearken to
the Lord when He is fulfilling, and making manifest, and expounding the
prophets?  For do you not, to the utmost of\`your power, strive to slay
the Lord Himself, since even to Himself you will not yield?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[536:2000](1040501.htm#fr_1999.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p2"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
33-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#033.md)<span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[536:2001](1040501.htm#fr_2000.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p4"></span> [Ps. xiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005.md)<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>,
LXX, cp. Hieron.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[536:2002](1040501.htm#fr_2001.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p5"></span> [Ps. xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006.md)<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>,
LXX. cp. Hieron.

<span id="fn_2002"></span>[536:2003](1040501.htm#fr_2002.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p6"></span> A suggested reading is, *"nos esse
viperas."*

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[536:2004](1040501.htm#fr_2003.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p7"></span> These both with others are celebrated
in the martyrology of the Donatists, see IIII.  *Idas Martii Sermo de
Passione SS. Donati et Advocati*, c. 340; *Passio Marculi sacerdotis
Donatistæ qui sub Macario interfectus a Donatistis pro Martyre
habebatur*  (Dec. 25, a. 348), and others.  See *Du Pin Monumenta vetera
ad Donatistarum Historiam pertinentia*, in his edition of Optatus.

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[536:2005](1040501.htm#fr_2004.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p8"></span> See below, c. 20, 46:  and *Contra
Crescon*. III. 49, 54.

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[537:2006](1040501.htm#fr_2005.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p10"></span> [Ps. xxii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027.md)<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[537:2007](1040501.htm#fr_2006.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p11"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md)<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[537:2008](1040501.htm#fr_2007.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p12"></span> [Rom. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003.md)<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[537:2009](1040501.htm#fr_2008.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p13"></span> [Ps. lvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004.md)<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[537:2010](1040501.htm#fr_2009.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p14"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004.md)<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[537:2011](1040501.htm#fr_2010.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xiv-p15"></span> [Luke xxiv.
44-47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044.md)<span
id="v.v.iv.xiv-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1040502.md)
