[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040037)  [Next](1040039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—Appeal to the Manichæans, Calling
on Them to Repent.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p2"></span>30.  What more do you wish?  Why do you
resist ignorantly and obstinately?  Why do you pervert untutored minds
by your mischievous teaching?  The God of both Testaments is one.  For
as there is an agreement in the passages quoted from both, so is there
in all the rest, if you are willing to consider them carefully and
impartially.  But because many expressions are undignified, and so far
adapted to minds creeping on the earth, that they may rise by human
things to divine, <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) while many are
figurative, that the inquiring mind may have the more profit from the
exertion of finding their meaning, and the more delight when it is
found, you pervert this admirable arrangement of the Holy Spirit for the
purpose of deceiving and ensnaring your followers.  As to the reason why
divine Providence permits you to do this, and as to the truth of the
apostle’s saying, "There must needs be many heresies, that they which
are approved may be made manifest among you," <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) it would take long to discuss these
things, and you, with whom we have now to do, are not capable of
understanding them.  I know you well.  To the consideration of divine
things, which are far higher than you suppose, you bring minds quite
gross and sickly, from being fed with material images.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p5"></span>31.  We must therefore in your case try
not to make you understand divine things, which is impossible, but to
make you desire to understand.  This is the work of the pure and
guileless love of God, which is seen chiefly in the conduct, and of
which we have already said much.  This love, inspired by the Holy
Spirit, leads to the Son, that is, to the wisdom of God, by which the
Father Himself is known.  For if wisdom and truth are not sought for
with the whole strength of the mind, it cannot possibly be found.  But
when it is sought as it deserves to be, it cannot withdraw or hide
itself from its lovers.  Hence its words, which you too are in the habit
of repeating, "Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you:" <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)   "Nothing is hid which shall not be
revealed." <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)   It is love that asks,
love that seeks, love that knocks, love that reveals, love, too, that
gives continuance in what is revealed.  From this love of wisdom, and
this studious inquiry, we are not debarred by the Old Testament, as you
always say most falsely, but are exhorted to this with the greatest
urgency.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p8"></span>32.  Hear, then, at length, and consider,
I pray you, what is said by the prophet:  "Wisdom is glorious, and never
fadeth away; yea, she is easily seen of them that love her, and found of
such as seek her.  She preventeth them that desire her, in making
herself first known unto them.  Whoso seeketh her early shall have no
great travail; for he shall find her sitting at his doors.  To think,
therefore, upon her is perfection of wisdom; and whoso watcheth for her
shall quickly be without care.  For she goeth about seeking such as are
worthy of her, showeth herself favorably unto them in the ways, and
meeteth them in every thought.  For the very true beginning of her is
the desire of discipline; and the care of discipline is love; and love
is the keeping of her laws; and the giving heed unto her laws is the
assurance of incorruption; and incorruption maketh us near unto God. 
Therefore the desire of wisdom bringeth to a kingdom."  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88)   Will you still continue in dogged
hostility to these things?  Do not things thus stated, though not yet
understood, make it evident to every one that they contain something
deep and unutterable?  Would that you could understand the things here
said!  Forthwith you would abjure all your silly legends and your
unmeaning material imaginations, and with great alacrity, sincere love,
and full assurance of faith, would betake yourselves bodily to the
shelter of the most holy bosom of the Catholic Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[50:85](1040038.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p3"></span> \[Here we have the key to all that is
best in Augustin’s defense of the anthropomorphisms and the seemingly
imperfect ethical representations of the Old Testament.  See Mozley’s
essay on "The Manichæans and the Jewish Fathers," in his *Ruling Ideas
in Early Ages*.  The entire volume represents an attempt to account for
the elements in the Old Testament that offend the Christian
consciousness.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_85"></span>[50:86](1040038.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.xix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[50:87](1040038.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p6"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.xix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[50:88](1040038.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p7"></span> [Matt. x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[50:89](1040038.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p9"></span> [Wisd. vi.
12-20](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1040039)
