[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040647)  [Next](1040649.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.li"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.li-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.li-p1.1"></span>Chapter 51.—</span>63.  Next, listen for a
short time to the kind of way in which he has tried to use, in his own
behalf, the passages which I had advanced from the writings of the
Apostle Paul.  "For you asserted," he says, "that the Apostle Paul finds
fault with those who used to say that they were of the Apostle Paul,
saying, ‘Was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of
Paul?’ <span id="fr_2443"></span>[2444](#fn_2443.md)   Wherefore, if they
were in error, and would have perished had they not been corrected,
because they wished to be of Paul, what hope can there possibly be for
those who have wished to be of Donatus?  For this is their sole object,
that the origin, and root, and head of him that is baptized should be
none other than he by whom he is baptized." <span
id="fr_2444"></span>[2445](#fn_2444.md)   <span id="page_623">p. 623</span>
<span id="v.v.v.li-Page_623"></span>These words, and this confirmation
from the writings of the apostle, he has quoted from my epistle, and he
has proposed to himself the task of refuting them.  Go on then, I beg of
you, to see how he has fulfilled the task.  For he says, "This assertion
is meaningless, and inflated, and childish, and foolish, and something
very far from a true exposition of our faith.  For you would only be
right in asserting this, if we were to say, We have been baptized in the
name of Donatus, or Donatus was crucified for us, or we have been
baptized in our own name.  But since such things as this neither have
been said nor are said by us,—seeing that we follow the formula of the
holy Trinity,—it is clear that you are mad to bring such accusations
against us.  Or if you think that we have been baptized in the name of
Donatus, or in our own name, you are miserably deceived, and at the same
time confess in your sacrilege that you on your part defile your
wretched selves in the name of Cæcilianus."  This is the answer which
Petilianus has made to those arguments of mine, not supposing—or rather
making a noise that no one might suppose—that he has made no answer at
all which could bear in any way upon the question which is under
discussion.  For who could fail to see that this witness of the apostle
has been adduced by us with all the more propriety, in that you do not
say that you were baptized in the name of Donatus, or that Donatus was
crucified for you, and yet separate yourselves from the communion of the
Catholic Church out of respect to the party of Donatus; as also those
whom Paul was rebuking certainly did not say that they had been baptized
in the name of Paul, or that Paul has been crucified for them, and yet
they were making a schism in the name of Paul.  As therefore in their
case, for whom Christ, not Paul, was crucified, and who were baptized in
the name of Christ, not of Paul, and who yet said, "I am of Paul," the
rebuke is used with all the more propriety, "Was Paul crucified for you?
or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" to make them cling to Him who
was crucified for them, and in whose name they were baptized, and not be
guilty of division in the name of Paul; so in your case, also, the
rebuke, Was Donatus crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name
of Donatus? is used all the more appositely, because you do not say, We
were baptized in the name of Donatus, and yet desire to be of the party
of Donatus.  For you know that it was Christ who was crucified for you,
and Christ in whose name you were baptized; and yet, out of respect to
the name and party of Donatus, you show such obstinacy in fighting
against the unity of Christ, who was crucified for you, and in whose
name you were baptized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2443"></span>[622:2444](1040648.htm#fr_2443.md) <span
id="v.v.v.li-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.li-p2"></span> [1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013.md)<span id="v.v.v.li-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2444"></span>[622:2445](1040648.htm#fr_2444.md) <span
id="v.v.v.li-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.li-p3"></span> See Book I. cc. 3, 4, 4, 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 52](1040649.md)
