[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040113)  [Next](1040115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—The Wild Fancies of
Manichæus.  The Battle Before the Constitution of the World.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p2"></span>14.  "Of that matter," he says,
"beloved brother of Patticus, of which you told me, saying that you
desired to know the manner of the birth of Adam and Eve, whether they
<span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-Page_135"></span>were produced by a word or sprung from
matter, I will answer you as is fit.  For in various writings and
narratives we find different assertions made and different descriptions
given by many authors.  Now the real truth on the subject is unknown to
all peoples, even to those who have long and frequently treated of it. 
For had they arrived at a clear knowledge of the generation of Adam and
Eve, they would not have remained liable to corruption and death." 
Here, then, is a promise to us of clear knowledge of this matter, so
that we shall not be liable to corruption and death.  And if this does
not suffice, see what follows:  "Necessarily," he says, "many things
have to be said by way of preface, before a discovery of this mystery
free from all uncertainty can be made."  This is precisely what I asked
for, to have such evidence of the truth as to free my knowledge of it
from all uncertainty.  And even were the promise not made by this writer
himself, it was proper for me to demand and to insist upon this, so that
no opposition should make me ashamed of becoming a Manichæan from a
Catholic Christian, in view of such a gain as that of perfectly clear
and certain truth.  Now, then, let us hear what he has to state.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p3"></span>15.  "Accordingly," he says, "hear
first, if you please, what happened before the constitution of the
world, and how the battle was carried on, that you may be able to
distinguish the nature of light from that of darkness."  Such are the
utterly false and incredible statements which this writer makes.  Who
can believe that any battle was fought before the constitution of the
world?  And even supposing it credible, we wish now to get something to
know, not to believe.  For to say that the Persians and Scythians long
ago fought with one another is a credible statement; but while we
believe it when we read or hear it, we cannot know it as a fact of
experience or as a truth of the understanding.  So, then, as I would
repudiate any such statement on the ground that I have been promised
something, not that I must believe on authority, but that I shall
understand without any ambiguity; still less will I receive statements
which are not only uncertain, but incredible.  But what if he have some
evidence to make these things clear and intelligible?  Let us hear,
then, if we can, what follows with all possible patience and
forbearance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1040115)
