[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040623)  [Next](1040625) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—</span>32.  But this is not
what we are now inquiring.  Let him rather answer (what he wanders off
into the most irrelevant matters in order to avoid answering) by what
means the conscience of the recipient is cleansed who is unacquainted
with the stain on the conscience of the giver, if the conscience of one
that gives in holiness is what we look for to cleanse the conscience of
the recipient? and from what source he receive faith who is unwittingly
baptized by one that is faithless, if he that has wittingly received his
faith from one that is faithless receives not faith but guilt? 
Omitting, therefore, his revilings, which he has cast at me without any
sound consideration, let us still notice that he does not say what we
demand in what follows.  But I should like to look at the garrulous mode
in which he has set this forth, as though he were sure to overwhelm us
with confusion.  "But let us return," he says, "to that argument of your
fancy, whereby you seem to have represented to yourself in a form of
words the persons you baptize.  For since you do not see the truth, it
would have been more seemly to have imagined what was probable."  These
words of his own, Petilianus put forth by way of preface, being about to
state the words that I had used.  Then he went on to quote:  "Behold,
you say, the faithless man stands ready to baptize, but he who is to be
baptized knows nothing of his faithlessness."  <span
id="fr_2380"></span>[2381](#fn_2380)   He has not quoted the whole of my
proposition and question; and presently he begins to ask me in his turn,
saying, "Who is the man, and from what corner has he started up, that
you propose to us?  Why do you seem to see a man who is the produce of
your imagination, in order to avoid seeing one whom you are bound to
see, and to examine and test most carefully?  But since I see that you
are unacquainted with the order of the sacrament, I tell you this as
shortly as I can:  you were bound both to examine your baptizer, and to
be examined by him."  What is it, then, that we were waiting for?  That
he should tell us by what means the conscience of the recipient is to be
cleansed, who is unacquainted with the stain on the conscience of him
that gives but not in holiness, and whence the man is to receive not
guilt but faith, who has received baptism unwittingly from one that is
faithless.  All that we have heard is that the baptizer ought most
diligently to be examined by him who wishes to receive not guilt but
faith, that the latter may make himself acquainted with the conscience
of him that gives in holiness, which is to cleanse the conscience of the
recipient.  For the man that has failed to make this examination, and
has unwittingly received baptism from one that is faithless, from the
very fact that he did not make the examination, and therefore did not
know of the stain on the conscience of the giver, was incapacitated from
receiving faith instead of guilt.  Why therefore did he add what he made
so much of adding,—the word *wittingly*, which he calumniously accused
me of having suppressed?  For in his unwillingness that the sentence
should run, "He who has received his faith from one that is faithless,
receives not faith but guilt," he seems to have left some hope to the
man that acts unwittingly.  But now, when he is asked whence that man is
to receive faith who is baptized unwittingly by one that is faithless,
he has answered that he ought to have examined his baptizer; so that,
beyond all doubt, he refuses the wretched man permission even to be
ignorant, by not finding out from what source he may receive faith,
unless he has placed his trust in the man that is baptizing him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2380"></span>[609:2381](1040624.htm#fr_2380) <span
id="v.v.v.xxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxvii-p2"></span> See Book I. c. 2, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1040625)
