[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040361)  [Next](1040363) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.viii.viii"></span> <span id="page_483">p. 483</span>
<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-Page_483"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—</span>11.  Cæcilius of
Bilta <span id="fr_1600"></span>[1601](#fn_1600) said:  "I know of one
baptism in the one Church and of none outside the Church.  The one will
be where there is true hope and sure faith.  For so it is written, ‘One
faith, one hope, one baptism.’ <span
id="fr_1601"></span>[1602](#fn_1601)   Not among heretics, where there
is no hope and a false faith; where all things are done by a lie; where
one possessed of a devil exorcises; the question of the sacrament is
asked by one from whose mouth and words proceeds a cancer; the faithless
gives faith; the guilty gives pardon for sins and Antichrist baptizes in
the name of Christ; one accursed of God blesses; the dead promises life;
the unpeaceful gives peace; the blasphemer calls on God; the profane
administers the priesthood; the sacrilegious sets up the altar.  To all
this is added this further evil that the servant of the devil dares to
celebrate the eucharist.  If this be not so, let those who stand by them
prove that all of it is false concerning heretics.  See the kind of
things to which the Church is compelled to assent, being forced to
communicate without baptism or the remission of sins.  This, brethren,
we ought to shun and avoid, separating ourselves from so great a sin,
and holding to the one baptism which is granted to the Church
alone." <span id="fr_1602"></span>[1603](#fn_1602)

<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-p5"></span>12.  To this I answer, that all who
even within the Church profess that they know God, but deny Him in their
deeds, such as are the covetous and envious, and those who, because they
hate their brethren, are pronounced to be murderers, not on my
testimony, but on that of the holy Apostle John, <span
id="fr_1603"></span>[1604](#fn_1603) —all these are both devoid of hope,
because they have a bad conscience; and are faithless, because they do
not do what they have vowed to God; and liars, because they make false
professions; and possessed of devils, because they give place in their
heart to the devil and his angels; and their words work corruption,
since they corrupt good manners by evil communications; and they are
infidels, because they laugh at the threats which God utters against
such men; and accursed, because they live wickedly; and antichrists,
because their lives are opposed to Christ; and cursed of God, since holy
Scripture everywhere calls down curses on such men; and dead, because
they are without the life of righteousness; and unpeaceful, because by
their contrary deeds they are at variance with God’s behests; and
blasphemous, because by their abandoned acts despite is done to the name
of Christian; and profane, because they are spiritually shut out from
that inner sanctuary of God; and sacrilegious, because by their evil
life they defile the temple of God within themselves; and servants of
the devil, because they do service to fraud and covetousness, which is
idolatry.  That of such a kind are some, nay very many, even within the
Church, is testified both by Paul the apostle and by Cyprian the
bishop.  Why, then, do they baptize?  Why also are some, who "renounce
the world in words and not in deeds," baptized without being converted
from a life like this, and not rebaptized when they are converted?  And
as to what he says with such indignation, "See the kind of things to
which the Church is compelled to assent, being forced to communicate
without baptism or the remission of sins," he could never have used such
expressions had there not been the other bishops who elsewhere forced
men to such things.  Whence also it is shown that at that time those men
held the truer views who did not depart from the primitive custom, which
is since confirmed by the consent of a general Council. <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604)   But what does he mean by adding,
"This, brethren, we ought to shun and avoid, separating ourselves from
so great a sin?"  For if he means that he is not to do nor to approve of
this, that is another matter; but if he means to condemn and sever from
him those that hold the contrary opinion, he is setting himself against
the earlier words of Cyprian, "Judging no man, nor depriving any of the
right of communion if he differ from us."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[483:1601](1040362.htm#fr_1600) <span
id="v.iv.viii.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-p2"></span> Bilta (Biltha, Vilta) was in Africa
Proconsularis.  This Cæcilius is probably the same as the one addressed
by Cyprian in Ep. lxiii.<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-p2.1"></span>, and who
unites with Cyprian and other bishops in letters addressed to others. 
Epp. iv. (to Pomponius), lvii., lxvii., lxx.

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[483:1602](1040362.htm#fr_1601) <span
id="v.iv.viii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-p3"></span> [Eph.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.viii.viii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[483:1603](1040362.htm#fr_1602) <span
id="v.iv.viii.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-p4"></span> Conc. Carth. sec. 1.

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[483:1604](1040362.htm#fr_1603) <span
id="v.iv.viii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-p6"></span> [1 John iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015)<span
id="v.iv.viii.viii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[483:1605](1040362.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="v.iv.viii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.viii-p7"></span> *Concilii universitate*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1040363)
