[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040015)  [Next](1040017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iv.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Augustin and the
Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p2"></span>In the preceding Chapter we have given in
Augustin’s own words some account of the process by which he became
ensnared in Manichæan error.  In reading Augustin’s account of his
experience among the Manichæans, we can not escape the conviction that
he was never wholly a Manichæan, that he never surrendered himself
absolutely to the system.  He held it rather as a matter of opinion than
as a matter of heart-attachment.  Doubtless the fact that he continued
to occupy himself with rhetorical and philosophical studies prevented
his complete enthrallment.  His mind was not naturally of an Oriental
cast, and the study of the hard, common-sense philosophy of Aristotle,
and of the Eclecticism of Cicero, could hardly have failed to make him
more or less conscious of the absurdity of Manichæism.  The influence of
scientific studies on his mind is very manifest from *Confessions*, Book
V. ch. 3, where he compares the accurate astronomical knowledge with
which he had become acquainted, with the absurd cosmological fancies of
Faustus, the great Manichæan teacher who appeared at Carthage in
Augustin’s twenty-ninth year.  "Many truths, however, concerning the
creation did I retain from these men \[the philosophers\], and the cause
appeared to confirm calculations, the succession of seasons, and the
visible manifestations of the stars; and I compared them with the
sayings of Manichæus, who in his frenzy has written most extensively on
these subjects, but discovered not any account either of the solstices,
or the equinoxes, the eclipses of the luminaries, or anything of the
kind I had learned in the books of secular philosophy.  But therein I
was ordered to believe, and yet it corresponded not with those rules
acknowledged by calculation and by our light, but was far different."

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p3"></span>From this time Augustin’s faith was
shaken, and he was soon able to throw off completely the yoke that had
become too grievous to be borne.  But to reject Manichæism was not
necessarily to become an orthodox Christian.  Augustin finds himself
still greatly perplexed about the nature of God and the origin of evil,
problems the somewhat plausible Manichæan solutions of which had
ensnared him.  It was through Platonism, or rather Neo-Platonism, that
he was led to more just and satisfying views, and through Platonism,
along with other influences, he was enabled at last to find peace in the
bosom of the Catholic church.  "And Thou, willing to show me how Thou
‘resistest the proud, but givest grace unto the humble,’ and by how
great an act of mercy Thou hadst pointed out to men the path of
humility, in that ‘Thy Word was made flesh and dwelt among men,’—Thou
procuredst for me, by the instrumentality of one inflated with monstrous
pride, certain books of the Platonists, translated from Greek into
Latin.  And therein I read not indeed in the same words but to the
self-same effect, enforced by many and divers reasons, that ‘In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God.  The same was in the beginning with God.  All things were made by
Him; and without Him was <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ix-Page_28"></span>not anything made that was made.’" <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)  In other words, Augustin thought that he
discerned complete harmony between the prologue of John’s gospel and the
teachings of the Platonists, and in this teaching, thus corroborated, he
found the solution of the problem that had caused him such anguish of
soul.  In this connection Augustin points out in some detail the
features that Platonism and Christianity have in common.  Thus
Neo-Platonism, not blindly followed, but adapted to his Christian
purpose, became not only a means of deliverance to Augustin himself, but
a mighty weapon for the combating of Manichæan error.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p5"></span>Neo-Platonism enters so largely and
influentially into Augustin’s polemics against Manichæism that it will
be apposite here to inquire into the extent and the nature of Augustin’s
dependence on this system of thought.  Much has been written on this
subject, especially by German and French scholars.  A brief statement of
some of the more important points of contact is all that is allowable in
an essay like this.  Premising, therefore, that Platonism essentially
influenced the entire circle of Augustin’s theological and philosophical
thinking, let us first examine the Neo-Platonic and Augustinian
conceptions of God.  With Augustin God is absolutely simple and
immutable, incomprehensible by men in their present state of existence,
exalted above all human powers of thought or expression.  All things may
be said of God, and yet nothing worthily; God is honored more by
reverential silence than by any human voice.  He is better known by not
being known; it is easier to say what He is not, than what He is.  God
is wanting in qualities; has no variety and multitude of properties and
attributes; is absolutely simple.  By no means is God to be called
substance, for the word substance pertains to a certain accident; nor is
it allowable to think of Him as composed of substance and of accidents. 
Divine qualities are therefore purely subjective.  There is no
discrimination in God of substance and accidents, of potency and act, of
matter and form, of universal and singular, of superior and inferior. 
To know, to will, to do, to be, are in God equivalent and identical. 
Eternity itself is the substance of God, which has nothing mutable,
nothing past, nothing future.  God makes new things, without being
Himself new, unchangeable He makes changeable things, He always works
and always rests.  The changes that take place in the world do not fall
in the will of God, but solely in the things moved by God.  God changes
them out of His unchangeable counsel.  For nearly every one of these
statements an almost exact parallel can be pointed out in the writings
of Plotinus, the Neo-Platonic writer with whom Augustin was most
conversant. <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)   It would be easy to
point out that Augustin here goes to a dangerous extreme, and narrowly
escapes fatalism on the one hand, and denial of the true personality of
God on the other.  But the effectiveness of this type of teaching
against Manichæism is what chiefly interests us in this connection. 
Readers of the following treatises will have no difficulty in seeing for
themselves how confidently and with what telling effect Augustin employs
this view of God against the crudities of Manichæism, which thought of
God as mutable, as capable of being successfully assailed by evil, as
rent asunder, as suffering miserable contamination and imprisonment by
mixture with matter, as painfully struggling for freedom, as suffering
with the suffering of plants and animals, as liberated by their decay
and by the digestive operations of the faithful, etc., etc.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p7"></span>Again, while still a Manichæan Augustin
had thought and written much about beauty.  On this point also, the
throwing off of Manichæism and the adoption of a Platonizing
Christianity brought about a revolution in his conceptions.  The
exactness with which he has followed Plotinus in his ideas of the beauty
of God and of his creatures is remarkable.  This we could fully
illustrate by the citation of parallel passages.  But we must content
our<span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ix-Page_29"></span>selves with remarking that Augustin himself
acknowledged his indebtedness, and that his idea of beauty was an
important factor in his polemics against Manichæism.  According to
Augustin (and Plotinus) God is the most beautiful and splendid of all
beings.  He is the beauty of all beauties; all the beautiful things that
are the objects of our vision and love He Himself made.  If these are
beautiful what is He?  All beauty is from the highest beauty, which is
God.  Augustin follows Plato and Plotinus even in neglecting the
distinction between the good and the beautiful.  The idea of Divine
beauty Augustin applies to Christ also.  He speaks of Him as beautiful
God, beautiful Word with God, beautiful on earth, beautiful in the womb,
beautiful in the hands of his parents, beautiful in miracles, beautiful
in being scourged, beautiful when inciting to life, beautiful when not
caring for death, beautiful when laying down his life, beautiful when
taking it up again, beautiful in the sepulchre, beautiful in Heaven. 
The beauty of the creation, which is simply a reflection of the beauty
of God, is not even disturbed by evil or sin.  Beauty is with Augustin
(and the Platonists) a comprehensive term, and is almost equivalent to
perfect harmony or symmetry of parts, perfect adaptation of beings to
the ends for which they exist.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p8"></span>It is patent that this view of the beauty
of God and His creation is diametrically opposed to the crude
conceptions of Mani, with reference to the disorder of the universe, a
disorder not confined even to the Kingdom of Darkness, but invading the
Realm of light itself.  So also Augustin’s Platonizing views of the
creation must be taken into consideration in judging of his attitude
towards Manichæism.  It goes without saying that from Augustin’s
theological point of view, to account for creation is a matter of grave
difficulty.  How can there be a relation between the infinite and the
finite?  Any substantial connection is unthinkable.  The only thing left
is a relation of causality.  The finite, according to Plotinus, is an
accident, an image and shadow of God.  It is constituted, established,
sustained, and nourished by the Divine potency, and is therefore
absolutely dependent upon God.  The power that flows from God permeates
each and every finite thing.  God as one, whole, and indivisible, is
perpetually present with his eternal process, to everything,
everywhere.  When Augustin teaches that God of his own free will,
subject to no necessity, by His own Word created the world out of
nothing, this statement might be taken in connection with his view of
the absolute simplicity of God and the consequent denial of distinction
between being, willing, doing, etc.  The easiest way to get over the
difficulty involved in creation was to maintain the simultaneous
creation of all things.  The six days of creation in Genesis are an
accommodation to human modes of thinking.  In some expressions Augustin
approaches the Platonic doctrine of the ideal or archetypal world. 
Finite things, so far as they exist, are essence, *i.e.*, God; so far as
they are not essence they do not exist at all.  Thus the distinction
between God and the world is almost obliterated.  Again, whatever is
finite and derivative is subject to negation or nothingness.  Thus he
goes along with Plato and Plotinus to the verge of denying the reality
of derived existence, and so narrowly escapes pantheism.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p9"></span>It is easy to see how effectively this
conception of creation might be employed against the Manichæan notion of
the creation as something forced upon God by the powers of evil, and as
a mere expedient for the gradual liberation of his imprisoned elements. 
The Manichæan limitation of God and his domain by the bordering Kingdom
of Darkness, was in sheer opposition to Augustin’s view of the
indivisibility of God and his presence as a whole everywhere and
always.  Augustin’s theory that nature or essence, as far as it has
existence is God, is quite the antithesis of Mani’s dualism, especially
of his supposition that the Kingdom of Darkness is essentially and
wholly evil.  Augustin argued that even the inhabitants of the Kingdom
of Darkness, and the King of Darkness himself, according to Mani’s own
representations, are good so far as they have essence or nature, and
evil only so far as they are non-existent.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p10"></span><span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ix-Page_30"></span>With Augustin’s Platonizing view of
creation is closely connected his theory of evil and his doctrine of
divine providence.  Evil with him, as with the Platonists, has no
substantial existence.  It is only privation of good.  It is wanting in
essence, substance, truth,—is in short mere negation, and so cannot have
God for its efficient cause or author, or be referred to God.  God would
not have permitted evil unless by His own supreme power he had been able
to make good use of it.  He attempts, with some success, to show the
advantages of the permission of evil in the world.  God made all things
good from the angels of heaven to the lowest beasts and herbs of the
earth.  Augustin delighted, with the Platonists, in dwelling upon the
goodness of nature as shown in the animal and vegetable worlds, as well
as in the great cosmical phenomena.  Each creature of God has its place,
some a higher, some a lower, but all so far as they conform to the idea
of their creation, or to their nature, are good.  So far as they fall
short of this idea they are evil.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p11"></span>This principle Augustin applied with
great force to the confutation of the Manichæan view of the
substantiality and permanence of evil.  This may be regarded as the
central point in Augustin’s controversies with the Manichæans.  He
evidently felt that the Manichæan view of evil was the citadel of their
system, and he never wearied of assailing it.  It would be beyond the
scope of the present essay to inquire whether and how far Augustin
himself became involved in error, in his efforts to dislodge the
Manichæans.  Far less satisfactory than his confutation of the
fundamental principles of the Manichæan system were his answers to the
Manichæan cavils against the Old Testament.  If we may judge from the
prominence given in the extant literature to the Old Testament question,
this must have been the favorite point of attack with the Manichæans. 
The importance of the questions raised and the necessity of answering
them was fully recognized by Augustin.  His principal reliance is the
allegorical or typological method of interpretation.  It would be hard
to find examples of more perverse allegorizing than Augustin’s
Anti-Manichæan treatises furnish.  It will not be needful to adduce
instances here, as readers of the treatises will discover them in
abundance.  Nothing more wearisome and disgusting in Biblical
interpretation can well be conceived of than certain sections of *The
Reply to Faustus, the Manichæan*.  Yet Augustin did not fail entirely to
recognize the distinction between Old Testament times and New, and he
even suggests the theory "that God could in a former age and to a people
of a lower moral standard, give commands to do actions, which we should
think it wrong to do now.… There was a certain inward want, an
unenlightenment, a rudeness of moral conception, in those to whom such
commands were given; otherwise they would not have been given.  God
would not have given a command to slaughter a whole nation to an
enlightened people." <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p13"></span>Yet with all the defects of Augustin’s
polemics against the Manichæans, they seem to have been adapted to the
needs of the time.  Well does Canon Mozley declare Augustin to have been
"the most marvellous controversial phenomenon which the whole history of
the Church from first to last presents.… Armed with superabundant
facility of expression,—so that he himself observes that one who had
written so much must have a good deal to answer for,—he was able to
hammer any point of view which he wanted, and which was desirable as a
counteracting one to a pervading heresy, with endless repetition upon
the ear of the Church; at the same time varying the forms of speech
sufficiently to please and enliven."  Certainly he was one of the
greatest debaters of any age.  He doubtless deserves the credit of
completely checking the progress of Manichæism in the West, and of
causing its gradual but almost complete overthrow.  His arguments were
probably more effective in guarding Christians against perversion by
Manichæan proselytizers, than in converting <span id="page_31">p.
31</span> <span id="iv.ii.ix-Page_31"></span>those that were already
ensnared by Manichæan error.  Other controversies of a completely
different character, especially the Pelagian, caused Augustin to look to
other aspects of truth and so led to certain modifications in his own
statements, nay led him on some occasions to the verge of Manichæan
error itself.  But we are chiefly interested at present in knowing that
his earnest efforts against the Manichæans from <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>A.D.</span> 388, the year of his baptism, to
<span class="c11"><span id="iv.ii.ix-p13.2"></span>A.D.</span> 405, were
not in vain. <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[28:15](1040016.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p4"></span> Confessions, Book. VII. ch. 9, vol. 1. p.
108, of the present series.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[28:16](1040016.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p6"></span> See G. <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.ix-p6.1"></span>Loesche</span>:  *De Augustino Plotinizante in
Doctrina de Deo Disserenda*, Jenæ, 1880.  Also, <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.ix-p6.2"></span>Dorner</span>:  *Augustinus*, <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.ii.ix-p6.3"></span>Zeller, Ueberweg,
Ritter</span>, and <span class="c11"><span id="iv.ii.ix-p6.4"></span>
Erdmann</span>:  *Histories of Philosophy*, sections on Augustin and
Neo-Platonism.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[30:17](1040016.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p12"></span> See J. B. <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>Mozley’s</span> *Ruling Ideas in Early Ages*,
art. The Manichæans and the Jewish Fathers.  The sentence quoted above
is Mozley’s.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[31:18](1040016.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p14"></span> For an account of the controversies in
which Augustin was engaged with the Manichæans, and for the
chronological order of the Anti-Manichæan treatises, see the Preface of
the Edinburgh editor.  Cf. <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>Bindemann</span>, on the various
controversies, in his *<span id="iv.ii.ix-p14.2"></span>Der h.
Augustinus, passim*.  See also, a good chronological list of St.
Augustin’s works in <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.ix-p14.3"></span>Cunningham</span>:  *St. Austin*, p. 277 sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](1040017)
