[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040008)  [Next](1040010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—Philosophical Basis, and
Antecedents of Manichæism.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>"About 500 years before the commencement
of the Christian era," writes Professor Monier Williams, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) "a great stir seems to have taken place in
Indo-Aryan, as in Grecian minds, and indeed in thinking minds everywhere
throughout the then civilized world.  Thus when Buddha arose in India,
Greece had her thinkers in Pythagoras, Persia in Zoroaster, and China in
Confucius.  Men began to ask themselves earnestly such questions as—What
am I?  Whence have I come?  Whither am I going?  How can I explain my
consciousness of personal existence?  What is the relationship between
my material and immaterial nature?  What is the world in which I find
myself? did a wise, good and all-powerful Being create it out of
nothing? or did it evolve out of an eternal germ? or did it come
together by <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ii-Page_8"></span>the combination of eternal atoms?  If
created by a Being of infinite wisdom, how can I account for the
inequality of condition in it—good and evil, happiness and misery.  Has
the Creator form or is he formless?  Has he any qualities or none?"

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p4"></span>It is true that such questions pressed
themselves with special importunity upon the thinkers of the age
mentioned, but we should be far astray if we should think for a moment
that now for the first time they suggested themselves and demanded
solution.  The fact is that the earliest literary records of the human
race bear evidence of high thinking on the fundamental problems of God,
man, and the world, and the relations of these to each other.  Recent
scholars have brought to light facts of the utmost interest with
reference to the pre-Babylonian (Accadian) religion.  A rude
nature-worship, with a pantheistic basis, but assuming a polytheistic
form, seems to have prevailed in Mesopotamia from a very early period. 
"Spirit everywhere dispersed produced all the phenomena of nature, and
directed and animated all created beings.  They caused evil and good,
guided the movements of the celestial bodies, brought back the seasons
in their order, made the wind to blow and the rain to fall, and produced
by their influence atmospheric phenomena both beneficial and
destructive; they also rendered the earth fertile, and caused plants to
germinate and to bear fruit, presided over the births and preserved the
lives of living beings, and yet at the same time sent death and
disease.  There were spirits of this kind everywhere, in the starry
heavens, in the earth, and in the intermediate region of the atmosphere;
each element was full of them, earth, air, fire and water; and nothing
could exist without them…As evil is everywhere present in nature side by
side with good, plagues with favorable influences, death with life,
destruction with fruitfulness; an idea of dualism as decided as in the
religion of Zoroaster pervaded the conceptions of the supernatural world
formed by the Accadian magicians, the evil beings of which they feared
more than they valued the powers of good.  There were essentially good
spirits, and others equally bad.  These opposing troops constituted a
vast dualism, which embraced the whole universe and kept up a perpetual
struggle in all parts of the creation." <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)   This primitive Turanian quasi-dualism (it
was not dualism in the strictest sense of the term) was not entirely
obliterated by the Cushite and Semitic civilizations and cults that
successively overlaid it.  So firmly rooted had this early mode of
viewing the world become that it materially influenced the religions of
the invaders rather than suffered extermination.  In the Babylonian
religion of the Semitic period the dualistic element was manifest
chiefly in the magical rites of the Chaldean priests who long continued
to use Accadian as their sacred language.  "Upon this dualistic
conception rested the whole edifice of sacred magic, of magic regarded
as a holy and legitimate intercourse established by rites of divine
origin, between man and the supernatural beings surrounding him on all
sides.  Placed unhappily in the midst of this perpetual struggle between
the good and bad spirits, man felt himself attacked by them at every
moment; his fate depended upon them.…He needed then some aid against the
attacks of the bad spirits, against the plagues and diseases which they
sent upon him.  This help he hoped to find in incantations, in
mysterious and powerful words, the secret of which was known only to the
priests of magic, in their prescribed rites and their talismans…The
Chaldeans had such a great idea of the power and efficacy of their
formulæ, rites and amulets, that they came to regard them as required to
fortify the good spirits themselves in their combat with the demons, and
as able to give them help by providing them with invincible weapons
which should ensure success." <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)   A
large number of magical texts have been preserved and deciphered, and
among them "the ‘favorable *Alad*,’ the ‘favorable *Lamma*,’ and the
‘favorable *Utuq*,’ are very frequently opposed…to the ‘evil *Alad*,’
the ‘evil *Lamma*,’ the ‘evil *Utuq*.’" <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md)  It would be interesting to give in detail
the results of the researches of George Smith, Lenor<span id="page_9">p.
9</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii-Page_9"></span>mant, A.H. Sayce, E.
Schrader, Friedrich Delitzsch and others, with reference to the
elaborate mythological and cosmological systems of the Babylonians. 
Some of the features thereof will be brought out further on by way of
comparison with the Manichæan mythology and cosmology.  Suffice it to
say that the dualistic element is everywhere manifest, though not in so
consistent and definite a form as in Zoroastrianism, to say nothing of
Manichæism.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p8"></span>The Medo-Persian invasion brought into
Babylonia the Zoroastrian system, already modified, no doubt, by the
Elamitic (Cushite) cult.  Yet the old Babylonian religion was too firmly
rooted to be supplanted, even by the religion of such conquerors as
Darius and Cyrus.  Modifications, however, it undoubtedly underwent. 
The dualism inherent in the system became more definite.  The influence
of the Jews in Mesopotamia upon the ancient population cannot have been
inconsiderable, especially as many of the former, including probably
most of the captives of the Northern tribes, were absorbed by the
latter.  As a result of this blending of old Babylonian, Persian, and
Hebrew blood, traditions, and religious ideas, there was developed in
Mesopotamia a type of religious thought that furnished a philosophical
basis and a mythological and cosmological garnishing for the Manichæan
system.  Dualism, therefore, arising from efforts of the unaided human
mind to account for the natural phenomena that appear beneficent and
malignant, partly of old Babylonian origin and partly of Persian, but
essentially modified by Hebrew influence more or less pure, furnished to
Mani the foundation of his system.  We shall attempt at a later stage of
the discussion to determine more accurately the relations of Manichæism
to the various systems with which correctly or incorrectly it has been
associated.  Suffice it to say, at present, that no new problem
presented itself to Mani, and that he furnished no essentially new
solution of the problems that had occupied the attention of his
countrymen for more than 2500 years.  Before proceeding to institute a
comparison between Manichæism and the various systems of religious
thought to which it stands related, it will be advantageous to have
before us an exposition of the Manichæan system itself, based upon the
most authentic sources.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[7:2](1040009.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span> *Indian Wisdom*, 3rd ed. (1876), p. 49.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[8:3](1040009.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p5"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>Lenormant</span>, *Chaldean Magic* (1877),  p.
144-145.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[8:4](1040009.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6"></span> *Ibid*. p. 146-147.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[8:5](1040009.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p7"></span> *Ibid*. p. 148.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](1040010.md)
