[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040457)  [Next](1040459.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iii.i"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—</span>1.  Ye know that we have
often wished to bring forward into open notoriety, and to confute, not
so much from our own arguments as from theirs, the sacrilegious error of
the Donatist heretics; whence it came to pass that we wrote letters even
to some of their leaders,—not indeed for purposes of communion with
them, for of that they had already in times past rendered themselves
unworthy by dissenting from the Church; nor yet in terms of reproach,
but of a conciliatory character, with the view that, having discussed
the question with us which caused them to break off from the holy
communion of the whole world, they might, on consideration of the truth,
be willing to be corrected, and <span id="page_520">p. 520</span> <span
id="v.v.iii.i-Page_520"></span>might not defend the headstrong
perversity of their predecessors with a yet more foolish obstinacy, but
might be reunited to the Catholic stock, so as to bring forth the fruits
of charity.  But as it is written, "With those who have hated peace I am
more peaceful," <span id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919.md) so they
rejected my letters, just as they hate the very name of peace, in whose
interests they were written.  Now, however, as I was in the church of
Constantina, Absentius <span id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920.md) being
present, with my colleague Fortunatus, his bishop, the brethren brought
before my notice a letter, which they said that a bishop of the said
schism had addressed to his presbyters, as was set forth in the
superscription of the letter itself.  When I had read it, I was so
amazed to find that in his very first words he cut away the very roots
of the whole claims of his party to communion, that I was unwilling to
believe that it could be the letter of a man who, if fame speaks truly,
is especially conspicuous among them for learning and eloquence.  But
some of those who were present when I read it, being acquainted with the
polish and embellishment of his composition, gradually persuaded me that
it was undoubtedly his address.  I thought, however, that whoever the
author might be, it required refutation, lest the writer should seem to
himself, in the company of the inexperienced, to have written something
of weight against the Catholic Church.

<span id="v.v.iii.i-p4"></span>2.  The first point, then, that he lays
down in his letter is the statement, "that we find fault with them for
the repetition of baptism, while we ourselves pollute our souls with a
laver stained with guilt."  But to what profit is it that I should
reproduce all his insulting terms?  For, since it is one thing to
strengthen proofs, another thing to meddle with abusive words by way of
refutation, let us rather turn our attention to the mode in which he has
sought to prove that we do not possess baptism, and that therefore they
do not require the repetition of what was already present, but confer
what hitherto was wanting.  For he says:  "What we look for is the
conscience of the giver to cleanse that of the recipient."  But
supposing the conscience of the giver is concealed from view, and
perhaps defiled with sin, how will it be able to cleanse the conscience
of the recipient, if, as he says, "what we look for is the conscience of
the giver to cleanse that of the recipient?"  For if he should say that
it makes no matter to the recipient what amount of evil may lie
concealed from view in the conscience of the giver, perhaps that
ignorance may have such a degree of efficacy as this, that a man cannot
be defiled by the guilt of the conscience of him from whom he receives
baptism, so long as he is unaware of it.  Let it then be granted that
the guilty conscience of his neighbor cannot defile a man so long as he
is unaware of it, but is it therefore clear that it can further cleanse
him from his own guilt?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[520:1920](1040458.htm#fr_1919.md) <span
id="v.v.iii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.i-p2"></span> [Ps. cxx.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007.md)<span id="v.v.iii.i-p2.1"></span>;
cf. Hieron.

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[520:1921](1040458.htm#fr_1920.md) <span
id="v.v.iii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.i-p3"></span> Probably Alypius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040459.md)
