[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040116)  [Next](1040118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—The Doctrine of Manichæus Not
Only Uncertain, But False.  His Absurd Fancy of a Land and Race of
Darkness Bordering on the Holy Region and the Substance of God.  The
Error, First of All, of Giving to the Nature of God Limits and Borders,
as If God Were a Material Substance, Having Extension in Space.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p2"></span>19.  What if I shall have shown, with
the help of God and of our Lord, that this writer’s statements are false
as well as uncertain?  What more unfortunate thing can be found than
that superstition which not only fails to impart the knowledge and the
truth which it promises, but also teaches what is directly opposed to
knowledge and truth?  This will appear more clearly from what follows: 
"In one direction on the border of this bright and holy land there was a
land of darkness deep and vast in extent, where abode fiery bodies,
destructive races.  Here was boundless darkness, flowing from the same
source in immeasurable abundance, with the productions properly
belonging to it.  Beyond this were muddy turbid waters with their
inhabitants; and inside of them winds terrible and violent with their
prince and their progenitors.  Then again a fiery region of destruction,
with its chiefs and peoples.  And similarly inside of this a race full
of smoke and gloom, where abode the dreadful prince and chief of all,
having around him innumerable princes, himself the mind and source of
them all.  Such are the five natures of the pestiferous land."

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p3"></span>20.  To speak of God as an aerial or
even as an ethereal body is absurd in the view of all who, with a clear
mind, possessing some measure of discernment, can perceive the nature of
wisdom and truth as not extended or scattered in space, but as great,
and imparting greatness without material size, nor confined more or less
in any direction, but throughout co-extensive with the Father of all,
nor having one thing here and another there, but everywhere perfect,
everywhere present. <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_279"></span>[136:280](1040117.htm#fr_279) <span
id="iv.viii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p4"></span> \[This exalted view of God Augustin
held in common with the Neo-Platonists.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1040118)
