[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040157)  [Next](1040159.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.xii-p1.1"></span>Book X.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p2"></span>Faustus insists that the Old Testament
promises are radically different from those of the New.  Augustin admits
a difference, but maintains that the moral precepts are the same in
both.

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xii-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  Another reason for not
receiving the Old Testament is, that both the Old and the New teach us
not to covet what belongs to others.  Everything in the Old Testament is
of this kind.  It promises riches, and plenty, and children, and
children’s children, <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xii-Page_177"></span>and long life, and withal the land of
Canaan; but only to the circumcised, the Sabbath observers, those
offering sacrifices, and abstaining from swine’s flesh.  Now I, like
every other Christian, pay no attention to these things, as being
trifling and useless for the salvation of the soul.  I conclude,
therefore, that the promises do not belong to me.  And mindful of the
commandment, Thou shall not covet, I gladly leave to the Jews their own
property, and content myself with the gospel, and with the bright
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.  If a Jew were to claim part in
the gospel, I should justly reproach him with claiming what he had no
right to, because he does not obey its precepts.  And a Jew might say
the same to me if I professed to receive the Old Testament while I
disregard its requirements.

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p4"></span>2.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xii-p4.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  Faustus is not
ashamed to repeat the same nonsense again and again.  But it is tiresome
to repeat the same answers, though it is to repeat truth.  What Faustus
says here has already been answered. <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375.md)   But if a Jew asks me why I profess
to believe the Old Testament while I do not observe its precepts, my
reply is this:  The moral precepts of the law are observed by
Christians; the symbolical precepts were properly observed during the
time that the things now revealed were prefigured.  Accordingly, those
observances, which I regard as no longer binding, I still look upon as a
testimony, as I do also the carnal promises from which the Old Testament
derives its name.  For although the gospel teaches me to hope for
eternal blessings, I also find a confirmation of the gospel in those
things which "happened to them for an example, and were written for our
admonition, on whom the ends of the world are come."  So much for our
answer to the Jews.  And now we have something to say to the Manichæans.

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p6"></span>3.  By showing the way in which we regard
the authority of the Old Testament we have answered the Jews, by whose
question about our not observing the precepts Faustus thought we would
be puzzled.  But what answer can you give to the question, why you
deceive simple-minded people by professing to believe in the New
Testament, while you not only do not believe it, but assail it with all
your force?  It will be more difficult for you to answer this than it
was for us to answer the Jews.  We hold all that is written in the Old
Testament to be true, and enjoined by God for suitable times.  But in
your inability to find a reason for not receiving what is written in the
New Testament, you are obliged, as a last resource, to pretend that the
passages are not genuine.  This is the last gasp of a heretic in the
clutches of truth; or rather it is the breath of corruption itself. 
Faustus, however, confesses that the Old Testament as well as the New
teaches him not to covet.  His own God could never have taught him
this.  For if this God did not covet what belonged to another, why did
he construct new worlds in the region of darkness?  Perhaps the race of
darkness first coveted his kingdom.  But this would be to imitate their
bad example.  Perhaps the kingdom of light was previously of small
extent, and war was desirable in order to enlarge it by conquest.  In
that case, no doubt, there was covetousness, though the hostile race was
allowed to begin the wars to justify the conquest.  If there had been no
such desire, there was no necessity to extend the kingdom beyond its old
limits into the region of the conquered foe.  If the Manichæans would
only learn from these Scriptures the moral precepts, one of which is, Do
not covet, instead of taking offence at the symbolical precept, they
would acknowledge in meekness and candor that they suited the time then
present.  We do not covet what belongs to another, when we read in the
Old Testament what "happened to them for examples, and was written for
our admonition, on whom the ends of the world are come."  It is surely
not coveting when a man reads what is written for his benefit.

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p7"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_375"></span>[177:376](1040158.htm#fr_375.md) <span
id="iv.ix.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p5"></span> Book vi. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XI](1040159.md)
