[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040402)  [Next](1040404.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—</span>6.  Victor of Gor <span
id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764.md) said:  "Seeing that sins are
forgiven only in the baptism of the Church, he who admits heretics to
communion without baptism is guilty of two errors contrary to reason;
for, on the one hand, he does not cleanse the heretics, and, on the
other, he defiles the Christians." <span
id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765.md)

<span id="v.iv.ix.iv-p4"></span>7.  To this we answer that the baptism
of the Church exists even among heretics, though they themselves are not
within the Church; just as the water of Paradise was found in the land
of Egypt, though that land was not itself in Paradise.  We do not
therefore admit heretics to communion without baptism; and since they
come with their waywardness corrected, we receive not their sins, but
the sacraments of Christ.  And, in respect of the remission of their
sins, we say again here exactly what we said above.  And certainly, in
regard of what he says at the end of his judgment, declaring that he "is
guilty of two errors contrary to reason, seeing that on the one hand he
does not cleanse the heretics, and on the other he defiles the
Christians," Cyprian himself is the first and the most earnest in
repudiating this with the colleagues who agreed with him.  For neither
did he think that he was defiled, when, on account of the bond of peace,
he decreed that it was right to hold communion with such men, when he
used the words, "Judging no one, nor removing any from the right of
communion if he entertain a different opinion."  Or, if heretics defile
the Church by being admitted to communion without being baptized, then
the whole Church has been defiled in virtue of that custom which has
been so often recorded here.  And just as those men call us *traditors*
because of our forefathers, in whom they were able to prove nothing of
the sort when they laid the charge against them, so, if every man
partakes of the character of those with whom he may have held communion,
all were then made heretics.  And if every one who asserts this is mad,
it must be false that Victor says, when he declares that "he who admits
heretics to communion without baptism, not only fails to cleanse the
heretics, but pollutes the Christians as well."  Or if this be true,
they were then not admitted without baptism, but those men had the
baptism of Christ, although it was given and received among heretics,
who were so admitted in accordance with that custom which these very men
acknowledged to exist; and on the same grounds they are even now rightly
admitted in the same manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[501:1765](1040403.htm#fr_1764.md) <span
id="v.iv.ix.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.iv-p2"></span> Gor (Gorduba) is variously supposed to
be Garra in ecclesiastical province of Mauritania Cæsariensis, or
Garriana in ecclesiastical province of Byzacium.  The name of a bishop
Victor occurs in Cypr. Epp. iv., lvii., lxii., lxvii.  In Ep. lxx.<span
id="v.iv.ix.iv-p2.1"></span> the names of three.

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[501:1766](1040403.htm#fr_1765.md) <span
id="v.iv.ix.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.iv-p3"></span> Conc. Carth. sec. 40.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1040404.md)
