[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040027)  [Next](1040029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—The Knowledge of God to Be Obtained
from the Scripture.  The Plan and Principal Mysteries of the Divine
Scheme of Redemption.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p2"></span>11.  But how can we follow after Him whom
we do not see? or how can we see Him, we who are not only men, but also
men of weak understanding?  For though God is seen not with the eyes but
with the mind, where can such a mind be found as shall, while obscured
by foolishness, succeed or even attempt to drink in that light?  We must
therefore have recourse to the instructions of those whom we have reason
to think wise.  Thus far argument brings us.  For in human things
reasoning is employed, not as of greater certainty, but as easier from
use.  But when we come to divine things, this faculty turns away; it
cannot behold; it pants, and gasps, and burns with desire; it falls back
from the light of truth, and turns again to its wonted obscurity, not
from choice, but from exhaustion.  What a dreadful catastrophe is this,
that the soul should be reduced to greater helplessness when it is
seeking rest from its toil!  So, when we are hasting to retire into
darkness, it will be well that by the appointment of adorable Wisdom we
should be met by the friendly shade of authority, and should be
attracted by the wonderful character of its contents, and by the
utterances of its pages, which, like shadows, typify and attemper the
truth.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p3"></span>12.  What more could have been done for
our salvation?  What can be more gracious and bountiful than divine
providence, which, when man had fallen from its laws, and, in just
retribution for his coveting mortal things, had brought forth a mortal
offspring, still did not wholly abandon him?  For in this most righteous
government, whose ways are strange and inscrutable, there is, by means
of unknown connections established in the creatures subject to it, both
a severity of punishment and a mercifulness of salvation.  How beautiful
this is, how great, how worthy of God, in fine, how true, which is all
we are seeking for, we shall never be able to perceive, unless,
beginning with things human and at hand, and holding by the faith and
the precepts of true religion, we continue without turning from it in
the way which God has secured for us by the separation of the
patriarchs, by the bond of the law, by the foresight of the prophets, by
the witness of the apostles, by the blood of the martyrs, and by the
subjugation of the Gentiles.  From this point, then, let no one ask me
for my opinion, but let us rather hear the oracles, and submit our weak
inferences to the announcements of Heaven. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[44:48](1040028.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p4"></span> \[Augustin’s transition from his fine
Platonizing discussion of virtue, the chief good, etc., to the
patriarchs, the law, and the prophets is very fine rhetorically and
apologetically.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1040029)
