[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040329)  [Next](1040331.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vii.v"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter</span> 5.—5.  Wherefore, even if
heretics should be truly anxious to correct their error and come to the
Church, for the very reason that they believed that they had no baptism
unless they received it in the Church, even under these circumstances we
should not be bound to yield to their desire for the repetition of
baptism; but rather they should be taught, on the one hand, that
baptism, though perfect in itself, could in no way profit their
perversity if they would not submit to be corrected; and, on the other
hand, that the perfection of baptism could not be impaired by their
perversity, while refusing to be corrected:  and again, that no further
perfection is added to baptism in them because they are submitting to
correction; but that, while they themselves are quitting their iniquity,
that which was before within them to their destruction is now beginning
to be of profit for salvation.  For, learning this, they will both
recognize the need of salvation in Catholic unity, and will cease to
claim as their own what is really Christ’s, and will not confound the
sacrament of truth, although existing in themselves, with their own
individual error.

<span id="v.iv.vii.v-p2"></span>6.  To this we may add a further reason,
that men, by a sort of hidden inspiration from heaven, shrink from any
one who for the second time receives baptism which he had already
received in any quarter whatsoever, insomuch that the very heretics
themselves, when their arguments start with that subject, rub their
forehead in perplexity, and almost all their laity, even those who have
grown old in their body, and have conceived an obstinate animosity
against the Catholic Church, confess that this one point in their system
displeases them; and many who, for the sake of gaining some secular
advantage, or avoiding some disadvantage, wish to secede to them, strive
with many secret efforts that they may have granted to them, as a
peculiar and individual privilege, that they should not be rebaptized;
and some, who are led to place credence in their other vain delusions
and false accusations against the Catholic Church, are recalled to unity
by this one consideration, that they are unwilling to associate with
them lest they should be compelled to be rebaptized.  And the Donatists,
through fear of this feeling, which has so thorough possession of all
men’s hearts, have consented to acknowledge the baptism which was
conferred among the followers of Maximianus, whom they had condemned,
and so to cut short their own tongues <span id="page_466">p. 466</span>
<span id="v.iv.vii.v-Page_466"></span>and close their mouths, in
preference to baptizing again so many men of the people of Musti, and
Assuræ, and other districts, whom they received with Felicianus and
Prætextatus, and the others who had been condemned by them and
afterwards returned to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1040331.md)
