[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040102)  [Next](1040104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii"></span> <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii-Page_129"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Against the Epistle of Manichæus Called
Fundamental. <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262.md) </span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p3.1"></span>\[Contra Epistolam Manichæi Quam Vocant
Fundamentum.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 397.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p4"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p4.1"></span>Chapter 1.—To Heal Heretics is Better Than
to Destroy Them.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p5.1"></span>My</span> prayer to the one true, almighty
God, of whom, and through whom, and in whom are all things, has been,
and is now, that in opposing and refuting the heresy of you Manichæans,
as you may after all be heretics more from thoughtlessness than from
malice, He would give me a mind calm and composed, and aiming at your
recovery rather than at your discomfiture.  For while the Lord, by His
servants, overthrows the kingdoms of error, His will concerning erring
men, as far as they are men, is that they should be amended rather than
destroyed.  And in every case where, previous to the final judgment, God
inflicts punishment, whether through the wicked or the righteous,
whether through the unintelligent or through the intelligent, whether in
secret or openly, we must believe that the designed effect is the
healing of men, and not their ruin; while there is a preparation for the
final doom in the case of those who reject the means of recovery.  Thus,
as the universe contains some things which serve for bodily punishment,
as fire, poison, disease, and the rest, and other things, in which the
mind is punished, not by bodily distress, but by the entanglements of
its own passions, such as loss, exile, bereavement, reproach, and the
like; while other things, again, without tormenting are fitted to
comfort and soothe the languishing, as, for example, consolations,
exhortations, discussions, and such things; in all these the supreme
justice of God makes use sometimes even of wicked men, acting in
ignorance, and sometimes of good men, acting intelligently.  It is ours,
accordingly, to desire in preference the better part, that we might
attain our end in your correction, not by contention, and strife, and
persecutions, but by kindly consolation, by friendly exhortation, by
quiet discussion; as it is written, "The servant of the Lord must not
strive; but be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, patient; in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves." <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263.md)   It is ours, I say, to desire to
obtain this part in the work; it belongs to God to give what is good to
those who desire it and ask for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[129:263](1040103.htm#fr_262.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p2"></span> Written about the year 397.  In his
*Retractations* (ii. 2) Augustin says:  "The book against the Epistle of
Manichæus, called Fundamental, refutes only its commencement; but on the
other parts of the epistle I have made notes, as required, refuting the
whole, and sufficient to recall the argument, had I ever had leisure to
write against the whole."  \[*The Fundamental Epistle* seems to have
been a sort of hand-book for Manichæan catechumens or Auditors.  In
making this document the basis of his attack, Augustin felt that he had
selected the best-known and most generally accepted standard of the
Manichæan faith.  The tone of the work is conciliatory, yet some very
sharp thrusts are made at Manichæan error.  The claims of Mani to be the
Paraclete are set aside, and the absurd cosmological fancies of Mani are
ruthlessly exposed.  Dualism is combated with substantially the same
weapons as in the treatise *Concerning Two Souls*.  We could wish that
the author had found time to finish the treatise, and had thus preserved
for us more of the *Fundamental Epistle* itself.  This work was written
after the author had become Bishop of Hippo.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_263"></span>[129:264](1040103.htm#fr_263.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p6"></span> [2 Tim.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040104.md)
