[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040108)  [Next](1040110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—In What Sense the Followers of
Manichæus Believe Him to Be the Holy Spirit.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p2"></span>8.  Besides, you should explain how it
is that, while the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are united in equality
of nature, as you also acknowledge, you are not ashamed to speak of
Manichæus, a man taken into union with the Holy Spirit, as born of
ordinary generation; and yet you shrink from believing that the man
taken into union with the only-begotten Wisdom of God was born of a
Virgin.  If human flesh, if generation \[*concubitus viri*\], if the
womb of a woman could not contaminate the Holy Spirit, how could the
Virgin’s womb contaminate the Wisdom of God?  This Manichæus, then, who
boasts of a connection with the Holy Spirit, and of being spoken of in
the gospel, must produce his claim to either of these two things,—that
he was sent by the Spirit, or that he was taken into union with the
Spirit.  If he was sent, let him call himself the apostle of the
Paraclete; if taken into union, let him allow that He whom the
only-begotten Son took upon Himself had a human mother, since he admits
a human father as well as mother in the case of one taken up by the Holy
Spirit.  Let him believe that the Word of God was not defiled by the
virgin womb of Mary, since he exhorts us to believe that the Holy Spirit
could not be defiled by the married life of his parents.  But if you say
that Manichæus was united to the Spirit, not in the womb or before
conception, but after his birth, still you must admit that he had a
fleshly nature derived from man and woman.  And since you are not afraid
to speak of the blood and the bodily substance of Manichæus as coming
from ordinary generation, or of the internal impurities contained in his
flesh, and hold that the Holy Spirit, who took on Himself, as you
believe, this human being, was not contaminated by all those things, why
should I shrink from speaking of the Virgin’s womb and body undefiled,
and not rather believe that the Wisdom of God in union with the human
being in his mother’s flesh still remained free from stain and
pollution?  Wherefore, as, whether your Manichæus professes to be sent
by or to be united with the Paraclete, neither statement can hold good,
I am on my guard, and refuse to believe either in his mission or in his
susception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1040110.md)
