[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040595)  [Next](1040597) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.cix"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 109.—</span>246.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.cix-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"Come therefore to the Church, all ye people, and flee the company of
*traditors*, if you would not also perish with them.  For that you may
the more readily know that, while they are themselves guilty, they yet
entertain an excellent opinion of our faith, let me inform you that I
baptize their polluted ones; they, though may God never grant them such
an opportunity, receive those who are made mine by baptism,—which
certainly they would not do if they recognized any defects in our
baptism.  See therefore how holy that is which we give, when even our
sacrilegious enemy fears to destroy it."

<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p2"></span>247.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p2.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  Against this
error I have said much already, both in this work and elsewhere.  But
since you think that in this sentence you have so strong a <span
id="page_595">p. 595</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.cix-Page_595"></span>confirmation of your vain opinions, that
you deemed it right to end your epistle with these words, that they
might remain as it were the fresher in the minds of your readers, I
think it well to make a short reply.  We recognize in heretics that
baptism, which belongs not to the heretics but to Christ, in such sort
as in fornicators, in unclean persons or effeminate, in idolaters, in
poisoners, in those who retain enmity, in those who are fond of
contention, in the credulous, in the proud, given to seditions, in the
envious, in drunkards, in revellers; and in men like these we hold valid
the baptism which is not theirs but Christ’s.  For of men like these,
and among them are included heretics also, none, as the apostle says,
shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. <span
id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312)   Nor are they to be considered as
being in the body of Christ, which is the Church, simply because they
are materially partakers of the sacraments.  For the sacraments indeed
are holy, even in such men as these, and shall be of force in them to
greater condemnation, because they handle and partake of them
unworthily.  But the men themselves are not within the constitution of
the Church, which increases in the increase of God in its members
through connection and contact with Christ.  For that Church is founded
on a rock, as the Lord says, "Upon this rock I will build my
Church." <span id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313)   But they build on
the sand, as the same Lord says, "Every one that heareth these sayings
of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which
built his house upon the sand." <span
id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314)   But that you may not suppose that
the Church which is upon a rock is in one part only of the earth, and
does not extend even to its furthest boundaries, hear her voice groaning
from the psalm, amid the evils of her pilgrimage.  For she says, "From
the end of the earth have I cried unto Thee; when my heart was
distressed Thou didst lift me up upon the rock; Thou hast led me, Thou,
my hope, hast become a tower of courage from the face of the enemy."
 <span id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315)   See how she cries from the
end of the earth.  She is not therefore in Africa alone, nor only among
the Africans, who send a bishop from Africa to Rome to a few
Montenses, <span id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316) and into Spain to
the house of one lady. <span id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317)   See
how she is exalted on a rock.  All, therefore, are not to be deemed to
be in her which build upon the sand, that is, which hear the words of
Christ and do them not, even though both among us and among you they
have and transmit the sacrament of baptism.  See how her hope is in God
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,—not in Peter or in Paul, still
less in Donatus or Petilianus.  What we fear, therefore, to destroy, is
not yours, but Christ’s; and it is holy of itself, even in sacrilegious
hands.  For we cannot receive those who come from you, unless we destroy
in them whatsoever appertains to you.  For we destroy the treachery of
the deserter, not the stamp of the sovereign.  Accordingly, do you
yourself consider and annul what you said:  "I," say you, "baptize their
polluted ones; they, though may God never grant them such an
opportunity, receive those who are made mine by baptism."  For you do
not baptize men who are infected, but you rebaptize them, so as to
infect them with the fraud of your error.  But we do not receive men who
are made yours by baptism; but we destroy that error of yours whereby
they are made yours, and we receive the baptism of Christ, by which they
are baptized.  Therefore it is not without significance that you
introduce the words, "Though may God never grant them such an
opportunity."  For you said, "They, though may God never grant them such
an opportunity, receive those who are made mine by baptism."  For while
you in your fear that we may receive your followers desire to be
understood, "may God never give them the opportunity of receiving such
as are mine," I suppose that, without knowing what it meant, you said,
"May God never make them mine that you should receive them."  For we
pray that those may not be really yours who come over at the present
moment to the Catholic Church.  Nor do they come over so as to be ours
by right of baptism, but by fellowship with us, and that with us they
may belong to Christ, in virtue of their baptism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[595:2313](1040596.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p3"></span> [Gal. v.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)<span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[595:2314](1040596.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p4"></span> [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[595:2315](1040596.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p5"></span> [Matt. vii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#026)<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[595:2316](1040596.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p6"></span> [Ps.
61:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#003)<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[595:2317](1040596.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p7"></span> That the Donatists were called at Rome
*Montenses*, is observed by Augustin, *de Hæresibus*, c. lxix., and
*Epist*. liii. 2; and before him by Optatus, Book II. c. iv.  That they
were also called *Cutzupitani*, or *Cutzupitæ*, we learn from the same
epistle, and from his treatise *de Unitate Ecclesiæ*, c. iii. 6.

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[595:2318](1040596.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="v.v.iv.cix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cix-p8"></span> Lucilla.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](1040597)
