[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040076)  [Next](1040078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—Of the Symbol of the Breast, and of
the Shameful Mysteries of the Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xx-p2"></span>65.  Lastly, there is the symbol of the
breast, in which your very questionable chastity consists.  For though
you do not forbid sexual intercourse, you, as the apostle long ago said,
forbid marriage in the proper sense, although this is the only good
excuse for such intercourse.  No doubt you will exclaim against this,
and will make it a reproach against us that you highly esteem and
approve perfect chastity, but do not forbid marriage, because your
followers—that is, those in the second grade among you—are allowed to
have wives.  After you have said this with great noise and heat, I will
quietly ask, Is it not you who hold that begetting children, by which
souls are confined in flesh, is a greater sin than cohabitation?  Is it
not you who used to counsel us to observe as much as possible the time
when a woman, after her purification, is most likely to conceive, and to
abstain from cohabitation at that time, lest the soul should be
entangled in flesh?  This proves that you approve of having a wife, not
for the procreation of children, but for the gratification of passion. 
In marriage, as the marriage law declares, the man and woman come
together for the procreation of children.  Therefore whoever makes the
procreation of children a greater sin than copulation, forbids marriage,
and makes the woman not a wife, but a mistress, who for some gifts
presented <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="iv.v.xx-Page_87"></span>to her is joined to the man to gratify his
passion.  Where there is a wife there must be marriage.  But there is no
marriage where motherhood is not in view; therefore neither is there a
wife.  In this way you forbid marriage.  Nor can you defend yourselves
successfully from this charge, long ago brought against you
prophetically by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.v.xx-p3"></span>66.  Moreover, when you are so eager in
your desire to prevent the soul from being confined in flesh by conjugal
intercourse, and so eager in asserting that the soul is set free from
seed by the food of the saints, do you not sanction, unhappy beings, the
suspicion entertained about you?  For why should it be true regarding
corn and beans and lentils and other seeds, that when you eat them you
wish to set free the soul, and not true of the seeds of animals?  For
what you say of the flesh of a dead animal, that it is unclean because
there is no soul in it, cannot be said of the seed of the animal; for
you hold that it keeps confined the soul which will appear in the
offspring, and you avow that the soul of Manichæus himself is thus
confined.  And as your followers cannot bring these seeds to you for
purification, who will not suspect that you make this purification
secretly among yourselves, and hide it from your followers, in case they
should leave you? <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)   If you do
not these things, as it is to be hoped you do not, still you see how
open to suspicion your superstition is, and how impossible it is to
blame men for thinking what your own profession suggests, when you
maintain that you set free souls from bodies and from senses by eating
and drinking.  I wish to say no more about this:  you see yourselves
what room there is here for denunciation.  But as the matter is one
rather to repress than to invite remark, and also as throughout my
discourse my purpose appears of exaggerating nothing, and of keeping to
bare facts and arguments, we shall pass on to other matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[87:185](1040077.htm#fr_184) <span
id="iv.v.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xx-p4"></span> \[Compare what is said about the
disgusting ceremonial of Ischas by Cyril of Jerusalem (*Cat*. vi.),
Augustin (*Haeres*. xlvi.), Pope Leo X. (*Serm. V. de Jejuniis, X.
Mens*.).  These charges were probably unfounded, though they are not
altogether out of harmony with the Manichæan principles.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1040078)
