[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040583)  [Next](1040585) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xcvii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 97.—</span>220.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"Choose, in short, which of the two alternatives you prefer.  If
innocence is on your side, why do you persecute us with the sword?  Or
if you call us guilty, why do you, who are yourselves innocent, seek for
our company?"

<span id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p2"></span>221.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p2.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  O most
ingenious dilemma, or rather most foolish verbosity!  Is it not usual
for the choice of two alternatives to be offered to an antagonist, when
it is impossible that he should adopt both?  For if you should offer me
the choice of the two propositions, that I should say either that we
were innocent, or that we were guilty; or, again, of the other pair of
propositions, viz., those concerning you, I could not escape choosing
either one or the other.  But as it is, you offer me the choice of these
two, whether we are innocent or you are guilty, and wish me to say which
of these two I choose for my reply.  But I refuse to make a choice; for
I assert them both, that we are innocent, and that you are guilty.  I
say that we are innocent of the false and calumnious accusations which
you bring against us, so far as any of us, being in the Catholic Church,
can say with a safe conscience that we have neither given up the sacred
books, nor taken part in the worship of idols, nor murdered any man, nor
been guilty of any of the other crimes which you allege against us; and
that any who may have committed any such offenses, which, however, you
have not proved in any case, have thereby shut the doors of <span
id="page_586">p. 586</span> <span id="v.v.iv.xcvii-Page_586"></span>the
kingdom of heaven, not against us, but against themselves; "for every
man shall bear his own burden." <span
id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261)   Here you have your answer on the
first head.  And I further say that you are all guilty and accursed,—not
some of you owing to the sins of others, which are wrought among you by
certain of your number, and are censured by certain others, but all of
you by the sin of schism; from which most heinous sacrilege no one of
you can say that he is free, so long as he refuses to hold communion
with the unity of all nations, unless, indeed, he be compelled to say
that Christ has told a lie concerning the Church which is spread abroad
among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. <span
id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262)   And so you have my second
answer.  See how I have made you two replies, of which you were desirous
that we should be reduced to choose the one.  At any rate, you should
have taken notice that both assertions might be made by us; and
certainly, if this was what you wished, you should have asked it as a
favor of us that we should choose one or the other, when you saw that it
was in our power to choose both.

<span id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p5"></span>222.  But "if innocence is on your
side, why do you persecute us with the sword?"  Look back for a moment
on your troops, which are not now armed after the ancient fashion of
their fathers only with cudgels, but have further added to their
equipment axes and lances and swords, and determine for yourselves to
which of us the question best belongs, "Why do you persecute us with the
sword?"  "Or if you call us guilty," say you, "why do you, who are
yourselves innocent, seek for our company?"  Here I answer very
briefly.  The reason why you, being guilty, are sought after by the
innocent, is that you may cease to be guilty, and begin to be innocent. 
Here then I have chosen both of the alternatives concerning us, and
answered both of those concerning you, only do you in turn choose one of
the two.  Are you innocent or guilty?  Here you cannot choose to make
the two assertions, and yet choose both, if so it pleases you.  For at
any rate you cannot be innocent in reference to the same circumstances
in respect of which you are guilty.  If therefore you are innocent do
not be surprised that you are invited to be at peace with your brethren;
but if you are guilty, do not be surprised that you are sought for
punishment by kings.  But since of these two alternatives you assume one
for yourselves, and the other is alleged of you by us,—for you assume to
yourselves innocence and it is alleged of you by us that you are living
impiously,—hear again once more what I shall say on either head.  If you
are innocent, why do you speak against the testimony of Christ?  But if
you are guilty, why do you not fly for refuge to His mercy?  For His
testimony, on the one hand, is to the unity of the world, and His mercy,
on the other, is in brotherly love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[586:2262](1040584.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p3"></span> [Gal. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005)<span id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[586:2263](1040584.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p4"></span> [Luke xxiv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span
id="v.v.iv.xcvii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 98](1040585)
