[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040267)  [Next](1040269.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—</span>7.  What then, ye
Donatists, what have ye to say to this?  If our opinion about baptism is
true, yet all who thought differently in the time of Cyprian were not
cut off from the unity of the Church, till God revealed to them the
truth of the point on which they were in error, why then have ye by your
sacrilegious separation broken the bond of peace?  But if yours is the
true opinion about baptism, Cyprian and the others, in conjunction with
whom ye set forth that he held such a Council, remained in unity with
those who thought otherwise; why, therefore, have ye broken the bond of
peace?  Choose which alternative ye will, ye are compelled to pronounce
an opinion against your schism.  Answer me, wherefore have ye separated
yourselves?  Wherefore have ye erected an altar in opposition to the
whole world?  Wherefore do ye not communicate with the Churches to which
apostolic epistles have been sent, which you yourselves read and
acknowledge, in accordance with whose tenor you say that you order your
lives?  Answer me, wherefore have ye separated yourselves?  I suppose in
order that ye might not perish by communion with wicked men.  How then
was it that Cyprian, and so many of his colleagues, did not perish?  For
though they believed that heretics and schismatics did not possess
baptism, yet they chose rather to hold communion with them when they had
been received into the Church without baptism, although they believed
that their flagrant and sacrilegious sins were yet upon their heads,
than to be separated from the unity of the Church, according to the
words of Cyprian, "Judging no one, nor depriving any one of the right of
communion if he differ from us."

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p2"></span>8.  If, therefore, by such communion
with the wicked the just cannot but perish, the Church had already
perished in the time of Cyprian.  Whence then sprang the origin of
Donatus? where was he taught, where was he baptized, where was he
ordained, since the Church had been already destroyed by the contagion
of communion with the wicked?  But if the Church still existed, the
wicked could do no harm to the good in one com<span id="page_429">p.
429</span> <span id="v.iv.iv.vi-Page_429"></span>munion with them. 
Wherefore did ye separate yourselves?  Behold, I see in unity Cyprian
and others, his colleagues, who, on holding a council, decided that
those who have been baptized without the communion of the Church have no
true baptism, and that therefore it must be given them when they join
the Church.  But again, behold I see in the same unity that certain men
think differently in this matter, and that, recognizing in those who
come from heretics and schismatics the baptism of Christ, they do not
venture to baptize them afresh.  All of these catholic unity embraces in
her motherly breast, bearing each other’s burdens by turns, and
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227.md) till God should reveal to one or
other of them any error in their views.  If the one party held the
truth, were they infected by the others, or no?  If the others held the
truth, were they infected by the first, or no?  Choose which ye will. 
If there was contamination, the Church even then ceased to exist; answer
me, therefore, whence came ye forth hither?  But if the Church remained,
the good are in no wise contaminated by the bad in such communion;
answer me, therefore, why did ye break the bond?

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p4"></span>9.  Or is it perhaps that schismatics,
when received without baptism, bring no infection, but that it is
brought by those who deliver up the sacred books? <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228.md)   For that there were traditors of
your number is proved by the clearest testimony of history.  And if you
had then brought true evidence against those whom you were accusing, you
would have proved your cause before the unity of the whole world, so
that you would have been retained whilst they were shut out.  And if you
endeavored to do this, and did not succeed, the world is not to blame,
which trusted the judges of the Church rather than the beaten parties in
the suit; whilst, if you would not urge your suit, the world again is
not to blame, which could not condemn men without their cause being
heard.  Why, then, did you separate yourselves from the innocent?  You
cannot defend the sacrilege of your schism.  But this I pass over.  But
so much I say, that if the traditors could have defiled you, who were
not convicted by you, and by whom, on the contrary, you were beaten,
much more could the sacrilege of schismatics and heretics, received into
the Church, as you maintain, without baptism, have defiled Cyprian.  Yet
he did not separate himself.  And inasmuch as the Church continued to
exist, it is clear that it could not be defiled.  Wherefore, then, did
you separate yourselves, I do not say from the innocent, as the facts
proved them, but from the traditors, as they were never proved to be? 
Are the sins of traditors, as I began to say, heavier than those of
schismatics?  Let us not bring in deceitful balances, to which we may
hang what weights we will and how we will, saying to suit ourselves,
"This is heavy and this is light;" but let us bring forward the sacred
balance out of holy Scripture, as out of the Lord’s treasure-house, and
let us weigh them by it, to see which is the heavier; or rather, let us
not weigh them for ourselves, but read the weights as declared by the
Lord.  At the time when the Lord showed, by the example of recent
punishment, that there was need to guard against the sins of olden days,
and an idol was made and worshipped, and the prophetic book was burned
by the wrath of a scoffing king, and schism was attempted, the idolatry
was punished with the sword, <span id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229.md)
the burning of the book by slaughter in war and captivity in a foreign
land, <span id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230.md) schism by the earth
opening, and swallowing up alive the leaders of the schism while the
rest were consumed with fire from heaven. <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231.md)   Who will now doubt that that was
the worse crime which received the heavier punishment?  If men coming
from such sacrilegious company, without baptism, as you maintain, could
not defile Cyprian, how could those defile you who were not convicted
but supposed betrayers of the sacred books? <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232.md)   For if they had not only given up
the books to be burned, but had actually burned them with their own
hands, they would have been guilty of a less sin than if they had
committed schism; for schism is visited with the heavier, the other with
the lighter punishment, not at man’s discretion, but by the judgment of
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[429:1228](1040268.htm#fr_1227.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p3"></span> [Eph. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003.md)<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[429:1229](1040268.htm#fr_1228.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p5"></span> *Traditores sanctorum librorum*.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[429:1230](1040268.htm#fr_1229.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p6"></span> [Ex.
xxxii](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#000.md)<span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[429:1231](1040268.htm#fr_1230.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p7"></span> [Jer.
xxxvi](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#000.md)<span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[429:1232](1040268.htm#fr_1231.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p8"></span> [Num.
xvi](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#000.md)<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[429:1233](1040268.htm#fr_1232.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.vi-p9"></span> *Non convicti sed conficti traditores*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1040269.md)
