[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040073)  [Next](1040075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Why the Manichæans Prohibit the
Use of Flesh.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p2"></span>36.  It is worth while to take note of
the whole reason for their superstitious abstinence, which is given as
follows:—Since, we are told, the member of God has been mixed with the
substance of evil, to repress it and to keep it from excessive
ferocity,—for that is what you say,—the world is made up of both
natures, of good and evil, mixed together.  But this part of God is
daily being set free in all parts of the world, and restored to its own
domain.  But in its passage upwards as vapor from earth to heaven, it
enters plants, because their roots are fixed in the earth, and so gives
fertility and strength to all herbs and shrubs.  From these animals get
their food, and, where there is sexual intercourse, fetter in the flesh
the member of God, and, turning it from its proper course, they come in
the way and entangle it in errors and troubles.  So then, if food
consisting of vegetables and fruits comes to the saints, that is, to the
Manichæans by means of their chastity, and prayers, and psalms, whatever
in it is excellent and divine is purified, and so is entirely perfected,
in order to restoration, free from all hindrance, to its own domain. 
Hence you forbid people to give bread or vegetables, or even water,
which would cost nobody anything, to a beggar, if he is not a Manichæan,
lest he should defile the member of God by his sins, and obstruct its
return.

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p3"></span>37.  Flesh, you say, is made up of
pollution itself.  For, according to you, some portion of that divine
part escapes in the eating of vegetables and fruits:  it escapes while
they undergo the infliction of rubbing, grinding, or cooking, as also of
biting or chewing.  It escapes, too, in all motions of animals, in the
carriage of burdens, in exercise, in toil, or in any sort of action.  It
escapes, too, in our rest, when digestion is going on in the body by
means of internal heat.  And as the divine nature escapes in all these
ways, some very unclean dregs remain, from which, in sexual intercourse,
flesh is formed.  These dregs, however, fly off, in the motions above
mentioned, along with what is good in the soul; for though it is mostly,
it is not entirely good.  So, when the soul has left the flesh, the
dregs are utterly filthy, and the soul of those who eat flesh is
defiled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1040075)
