[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040042)  [Next](1040044.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—Fortitude Comes from the Love of
God.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p2"></span>40.  On fortitude we must be brief.  The
love, then, of which we speak, which ought with all sanctity to burn in
desire for God, is called temperance, in not seeking for earthly things,
and fortitude in bearing the loss of them.  But among all things which
are possessed in this life, the body is, by God’s most righteous laws,
for the sin of old, man’s heaviest bond, which is well known as a fact
but most incomprehensible in its mystery.  Lest this bond should be
shaken and disturbed, the soul is shaken with the fear of toil and pain;
lest it should be lost and destroyed, the soul is shaken with the fear
of death.  For the soul loves it from the force of habit, not knowing
that by using it well and wisely its resurrection and reformation will,
by the divine help and decree, be without any trouble made subject to
its authority.  But when the soul turns to God wholly in this love, it
knows these things, and so will not only disregard death, but will even
desire it.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>41.  Then there is the great struggle
with pain.  But there is nothing, though of iron hardness, which the
fire of love cannot subdue.  And when the mind is carried up to God in
this love, it will soar above all torture free and glorious, with wings
beauteous and unhurt, on which chaste love rises to the embrace of God. 
Otherwise God must allow the lovers of gold, the lovers of praise, the
lovers of women, to have more fortitude than the lovers of Himself,
though love in those cases is rather to be called passion or lust.  And
yet even here we may see with what force the mind presses on with
unflagging energy, in spite of all alarms, towards that it loves; and we
learn that we should bear all things rather than forsake God, since
those men bear so much in order to forsake Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1040044.md)
