[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040254)  [Next](1040256.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—</span>21.  For it often
happens that a man has an enemy whom he hates most unjustly; although we
are commanded to love even our unjust enemies, and to pray for them. 
But in some sudden danger of death he begins to be uneasy, and desires
baptism, which he receives in such haste, that the emergency scarcely
admits of the necessary formal examination of a few words, much less of
a long conversation, so that this hatred should be driven from his
heart, even supposing it to be known to the minister who baptizes him. 
Certainly cases of this sort are still found to occur not only with us,
but also with them.  What shall we say then?  Are this man’s sins
forgiven or not?  Let them choose just which alternative they prefer. 
For if they are forgiven, they immediately return:  this is the teaching
of the gospel, the authoritative announcement of truth.  Whether,
therefore, they are forgiven or not, medicine is necessary afterwards;
and yet if the man lives, and learns that his fault stands in need of
correction, and corrects it, he is not baptized anew, either with them
or with us.  So in the points in which schismatics and heretics neither
entertain different opinions nor observe different practice from
ourselves, we do not correct them when they join us, but rather commend
what we find in them.  For where they do not differ from us, they are
not separated from us.  But because these things do them no good so long
as they are schismatics or heretics, on account of <span
id="page_421">p. 421</span> <span
id="v.iv.iii.xiii-Page_421"></span>other points in which they differ
from us, not to mention the most grievous sin that is involved in
separation itself, therefore, whether their sins remain in them, or
return again immediately after remission, in either case we exhort them
to come to the soundness of peace and Christian charity, not only that
they may obtain something which they had not before, but also that what
they had may begin to be of use to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1040256.md)
