[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040105)  [Next](1040107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—Proofs of the Catholic
Faith.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p2"></span> 5.  For in the Catholic Church, not to
speak of the purest wisdom, to the knowledge of which a few spiritual
men attain in this life, so as to know it, in the scantiest measure,
indeed, because they are but men, still without any uncertainty (since
the rest of the multitude derive their entire security not from
acuteness of intellect, but from simplicity of faith,)—not to speak of
this wisdom, which you do not believe to be in the Catholic Church,
there are many other things which most justly keep me in her bosom.  The
consent of peoples and nations keeps me in the Church; so does her
authority, inaugurated by miracles, nourished by hope, enlarged by love,
established by age.  The succession of priests keeps me, beginning from
the very seat of the Apostle Peter, to whom the Lord, after His
resurrection, gave it in charge to feed His sheep, down to the present
episcopate.  And so, lastly, does the name itself of Catholic, which,
not without reason, amid so many heresies, the Church has thus retained;
so that, though all heretics wish to be called Catholics, yet when a
stranger asks where the Catholic Church meets, no heretic will venture
to point to his own chapel or house.  Such then in number and importance
are the precious ties belonging to the Christian name which keep a
believer in the Catholic Church, as it is right they should, though from
the slowness of our understanding, or the small attainment of our life,
the truth may not yet fully disclose itself.  But with you, where there
is none of these things to attract or keep me, the promise of truth is
the only thing that comes into play.  Now if the truth is so clearly
proved as to leave no possibility of doubt, it must be set before all
the things that keep me in the Catholic Church; but if there is only a
promise without any fulfillment, no one shall move me from the faith
which binds my mind with ties so many and so strong to the Christian
religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1040107)
