[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040352)  [Next](1040354) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—</span>39.  Hence,
therefore, we have now set before us an easier and more simple
consideration of that ark of which Noah was the builder and pilot.  For
Peter says that in the ark of Noah, "few, that is, eight souls, were
saved by water.  The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now
save us, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer
of a good conscience towards God)."  <span
id="fr_1579"></span>[1580](#fn_1579)   Wherefore, if those appear to men
to be baptized in Catholic unity who renounce the world in words only
and not in deeds, how do they belong to the mystery of this ark in whom
there is not the answer of a good conscience?  Or how are they saved by
water, who, making a bad use of holy baptism, though they seem to be
within, yet persevere to the end of their days in a wicked and abandoned
course of life?  Or how can they fail to be saved by water, of whom
Cyprian himself records that they were in time past simply admitted to
the Church with the baptism which they had received in heresy?  For the
same unity of the ark saved them, in which no one has been saved except
by water.  For Cyprian himself says, "The Lord is able of His mercy to
grant pardon, and not to sever from the gifts of His Church those who,
being in all simplicity admitted to the Church, have fallen asleep
within her pale." <span id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580)   If not by
water, how in the ark?  If not in the ark, how in the Church?  But if in
the Church, <span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span
id="v.iv.vii.xxviii-Page_478"></span>certainly in the ark; and if in the
ark, certainly by water.  It is therefore possible that some who have
been baptized without may be considered, through the foreknowledge of
God, to have been really baptized within, because within the water
begins to be profitable to them unto salvation; nor can they be said to
have been otherwise saved in the ark except by water.  And again, some
who seemed to have been baptized within may be considered, through the
same foreknowledge of God, more truly to have been baptized without,
since, by making a bad use of baptism, they die by water, which then
happened to no one who was not outside the ark.  Certainly it is clear
that, when we speak of within and without in relation to the Church, it
is the position of the heart that we must consider, not that of the
body, since all who are within in heart are saved in the unity of the
ark through the same water, through which all who are in heart without,
whether they are also in body without or not, die as enemies of unity. 
As therefore it was not another but the same water that saved those who
were placed within the ark, and destroyed those who were left without
the ark, so it is not by different baptisms, but by the same, that good
Catholics are saved, and bad Catholics or heretics perish.  But what the
most blessed Cyprian thinks of the Catholic Church, and how the heretics
are utterly crushed by his authority; notwithstanding the much I have
already said, I have yet determined to set forth by itself, if God will,
with somewhat greater fullness and perspicuity, so soon as I shall have
first said about his Council what I think is due from me, which, in
God’s will, I shall attempt in the following book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[477:1580](1040353.htm#fr_1579) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xxviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xxviii-p2"></span> [1 Pet.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.vii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[477:1581](1040353.htm#fr_1580) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xxviii-p3"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](1040354)
