[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040031)  [Next](1040033.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—God is the One Object of Love;
Therefore He is Man’s Chief Good.  Nothing is Better Than God.  God
Cannot Be Lost Against Our Will.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p2"></span>18.  Following after God is the desire
of happiness; to reach God is happiness itself.  We follow after God by
loving Him; we reach Him, not by becoming entirely what He is, but in
nearness to Him, and in wonderful and immaterial contact with Him, and
in being inwardly illuminated and occupied by His truth and holiness. 
He is light itself; we get enlightenment from Him.  The greatest
commandment, therefore, which leads to happy life, and the first, is
this:  "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul,
and mind."  For to those who love the Lord all things issue in good. 
Hence Paul adds shortly after, "I am persuaded that neither death, nor
life, nor angels, nor virtue, nor things present, nor things future, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, <span id="page_47">p.
47</span> <span id="iv.iv.xiii-Page_47"></span>shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md)   If, then, to those who love God all
things issue in good, and if, as no one doubts, the chief or perfect
good is not only to be loved, but to be loved so that nothing shall be
loved better, as is expressed in the words, "With all thy soul, with all
thy heart, and with all thy mind," who, I ask, will not at once
conclude, when these things are all settled and most surely believed,
that our chief good which we must hasten to arrive at in preference to
all other things is nothing else than God?  And then, if nothing can
separate us from His love, must not this be surer as well as better than
any other good?

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p4"></span>19.  But let us consider the points
separately.  No one separates us from this by threatening death.  For
that with which we love God cannot die, except in not loving God; for
death is not to love God, and that is when we prefer anything to Him in
affection and pursuit.  No one separates us from this in promising life;
for no one separates us from the fountain in promising water.  Angels do
not separate us; for the mind cleaving to God is not inferior in
strength to an angel.  Virtue does not separate us; for if what is here
called virtue is that which has power in this world, the mind cleaving
to God is far above the whole world.  Or if this virtue is perfect
rectitude of our mind itself, this in the case of another will favor our
union with God, and in ourselves will itself unite us with God.  Present
troubles do not separate us; for we feel their burden less the closer we
cling to Him from whom they try to separate us.  The promise of future
things does not separate us; for both future good of every kind is
surest in the promise of God, and nothing is better than God Himself,
who undoubtedly is already present to those who truly cleave to Him. 
Height and depth do not separate us; for if the height and depth of
knowledge are what is meant, I will rather not be inquisitive than be
separated from God; nor can any instruction by which error is removed
separate me from Him, by separation from whom it is that any one is in
error.  Or if what is meant are the higher and lower parts of this
world, how can the promise of heaven separate me from Him who made
heaven?  Or who from beneath can frighten me into forsaking God, when I
should not have known of things beneath but by forsaking Him?  In fine,
what place can remove me from His love, when He could not be all in
every place unless He were contained in none?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[47:56](1040032.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p3"></span> [Rom.
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038.md),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1040033.md)
