[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040253)  [Next](1040255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—</span>18.  What if he
approached baptism itself in deceit? were his sins remitted, or were
they not?  Let them choose which they will.  Whichever they choose will
answer our purpose.  If they say they were remitted, how then shall "the
Holy Spirit of discipline flee deceit," <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183) if in him who was full of deceit He
worked remission of sins?  If they say they were not remitted, I ask
whether, if he should afterwards confess his sin with contrition of
heart and true sorrow, it would be judged that he ought to be baptized
again.  And if it is mere madness to assert this, then let them confess
that a man can be baptized with the true baptism of Christ, and that yet
his heart, persisting in malice or sacrilege, may not allow remission of
sins to be given; and so let them understand that men may be baptized in
communions severed from the Church, in which Christ’s baptism is given
and received in the said celebration of the sacrament, but that it will
only then be of avail for the remission of sins, when the recipient,
being reconciled to the unity of the Church, is purged from the
sacrilege of deceit, by which his sins were retained, and their
remission prevented.  For, as in the case of him who had approached the
sacrament in deceit there is no second baptism, but he is purged by
faithful discipline and truthful confession, which he could not be
without baptism, so that what was given before becomes then powerful to
work his salvation, when the former deceit is done away by the truthful
confession; so also in the case of the man who, while an enemy to the
peace and love of Christ, received in any heresy or schism the baptism
of Christ, which the schismatics in question had not lost from among
them, though by his sacrilege his sins were not remitted, yet, when he
corrects his error, and comes over to the communion and unity of the
Church, he ought not to be again baptized:  because by his very
reconciliation to the peace of the Church he receives this benefit, that
the sacrament now begins in unity to be of avail for the remission of
his sins, which could not so avail him as received in schism.

<span id="v.iv.iii.xii-p3"></span>19.  But if they should say that in
the man who has approached the sacrament in deceit, his sins are indeed
removed by the holy power of so great a sacrament at the moment when he
received it, but return immediately in consequence of his deceit:  so
that the Holy Spirit has both been present with him at his baptism for
the removal of his sins, and has also fled before his perseverance in
deceit so that they should return:  so that both declarations prove
true,—both, "As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put
on Christ;" and also, "The holy spirit of discipline will flee
deceit;"—that is to say, that both the holiness of baptism clothes him
with Christ, and the sinfulness of deceit strips him of <span
id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="v.iv.iii.xii-Page_420"></span>Christ; like the case of a man who
passes from darkness through light into darkness again, his eyes being
always directed towards darkness, though the light cannot but penetrate
them as he passes;—if they should say this, let them understand that
this is also the case with those who are baptized without the pale of
the Church, but yet with the baptism of the Church, which is holy in
itself, wherever it may be; and which therefore belongs not to those who
separate themselves, but to the body from which they are separated;
while yet it avails even among them so far, that they pass through its
light back to their own darkness, their sins, which in that moment had
been dispelled by the holiness of baptism, returning immediately upon
them, as though it were the darkness returning which the light had
dispelled while they were passing through it.

<span id="v.iv.iii.xii-p4"></span>20.  For that sins which have been
remitted do return upon a man, where there is no brotherly love, is most
clearly taught by our Lord, in the case of the servant whom He found
owing Him ten thousand talents, and to whom He yet forgave all at his
entreaty.  But when he refused to have pity on his fellow-servant who
owed him a hundred pence, the Lord commanded him to pay what He had
forgiven him.  The time, then, at which pardon is received through
baptism is as it were the time for rendering accounts, so that all the
debts which are found to be due may be remitted.  Yet it was not
afterwards that the servant lent his fellow-servant the money, which he
had so pitilessly exacted when the other was unable to pay it; but his
fellow-servant already owed him the debt, when he himself, on rendering
his accounts to his master, was excused a debt of so vast an amount.  He
had not first excused his fellow-servant, and so come to receive
forgiveness from his Lord.  This is proved by the words of the
fellow-servant:  "Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all." 
Otherwise he would have said, "You forgave me it before; why do you
again demand it?"  This is made more clear by the words of the Lord
Himself.  For He says, "But the same servant went out, and found one of
his fellow-servants which was owing <span
id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184) him a hundred pence." <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185)   He does not say, "To whom he had
already forgiven a debt of a hundred pence."  Since then He says, "was
owing him," it is clear that he had not forgiven him the debt.  And
indeed it would have been better, and more in accordance with the
position of a man who was going to render an account of so great a debt,
and expected forbearance from his lord, that he should first have
forgiven his fellow-servant what was due to him, and so have come to
render the account when there was such need for imploring the compassion
of his lord.  Yet the fact that he had not yet forgiven his
fellow-servant, did not prevent his lord from forgiving him all his
debts on the occasion of receiving his accounts.  But what advantage was
it to him, since they all immediately returned with redoubled force upon
his head, in consequence of his persistent want of charity?  So the
grace of baptism is not prevented from giving remission of all sins,
even if he to whom they are forgiven continues to cherish hatred towards
his brother in his heart.  For the guilt of yesterday is remitted, and
all that was before it, nay, even the guilt of the very hour and moment
previous to baptism, and during baptism itself.  But then he immediately
begins again to be responsible, not only for the days, hours, moments
which ensue, but also for the past,—the guilt of all the sins which were
remitted returning on him, as happens only too frequently in the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[419:1184](1040254.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="v.iv.iii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.xii-p2"></span> [Wisd. i.
5](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.iii.xii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[420:1185](1040254.htm#fr_1184) <span
id="v.iv.iii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.xii-p5"></span> *Debebat*.  Hieron, debebat, LXX.
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.iii.xii-p5.1"></span>ὤφειλεν</span>.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[420:1186](1040254.htm#fr_1185) <span
id="v.iv.iii.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.xii-p6"></span> [Matt. xviii.
23-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023)<span
id="v.iv.iii.xii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1040255)
