[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040451)  [Next](1040453.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ix.liii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.liii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.ix.liii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 53.—</span>101.  The question is
also commonly raised, whether baptism is to be held valid which is
received from one who had not himself received it, if, from some
promptings of curiosity, he had chanced to learn how it ought to be
conferred; and whether it makes no difference in what spirit the
recipient receives it, whether in mockery or in sincerity:  if in
mockery, whether the difference arises when the mockery is of deceit, as
in the Church, or in what is thought to be the Church; or when it is in
jest, as in a play:  and which is the more accursed, to receive it
deceitfully in the Church, or in heresy or schism <span id="page_513">p.
513</span> <span id="v.iv.ix.liii-Page_513"></span>without deceit, that
is to say, with full sincerity of heart:  or whether it be worse to
receive it deceitfully in heresy or in good faith in a play, if any one
were to be moved by a sudden feeling of religion in the midst of his
acting.  And yet, if we compare such an one even with him who receives
it deceitfully in the Catholic Church itself, I should be surprised if
any one were to doubt which of the two should be preferred; for I do not
see of what avail the intention of him who gives in truth can be to him
who receives deceitfully.  But let us consider, in the case of some one
also giving it in deceit, when both the given and the recipient are
acting deceitfully in the unity of the Catholic Church itself, whether
this should rather be acknowledged as baptism, or that which is given in
a play, if any one should be found who received it faithfully from a
sudden impulse of religion:  or whether it be not true that, so far as
the men themselves are concerned, there is a very great difference
between the believing recipient in a play, and the mocking recipient in
the Church; but that in regard to the genuineness of the sacrament there
is no difference.  For if it makes no difference in respect to the
genuineness of the sacrament within the Catholic Church itself, whether
certain persons celebrate it in truth or in deceit, so long as both
still celebrate the same thing, I cannot see why it should make a
difference outside, seeing that he who receives it is not cloaked by his
deceit, but he is changed by his religious impulse.  Or have those
truthful persons among whom it is celebrated more power for the
confirmation of the sacrament, than those deceitful men by whom and in
whom it is celebrated can exert for its invalidation?  And yet, if the
deceit be subsequently brought to light, no one seeks a repetition of
the sacrament; but the fraud is either punished by excommunication or
set right by penitence.

<span id="v.iv.ix.liii-p2"></span>102.  But the safe course for us is,
not to advance with any rashness of judgment in setting forth a view
which has neither been started in any regionary Council of the Catholic
Church nor established in a plenary one; but to assert, with all the
confidence of a voice that cannot be gainsaid, what has been confirmed
by the consent of the universal Church, under the direction of our Lord
God and Saviour Jesus Christ.  Nevertheless, if any one were to press
me—supposing I were duly seated in a Council in which a question were
raised on points like these—to declare what my own opinion was, without
reference to the previously expressed views of others, whose judgment I
would rather follow, if I were under the influence of the same feelings
as led me to assert what I have said before, I should have no hesitation
in saying that all men possess baptism who have received it in any
place, from any sort of men, provided that it were consecrated in the
words of the gospel, and received without deceit on their part with some
degree of faith; although it would be of no profit to them for the
salvation of their souls if they were without charity, by which they
might be grafted into the Catholic Church.  For "though I have faith,"
says the apostle, "so that I could remove mountains, but have not
charity, I am nothing." <span id="fr_1915"></span>[1916](#fn_1915.md)  
Just as already, from the established decrees of our predecessors, I
have no hesitation in saying that all those have baptism who, though
they receive it deceitfully, yet receive it in the Church, or where the
Church is thought to be by those in whose society it is received, of
whom it was said, "They went out from us." <span
id="fr_1916"></span>[1917](#fn_1916.md)   But when there was no society of
those who so believed, and when the man who received it did not himself
hold such belief, but the whole thing was done as a farce, or a comedy,
or a jest,—if I were asked whether the baptism which was thus conferred
should be approved, I should declare my opinion that we ought to pray
for the declaration of God’s judgment through the medium of some
revelation seeking it with united prayer and earnest groanings of
suppliant devotion, humbly deferring all the time to the decision of
those who were to give their judgment after me, in case they should set
forth anything as already known and determined.  And, therefore, how
much the more must I be considered to have given my opinion now without
prejudice to the utterance of more diligent research or authority higher
than my own!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1915"></span>[513:1916](1040452.htm#fr_1915.md) <span
id="v.iv.ix.liii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.liii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002.md)<span id="v.iv.ix.liii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1916"></span>[513:1917](1040452.htm#fr_1916.md) <span
id="v.iv.ix.liii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.liii-p4"></span> [1 John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019.md)<span
id="v.iv.ix.liii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54](1040453.md)
