[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040153)  [Next](1040155.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.viii-p1.1"></span>Book VI.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p2"></span>Faustus avows his disbelief in the Old
Testament and his disregard of its precepts, and accuses Catholics of
inconsistency in neglecting its ordinances, while claiming to accept it
as authoritative.  Augustin explains the Catholic view of the relation
of the Old Testament to the New.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.viii-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  You ask if I believe
the Old Testament.  Of course not, for I do not keep its precepts. 
Neither, I imagine, do you.  I reject circumcision as disgusting; and if
I mistake not, so do you.  I reject the observance of Sabbaths as
superfluous:  I suppose you do the same.  I reject sacrifice as
idolatry, as doubtless you also do.  Swine’s flesh is not the only flesh
I abstain from; nor is it the only flesh you eat.  I think all flesh
unclean:  you think none unclean.  Both alike, in these opinions, throw
over the Old Testament.  We both look upon the weeks of unleavened bread
and the feast of tabernacles as unnecessary and useless.  Not to patch
linen garments with purple; to count it adultery to make a garment of
linen and wool; to call it sacrilege to yoke together an ox and an ass
when necessary; not to appoint as priest a bald man, or a man with red
hair, or any similar peculiarity, as being unclean in the sight of God,
are things which we both despise and laugh at, and rank as of neither
first nor second importance; and yet they are all precepts and judgments
of the Old Testament.  You cannot blame me for rejecting the Old
Testament; for whether it is right or wrong to do so, you do it as much
as I.  As for the difference between your faith and mine, it is this,
that while you choose to act deceitfully, and meanly to praise in words
what in your heart you hate, I, not having learned the art of deception,
frankly declare that I hate both these abominable precepts and their
authors.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p4"></span>2.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.viii-p4.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  How and for what
purpose the Old Testament is received by the heirs of the New Testament
has been already explained. <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md)  
But as the remarks of Faustus were then about the promises of the Old
Testament, and now he speaks of the precepts, I reply that he displays
ignorance of the difference between moral and symbolical precepts.  For
example, "Thou shalt not covet" is a moral precept; "Thou shalt
circumcise every male on the eighth day" is a symbolical precept.  From
not making this distinction, the Manichæans, and all who find fault with
the writings of the Old Testament, not seeing that whatever observance
God appointed for the former dispensation was a shadow of future things,
because these observances are now discontinued, condemn them, though no
doubt what is unsuitable <span id="page_168">p. 168</span> <span
id="iv.ix.viii-Page_168"></span>now was perfectly suitable then as
prefiguring the things now revealed.  In this they contradict the
apostle who says, "All these things happened to them for an example, and
they were written for our learning, on whom the end of the world is
come." <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346.md)   The apostle here
explains why these writings are to be received, and why it is no longer
necessary to continue the symbolical observances.  For when he says,
"They were written for our learning," he clearly shows that we should be
very diligent in reading and in discovering the meaning of the Old
Testament Scriptures, and that we should have great veneration for them,
since it was for us that they were written.  Again, when he says, "They
are our examples," and "these things happened to them for an example,"
he shows that, now that the things themselves are clearly revealed, the
observance of the actions by which these things were prefigured is no
longer binding.  So he says elsewhere, "Let no man judge you in meat, or
in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon or of the
sabbath-days, which are a shadow of things to come." <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347.md)   Here also, when he says, "Let no one
judge you" in these things, he shows that we are no longer bound to
observe them.  And when he says, "which are a shadow of things to come,"
he explains how these observances were binding at the time when the
things fully disclosed to us were symbolized by these shadows of future
things.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p8"></span>3.  Assuredly, if the Manichæans were
justified by the resurrection of the Lord,—the day of whose
resurrection, the third after His passion, was the eighth day, coming
after the Sabbath, that is, after the seventh day,—their carnal minds
would be delivered from the darkness of earthly passions which rests on
them; and rejoicing in the circumcision of the heart, they would not
ridicule it as prefigured in the Old Testament by circumcision in the
flesh, although they should not enforce this observance under the New
Testament.  But, as the apostle says, "To the pure all things are pure. 
But to the impure and unbelieving nothing is pure, but both their mind
and conscience are defiled." <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348.md)  
So these people, who are so pure in their own eyes, that they regard, or
pretend to regard, as impure these members of their bodies, are so
defiled with unbelief and error, that, while they abhor the circumcision
of the flesh,—which the apostle calls a seal of the righteousness of
faith,—they believe that the divine members of their God are subjected
to restraint and contamination in these very carnal members of theirs. 
For they say that flesh is unclean; and it follows that God, in the part
which is detained by the flesh, is made unclean:  for they declare that
He must be cleansed, and that till this is done, as far as it can be
done, He undergoes all the passions to which flesh is subject, not only
in suffering pain and distress, but also in sensual gratification.  For
it is for His sake, they say, that they abstain from sexual intercourse,
that He may not be bound more closely in the bondage of the flesh, nor
suffer more defilement.  The apostle says, "To the pure all things are
pure."  And if this is true of men, who may be led into evil by a
perverse will, how much more must all things be pure to God, who remains
for ever immutable and immaculate!  In those books which you defile with
your violent reproaches, it is said of the divine wisdom, that "no
defiled thing falleth into it, and it goeth everywhere by reason of its
pureness." <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349.md)   It is mere prurient
absurdity to find fault with the sign of human regeneration appointed by
that God, to whom all things are pure, to be put on the organ of human
generation, while you hold that your God, to whom nothing is pure, is in
a part of his nature subjected to taint and corruption by the vicious
actions in which impure men employ the members of their body.  For if
you think there is pollution in conjugal intercourse, what must there be
in all the practices of the licentious?  If you ask, then, as you often
do, whether God could not find some other way of sealing the
righteousness of faith, the answer is, Why not this way, since all
things are pure to the pure, much more to God?  And we have the
authority of the apostle for saying that circumcision was the seal of
the righteousness of the faith of Abraham.  As for you, you must try not
to blush when you are asked whether your God had nothing better to do
than to entangle part of his nature with these members that you revile
so much.  These are delicate subjects to speak of, on account of the
penal corruption attending the propagation of man.  They are things
which call into exercise the modesty of the chaste, the passions of the
impure, and the justice of God.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p11"></span>4.  The rest of the Sabbath we consider
no longer binding as an observance, now that the hope of our eternal
rest has been revealed.  But it is a very useful thing to read of, and
to reflect on.  In prophetic times, when things now manifested were
prefigured and predicted by actions as well as words, this <span
id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span id="iv.ix.viii-Page_169"></span>sign
of which we read was a presage of the reality which we possess.  But I
wish to know why you observe a sort of partial rest.  The Jews, on their
Sabbath, which they still keep in a carnal manner, neither gather any
fruit in the field, nor dress and cook it at home.  But you, in your
rest, wait till one of your followers takes his knife or hook to the
garden, to get food for you by murdering the vegetables, and brings
back, strange to say, living corpses.  For if cutting plants is not
murder, why are you afraid to do it?  And yet, if the plants are
murdered, what becomes of the life which is to obtain release and
restoration from your mastication and digestion?  Well, you take the
living vegetables, and certainly you ought, if it could be done to
swallow them whole; so that after the one wound your follower has been
guilty of inflicting in pulling them, of which you will no doubt consent
to absolve him, they may reach without loss or injury your private
laboratory, where your God may be healed of his wound.  Instead of this,
you not only tear them with your teeth, but, if it pleases your taste,
mince them, inflicting a multitude of wounds in the most criminal
manner.  Plainly it would be a most advantageous thing if you would rest
at home too, and not only once a week, like the Jews, but every day of
the week.  The cucumbers suffer while you are cooking them, without any
benefit to the life that is in them:  for a boiling pot cannot be
compared to a saintly stomach.  And yet you ridicule as superfluous the
rest of the Sabbath.  Would it not be better, not only to refrain from
finding fault with the fathers for this observance, in whose case it was
not superfluous, but, even now that it is superfluous, to observe this
rest yourselves instead of your own, which has no symbolical use, and is
condemned as grounded on falsehood?  According to your own foolish
opinions, you are guilty of a defective observance of your own rest,
though the observance itself is foolish in the judgment of truth.  You
maintain that the fruit suffers when it is pulled from the tree, when it
is cut and scraped, and cooked, and eaten.  So you are wrong in eating
anything that can not be swallowed raw and unhurt, so that the wound
inflicted might not be from you, but from your follower in pulling
them.  You declare that you could not give release to so great a
quantity of life, if you were to eat only things which could be
swallowed without cooking or mastication.  But if this release
compensates for all the pains you inflict, why is it unlawful for you to
pull the fruit?  Fruit may be eaten raw, as some of your sect make a
point of eating raw vegetables of all kinds.  But before it can be eaten
at all, it must be pulled or fall off, or be taken in some way from the
ground or from the tree.  You might well be pardoned for pulling it,
since nothing can be done without that, but not for torturing the
members of your God to the extent you do in dressing your food.  One of
your silly notions is that the tree weeps when the fruit is pulled. 
Doubtless the life in the tree knows all things, and perceives who it is
that comes to it.  If the elect were to come and pull the fruit, would
not the tree rejoice to escape the misery of having its fruit plucked by
others, and to gain felicity by enduring a little momentary pain?  And
yet, while you multiply the pains and troubles of the fruit after it is
plucked, you will not pluck it.  Explain that, if you can!  Fasting
itself is a mistake in your case.  There should be no intermission in
the task of purging away the dross of the excrements from the spiritual
gold, and of releasing the divine members from confinement.  The most
merciful man among you is he who keeps himself always in good health,
takes raw food, and eats a great deal.  But you are cruel when you eat,
in making your food undergo so much suffering; and you are cruel when
you fast, in desisting from the work of liberating the divine
members. <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350.md)

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p13"></span>5.  With all this, you venture to
denounce the sacrifices of the Old Testament, and to call them idolatry,
and to attribute to us the same impious notion.  To answer for ourselves
in the first place, while we consider it no longer a duty to offer
sacrifices, we recognize sacrifices as part of the mysteries of
Revelation, by which the things prophesied were foreshadowed.  For they
were our examples, and in many and various ways they all pointed to the
one sacrifice which we now commemorate.  Now that this sacrifice has
been revealed, and has been offered in due time, sacrifice is no longer
binding as an act of worship, while it retains its symbolical
authority.  For these things "were written for our learning, upon whom
the end of the world is come." <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351.md)  
What you object to in sacrifice is the slaughter of animals, though the
whole animal creation is intended conditionally in some way for the use
of man.  You are merciful to beasts, believing them to contain the souls
of human beings, while you refuse a piece of bread to a hungry beggar. 
The Lord Jesus, on the other hand, was cruel to the swine when He
granted the request of the devils to <span id="page_170">p. 170</span>
<span id="iv.ix.viii-Page_170"></span>be allowed to enter into them.
 <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352.md)   The same Lord Jesus, before
the sacrifice of His passion, said to a leper whom He had cured, "Go,
show thyself to the priest, and give the offering, as Moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them." <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353.md)  
When God, by the prophets, repeatedly declares that He needs no
offering, as indeed reason teaches us that offerings cannot be needed by
Him who stands in need of nothing, the human mind is led to inquire what
God wished to teach us by these sacrifices.  For, assuredly, He would
not have required offerings of which He had no need, except to teach us
something that it would profit us to know, and which was suitably set
forth by means of these symbols.  How much better and more honorable it
would be for you to be still bound by these sacrifices, which have an
instructive meaning, though they are not now necessary, than to require
your followers to offer to you as food what you believe to be living
victims.  The Apostle Paul says most appropriately of some who preached
the gospel to gratify their appetite, that their "god was their
belly." <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354.md)   But the arrogance of
your impiety goes much beyond this; for, instead of making your belly
your god, you do what is far worse in making your belly the purifier of
God.  Surely it is great madness to make a pretence of piety in not
slaughtering animals, while you hold that the souls of animals inhabit
all the food you eat, and yet make what you call living creatures suffer
such torture from your hands and teeth.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p18"></span>6.  If you will not eat flesh why
should you not slay animals in sacrifice to your God, in order that
their souls, which you hold to be not only human, but so divine as to be
members of God Himself, may be released from the confinement of flesh,
and be saved from returning by the efficacy of your prayers?  Perhaps,
however, your stomach gives more effectual aid than your intellect, and
that part of divinity which has had the advantage of passing through
your bowels is more likely to be saved than that which has only the
benefit of your prayers.  Your objection to eating flesh will be that
you cannot eat animals alive, and so the operation of your stomach will
not avail for the liberation of their souls.  Happy vegetables, that,
torn up with the hand, cut with knives, tortured in fire, ground by
teeth, yet reach alive the altars of your intestines!  Unhappy sheep and
oxen, that are not so tenacious of life, and therefore are refused
entrance into your bodies!  Such is the absurdity of your notions.  And
you persist in making out an opposition in us to the Old Testament,
because we consider no flesh unclean:  according to the opinion of the
apostle, "To the pure all things are pure;" <span
id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355.md) and according to the saying of our
Lord Himself, "Not that which goeth into your mouth defileth you, but
that which cometh out." <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356.md)   This
was not said to the crowd only, as your Adimantus, whom Faustus, in his
attack on the Old Testament, praises as second only to Manichæus, wishes
us to understand; but when retired from the crowd, the Lord repeated
this still more plainly and pointedly to His disciples.  Adimantus
quotes this saying of our Lord in opposition to the Old Testament, where
the people are prohibited from eating some animals which are pronounced
unclean; and doubtless he was afraid that he should be asked why, since
he quotes a passage from the Gospel about man not being defiled by what
enters into his mouth and passes into his belly, and out into the draft,
he yet considers not some only, but all flesh unclean, and abstains from
eating it.  It is in order to escape from this strait, when the plain
truth is too much for his error, that he makes the Lord say this to the
crowd; as if the Lord were in the habit of speaking the truth only in
small companies, while He blurted out falsehoods in public.  To speak of
the Lord in this way is blasphemy.  And all who read the passage can see
that the Lord said the same thing more plainly to His disciples in
private.  Since Faustus praises Adimantus so much at the beginning of
this book of his, placing him next to Manichæus, let him say in a word
whether it is true or false that a man is not defiled by what enters
into his mouth.  If it is false, why does this great teacher Adimantus
quote it against the Old Testament?  If it is true, why, in spite of
this, do you believe that eating any flesh will defile you?  It is true,
if you choose this explanation, that the apostle does not say that all
things are pure to heretics, but, "to the pure all things are pure." 
The apostle also goes on to explain why all things are not pure to
heretics:  "To the impure and unbelieving nothing is pure, but both
their mind and conscience are defiled." <span
id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357.md)   So to the Manichæans there is
absolutely nothing pure; for they hold that the very substance or nature
of God not only may be, but has actually been defiled, and so defiled
that it can never be wholly restored and purified.  What do they mean
when they call animals unclean, and refrain from eating them, when it is
impossible for them to think anything, whether food or whatever it may
be, clean?  According to them, vegetables <span id="page_171">p.
171</span> <span id="iv.ix.viii-Page_171"></span>too, fruits, all kinds
of crops, the earth and sky, are defiled by mixture with the race of
darkness.  Why do they not act up to their opinions about other things
as well as about animals?  Why do they not abstain altogether, and
starve themselves to death, instead of persisting in their blasphemies? 
If they will not repent and reform, this is evidently the best thing
that they could do.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p22"></span>7.  The saying of the apostle, that "to
the pure all things are pure," and that "every creature of God is good,"
is not opposed to the prohibitions of the Old Testament; and the
explanation, if they can understand it, is this.  The apostle speaks of
the natures of the things, while the Old Testament calls some animals
unclean, not in their nature, but symbolically, on account of the
prefigurative character of that dispensation.  For instance, a pig and a
lamb are both clean in their nature, for every creature of God is good;
but symbolically, a lamb is clean, and a pig unclean.  So the words wise
and fool are both clean in their nature, as words composed of letters
but fool may be called symbolically unclean, because it means an unclean
thing.  Perhaps a pig is the same among symbols as a fool is among real
things.  The animal, and the four letters which compose the word, may
mean the same thing.  No doubt the animal is pronounced unclean by the
law, because it does not chew the cud; which is not a fault but its
nature.  But the men of whom this animal is a symbol are unclean, not by
nature, but from their own fault; because, though they gladly hear the
words of wisdom, they never reflect on them afterwards.  For to recall,
in quiet repose, some useful instruction from the stomach of memory to
the mouth of reflection, is a kind of spiritual rumination.  The animals
above mentioned are a symbol of those people who do not do this.  And
the prohibition of the flesh of these animals is a warning against this
fault.  Another passage of Scripture speaks of the precious treasure of
wisdom, and describes ruminating as clean, and not ruminating as
unclean:  "A precious treasure resteth in the mouth of a wise man; but a
foolish man swallows it up." <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358.md)  
Symbols of this kind, either in words or in things, give useful and
pleasant exercise to intelligent minds in the way of inquiry and
comparison.  But formerly people were required not only to hear, but to
practise many such things.  For at that time it was necessary that, by
deeds as well as by words, those things should be foreshadowed which
were in after times to be revealed.  After the revelation by Christ and
in Christ, the community of believers is not burdened with the practice
of the observances, but is admonished to give heed to the prophecy. 
This is our reason for accounting no animals unclean, in accordance with
the saying of the Lord and of the apostle, while we are not opposed to
the Old Testament, where some animals are pronounced unclean.  Now let
us hear why you consider all animal food unclean.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p24"></span>8.  One of your false doctrines is,
that flesh is unclean on account of mixture with the race of darkness. 
But this would make not only flesh unclean, but your God himself, in
that part which he sent to become subject to absorption and
contamination, in order that the enemy might be conquered and taken
captive.  Besides, on account of this mixture, all that you eat must be
unclean.  But you say flesh is especially unclean.  It requires patience
to listen to all their absurd reasons for this peculiar impurity of
flesh.  I will mention only what will suffice to show the inveterate
folly of these critics of the Old Testament, who, while they denounce
flesh, savor only fleshly things, and have no sort of spiritual
perception.  And a lengthy discussion of this question may perhaps
enable us to dispense with saying much on some other points.  The
following, then, is an account of their vain delusions in this
matter:—In that battle, when the First Man ensnared the race of darkness
by deceitful elements, princes of both sexes belonging to this race were
taken.  By means of these princes the world was constructed; and among
those used in the formation of the heavenly bodies, were some pregnant
females.  When the sky began to rotate, the rapid circular motion made
these females give birth to abortions, which, being of both sexes, fell
on the earth, and lived, and grew, and came together, and produced
offspring.  Hence sprang all animal life in earth, air, and sea. <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359.md)   Now if the origin of flesh is from
heaven, that is no reason for thinking it especially unclean.  Indeed,
in this construction of the world, they hold that these principles of
darkness were arranged higher or lower, according to the greater or less
amount of good mixed with them in the construction of the various parts
of the world.  So flesh ought to be cleaner than vegetables which come
out of the earth, for it comes from heaven.  And how irrational to
suppose that the abortions, before becoming animate, were so lively,
though in an abortive state, that after falling from the sky, they could
live and multiply; whereas, after becoming animate, they die if brought
<span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span
id="iv.ix.viii-Page_172"></span>forth prematurely, and a fall from a
very moderate height is enough to kill them!  The kingdom of life in
contest with the kingdom of death ought to have improved them, by giving
them life instead of making them more perishable than before.  If the
perishableness is a consequence of a change of nature, it is wrong to
say that there is a bad nature.  The change is the only cause of the
perishableness.  Both natures are good, though one is better than the
other.  Whence then comes the peculiar impurity of flesh as it exists in
this world, sprung, as they say, from heaven?  They tell us, indeed, of
the first bodies of these principles of darkness being generated like
worms from trees of darkness; and the trees, they say, are produced from
the five elements.  But supposing that the bodies of animals come in the
first place from trees, and afterwards from heaven, why should they be
more unclean than the fruit of trees?  Perhaps it will be said that what
remains after death is unclean, because the life is no longer there. 
For the same reason fruits and vegetables must be unclean, for they die
when they are pulled or cut.  As we saw before, the elect get others to
bring their food to them, that they may not be guilty of murder. 
Perhaps, since they say that every living being has two souls, one of
the race of light, and the other of the race of darkness, the good soul
leaves at death, and the bad soul remains.  But, in that case, the
animal would be as much alive as it was in the kingdom of darkness, when
it had only the soul of its own race, with which it had rebelled against
the kingdom of God.  So, since both souls leave at death, why call the
flesh unclean, as if only the good soul had left?  Any life that remains
must be of both kinds; for some remains of the members of God are found,
we are told, even in filth.  There is therefore no reason for making
flesh more unclean than fruits.  The truth is, they pretend to great
chastity in holding flesh unclean because it is generated.  But if the
divine body is more grossly shut in by flesh, there is all the more
reason that they should liberate it by eating.  And there are
innumerable kinds of worms not produced from sexual intercourse; some in
the neighborhood of Venice come from trees, which they should eat, since
there is not the same reason for their being unclean.  Besides, there
are the frogs produced by the earth after a shower of rain. <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360.md)   Let them liberate the members of
their God from these.  Let them rebuke the mistake of mankind in
preferring fowls and pigeons produced from males and females to the pure
frogs, daughters of heaven and earth.  By this theory, the first
principles of darkness produced from trees must be purer than Manichæus,
who was produced by generation; and his followers, for the same reason,
must be less pure than the lice which spring from the perspiration of
their bodies.  But if everything that comes from flesh is unclean,
because the origin of flesh itself is unclean, fruits and vegetables
must also be unclean, because they are manured with dung.  After this,
what becomes of the notion that fruits are cleaner than flesh?  Dung is
the most unclean product of flesh, and also the most fertilizing
manure.  Their doctrine is, that the life escapes in the mastication and
digestion of the food, so that only a particle remains in the
excrement.  How is it, then, that this particle of life has such an
effect on the growth and the quality of your favorite food?  Flesh is
nourished by the productions of the earth, not by its excrements; while
the earth is nourished by the excrements of flesh, not by its
productions.  Let them say which is the cleaner.  Or let them turn from
being unbelieving and impure to whom nothing is clean, and join with us
in embracing the doctrine of the apostle, that to the pure all things
are pure; that the earth is the Lord’s, and the fullness thereof; that
every creature of God is good.  All things in nature are good in their
own order; and no one sins in using them, unless, by disobedience to
God, he transgresses his own order, and disturbs their order by using
them amiss.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p27"></span>9.  The elders who pleased God kept
their own order by their obedience, in observing, according to God’s
arrangement, what was appointed as suitable to certain times.  So,
although all animals intended for food are by nature clean, they
abstained from some which had then a symbolical uncleanness, in
preparation for the future revelation of the things signified.  And so
with regard to unleavened bread and all such things, in which the
apostle says there was a shadow of future things, neglect of their
observance under the old dispensation, when this observance was
enjoined, and was employed to prefigure what was afterwards to be
revealed, would have been as criminal, as it would now be foolish in us,
after the light of the New Testament has arisen, to think that these
predictive observances could be of any use to us.  On the other hand,
since the Old Testament teaches us that the things now revealed were so
long ago prefigured, that we may be firm and faithful in our adherence
to them, it would be blasphemy and impiety to discard these <span
id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span id="iv.ix.viii-Page_173"></span>books,
simply because the Lord requires of us now not a literal, but a
spiritual and intelligent regard to their contents.  They were written,
as the apostle says, for our admonition, on whom the end of the world is
come. <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361.md)   "For whatsoever things
were written aforetime were written for our learning." <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362.md)   Not to eat unleavened bread in the
appointed seven days was a sin in the time of the Old Testament; in the
time of the New Testament it is not a sin.  But having the hope of a
future world through Christ, who makes us altogether new by clothing our
souls with righteousness and our bodies with immortality, to believe
that the bondage and infirmity of our original corruption will prevail
over us or over our actions, must continue to be a sin, till the seven
days of the course of time are accomplished.  In the time of the Old
Testament, this, under the disguise of a type, was perceived by some
saints.  In the time of the New Testament it is fully declared and
publicly preached. <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363.md)

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p31"></span>What was then a precept of Scripture is
now a testimony.  Formerly, not to keep the feast of tabernacles was a
sin, which is not the case now.  But not to form part of the building of
God’s tabernacle, which is the Church, is always a sin.  Formerly this
was acted in a figure; now the record serves as testimony.  The ancient
tabernacle, indeed, would not have been called the tabernacle of the
testimony, unless as an appropriate symbol it had borne testimony to
some truth which was to be revealed in its own time.  To patch linen
garments with purple, or to wear a garment of woollen and linen
together, is not a sin now.  But to live intemperately, and to wish to
combine opposite modes of life,—as when a woman devoted to religion
wears the ornaments of married women, or when one who has not abstained
from marriage dresses like a virgin,—is always sin.  So it is sin
whenever inconsistent things are combined in any man’s life.  This,
which is now a moral truth, was then symbolized in dress.  What was then
a type is now revealed truth.  So the same Scripture which then required
symbolical actions, now testifies to the things signified.  The
prefigurative observance is now a record for the confirmation of our
faith.  Formerly it was unlawful to plough with an ox and an ass
together; now it is lawful.  The apostle explains this when he quotes
the text about not muzzling the ox that is treading out the corn.  He
says, "Does God care for oxen?"  What, then, have we to do with an
obsolete prohibition?  The apostle teaches us in the following words,
"For our sakes it is written." <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364.md)  
It must be impiety in us not to read what was written for our sakes; for
it is more for our sakes, to whom the revelation belongs, than for
theirs who had only the figure.  There is no harm in joining an ox with
an ass where it is required.  But to put a wise man and a fool together,
not that one should teach and the other obey, but that both with equal
authority should declare the word of God, cannot be done without causing
offence.  So the same Scripture which was once a command enjoining the
shadow in which future things were veiled, is now an authoritative
witness to the unveiled truth.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p33"></span>In what he says of the uncleanness of a
man that is bald or has red hair, Faustus is inaccurate, or the
manuscript he has used is incorrect. <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365.md)   Would that Faustus were not ashamed
to bear on his forehead the cross of Christ, the want of which is
baldness, instead of maintaining that Christ, who says, "I am the
truth," showed unreal marks, after His resurrection, of unreal wounds! 
Faustus says he has not learned the art of deceiving, and speaks what he
thinks.  He cannot therefore be a disciple of his Christ, whom he madly
declares to have shown false marks of wounds to his disciples when they
doubted.  Are we to believe Faustus, not only in his other absurdities,
but also when he tells us that he does not deceive us in calling Christ
a deceiver?  Is he better than Christ?  Is he not a deceiver, while
Christ is?  Or does he prove himself to be a disciple not of the
truthful Christ, but of the deceiver Manichæus, by this very falsehood,
when he boasts that he has not learned the art of deceiving?

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p35"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_345"></span>[167:346](1040154.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p5"></span> Book iv.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[168:347](1040154.htm#fr_346.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. x.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[168:348](1040154.htm#fr_347.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p7"></span> [Col.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[168:349](1040154.htm#fr_348.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p9"></span> [Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[168:350](1040154.htm#fr_349.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p10"></span> [Wis.
7:24](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[169:351](1040154.htm#fr_350.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p12"></span> \[In bringing to notice the
absurdities of the Manichæan moral system, Augustin may seem to be
trifling, but he is in reality striking at the root of the
heresy.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_351"></span>[169:352](1040154.htm#fr_351.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p14"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[170:353](1040154.htm#fr_352.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p15"></span> [Matt. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#032.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[170:354](1040154.htm#fr_353.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p16"></span> [Luke v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[170:355](1040154.htm#fr_354.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p17"></span> [Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[170:356](1040154.htm#fr_355.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p19"></span> [Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[170:357](1040154.htm#fr_356.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p20"></span> [Matt. xvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[170:358](1040154.htm#fr_357.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p21"></span> [Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[171:359](1040154.htm#fr_358.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p23"></span> [Prov. xxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[171:360](1040154.htm#fr_359.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p25"></span> \[Compare the *Introduction*, where an
abstract is given of the *Fihrist’s* account of the creation.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_360"></span>[172:361](1040154.htm#fr_360.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p26"></span> \[These biological blunders belong to
the age, and are not Augustin’s peculiar fancies.  Of course, the
argumentative value of them depends on their general
acceptance.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_361"></span>[173:362](1040154.htm#fr_361.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p28"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[173:363](1040154.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p29"></span> [Rom. xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[173:364](1040154.htm#fr_363.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p30"></span> \[It will be seen in subsequent
portions of this treatise that Augustin carries the typological idea to
an absurd extreme.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_364"></span>[173:365](1040154.htm#fr_364.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p32"></span> [1 Cor.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[173:366](1040154.htm#fr_365.md) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p34"></span> Cf. [Lev. xxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p34.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII](1040155.md)
