[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040627)  [Next](1040629) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xxxi"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter</span>. 31.—36.  "And where," he
says, "is the word that I added, *wittingly?*so that I did not say, He
that has received his faith from one that is faithless; but, He that has
received his faith *wittingly* from one that is faithless, receives not
faith but guilt."  He therefore who received his faith unwittingly from
one that was faithless, received not guilt but faith; and accordingly I
ask from what source he has received it?  And being thus placed in a
strait, he answers, "He ought to have examined him."  Granted that he
ought to have done so; but, as a matter of fact, he did not, or he was
not able:  what is your verdict about him?  Was he cleansed, or was he
not?  If he was cleansed, I ask from what source?  For the polluted
conscience of him that gave but not in holiness, with which he was
unacquainted, could not cleanse him.  But if he was not cleansed,
command that he be so now.  You give no such orders, therefore he was
cleansed.  Tell me by what means?  Do you at any rate tell me what
Petilianus has failed to tell.  For I propose to you the very same words
which he was unable to answer.  "Behold the faithless man stands ready
to baptize; but he who is to be baptized knows nothing of his
faithlessness:  what do you think that he will receive—faith, or
guilt?" <span id="fr_2388"></span>[2389](#fn_2388)   This is sufficient
as a constant form of question:  answer, or search diligently to find
what he has answered.  You will find abuse that has already been
convicted.  He finds fault with me, as though in derision, maintaining
that I ought to suggest what is probable for consideration, since I
cannot see the truth.  For, repeating my words, and cutting my sentence
in two, he says, "Behold, you say, the faithless man stands ready to
baptize; but he who is to be baptized knows nothing of his
faithlessness."  Then he goes on to ask, "Who is the man, and from what
corner has he started up, that you propose to us?"  Just as though there
were some one or two individuals, and such cases were not constantly
occurring everywhere on either side!  Why does he ask of me who the man
in question is, and from what corner he has started up, instead of
looking round, and seeing that the churches are few and far between,
whether in cities or in country districts, which do not contain men
detected in crimes, and degraded from the ministry?  While their true
character was concealed, while they wished to be thought good, though
really bad, and to be reputed chaste, though really guilty of adultery,
so long they were involved in deceit; and so the Holy Spirit, according
to the Scripture, was fleeing from them. <span
id="fr_2389"></span>[2390](#fn_2389)   It is from the crowd, therefore,
of these men who hitherto concealed their character that the faithless
man whom I suggested started up.  Why does he ask me whence he started
up, shutting his eyes to all this crowd, from which sufficient noise
arises to satisfy the blind, if we take into consideration none but
those who might have been convicted and degraded from their office?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2388"></span>[611:2389](1040628.htm#fr_2388) <span
id="v.v.v.xxxi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxxi-p2"></span> Book I. cc. 1, 2, 2, 3.

<span id="fn_2389"></span>[611:2390](1040628.htm#fr_2389) <span
id="v.v.v.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxxi-p3"></span> [Wisd. i.
5](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#005)<span id="v.v.v.xxxi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](1040629)
