[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040591)  [Next](1040593.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.cv"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 105.—</span>238.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.cv-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"But he thus praises the ointment of concord among brethren:  ‘Behold
how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity!  It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down
upon the beard, even Aaron’s beard; that went down to the skirts of his
garments; as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion:  for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life
for evermore.’ <span id="fr_2292"></span>[2293](#fn_2292.md)   Thus, he
says, is unity anointed, even as the priests are anointed."

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p3"></span>239.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  What you say is
true.  For that priesthood in the body of Christ had an anointing, and
its salvation is secured by the bond of unity.  For indeed Christ
Himself derives His name from chrism, that is, from anointing.  Him the
Hebrews call the Messiah, which word is closely akin <span
id="page_592">p. 592</span> <span id="v.v.iv.cv-Page_592"></span>to the
Phœnician language, as is the case with very many other Hebrew words, if
not with almost all.  <span id="fr_2293"></span>[2294](#fn_2293.md)   What
then is meant by the head in that priesthood, what by the beard, what by
the skirts of the garments?  So far as the Lord enables me to
understand, the head is none other than the Saviour of the body, of whom
the apostle says, "And He is the head of the body, the Church." <span
id="fr_2294"></span>[2295](#fn_2294.md)   By the beard is not unsuitably
understood fortitude.  Therefore, on those who show themselves to be
brave in His Church, and cling to the light of His countenance, to
preach the truth without fear, there descends from Christ Himself, as
from the head, a sacred ointment, that is to say, the sanctification of
the Spirit.  By the skirts of the garments we are here given to
understand that which is at the top of the garments, through which the
head of Him who gives the clothing enters.  By this are signified those
who are perfected in faith within the Church.  For in the skirts is
perfection.  And I presume you must remember what was said to a certain
rich man:  "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and
give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven; and come and
follow me." <span id="fr_2295"></span>[2296](#fn_2295.md)   He indeed went
away sorrowful, slighting what was perfect, choosing what was
imperfect.  But does it follow that there were wanting those who were so
made perfect by such a surrender of earthly things, that the ointment of
unity descended upon them, as from the head upon the skirts of the
garments?  For, putting aside the apostles, and those who were
immediately associated with those leaders and teachers of the Church,
whom we understand to be represented with greater dignity and more
conspicuous fortitude in the beard, read in the Acts of the Apostles,
and see those who "brought the prices of the things that were sold, and
laid them down at the apostles’ feet.  Neither said any of them that
aught of the things which he possessed was his own:  but they had all
things common:  and distribution was made unto every man according as he
had need.  And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and
of one soul." <span id="fr_2296"></span>[2297](#fn_2296.md)   I doubt not
that you are aware that it is so written.  Recognize, therefore, how
good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. 
Recognize the beard of Aaron; recognize the skirts of the spiritual
garments.  Search the Scriptures themselves, and see where those things
began to be done; you will find that it was in Jerusalem.  From this
skirt of the garment is woven together the whole fabric of unity
throughout all nations.  By this the Head entered into the garment, that
Christ should be clothed with all the variety of the several nations of
the earth, because in this skirt of the garment appeared the actual
variety of tongues.  Why, therefore, is the Head itself, whence that
ointment of unity descended, that is, the spiritual fragrance of
brotherly love,—why, I say, is the Head itself exposed to your
resistance, while it testifies and declares that "repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in His name among all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem"? <span id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297.md)  
And by this ointment you wish the sacrament of chrism to be understood,
which is indeed holy as among the class of visible signs, like baptism
itself, but yet can exist even among the worst of men, wasting their
life in the works of the flesh, and never destined to possess the
kingdom of heaven, and having therefore nothing to do either with the
beard of Aaron, or with the skirts of his garments, or with any fabric
of priestly clothing.  For where do you intend to place what the apostle
enumerates as "the manifest works of the flesh, which," he says, "are
these:  fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, poisonings,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, heresies, envyings,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like:  of the which I tell you before,
as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things
shall not inherit the kingdom of God?" <span
id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298.md)   I put aside fornications, which
are committed in secret; interpret uncleanness as you please, I am
willing to put it aside as well.  Let us put on one side also poisons,
since no one is openly a compounder or giver of poisons.  I put aside
also heresies, since you will have it so.  I am in doubt whether I ought
to put aside idolatry, since the apostle classes with it covetousness,
which is openly rife among you.  However, setting aside all these, are
there none among you lascivious, none covetous, none open in their
indulgence of enmities, none fond of strife, or fond of emulation,
wrathful, given to seditions, envious, drunken, wasting their time in
revellings?  Are none of such a character anointed among you?  Do none
die well known among you to be given to such things, or openly indulging
in them?  If you say there are none, I would have you consider whether
you do <span id="page_593">p. 593</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.cv-Page_593"></span>not come under the description yourself,
since you are manifestly telling lies in the desire for strife.  But if
you are yourself severed from men of this sort, not by bodily
separation, but by dissimilarity of life, and if you behold with
lamentation crowds like these around your altars, what shall we say,
since they are anointed with holy oil, and yet, as the apostle assures
us with the clearness of truth, shall not inherit the kingdom of God? 
Must we do such impious despite to the beard of Aaron and to the skirts
of his garments, as to suppose that they are to be placed there?  Far be
that from us.  Separate therefore the visible holy sacrament, which can
exist both in the good and in the bad,—in the former for their reward,
in the latter for judgment; separate it from the invisible unction of
charity, which is the peculiar property of the good.  Separate them,
separate them, ay, and may God separate you from the party of Donatus,
and call you back again into the Catholic Church, whence you were torn
by them while yet a catechumen, to be bound by them in the bond of a
deadly distinction.  Now are ye not in the mountains of Zion, the dew of
Hermon on the mountains of Zion, in whatever sense that be received by
you; for you are not in the city upon a hill, which has this as its sure
sign, that it cannot be hid.  It is known therefore unto all nations. 
But the party of Donatus is unknown to the majority of nations,
therefore is it not the true city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2292"></span>[591:2293](1040592.htm#fr_2292.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p2"></span> [Ps.
cxxxiii](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#000.md)<span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2293"></span>[592:2294](1040592.htm#fr_2293.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p4"></span> Compare *Tract*. xv. 27 *in Joannem*: 
"Messiah was anointed.  The Greek for ‘anointed’ is ‘Christ,’ the Hebrew
Messiah; whence also in Phœnician we have ‘Messe’ for ‘anoint.’  For
these languages, the Hebrew, Phœnician and Syrian, are closely cognate,
as well as geographically bordering on each other."  See also Max
Müller’s *Lectures on the Science of Language*, series I. Lect. VIII. 
"The ancient language of Phœnicia, to judge from inscriptions, was most
closely allied to Hebrew."

<span id="fn_2294"></span>[592:2295](1040592.htm#fr_2294.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p5"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md)<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2295"></span>[592:2296](1040592.htm#fr_2295.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p6"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021.md)<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2296"></span>[592:2297](1040592.htm#fr_2296.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p7"></span> [Acts iv.
32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md)<span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[592:2298](1040592.htm#fr_2297.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p8"></span> [Luke xxiv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047.md)<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[592:2299](1040592.htm#fr_2298.md) <span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.cv-p9"></span> [Gal. v.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019.md)<span
id="v.v.iv.cv-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 106](1040593.md)
