[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040330)  [Next](1040332.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—</span>7.  For when this is done
occasionally in the case of individuals, at great intervals of time and
space, the enormity of the deed is not equally felt; but if all were
suddenly to be brought together who had been baptized in course of time
by the aforesaid followers of Maximianus, either under pressure of the
peril of death or at their Easter solemnities, and it were told them
that they must be baptized again, because what they had already received
in the sacrilege of schism was null and void, they might indeed say what
obstinate perseverance in their error would compel them to say, that
they might hide the rigor and iciness of their hardness under any kind
of false shade of consistency against the warmth of truth.  But in fact,
because the party of Maximianus could not bear this, and because the
very men who would have to enforce it could not endure what must needs
have been done in the case of so many men at once, especially as those
very men would be rebaptizing them in the party of Primianus who had
already baptized them in the party of Maximianus, for these reasons
their baptism was received, and the pride of the Donatists was cut
short.  And this course they would certainly not have chosen to adopt,
had they not thought that more harm would have been done to their cause
by the offense men would have taken at the repetition of the baptism,
than by the reputation lost in abandoning their defense.  And this I
would not say with any idea that we ought to be restrained by
consideration of human feelings, if the truth compelled those who came
from heretics to be baptized afresh.  But because the holy Cyprian says,
"that heretics might have been all the more impelled to the necessity of
coming over, if only they were to be rebaptized in the Catholic
Church," <span id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473.md) on this account I
have wished to place on record the intensity of the repugnance to this
act which is seated deeply in the heart of nearly every one,—a
repugnance which I can believe was inspired by God Himself, that the
Church might be fortified by the instinct of repugnance against any
possible arguments which the weak cannot dispel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[466:1474](1040331.htm#fr_1473.md) <span
id="v.iv.vii.vi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.vi-p2"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1040332.md)
