[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040661)  [Next](1040663) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.v"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—</span>12.  But those who are
unacquainted with their habits think that they only kill themselves now
that all the mass of the people are freed from the fearful madness of
their usurped dominion, in virtue of the laws which have been passed for
the preservation of unity.  But those who know what they were accustomed
to do before the passing of the laws, do not wonder at their deaths, but
call to mind their character; and especially how vast crowds of them
used to come in procession to the most frequented ceremonies of the
pagans, while the worship of idols still continued,—not with the view of
breaking the idols, but that they might be put to death by those who
worshipped them.  For if they had sought to break the idols under the
sanction of legitimate authority, they might, in case of anything
happening to them, have had some shadow of a claim to be considered
martyrs; but their only object in coming was, that while the idols
remained uninjured, they themselves might meet with death.  For it was
the general custom of the strongest youths among the worshippers of
idols, for each of them to offer in sacrifice to the idols themselves
any victims that he might have slain.  Some went so far as to offer
themselves for slaughter to any travellers whom they met with arms,
using violent threats that they would murder them if they failed to meet
with death at their hands.  Sometimes, too, they extorted with violence
from any passing judge that they should be put to death by the
executioners, or by the officer of his court.  And hence we have a
story, that a certain judge played a trick upon them, by ordering them
to be bound and led away, as though for execution, and so escaped their
violence, without injury to himself or them.  Again, it was their daily
sport to kill themselves, by throwing themselves over precipices, or
into the water, or into the fire.  For the devil taught them these three
modes of suicide, so that, when they wished to die, and could not find
any one whom they could terrify into slaying them with his sword, they
threw themselves over the rocks, or committed themselves to the fire or
the eddying pool.  But who can be thought to have taught them this,
having gained possession of their hearts, but he who actually suggested
to our Saviour Himself as a duty sanctioned by the law, that He should
throw Himself down from a pinnacle of the temple?  <span
id="fr_2493"></span>[2494](#fn_2493)   And his suggestion they <span
id="page_638">p. 638</span> <span id="v.vi.v-Page_638"></span>would
surely have thrust far from them, had they carried Christ, as their
Master, in their hearts.  But since they have rather given place within
them to the devil, they either perish like the herd of swine, whom the
legion of devils drove down from the hill-side into the sea, <span
id="fr_2494"></span>[2495](#fn_2494) or, being rescued from that
destruction, and gathered together in the loving bosom of our Catholic
Mother, they are delivered just as the boy was delivered by our Lord,
whom his father brought to be healed of the devil, saying that ofttimes
he was wont to fall into the fire, and oft into the water. <span
id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495)

<span id="v.vi.v-p5"></span>13.  Whence it appears that great mercy is
shown towards them, when by the force of those very imperial laws they
are in the first instance rescued against their will from that sect in
which, through the teaching of lying devils, they learned those evil
doctrines, so that afterwards they might be made whole in the Catholic
Church, becoming accustomed to the good teaching and example which they
find in it.  For many of the men whom we now admire in the unity of
Christ, for the pious fervor of their faith, and for their charity, give
thanks to God with great joy that they are no longer in that error which
led them to mistake those evil things for good,—which thanks they would
not now be offering willingly, had they not first, even against their
will, been severed from that impious association.  And what are we to
say of those who confess to us, as some do every day, that even in the
olden days they had long been wishing to be Catholics; but they were
living among men among whom those who wished to be Catholics could not
be so through the infirmity of fear, seeing that if any one there said a
single word in favor of the Catholic Church, he and his house were
utterly destroyed at once?  Who is mad enough to deny that it was right
that assistance should have been given through the imperial decrees,
that they might be delivered from so great an evil, whilst those whom
they used to fear are compelled in turn to fear, and are either
themselves corrected through the same terror, or, at any rate, whilst
they pretend to be corrected, they abstain from further persecution of
those who really are, to whom they formerly were objects of continual
dread?

<span id="v.vi.v-p6"></span>14.  But if they have chosen to destroy
themselves, in order to prevent the deliverance of those who had a right
to be delivered, and have sought in this way to alarm the pious hearts
of the deliverers, so that in their apprehension that some few abandoned
men might perish, they should allow others to lose the opportunity of
deliverance from destruction, who were either already unwilling to
perish, or might have been saved from it by the employment of
compulsion; what is in this case the function of Christian charity,
especially when we consider that those who utter threats of their own
violent and voluntary deaths are very few in number in comparison with
the nations that are to be delivered?  What then is the function of
brotherly love?  Does it, because it fears the shortlived fires of the
furnace for a few, therefore abandon all to the eternal fires of hell?
and does it leave so many, who are either already desirous, or hereafter
are not strong enough to pass to life eternal, to perish everlastingly,
while taking precautions that some few should not perish by their own
hand, who are only living to be a hindrance in the way of the salvation
of others, whom they will not permit to live in accordance with the
doctrines of Christ, in the hopes that some day or other they may teach
them too to hasten their death by their own hand, in the manner which
now causes them themselves to be a terror to their neighbors, in
accordance with the custom inculcated by their devilish tenets? or does
it rather save all whom it can, even though those whom it cannot save
should perish in their own infatuation?  For it ardently desires that
all should live, but it more especially labors that not all should die. 
But thanks be to the Lord, that both amongst us—not indeed everywhere,
but in the great majority of places—and also in the other parts of
Africa, the peace of the Catholic Church both has gained and is gaining
ground, without any of these madmen being killed.  But those deplorable
deeds are done in places where there is an utterly furious and useless
set of men, who were given to such deeds even in the days of old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2493"></span>[637:2494](1040662.htm#fr_2493) <span
id="v.vi.v-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p2"></span> [Luke iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#009)<span id="v.vi.v-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2494"></span>[638:2495](1040662.htm#fr_2494) <span
id="v.vi.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p3"></span> [Mark v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#013)<span id="v.vi.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[638:2496](1040662.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="v.vi.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p4"></span> [Matt. xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014)<span id="v.vi.v-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040663)
