[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040010)  [Next](1040012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Relation of Manichæism to
Zoroastrianism.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>The very close connection of these two
systems has commonly been presupposed, and is undeniable.  In fact
Manichæism has frequently been represented as Zoroastrian dualism,
slightly modified by contact with Christianity and other systems.  No
one could possibly gain even a superficial view of the two systems
without being strongly impressed with their points of resemblance.  A
closer examination, however, will reveal points of antagonism just as
striking, and will enable us to account for the fact that Mani was put
to death by a <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iv-Page_19"></span>zealous Zoroastrian ruler on account of his
recognized hostility to the state religion.  The leading features of the
Manichæan system are already before us.  Instead of quoting at length
from the Zend-Avesta, which is now happily accessible in an excellent
English translation, we may for the sake of brevity quote Tiele’s
description of Zoroastrian dualism as a basis of comparison: <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>"Parsism is decidedly dualistic, not in
the sense of accepting two hostile deities, for it recognizes no worship
of evil beings, and teaches the adoration only of Ahura Mazda and the
spirits subject to him; but in the sense of placing in hostility to each
other two sharply divided kingdoms, that of light, of truth, and of
purity, and that of darkness, of falsehood, and of impurity.  This
division is carried through the whole creation, organic and inorganic,
material and spiritual.  Above, in the highest sphere, is the domain of
the undisputed sovereignty of the All-wise God; beneath, in the lowest
abyss, the kingdom of his mighty adversary; midway between the two lies
this world, the theatre of the contest.… This dualism further dominates
the cosmogony, the cultus, and the entire view of the moral order of the
world held by the Mazda worshippers.  Not only does Anro-Maînyus
(Ahriman) spoil by his counter-creations all the good creations of
Ahura-Mazda (Ormuzd), but by slaying the protoplasts of man and beast,
he brings death into the world, seduces the first pair to sin, and also
brings forth noxious animals and plants.  Man finds himself, in
consequence, surrounded on all sides by the works of the spirits of
darkness and by his hosts.  It is the object of worship to secure the
pious against their influence."

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>Let us bring in review some of the points
of resemblance between the two systems.  Both are in a sense
*dualistic*.  In both the kingdoms of Light and Darkness are set over
against each other in the sharpest antagonism.  In both we have similar
emanations from these kingdoms (or kings).  Yet, while in the Manichæan
system the dualism is absolute and eternal, in the later Zoroastrian
system (as in the Jewish and Christian doctrine of Satan), Ahriman
(Satan) if not merely a fallen creature <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) of Ormuzd (the good and supreme God.md) was at
least an immeasurably inferior being.  The supreme control of the
universe, to which it owes its perfect order, was ascribed by
Zoroastrianism to Ormuzd.  The struggle between good and evil,
beneficent and malevolent, was due to the opposition of the mighty, but
not almighty, Ahriman.  Whatever form of Mazdeism (Zoroastrianism) we
take for purposes of comparison, we are safe in saying that the
Manichæan dualism was by far the more absolute.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>In both systems each side of the dualism
is represented by a series (or rather several series) of *personified
principles*.  These agree in the two systems in some particulars.  Yet
the variations are quite as noticeable as the agreements.  There is much
in common between the Manichæan and the Zoroastrian delineations of the
fearful conflict between the Kingdom of Light and the Kingdom of
Darkness, yet the beginning of the conflict is quite differently
conceived of in the two systems.  In Manichæism the creation is
accounted for by the conflict in which Primordial Man was beaten by the
powers of Darkness and suffered the mixing of his elements with the
elements of darkness.  The actual world was made by the good God, or
rather by his subordinates, as a means of liberating the imprisoned
light. <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iv-Page_20"></span>The creation of man is ascribed, on the
other hand, to the King of Darkness (or his subordinates), with a view
to hindering the escape of the mingled light by diffusion thereof
through propagation.  Mazdeism derives the creation solely from Ormuzd,
from whose hand it issued "as pure and perfect as himself" (<span
class="c11"><span id="iv.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>Lenormant</span>, *Anc.
Hist.* II. p. 30).  It was the work of Ahriman to "spoil it by his evil
influence."  The appellation "Maker of the material world" is constantly
applied to Ormuzd in the *Vendîdâd* and other sacred books. The most
instructive Mazdean account of the creation that has come down to us is
that contained in the *Vendîdâd*, Fargard I.  Ahura Mazda (Ormuzd) is
represented here as naming one by one the sixteen good lands that he had
created.  Angra Mainyu (Ahriman) is represented as coming to each, one
by one, and creating in it noxious things.  Examples of these
counter-creations are, the serpents, winter, venomous flies, sinful
lusts, mosquitoes, pride, unnatural sin, burying the dead, witchcraft,
the sin of unbelief, the burning of corpses, abnormal issues in women,
oppression of foreign rulers, excessive heat, etc.  This jumble of
physical evils and sins is characteristic of Mazdeism.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>According to Mani matter is inherently
evil, and it only ceases to be absolutely evil by the mixture with it of
the elements of the Kingdom of Light.  Creation is a process forced upon
the King of Light by the ravages of the King of Darkness, and is at best
only partially good.  Zoroastrianism looked upon earth, fire, water, as
sacred elements, to defile which was sin of the most heinous kind. 
Manichæism regarded actual fire and water as made up of a mixture of
elements of light and darkness, and so, as by no means wholly pure. 
Manichæans regarded earth, so far as it consisted of dead matter, with
the utmost contempt.  The life-giving light in it was alone thought of
with respect.  Zoroastrianism somewhat arbitrarily divided animals and
plants between the kingdoms of Ormuzd and Ahriman; but the idea that all
material things, so far as they are material, are evil, seems never to
have occurred to the early Mazdeists.  Manichæans agreed with Mazdeists
in their veneration for the sun, but the principles underlying this
veneration seem to have been widely different in the two cases.  The
most radical opposition of the two systems is seen in their views of
human propagation.  Mani regarded the procreation of children as
ministering directly to the designs of the King of Darkness to imprison
the light, and so absolutely condemned it.  The *Zend-Avesta* says: 
(*Vendîdâd*, Fargard IV.):  "Verily I say unto thee, O Spitama
Zarathustra; the man who has a wife is far above him who begets no sons;
he who keeps a house is far above him who has none; he who has children
is far above a childless man."  Mani made great merit of voluntary
poverty.  The *Zend-Avesta (ibid.)* says:  "He who has riches is far
above him who has none."  Mani forbade the use of animal food as
preventing the escape of the light contained in the bodies of animals. 
The *Zend-Avesta (ibid.)*:  "And of two men, he who fills himself with
meat is filled with the good spirit much more than he who does not do
so; the latter is all but dead; the former is above him by the worth of
an Asperena, by the worth of a sheep, by the worth of an ox, by the
worth of a man." <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>The eschatology of the two systems might
be shown to present just as striking contrasts, and just as marked
resemblances.  In both systems the consummation of the age is effected
by means of a conflagration, the aim of the conflagration in Mazdeism
being the punishment and the purging of wicked men, the destruction of
wicked spirits, the renovation of the earth, and the inauguration of the
sole sovereignty of Ormuzd, while in Manichæism the aim of the
conflagration is to liberate the portions of light which the processes
of animal and vegetable growth, with the aid of sun and the moon have
proved unable to liberate.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span><span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iv-Page_21"></span>But enough has been said to make it evident
that Manichæism was by no means a slightly altered edition of
Zoroastrianism.  The points of similarity between the two are certainly
more apparent than real, though the historical relationship can by no
means be denied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[19:8](1040011.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span> *Outlines of the Hist. of Religion*
(1877), p. 173.  Cf. J. <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>Darmsteter</span>, *Introduction to the
Zend-Avesta*, p. xliii., xliv., lvi., lxxii., lxxiv. sq.; and his
article in the *Contemporary Review* (Oct. 1879), on *"The Supreme God
in the Indo-European Mythology."*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[19:9](1040011.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span> This is confidently asserted by Kessler
(Art. Mani in *Herzog’s* *RE,* 2d ed. vol. IX. p. 258), and after him by
Harnack, *Encyclopædia Britannica*, art. Manichæism.  On the other hand,
Lenormant (*Anc. Hist*. II. p. 30), says:  "Ahriman had been eternal in
the past, he had no beginning, and proceeded from no former being \* \*
\* .  This being who had no beginning would come to an end. \* \* \* . 
Evil then should be finally conquered and destroyed, the creation should
become as pure as on its first day, and Ahriman should disappear
forever."  Such, doubtless, was the original doctrine, but the form
probably in vogue in the time of Mani was more pantheistic or
monotheistic, both Ormuzd and Ahriman proceeding from boundless time
(*Zrvan akarana*).  See on this matter, <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii.iv-p6.1"></span> Darmsteter</span>:  *Introd. to the
Zend-Avesta*, p. lxxii, etc., and his art. in *Contemp. Review*; and
<span class="c11"><span id="iv.ii.iv-p6.2"></span>Lenormant</span>: 
*Anc. Hist.* as above.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[20:10](1040011.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span> That meat is used in the sense of flesh
may be inferred from Darmsteter’s comment on this passage, which he
suggests may be a bit of religious polemics against Manichæism.  See his
*Introd. to the Zend-Avesta*, p. xl. sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](1040012.md)
