[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040110)  [Next](1040112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—When the Holy Spirit Was
Sent.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p2"></span>10.  Perhaps you will say to me, When,
then, did the Paraclete promised by the Lord come?  As regards this, had
I nothing else to believe on the subject, I should rather look for the
Paraclete as still to come, than allow that He came in Manichæus.  But
seeing that the advent of the Holy Spirit is narrated with perfect
clearness in the Acts of the Apostles, where is the necessity of my so
gratuitously running the risk of believing heretics?  For in the Acts it
is written as follows:  "The former treatise have we made, O Theophilus,
of all that Jesus began both to do and teach, in the day in which He
chose the apostles by the Holy Spirit, and commanded them to preach the
gospel.  By those to whom He showed Himself alive after His passion by
many proofs in the daytime, He was seen forty days, teaching concerning
the kingdom of God.  And how He conversed with them, and commanded them
that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of
the Father, which, saith He, ye have heard of me.  For John indeed
baptized with water, but ye shall begin to be baptized with the Holy
Spirit, whom also ye shall receive after not many days, that is, at
Pentecost.  When they had come, they asked him, saying, Lord, wilt Thou
at this time manifest Thyself?  And when will be the kingdom of Israel? 
And He said unto them, No one can know the time which the Father hath
put in His own power.  But ye shall receive the power of the Holy Ghost
coming upon you, and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem,
and in all Judæa, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the
earth." <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272)   Behold you have here
the Lord reminding His disciples of the promise of the Father, which
they had heard from His mouth, of the coming of the Holy Spirit.  Let us
now see when He was sent; for shortly after we read as follows:  "And
when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord
in one place.  And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a
rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were
sitting.  And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire,
and it sat upon each of them.  And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance.  And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out
of every nation under heaven.  And when the sound was heard, the
multitude came together, and were confounded, because every man heard
them speak in his own language.  And they were all amazed, and
marvelled, saying one to another, Are not all these which speak
Galilæans? and how heard we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were
born?  Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in
Mesopotamia, in Armenia, and in Cappadocia, in Pontus, Asia, Phrygia,
and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the regions of Africa about Cyrene, and
strangers of Rome, Jews, natives, Cretes, and Arabians, they heard them
speak in their own tongues the wonderful works of God.  And they were
all amazed, and were in doubt on account of what had happened, saying,
What meaneth this?  But others, mocking, said, These men are full of new
wine." <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273)   You see when the Holy
Spirit came.  What more do you wish?  If the Scriptures are credible,
should not I believe most readily in these Acts, which have the
strongest testimony in their support, and which have had the advantage
of becoming generally known, and of being handed down and of being
publicly taught along with the gospel itself, which contains the promise
of the Holy Spirit, which also we believe?  On <span id="page_134">p.
134</span> <span id="iv.viii.x-Page_134"></span>reading, then, these
Acts of the Apostles, which stand, as regards authority, on a level with
the gospel, I find that not only was the Holy Spirit promised to these
true apostles, but that He was also sent so manifestly, that no room was
left for errors on this subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_272"></span>[133:273](1040111.htm#fr_272) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p3"></span> [Acts i.
1-8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)<span id="iv.viii.x-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[133:274](1040111.htm#fr_273) <span
id="iv.viii.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.x-p4"></span> [Acts ii.
1-13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span id="iv.viii.x-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1040112)
