[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040648)  [Next](1040650) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.lii"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.lii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.lii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 52.—</span>64.  But if you wish to
see that the object of Petilianus in his writings really was to prove
"that the origin, and root, and head of him that is baptized is none
other than he by whom he is baptized," and that this has not been
asserted by me without meaning, or childishly, or foolishly, review the
beginning of the epistle itself to which I made my reply, or rather pay
careful attention to me as I quote it.  "The conscience," he says, "of
one that gives in holiness is what we look for to cleanse the conscience
of the recipient; for he who has received his faith from one that is
faithless, receives not faith but guilt."  And as though some one had
said to him, Whence do you derive your proof of this? he goes on to say,
"For everything has its existence from a source and root; and if
anything has not a head, it is nothing; nor does anything well confer a
new birth, unless it be born again of good seed.  And this being so,
brethren, what perversity must it be to maintain that he who is guilty
by reason of his own offenses should make another free from guilt;
whereas our Lord Jesus Christ says, ‘A good tree bringeth forth good
fruit:  do men gather grapes of thorns?’  And again, ‘A good man, out of
the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things; and an evil
man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things.’  And again,
‘When a man is baptized by one that is dead, his washing profiteth him
nothing.’"  You see to what end all these things tend, viz., that the
conscience of him that gives in holiness (lest any one, by receiving his
faith from one that is faithless, should receive not faith but guilt)
should be itself the origin, and root, and head, and seed of him that is
baptized.  For, wishing to prove that the conscience of one that gives
in holiness is what we look for to cleanse the conscience of the
recipient, and that he receives not faith but guilt, who wittingly
receives his faith from one that is faithless, he has added immediately
afterwards, "For everything has its existence from a source and root;
and if anything has not a head, it is nothing; nor does anything well
confer a new birth, unless it be born again of good seed."  And for fear
that any one should be so dull as still not to understand that in each
case he is speaking of the man by whom a person is baptized, he explains
this afterwards, and says, "This being so, brethren, what perversity
must it be to maintain that he who is guilty by reason of his own <span
id="page_624">p. 624</span> <span
id="v.v.v.lii-Page_624"></span>offenses should make another free from
guilt; whereas our Lord Jesus Christ says, ‘A good tree bringeth forth
good fruit:  do men gather grapes of thorns?’"  And lest, by some
incredible stupidity of understanding, the hearer or seer should be
blind enough not to see that he is speaking of the man that baptizes, he
adds another passage, where he actually specifies the man.  "And again,"
he says, "‘A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth
forth good things; and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth
forth evil things;’ and again, ‘When a man is baptized by one that is
dead, his washing profiteth him nothing,’"  Certainly it is now plain,
certainly he needs no longer any interpreter, or disputant, or
demonstrator, to show that the object of his party is to prove that the
origin, and root, and head of him that is baptized is none other than he
by whom he is baptized.  And yet, being overwhelmed by the force of
truth, and as though forgetful of what he had said before, Petilianus
acknowledges afterwards to me that Christ is the origin and root of them
that are regenerate, and the Head of the Church, and not any one that
may happen to be the dispenser and minister of baptism.  For having said
that the apostles used to baptize in the name of Christ, and set forth
Christ as the foundation of their faith, to make men Christians, and
being fain to prove this, too, by passages and examples from holy
Scripture, just as though we were denying it, he says, "Where is now
that voice, from which issued the noise of those minute and constant
petty questionings, wherein, in the spirit of envy and self-conceit, you
uttered many involved sayings about Christ, and for Christ, and in
Christ, in opposition to the rashness and haughtiness of men?  Lo,
Christ is the origin, Christ is the head, Christ is the root of the
Christian."  When, therefore, I heard this, what could I do but give
thanks to Christ, who had compelled the man to make confession?  All
those things, therefore, are false which he said in the beginning of his
epistle, when he wished to persuade us that the conscience of one that
gives in holiness must be looked for to cleanse the conscience of the
recipient; and that when one has wittingly received his faith from one
that is faithless he receives not faith but guilt.  For, wishing as it
were to show clearly how much rested in the man that baptizes, he had
added what he seems to think most weighty proofs, saying "For everything
has its existence from a source and root; and if anything has not a
head, it is nothing."  But afterwards, when he says what we also say,
"Lo, Christ is the origin, Christ is the head, Christ is the root of the
Christian," he wipes out what he had said before, "that the conscience
of one that gives in holiness is the origin, and root, and head of the
recipient."  The truth, therefore, has prevailed, so that the man who is
desirous to receive the baptism of Christ should not rest his hope upon
the man who administers the sacrament, but should approach in all
security to Christ Himself, as to the source which is not changed, to
the root which is not plucked up, to the head which is not cast down.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 53](1040650)
