[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040032)  [Next](1040034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—We are United to God by Love, in
Subjection to Him.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p2"></span>20.  "No other creature," he says,
separates us.  O man of profound mysteries!  He thought it not enough to
say, no creature:  but he says no other creature; teaching that with
which we love God and by which we cleave to God, our mind, namely, and
understanding, is itself a creature.  Thus the body is another creature;
and if the mind is an object of intellectual perception, and is known
only by this means, the other creature is all that is an object of
sense, which as it were makes itself known through the eyes, or ears, or
smell, or taste, or touch, and this must be inferior to what is
perceived by the intellect alone.  Now, as God also can be known by the
worthy, only intellectually, <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md)
exalted though He is above the intelligent mind as being its Creator and
Author, there was danger lest the human mind, from being reckoned among
invisible and immaterial things, should be thought to be of *the same*
nature with Him who created it, and so should fall away by pride from
Him to whom it should be united by love.  For the mind becomes like God,
to the extent vouchsafed by its subjection of itself to Him for
information and enlightenment.  And if it obtains the greatest nearness
by that subjection which produces likeness, it must be far removed from
Him by that presumption which would make the likeness greater.  It is
this presumption which leads the mind to refuse obedience to the laws of
God, in the desire to be sovereign, as God is.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p4"></span>21.  The farther, then, the mind departs
from God, not in space, but in affection and lust after things below
Him, the more it is filled with folly and wretchedness.  So by love it
returns to God,—a love which places it not along with God, but under
Him.  And the more ardor and eagerness there is in this, the happier and
more elevated will the mind be, and with God as sole governor it will be
in perfect liberty.  Hence it must know that it is a creature.  It must
believe what is the truth,—that its Creator remains ever possessed of
the inviolable and immutable nature of truth and wisdom, and must
confess, even in view of the errors from which it desires deliverance,
that it is liable to folly and falsehood.  But then again, it must take
care that it be not separated by the love of the other creature, that
is, of this visible world, from the love of God Himself, which
sanctifies it in order to lasting happiness.  No <span id="page_48">p.
48</span> <span id="iv.iv.xiv-Page_48"></span>other creature, then,—for
we are ourselves a creature,—separates us from the love of God which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[47:57](1040033.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p3"></span> \[*I.e*. only by the use of the mental
faculty of which God Himself is the Creator and Author; not by any
independently existing power "of the same nature with Him who created
it."—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1040034.md)
