[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040473)  [Next](1040475.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—</span>18.  Then he further
adds:  "Both are without the life of baptism, both he who never had it
at all, and he who had it but has lost it."  He therefore never had it,
whom Felicianus, the follower of Maximianus or Prætextatus, baptized
outside; and these men themselves have lost what once they had when,
therefore, these were received with their followers, who gave to those
whom they baptized what previously they did not have? and who restored
to themselves what they had lost?  But they took away with them the form
of baptism, but lost the veritable excellence of baptism by their wicked
schism.  Why do you repudiate the form itself, which is holy at all
times and all places, in the Catholics whom you have not heard, whilst
you are willing to acknowledge it in the followers of Maximianus whom
you have punished?

<span id="v.v.iii.xvii-p2"></span>19.  But whatever he seemed to himself
to say by way of accusation about the traitor Judas, I see not how it
can concern us, who are not proved by them to have betrayed our trust;
nor, indeed, if such treason were proved on the part of any who before
our time have died in our communion, would that treason in any way
defile us by whom it was disavowed, and to whom it was displeasing.  For
if they themselves are not defiled by offenses condemned by themselves,
and afterwards condoned, how much less can we be defiled by what we have
disavowed so soon as we have heard of them!  However weighty, therefore,
his invective against *traditors*, let him be assured that they are
condemned by me in precisely the same terms.  But yet I make a
distinction; for he accuses one on my side who has long been dead
without having been condemned in any investigation made by me.  I point
to a man adhering closely to his side, who had been condemned by him, or
at least had been separated by a sacrilegious schism, and whom he
received again with undiminished honor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1040475.md)
