[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040136)  [Next](1040138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 35.—Evil Alone is Corruption. 
Corruption is Not Nature, But Contrary to Nature.  Corruption Implies
Previous Good.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxvi-p2"></span>39.  For who can doubt that the whole
of that which is called evil is nothing else than corruption?  Different
evils may, indeed, be called by different names; but that which is the
evil of all things in which any evil is perceptible is corruption.  So
the corruption of an educated mind is ignorance; the corruption of a
prudent mind is imprudence; the corruption of a just mind, injustice;
the corruption of a brave mind, cowardice; the corruption of a calm,
peaceful mind, cupidity, fear, sorrow, pride.  Again, in a living body,
the corruption of health is pain and disease; the corruption of strength
is exhaustion; the corruption of rest is toil.  Again, in any corporeal
thing, the corruption of beauty is ugliness; the corruption of
straightness is crookedness; the corruption of order is confusion; the
corruption of entireness is disseverance, or fracture, or diminution. 
It would be long and laborious to mention by name all the corruptions of
the things here mentioned, and of countless other things; for in many
cases the words may apply to the mind as well as to the body, and in
innumerable cases the corruption has a distinct name of its own.  But
enough has been said to show that corruption does harm only as
displacing the natural condition; and so, that corruption is not nature,
but against nature.  And if corruption is the only evil to be found
anywhere, and if corruption is not nature, no nature is evil.

<span id="iv.viii.xxxvi-p3"></span>40.  But if, perchance, you cannot
follow this, consider again, that whatever is corrupted is deprived of
some good:  for if it were not corrupted, it would be incorrupt; or if
it could not in any way be corrupted, it would be incorruptible.  Now,
if corruption is an evil, both incorruption and incorruptibility must be
good things.  We are not, however, speaking at present of incorruptible
nature, but of things which admit of corruption, and which, while not
corrupted, may be called incorrupt, but not incorruptible.  That alone
can be called incorruptible which not only is not corrupted, but also
cannot in any part be corrupted.  Whatever things, then, being
incorrupt, but liable to corruption, begin to be corrupted, are deprived
of the good which they had as incorrupt.  Nor is this a slight good, for
corruption is a great evil.  And the continued increase of corruption
implies the continued presence of good, of which they may be deprived. 
Accordingly, the natures supposed to exist in the region of darkness
must have been either corruptible or incorruptible.  If they were
incorruptible, they were in possession of a good than which nothing is
higher.  If they were corruptible, they were either corrupted or not
corrupted.  If they were not corrupted, they were incorrupt, to say
which of anything is to give it great praise.  If they were corrupted,
they were deprived of this great good of incorruption; but the
deprivation implies the previous possession of the good they are
deprived of; and if they possessed this good, they were not the
perfection of evil, and consequently all the Manichæan story is a
falsehood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](1040138)
