[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040264)  [Next](1040266.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iv.iii"></span> <span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="v.iv.iv.iii-Page_427"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—</span>4.  Now let the proud and
swelling necks of the heretics raise themselves, if they dare, against
the holy humility of this address.  Ye mad Donatists, whom we desire
earnestly to return to the peace and unity of the holy Church, that ye
may receive health therein, what have ye to say in answer to this?  You
are wont, indeed, to bring up against us the letters of Cyprian, his
opinion, his Council; why do ye claim the authority of Cyprian for your
schism, and reject his example when it makes for the peace of the
Church?  But who can fail to be aware that the sacred canon of
Scripture, both of the Old and New Testament, is confined within its own
limits, and that it stands so absolutely in a superior position to all
later letters of the bishops, that about it we can hold no manner of
doubt or disputation whether what is confessedly contained in it is
right and true; but that all the letters of bishops which have been
written, or are being written, since the closing of the canon, are
liable to be refuted if there be anything contained in them which strays
from the truth, either by the discourse of some one who happens to be
wiser in the matter than themselves, or by the weightier authority and
more learned experience of other bishops, by the authority of Councils;
and further, that the Councils themselves, which are held in the several
districts and provinces, must yield, beyond all possibility of doubt, to
the authority of plenary Councils which are formed for the whole
Christian world; and that even of the plenary Councils, the earlier are
often corrected by those which follow them, when, by some actual
experiment, things are brought to light which were before concealed, and
that is known which previously lay hid, and this without any whirlwind
of sacrilegious pride, without any puffing of the neck through
arrogance, without any strife of envious hatred, simply with holy
humility, catholic peace, and Christian charity?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040266.md)
