[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040320)  [Next](1040322) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—</span>31.  But what is the
precise value of the sanctification of the sacrament (which that thief
did not receive, not from any want of will on his part, but because it
was unavoidably omitted) and what is the effect on a man of its material
application, it is not easy to say.  Still, had it not been of the
greatest value, the Lord would not have received the baptism of a
servant.  But since we must look at it in itself, without entering upon
the question of the salvation of the recipient, which it is intended to
work, it shows clearly enough that both in the bad, and in those who
renounce the world in word and not in deed, it is itself complete,
though they cannot receive salvation unless they amend their lives.  But
as in the thief, to whom the material administration of the sacrament
was necessarily wanting, the salvation was complete, because it was
spiritually present through his piety, so, when the sacrament itself is
present, salvation is complete, if what the thief possessed be
unavoidably wanting.  And this is the firm tradition of the universal
Church, in respect of the baptism of infants, who certainly are as yet
unable "with the heart to believe unto righteousness, and with the mouth
to make confession unto salvation," as the thief could do; nay, who
even, by crying and moaning when the mystery is performed upon them,
raise their voices in opposition to the mysterious words, and yet no
Christian will say that they are baptized to no purpose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1040322)
