[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040014)  [Next](1040016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—The Relation of Manichæism to
Christianity.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p2"></span>Far more superficial are the relations
of Manichæism to Christianity than to any of the heathen systems to
which we have adverted.  In fact no Christian idea has been introduced
into the system without being completely perverted.  If Christian
language is used, it is utterly emptied of its meaning.  If Christian
practices are introduced, a completely different motive lies at the
basis.  Indeed the wildest of the Christian Gnostic systems kept
immeasurably nearer to historical Christianity than did the Manichæans. 
While he blasphemed against the historical Jesus, Mani claimed to
believe in Christ, a purely spiritual and divine manifestation, whose
teachings had been sadly perverted by the Jews.  It is scarcely possible
to determine with any certainty what view Mani actually took of New
Testament history.  That he claimed to be a follower of Christ, and the
Paraclete whom Christ had promised to send, or at least the organ of the
Paraclete, Eastern and Western authorities agree.  Mani is said, by
Augustin, to have begun his *Fundamental Epistle* as follows: 
"Manichæus, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the providence of God the
Father.  These are wholesome words from the perennial and living
fountain."  So also in the *Act. Archel.*, Mani is represented as
introducing a letter:  "Manichæus, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and all
the saints who are with me, and the virgins, to Marcellus, my beloved
son:  Grace, mercy, and peace be with you from God the Father, and from
our Lord Jesus Christ."  There can be no doubt but that Mani and his
followers, whether from designed imposture or from less sinister
motives, attempted to palm themselves off as Christians, nay, as the
only true Christians.  It is certain, moreover, that in this guise they
gained many proselytes from the Christian ranks.  As previously
remarked, Mani and his followers professed to accept the New Testament
Scriptures, yet they treated them in a purely subjective manner,
eliminating as Judaistic interpolation whatever they could not reconcile
with their own tenets.  Their adherence to the New Testament, as well as
their adherence to Christ, was, therefore, virtually a mere pretence. 
In common with Christianity, Manichæism laid much stress on redemption,
yet there was nothing in common between the Christian idea of redemption
through the atoning suffering of Jesus Christ and the Manichæan notion
of <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span
id="iv.ii.viii-Page_25"></span>redemption through the escape of
imprisoned light.  Manichæans and Christians were at one in advocating
self-denial and the due subordination of the flesh.  It need not be
pointed out how radically different the Christian view was from the
Manichæan view, already expounded.  Yet pagan ascetical ideas had
already invaded the Church long before the time of Mani, and many
Christians were in a position to be attracted strongly by the Manichæan
theory and practice.  The later asceticism as it appeared in the hermit
life of the fourth and following centuries was essentially pagan and had
much in common with the Manichæan.  Still more manifest is the
anatagonism between Manichæism and Christianity on the great fundamental
principles of religion.  The Manichæan and Christian ideas of God are
mutually contradictory.  Christianity holds fast at the same time to the
unity, the omnipotence, the omniscience, the perfect wisdom, the
holiness and the goodness of God.  If He permits sin to exist in the
world it is not because He looks upon it with complacency, nor because
He lacked wisdom to provide against its rise or power to annihilate it
at once when it appeared, nor because He did not foresee its rise and
its ravages, but because the permission of sin forms part of His
all-wise plan for the education of moral and spiritual beings.  If the
forces of nature are under certain circumstances hurtful or destructive
to man, Christianity does not regard them as the operations of a
malevolent power thwarting God’s purposes, but it sees underneath the
destructive violence purposes of goodness and of grace; or if it fails
to see them in any given instance it yet believes that God doeth all
things well.  Christianity admits the existence of evil in men and in
demons, yet of evil that ministers to the purposes of the Most High. 
Christianity is the only religion that has been able to arrive at a
perfectly satisfactory theology, cosmology, anthropology, and
eschatology, and this is because Christianity alone has a true and
satisfying soteriology.  It is God manifest in the flesh that meets all
the conditions for the solution of the problem of human existence. 
Manichæism openly antagonized Christianity in its adherence to Old
Testament revelation, including the Jewish and Christian monotheism. 
The good God could not, they maintained, be the creator of this world
and of the universe of being.  That God should be looked upon as in any
sense the creator of the devil and his angels, and of the material
world, was in their view an absurdity—a monstrosity.  The unchristian
character of the Manichæan view of matter, leading to unchristian
asceticism, has already been sufficiently indicated.  The reader will
only need to compare the principles and practices of Manichæism, as
delineated above, with those of Christianity as they are delineated in
the New Testament and in the evangelical churches of to-day, to be
impressed with the completely anti-Christian character of the former.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>How then, it may well be asked, could
Manichæism succeed as it did in fascinating so many intelligent members
of the Catholic Church during the third, fourth and fifth centuries?  In
attempting to answer this question it should be premised that the later
Western Manichæism took far more account of historical Christianity than
did Mani and his immediate followers.  In the West, at least, Manichæism
set itself up as the only genuine exponent of Christianity.  The
Jewish-Alexandrian philosophy, and Gnosticism its product, had done much
towards discrediting the Old Testament Scriptures, and the moral and
religious teachings therein contained.  Devout Jewish and Christian
thinkers who had adopted this mode of thought, had attempted by means of
the allegorical method of interpretation to reconcile the seeming
antagonism between Judaism and philosophy.  But the process was so
forced that its results could not be expected to satisfy those that felt
no special interest in the removal of the difficulties.  Marcionism
represents a stern refusal to apply the allegory, and a determination to
exhibit the antagonism between Judaism and current thought, and
especially the seeming antagonism between Judaism and Christianity, in
the harshest manner.  Marcionism was still vigorous in the East when
Manichæism arose, and <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="iv.ii.viii-Page_26"></span>through this party unfavorable views of
the Old Testament were widely disseminated.  Many Christians doubtless
felt that the Old Testament and its religion were burdensome and
trammelling to Christianity.  The very fact that Mani set aside so
summarily every element of Judaism that he encountered in the current
Christianity, doubtless commended his views to a large and influential
element in the East and the West alike.  Mani claimed to set forth a
spiritual religion as opposed to a carnal.  The asceticism of Manichæism
was in the line of a wide-spread popular ascetical movement that was
already in progress, and so commended it to many.  The question as to
the origin of evil, and as to the relation of the good, wise and
powerful God to the evil that appears in the world, in man and in demons
was never asked with more interest than during the early Christian
centuries, and any party that should advance a moderately plausible
theory was sure to receive its share of public attention.  Mani
professed to have a solution and the only possible solution of questions
of this class, and however fantastic may have been the forms in which
his speculations were set forth, they were doubtless all the more
acceptable on this account in that semi-pagan age to many intelligent
people.  The fact that these forms satisfied so able a thinker as Mani
undoubtedly was, would guarantee their acceptance by a large number both
East and West.  There was in the West at this time, and had been for
centuries, a hankering after Oriental theosophy, the more extravagant
the better.  The wide-spread worship of Mithra was an excellent
preparation for the more complete system of Mani.  Manichæism and
Neo-Platonism antagonized the Christianity of the fourth and fifth
centuries from opposite sides, and those minds for whom Platonism had no
charms were almost sure to be attracted by the theosophy of Mani.  "How
are we to explain," asks Harnack, <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)
"the rapid spread of Manichæism, and the fact that it really became one
of the great religions?  Our answer is, that Manichæism was the most
complete Gnosis, the richest, most consequent and most artistic system
formed on the basis of the ancient Babylonian religion.… What gave
strength to Manichæism was… that it united its ancient mythology and a
thorough-going materialistic dualism with an exceedingly simple
spiritual worship and a strict morality.  On comparing it with the
Semitic religions of nature, we perceive that it retained their
mythologies, after transforming them into doctrines, but abolished all
their sensuous cultus, substituting instead a spiritual worship as well
as a strict morality.  Manichæism was thus able to satisfy the new wants
of an old world.  It offered revelation, redemption, moral virtue, and
immortality \[this last is very doubtful, if conscious immortality be
meant\], spiritual benefits on the basis of the religion of nature.  A
further source of strength lay in the simple, yet firm social
organization which was given by Mani himself to his new institution. 
The wise man and the ignorant, the enthusiast and the man of the world,
could all find acceptance here, and there was laid on no one more than
he was able and willing to bear."

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p5"></span>The question as to the secret of the
fascination that Manichæism was able to exercise even over the most
intelligent Western minds, may receive a more concrete answer from the
autobiographical account of Augustin’s own relations to the party.  What
was it that attracted and enthralled, for nine years, him who was to
become the greatest theologian of the age?  In his *Confessions* (Book
III. ch. 6) he gives this impassioned account of his first connection
with Manichæism:  "Therefore I fell among men proudly railing, very
carnal and voluble, in whose mouth were the snares of the devil—the bird
lime being composed of a mixture of the syllables of Thy Name, and of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter.  These names departed not out of their mouths, but so far
forth as the sound and clatter of the tongue; for the heart was empty of
truth.  Still <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="iv.ii.viii-Page_27"></span>they cried ‘Truth, Truth,’ and spoke much
about it to me, yet it was not in them, but they spake falsely not of
Thee only—who, verily art the Truth—but also of the elements of this
world, Thy creatures… O Truth, Truth! how inwardly even then did the
marrow of my soul pant after Thee, when they frequently and in a
multiplicity of ways, and in numerous and huge books, sounded out Thy
Name to me, though it was but a voice.  And these were the dishes in
which to me, hungering for Thee, they, instead of Thee, served up the
sun and the moon, Thy beauteous works—but yet Thy works, not Thyself,
nay, nor Thy first works…Woe, woe, by what steps was I dragged down to
the depths of hell!—toiling and turmoiling through want of Truth, when I
sought after Thee, my God,—to Thee I confess it, who hadst mercy on me
when I had not yet confessed, sought after Thee not according to the
understanding of the mind in which Thou desiredst that I should excel
the beasts, but according to the sense of the flesh."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[26:14](1040015.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p4"></span> *Encyclopædia Britannica*, art.
Manichæism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](1040016.md)
