[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040642)  [Next](1040644) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xlvi"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xlvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xlvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 46.—</span>55.  Now, seeing that
when Petilianus attributes this to me as though it were my opinion, he
makes it an occasion for a serious and vehement invective against me, he
at any rate shows, by the very force of his indignation, how great a sin
it is in his opinion to entertain such views; and, accordingly, whatever
he has wished it to appear that he said against me for holding this
opinion will be found to have been really said against himself, who is
proved to entertain the view.  For he shows herein by how great force on
the side of truth he is overcome, when he cannot find any other door of
escape except to pretend that it was I who entertained the views which
really are his own.  Just as if those whom the apostle confutes for
maintaining that there was no resurrection from the dead, were to wish
to bring an accusation against the same apostle, on the ground that he
said, "Then is Christ not risen," and to maintain that the preaching of
the apostle was vain, and the faith of those who believed in it was also
vain, and that false witnesses were found against God in those who had
said that He raised up Christ from the dead.  This is what Petilianus
wished to do to me, never expecting that any one could read what I had
written, which he could not answer, though very anxious that men should
believe him to have answered it.  But just as, if any one had done this
to the apostle, the whole calumnious accusation would have recoiled on
the head of those who made it so soon as the entire passage in his
epistle was read, and the preceding words restored, on which any one who
reads them must perceive that those which I have quoted depend, in the
same way, so soon as the preceding words of my epistle are restored, the
accusation which Petilianus brings against me is cast back with all the
greater force upon his own head, from which he had striven to remove it.

<span id="v.v.v.xlvi-p2"></span>56.  For the apostle, in confuting those
who denied that there was any resurrection of the dead, corrects their
view by showing the absurdity which follows those who entertain this
view, however loth they may be to admit the consequence, in order that,
while they shrink in abhorrence from what is impious to say, they may
correct what they have ventured to believe.  His argument continues
thus:  "But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not
risen:  and if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your
faith is also vain.  Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God: 
because we have testified of God that He raised up Christ; whom He
raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not." <span
id="fr_2416"></span>[2417](#fn_2416)   In order that, while they fear to
say that Christ had not risen, with the other wicked and accursed
conclusions which follow from such a statement, they may correct what
they said in a spirit of folly and infidelity, that there is no
resurrection of the dead.  If, therefore, you take away what stands at
the head of this argument, "If there be no resurrection of the dead,"
the rest is spoken amiss, and yet must be ascribed to the apostle.  But
if you restore the supposition on which the rest depends, and place as
the hypothesis from which you start, "There is no resurrection of the
dead," then the conclusion will follow rightly, "Then is Christ not
risen, and our preaching is vain, and your faith is also vain," with all
the rest that is appended to it.  And all these statements of the
apostle are wise and good, since whatever evil they have in them is to
be imputed to those who denied the resurrection of the dead.  In the
same manner also, in my epistle, take away my supposition, If every one
is born again in spiritual grace of the same character as he by whom he
is baptized, and if, when the man who baptizes is genuinely and
manifestly good, he does of himself give faith, he is the origin and
root and head of him who is being born again; but when the baptizer is a
wicked man, and undetected in his wickedness, then each man who is
baptized receives his faith from Christ, derives his origin from Christ,
is rooted in Christ, makes his boast in Christ as his Head:—take away, I
say, this hypothesis, on which all that follows depends, and there
remains a saying of the worst description which must fairly be ascribed
to me, viz., that all who are baptized should desire that they should
have faithless men to baptize them, and be igno<span id="page_620">p.
620</span> <span id="v.v.v.xlvi-Page_620"></span>rant of their
faithlessness.  For however good men they may have to baptize them,
Christ is incomparably better who will then be the Head of the baptized,
if the baptizer be a faithless man, but undetected. <span
id="fr_2417"></span>[2418](#fn_2417)   But let the statements that you
make be restored, and then it will forthwith be found that this which
depends upon it and follows in close connection from it is not my
sentiment, and that any evil which it contains is retorted on the
opinion which you maintain.  In like manner, take away the supposition,
If the good baptizer is the good tree, so that he whom he has baptized
is his good fruit, and if, when the character of an evil tree is
concealed, then any one that has been baptized by it is born, not of it,
but of Christ,—take away this hypothesis, which you were compelled to
confess had its origin in your sect and in the letter of Petilianus, and
the mad conclusion which follows from it will be mine, to be ascribed to
me alone, then they are justified with greater holiness who are baptized
by undetected evil men, than they who are baptized by men that are
genuinely and manifestly good. <span
id="fr_2418"></span>[2419](#fn_2418)   But restore the hypothesis on
which this depends, and you will at once see both that I have been right
in making this statement for your correction, and that all that with
good reason displeases you in this opinion has recoiled upon your own
head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2416"></span>[619:2417](1040643.htm#fr_2416) <span
id="v.v.v.xlvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xlvi-p3"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013)<span
id="v.v.v.xlvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2417"></span>[620:2418](1040643.htm#fr_2417) <span
id="v.v.v.xlvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xlvi-p4"></span> See Book I. c. 6, 7.

<span id="fn_2418"></span>[620:2419](1040643.htm#fr_2418) <span
id="v.v.v.xlvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xlvi-p5"></span> See Book I. c. 8, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 47](1040644)
