[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040570)  [Next](1040572) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 84.—</span>183.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span>
said:  "But if authority had been given by some law for persons to be
compelled to what is good, you yourselves, unhappy men, ought to have
been compelled by us to embrace the purest faith.  But far be it, far be
it from our conscience to compel any one to embrace our faith."

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p2"></span>184.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p2.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  No one is
indeed to be compelled to embrace the faith against his will; but by the
severity, or one might rather say, by the mercy of God, it is common for
treachery to be chastised with the scourge of tribulation.  Is it the
case, because the best morals are chosen by freedom of will, that
therefore the worst morals are not punished by integrity of law?  But
yet discipline to punish an evil manner of living is out of the
question, except where principles of good living which had been learned
have come to be despised.  If any laws, therefore, have been enacted
against you, you are not thereby forced to do well, but are only
prevented from doing ill. <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192)  
For no one can do well unless he has deliberately chosen, and unless he
has loved what is in free will; but the fear of punishment, even if it
does not share in the pleasures of a good conscience, at any rate keeps
the evil desire from escaping beyond the bounds of thought.  Who are
they, however, that have enacted adverse laws by which your audacity
could be repressed?  Are they not those of whom the apostle says that
"they bear not the sword in vain; for they are the ministers of God,
revengers to execute wrath upon them that do evil?" <span
id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193)   The whole question therefore is,
whether you are not doing ill, who are charged by the whole world with
the sacrilege of so great a schism.  And yet, neglecting the discussion
of this question, you talk on irrelevant matters; and while you live as
robbers, you boast that you die as martyrs. <span
id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194)   And, through fear either of the
laws themselves, or of the odium which you might incur, or else because
you are unequal to the task of resisting, I do not say so many men, but
so many Catholic nations, you even glory in your gentleness, that you do
not compel any to join your party.  According to your way of talking,
the hawk, when he has been prevented by flight from carrying off the
fowls, might call himself a dove.  For when have you ever had the power
without using it?  And hence you show how you <span id="page_573">p.
573</span> <span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-Page_573"></span>would do more if you
only could.  When Julian, envying the peace of Christ, restored to you
the churches which belonged to unity, who could tell of all the
massacres which were committed by you, when the very devils rejoiced
with you at the opening of their temples?  In the war with Firmus and
his party, let Mauritania Cæsariensis itself be asked to tell us what
the Moor Rogatus <span id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195) suffered at
your hands.  In the time of Gildo, because one of your colleagues <span
id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) was his intimate friend, let the
followers of Maximianus be our witnesses to their sufferings.  For if
one might appeal to Felicianus himself, who is now with you, on his
oath, whether Optatus did not compel him against his will to return to
your communion, he would not dare to open his lips, especially if the
people of Musti could behold his face, who were witnesses to everything
that was done.  But let them, as I have said, be witnesses to what they
have suffered at the hands of those with whom they acted in such wise
towards Rogatus.  The Catholic Church herself, though strengthened by
the assistance of Catholic princes ruling by land and sea, was savagely
attacked by hostile troops in arms under Optatus.  It was this that
first made it necessary to urge before the vicar Seranus that the law
should be put in force against you which imposes a fine of ten pounds of
gold, which none of you have ever paid to this very day, and yet you
charge us with cruelty.  But where could you find a milder course of
proceeding, than that crimes of such magnitude on your part should be
punished by the imposition of a pecuniary fine?  Or who could enumerate
all the deeds which you commit in the places which you hold, of your own
sovereign will and pleasure, each one as he can, without any friendship
on the part of judges or any others in authority?  Who is there of our
party, among the inhabitants of our towns, who has not either learned
something of this sort from those who came before him, or experienced it
for himself?  Is it not the case that at Hippo, where I am, there are
not wanting some who remember that your leader Faustinus gave orders, in
the time of his supreme power, in consequence of the scanty numbers of
the Catholics in the place, that no one should bake their bread for
them, insomuch that a baker, who was the tenant of one of our deacons,
threw away the bread of his landlord unbaked, and though he was not
sentenced to exile under any law, he cut him off from all share in the
necessaries of life not only in a Roman state, <span
id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197) but even in his own country, and
not only in his own country, but in his own house?  Why, even lately, as
I myself recall with mourning to this day, did not Crispinus of Calama,
one of your party, having bought a property, and that only
copy-hold, <span id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198) boldly and
unhesitatingly immerse in the waters of a second baptism no less than
eighty souls, murmuring with miserable groans under the sole influence
of terror; and this in a farm belonging to the Catholic emperors, by
whose laws you were forbidden even to be in any Roman city? <span
id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199)   But what else was it, save such
deeds as these of yours, that made it necessary for the very laws to be
passed of which you complain?  The laws, indeed, are very far from being
proportionate to your offenses; but, such as they are, you may thank
yourselves for their existence.  Indeed, should we not certainly be
driven on all sides from the country by the furious attacks of your
Circumcelliones, who fight under your command in furious troops, unless
we held you as hostages in the towns, who might well be unwilling to
endure under any circumstances the mere gaze of the people, and the
censure of all honorable men. from very shame, if not from fear?  Do not
therefore say, "Far be it, far be it from our conscience, to force any
one to embrace our faith."  For you do it when you can; and when you do
not do it, it is because you are unable, either from fear of the laws or
the odium which would accompany it, or because of the numbers of those
who would resist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[572:2193](1040571.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p3"></span> See below, 95, 217, and *c.
Gaudentium*, I. 25, 28 sqq.

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[572:2194](1040571.htm#fr_2193) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p4"></span> [Rom. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)<span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[572:2195](1040571.htm#fr_2194) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p5"></span> Augustin speaks of the Moor Rogatus,
bishop of Cartenna in ecclesiastical province of Mauritania Cæsariensis
in his ninety-third epistle, to Vincentius, c. iii. 11.  We learn from
the eighty-seventh epistle, to Emeritus, sec. 10, that the followers of
Rogatus called the other Donatists *Firmiani*, because they had been
subjected to much cruelty at their hands under the authority of Firmus.

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[573:2196](1040571.htm#fr_2195) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p6"></span> Cp. note 3, p. 556.

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[573:2197](1040571.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p7"></span> Optatus of Thaumugade (Thamogade),
the friend of Gildo.

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[573:2198](1040571.htm#fr_2197) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p8"></span> Augustin mentions again in his
thirty-fifth epistle, to Eusebius, sec. 3, that Hippo had received the
Roman citizenship.  His argument is that, even if not a native of the
place, the deacon should have been safe from molestation wherever Roman
laws prevailed.

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[573:2199](1040571.htm#fr_2198) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p9"></span> Emphyteuticam.  The land, therefore,
was held under the emperors, and less absolutely in the power of the
owner than if it had been freehold.

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[573:2200](1040571.htm#fr_2199) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxiv-p10"></span> Augustin remonstrates with
Crispinus on the point, *Epist*. lxvi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 85](1040572)
