[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040636)  [Next](1040638) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xl"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xl-p1.1"></span>Chapter 40.—</span>46.  For if the baptism
which Prætextatus and Felicianus administered in the communion of
Maximianus was their own, why was it received by you in those whom they
baptized as though it were the baptism of Christ?  But if it is truly
the baptism of Christ, as indeed it is, and yet could not profit those
who had received it with the guilt of schism, what do you say that you
could have granted to those whom you have received into your body with
the same baptism, except that, now that the offense of their accursed
division is wiped out by the bond of peace, they should not be compelled
to receive the sacrament of the holy laver as though they had it not,
but that, as what they had was before for their destruction, so it
should now begin to be of profit to them?  Or if this is not granted to
them in your communion, because it could not possibly be that it should
be granted to schismatics among schismatics, it is at any rate granted
to you in the Catholic communion, not that you should receive baptism as
though it were lacking in you, but that the baptism which you have
actually received should be of profit to you.  For all the sacraments of
Christ, if not combined with the love which belongs to the unity of
Christ, are <span id="page_616">p. 616</span> <span
id="v.v.v.xl-Page_616"></span>possessed not unto salvation, but unto
judgment.  But since it is not a true verdict, but your verdict, "that
through the baptism of certain *traditors* the baptism of Christ has
perished from the world in general," it is with good reason that you
cannot find any answer to make respecting the recognition of the baptism
of the followers of Maximianus.

<span id="v.v.v.xl-p2"></span>47.  See therefore, and remember with the
most watchful care, how Petilianus has made no answer to that very
question, which he proposes to himself in such terms as to seem to make
it a starting-point from which to say something.  For the former
question he has dismissed altogether, and has not wished to speak of it
to us, because I suppose it was beyond his power; nor is he at any time,
up to the very end of his volume, going to say anything about it, though
he quoted it from the first part of my epistle as though it were a
matter calling for refutation.  For even though he has added the two
words which he accused me of having suppressed, as though they were the
strongest bulwarks of his position, he yet lies wholly defenseless,
unable to find any answer to make when he is asked, If the conscience of
one that gives in holiness is what we look for to cleanse the conscience
of the recipient, where are we to find means for cleansing the
conscience of the man who is unacquainted with the conscience of him
gives, but not in holiness? and if it be the case that any one who has
received his faith from one that is faithless, receives not faith but
guilt, from what source is he to receive not guilt but faith, who is
unwittingly baptized by one that is faithless?  To this question it has
long been manifest from what he says that he has made no answer.

<span id="v.v.v.xl-p3"></span>48.  In the next place, he has gone on,
with calumnious mouth, to abuse monasteries and monks, finding fault
also with me, as having been the founder of this kind of life. <span
id="fr_2405"></span>[2406](#fn_2405)   And what this kind of life really
is he does not know at all, or rather, though it is perfectly well known
throughout all the world, he pretends that he is unacquainted with it. 
Then, asserting that I had said that Christ was the baptizer, he has
also added certain words from my epistle as though I had set this forth
as my own sentiment, when I had really quoted it as his and yours, and
it was inveighed against with most copious harshness, as if it were I
who had said these things against myself, when what he reprehended was
not mine, but his and your sentiment, as I will presently show clearly
to the best of my ability. <span id="fr_2406"></span>[2407](#fn_2406)  
Then he has endeavored to show us, in many unnecessary words, that
Christ does not baptize, but that baptism is administered in His name,
at once in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; of which Trinity itself he has said, either because it was what
he wished, or because it was all that he could say, that "Christ is the
centre of the Trinity."  In the next place, he has taken occasion of the
names of the sorcerers Simon and Barjesus to vent against us what
insults he thought fit.  Then he goes on, keeping in guarded suspense
the case of Optatus of Thamugas, that he might not be steeped in the
odium that arose from it, denying that neither he or his party could
have passed judgment upon him, and actually intimating in respect of
him, that he was crushed in consequence of suggestions from myself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2405"></span>[616:2406](1040637.htm#fr_2405) <span
id="v.v.v.xl-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xl-p4"></span> See Possidius’ *Life of St. Augustin*,
cc. v.-xi.

<span id="fn_2406"></span>[616:2407](1040637.htm#fr_2406) <span
id="v.v.v.xl-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xl-p5"></span> See c. 45, 54.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41](1040638)
