[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040224)  [Next](1040226) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xliii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 41.—How Great Good Things the
Manichæans Put in the Nature of Evil, and How Great Evil Things in the
Nature of Good.</span>

<span id="iv.x.xliii-p2"></span>But if the Manichæans were willing,
without pernicious zeal for defending their error, and with the fear of
God, to think, they would not most criminally blaspheme by supposing two
natures, the one good, which they call God, the other evil, which God
did not make:  so erring, so delirious, nay so insane, are they that
they do not see, that even in what they call the nature of supreme evil
they place so great good things:  life, power, safety, mem<span
id="page_360">p. 360</span> <span id="iv.x.xliii-Page_360"></span>ory,
intellect, temperance, virtue, plenty, sense, light, suavity,
extensions, numbers, peace, measure, form, order; but in what they call
supreme good, so many evil things:  death, sickness, forgetfulness,
foolishness, confusion, impotence, need, stolidity, blindness, pain,
unrighteousness, disgrace, war, intemperance, deformity, perversity. 
For they say that the princes of darkness also have been alive in their
own nature, and in their own kingdom were safe, and remembered and
understood.  For they say that the Prince of Darkness harangued in such
a manner, that neither could he have said such things, nor could he have
been heard by those by whom he was said to have been heard, without
memory and understanding; and to have had a temper suitable to his mind
and body, and to have ruled by virtue of power, and to have had
abundance and fruitfulness with respect to his elements, and they are
said to have perceived themselves mutually and the light as near at
hand, and to have had eyes by which they could see the light afar off;
which eyes assuredly could not have seen the light without some light
(whence also they are rightly called light); and they are said to have
enjoyed exceedingly the sweetness of their pleasures, and to have been
determined by measured members and dwelling-places.  But unless there
had been some sort of beauty there, they would not have loved their
wives, nor would their bodies have been steady by adaptation of parts;
without which, those things could not have been done there which the
Manichæans insanely say were done.  And unless some peace had been
there, they would not have obeyed their Prince.  Unless measure had been
there, they would have done nothing else than eat or drink, or rage, or
whatever they might have done, without any society:  although not even
those that did these things would have had determinate forms, unless
measure had been there.  But now the Manichæans say that they did such
things that they cannot be denied to have had in all their actions
measures suitable to themselves.  But if form had not been there, no
natural quality would have there subsisted.  But if there had been no
order there, some would not have ruled, others been ruled; they would
not have lived harmoniously in their element; in fine, they would not
have had their members adapted to their places, so that they could not
do all those things that the Manichæans vainly fable.  But if they say
that God’s nature does not die, what according to their vanity does
Christ raise from the dead?  If they say that it does not grow sick,
what does He cure?  If they say that it is not subject to forgetfulness,
what does He remind?  If they say that it is not deficient in wisdom,
what does He teach?  If they say that it is not confused, what does He
restore?  If they say that it was not vanquished and taken captive, what
does He liberate?  If they say that it was not in need, to what does He
minister aid?  If they say that it did not lose feeling, what does He
animate?  If they say that it has not been blinded, what does He
illuminate?  If it is not in pain, to what does He give relief?  If it
is not unrighteous, what does He correct through precepts?  If it is not
in disgrace, what does He cleanse?  If it is not in war, to what does He
promise peace?  If it is not deficient in moderation, upon what does He
impose the measure of law?  If it is not deformed, what does He reform? 
If it is not perverse, what does He emend?  For all these things done by
Christ, they say, are to be attributed not to that thing which was made
by God, and which has become depraved by its own free choice in sinning,
but to the very nature, yea to the very substance of God, which is what
God Himself is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 42](1040226)
