[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040131)  [Next](1040133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—The Number of Good Things in
Those Natures Which Manichæus Places in the Region of Darkness.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxi-p2"></span>33.  "But," is the reply, "the orders
of beings inhabiting those five natures were fierce and destructive." 
As if I were praising their fierceness and destructiveness.  I, you see,
join with you in condemning the evils you attribute to them; join you
with me in praising the good things which you ascribe to them:  so it
will appear that there is a mixture of good and evil in what you call
the last extremity of evil.  If I join you in condemning what is
mischievous in this region, you must join with me in praising what is
beneficial.  For these beings could not have been produced, or
nourished, or have continued to inhabit that region, without some
salutary influence.  I join with you in condemning the darkness; join
with me in praising the productiveness.  For while you call the darkness
immeasurable, you speak of "suitable productions."  Darkness, indeed, is
not a real substance, and means no more than the absence of light, as
nakedness means the want of clothing, and emptiness the want of material
contents:  so that darkness could produce nothing, although a region in
darkness—that is, in the absence of light—might produce something.  But
passing over this for the present, it is certain that where productions
arise there must be a beneficent adaptation of substances, as well as a
symmetrical arrangement and construction in unity of the members of the
beings produced,—a wise adjustment making them agree with one another. 
And who will deny that all these things are more to be praised than
darkness is to be condemned?  If I join with you in condemning the
muddiness of the waters, you must join with me in praising the waters as
far as they possessed the form and quality of water, and also the
agreement of the members of the inhabitants swimming in the waters,
their life sustaining and directing their body, and every particular
adaptation of substances for the benefit of health.  For though you find
fault with the waters as turbid and muddy, still, in allowing them the
quality of producing and maintaining their living inhabitants, you imply
that there was some kind of bodily form, and similarity of parts, giving
unity and congruity of character; otherwise there could be no body at
all:  and, <span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xxxi-Page_144"></span>as a rational being, you must see that
all these things are to be praised.  And however great you make the
ferocity of these inhabitants, and their massacrings and devastations in
their assaults, you still leave them the regular limits of form, by
which the members of each body are made to agree together, and their
beneficial adaptations, and the regulating power of the living principle
binding together the parts of the body in a friendly and harmonious
union.  And if all these are regarded with common sense it will be seen
that they are more to be commended than the faults are to be condemned. 
I join with you in condemning the frightfulness of the winds; join with
me in praising their nature, as giving breath and nourishment, and their
material form in its continuousness and diffusion by the connection of
its parts:  for by these things these winds had the power of producing
and nourishing, and sustaining in vigor these inhabitants you speak of;
and also in these inhabitants—besides the other things which have
already been commended in all animated creatures—this particular power
of going quickly and easily whence and whither they please, and the
harmonious stroke of their wings in flight, and their regular motion.  I
join with you in condemning the destructiveness of fire; join with me in
commending the productiveness of this fire, and the growth of these
productions, and the adaptation of the fire to the beings produced, so
that they had coherence, and came to perfection in measure and shape,
and could live and have their abode there:  for you see that all these
things deserve admiration and praise, not only in the fire which is thus
habitable, but in the inhabitants too.  I join with you in condemning
the denseness of smoke, and the savage character of the prince who, as
you say, abode in it; join with me in praising the similarity of all the
parts in this very smoke, by which it preserves the harmony and
proportion of its parts among themselves, according to its own nature,
and has an unity which makes it what it is:  for no one can calmly
reflect on these things without wonder and praise.  Besides, even to the
smoke you give the power and energy of production, for you say that
princes inhabited it; so that in that region the smoke is productive,
which never happens here, and, moreover, affords a wholesome dwelling
place to its inhabitants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1040133)
