[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040358)  [Next](1040360.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.viii.v"></span>

<span id="v.iv.viii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.viii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—</span>7.  Wherefore all bad men
are separated in the spirit from the good; but if they are separated in
the body also by a manifest dissension, they are made yet worse.  But,
as it has been said, it makes no difference to the holiness of baptism
how much worse the man may be that has it, or how much worse he that
confers it:  yet he that is separated may confer it, as he that is
separated may have it; but as he has it to destruction, so he may confer
it to destruction.  But he on whom he confers it may receive it to his
soul’s health, if he, on his part, receive it not in separation; as it
has happened to many that, in a catholic spirit, and with heart not
alienated from the unity of peace, they have, under some pressure of
impending death, turned hastily to some heretic and received from him
the baptism of Christ without any share in his perversity, so that,
whether dying or restored to life, they by no means remain in communion
with those to whom they never passed in heart.  But if the recipient
himself has received the baptism in separation, he receives it so much
the more to his destruction, in proportion to the greatness of the good
which he has not received well; and it tends the more to his destruction
in his separation, as it would avail the more to the salvation of one in
unity.  And so, if, reforming himself from his perverseness and turning
from his separation, he should come to the Catholic peace, his sins are
remitted through the bond of peace and the same baptism under which his
sins were retained through the sacrilege of separation, because that is
always holy both in the just and the unjust, which is neither increased
by the righteousness nor diminished by the unrighteousness of any man.

<span id="v.iv.viii.v-p2"></span>8.  This being the case, what bearing
has it on so clear a truth, that many of his fellow-bishops agreed with
Cyprian in that opinion, and advanced their own several opinions on the
same side, except that his charity towards the unity of Christ might
become more and more conspicuous?  For if he had been the only one to
hold that opinion, with no one to agree with him, he might have been
thought, in remaining, to have shrunk from the sin of schism, because he
found no companions in his error; but when so many agreed with him, he
showed, by remaining in unity with the rest who thought differently from
him, that he preserved the most sacred bond of universal catholicity,
not from any fear of isolation, but from the love of peace.  Wherefore
it might indeed seem now to be superfluous to consider the several
opinions of the other bishops also in that Council; but since those who
are slow in heart think that no answer has been made at all, if to any
passage in any discourse the answer which might be brought to bear on
the spot be given not there but somewhere else, it is better that by
reading much they should be polished into sharpness, than that by
understanding little they should have room left for complaining that the
argument has not been fairly conducted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1040360.md)
