[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040303)  [Next](1040305.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—</span>9.  But as regards his
saying, "Nor let any one affirm that what they have received from the
apostles, that they follow; for the apostles handed down only one Church
and one baptism, and that appointed only in the same Church:" <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365.md)   this does not so much move me to
venture to condemn the baptism of Christ when found amongst heretics
(just as it is necessary to recognize the gospel itself when I find it
with them, though I abominate their error), as it warns me that there
were some even in the times of the holy Cyprian who traced to the
authority of the apostles that custom against which the African Councils
were held, and in respect of which he himself said a little above, "In
vain do those who are beaten by reason oppose to us the authority of
custom."  Nor do I find the reason why the same Cyprian found this very
custom, which after his time was confirmed by nothing less than a
plenary Council of the whole world, already so strong before his time,
that when with all his learning he sought an authority worth following
for changing it, he found nothing but a Council of Agrippinus held in
Africa a very few years before his own time.  And seeing that this was
not enough for him, as against the custom of the whole world, he laid
hold on these reasons which we just now, considering them with great
care, and being confirmed by the antiquity of the custom itself, and by
the subsequent authority of a plenary Council, found to be truth-like
rather than true; which, however, seemed to him true, as he toiled in a
question of the greatest obscurity, and was in doubt about the remission
of sins,—whether it could fail to be given in the baptism of Christ, and
whether it could be given among heretics.  In which matter, if an
imperfect revelation of the truth was given to Cyprian, that the
greatness of his love in not deserting the unity of the Church might be
made manifest, there is yet not any reason why any one should venture to
claim superiority over the strong defenses and excellence of his
virtues, and the abundance of graces which were found in him, merely
because, with the instruction derived from the strength of a general
Council, he sees something which Cyprian did not see, because the Church
had not yet held a plenary Council on the matter.  Just as no one is so
insane as to set himself up as surpassing the merits of the Apostle
Peter, because, taught by the epistles of the Apostle Paul, and
confirmed by the custom of the Church herself, he does not compel the
Gentiles to judaize, as Peter once had done. <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366.md)

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p4"></span>10.  We do not then "find that any one,
after being baptized among heretics, was afterwards admitted by the
apostles with the same baptism, and communicated;" <span
id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367.md) but neither do we find this, that
any one coming from the society of heretics, who had been baptized among
them, was baptized anew by the apostles.  But this custom, which even
then those who looked back to past ages could not find to have been
invented by men of a later time, is rightly believed to have been handed
down from the apostles.  And there are many other things of the same
kind, which it would be tedious to recount.  Wherefore, if they had
something to say for themselves to whom Cyprian, wishing to persuade
them of the truth of his own view, says, "Let no one say, What we have
received from the apostles, that we follow," with how much more force we
now say, What the custom of the Church has always held, what this
argument has failed to prove false, and what a plenary Council has
confirmed, this we follow!  To this we may add that it may also be said,
after a careful inquiry into the reasoning on both sides of the
discussion, and into the evidence <span id="page_451">p. 451</span>
<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-Page_451"></span>of Scripture, What truth has
declared, that we follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[450:1366](1040304.htm#fr_1365.md) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p2"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. 13.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[450:1367](1040304.htm#fr_1366.md) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p3"></span> [Gal. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014.md)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[450:1368](1040304.htm#fr_1367.md) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p5"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1040305.md)
