[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040229)  [Next](1040231.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xlviii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.xlviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 46.—The Unspeakable Doctrine of the
Fundamental Epistle.</span>

<span id="iv.x.xlviii-p2"></span>For they even say that Adam, the first
man, was created by certain princes of darkness so that the light might
be held by them lest it should escape.  For in the epistle which they
call *Fundamental*, Manichæus wrote as follows respecting the way in
which the Prince of Darkness, whom they represent as the father of the
first man, spoke to the rest of his allied princes of darkness, and how
he acted:  "Therefore with wicked inventions he said to those present: 
What does this huge light that is rising seem to you to be?  See how the
pole moves, how it shakes most of the powers.  Wherefore it is right for
me rather to ask you beforehand for whatever light you have in your
powers:  since thus I will form an image of that great one who has
appeared in his glory, through which we may be able to rule, freed in
some measure from the conversation of darkness.  Hearing these things,
and deliberating for a long time among themselves, they thought it most
just to furnish what was demanded of them.  For they did not have
confidence in being able to retain the light that they had forever;
hence they thought it better to offer it to their Prince, by no means
without hope that in this way they would rule.  It must be considered
therefore how they furnished the light that they had.  For this also is
scattered throughout all the divine scriptures and the heavenly secrets;
but to the wise it is easy enough to know how it was given:  for it is
known imme<span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="iv.x.xlviii-Page_364"></span>diately and openly by him who should
truly and faithfully wish to consider.  Since there was a promiscuous
throng of those who had come together, females and males of course, he
impelled them to copulate among themselves:  in which copulation the
males emitted seed, the females were made pregnant.  But the offspring
were like those who had begotten them, the first obtaining as it were
the largest portion of the parents’ strength.  Taking these as a special
gift their Prince rejoiced.  And just as even now we see take place,
that the nature of evil taking thence strength forms the fashioner of
bodies, so also the aforesaid Prince, taking the offspring of his
companions, which had the senses of their parents, sagacity, light,
procreated at the same time with themselves in the process of
generation, devoured them; and very many powers having been taken from
food of this kind, in which there was present not only fortitude, but
much more astuteness and depraved sensibilities from the ferocious race
of the progenitors, he called his own spouse to himself, springing from
the same stock as himself, emitted, like the rest the abundance of evils
that he had devoured, himself also adding something from his own thought
and power, so that his disposition became the former and arranger of all
the things that he had poured forth; whose consort received these things
as soil cultivated in the best way is accustomed to receive seed.  For
in her were constructed and woven together the images of all heavenly
and earthly powers, so that what was formed obtained the likeness, so to
speak, of a full orb."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 47](1040231.md)
