[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040584)  [Next](1040586) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xcviii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 98.—</span>223.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span>
said:  "Lastly, as we have often said before, how great is your
presumption, that you should speak as you presume to do of kings, when
David says, ‘It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in
man:  it is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in
princes?’" <span id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263)

<span id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p3"></span>224.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  We put no
confidence in man, but, so far as we can, we warn men to place their
trust in the Lord; nor do we put confidence in princes, but, so far as
we can, we warn princes to put confidence in the Lord.  And though we
may seek aid from princes to promote the advantage of the Church, yet do
we not put confidence in them.  For neither did the apostle himself put
confidence in that tribune, in the sense in which the Psalmist talks of
putting confidence in princes, from whom he obtained for himself that an
escort of armed men should be assigned to him; nor did he put confidence
in the armed men, by whose protection he escaped the snares of the
wicked ones, in any such sense as that of the Psalmist where he speaks
of putting confidence in men. <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264)
  But neither do we find fault with you yourselves, because you sought
from the emperor that the basilicas should be restored to you, as though
you had put your trust in Julian the prince; but we find fault with you,
that you have despaired of the witness of Christ, from whose unity you
have separated the basilicas themselves.  For you received them at the
bidding of an enemy of Christ, that in them you should despise the
commands of Christ, whilst you find force and truth in what Julian
ordained, saying, "This, moreover, on the petition of Rogatianus,
Pontius, Cassianus, and other bishops, not without an intermixture of
clergy, is added to complete the whole, that those proceedings which
were taken to their prejudice wrongly and without authority being all
annulled, everything should be restored to its former position;" and yet
you find nothing that has either force or truth in what Christ ordained,
saying, "Ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and in Samaria, and even in the whole earth." <span
id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265)   <span id="page_587">p. 587</span>
<span id="v.v.iv.xcviii-Page_587"></span>We entreat you, let yourselves
be reformed.  Return to this most manifest unity of the whole world; and
let all things be restored to their former position, not in accordance
with the words of the apostate Julian, but in accordance with the words
of our Saviour Christ.  Have pity on your own soul.  We are not now
comparing Constantine and Julian in order to show how different they
are.  We are not saying, If you have not placed confidence in a man and
in a prince, when you said to a pagan and apostate emperor, that "in him
justice only found a place," seeing that the party of Donatus has
universally employed the prayers and the rescript in which those words
occur, as is proved by the records of the audience; much less ought we
to be accused by you, as though we put our confidence in any man or
prince, if without any blasphemous flattery we obtained any request from
Constantine or from the other Christian emperors; or if they themselves,
without our asking for it, but remembering the account which they shall
render to the Lord, under whose words they tremble when they hear what
you yourself have quoted, "Be wise now therefore, O ye kings," etc., and
many other sayings of the sort, make any ordinance of their own accord
in support of the unity of the Catholic Church.  But I say nothing about
Constantine.  It is Christ and Julian that we contrast before you; nay,
more than this, it is God and man, the Son of God and the son of hell,
the Saviour of our souls and the destroyer of his own.  Why do you
maintain the rescript of Julian in the occupation of the basilicas, and
yet not maintain the gospel of Christ in embracing the peace of the
Church?  We too cry out, "Let all things that have been done amiss be
restored to their ancient condition."  The gospel of Christ is of
greater antiquity than the rescript of Julian; the unity of Christ is of
greater antiquity than the party of Donatus; the prayers of the Church
to the Lord on behalf of the unity of the Church are of greater
antiquity than the prayers of Rogatianus, and Pontius, and Cassianus, to
Julian on behalf of the party of Donatus.  Are proceedings wrongly taken
when kings forbid division? and are they not wrongly taken when bishops
divide unity?  Is that wrong action when kings minister to the witness
of Christ in defence of the Church? and is it not wrong action when
bishops contradict the witness of Christ in order to deny the Church? 
We entreat you, therefore, that the words of Julian himself, to whom you
thus made supplication, may be listened to, not in opposition to the
gospel, but in accordance with the gospel, and that "all things which
have been done amiss may be restored to their former condition."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[586:2264](1040585.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p2"></span> [Ps.
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009)<span
id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[586:2265](1040585.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p4"></span> [Acts xxiii.
12-33](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012)<span
id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[586:2266](1040585.htm#fr_2265) <span
id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p5"></span> [Acts i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008)<span
id="v.v.iv.xcviii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 99](1040586)
