[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040051)  [Next](1040053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 31.—The Life of the Anachoretes
and Cœnobites Set Against the Continence of the Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span>65.  What must we think is seen by
those who can live without seeing their fellow-creatures, though not
without loving them?  It must be something transcending human things in
contemplating which man can live without seeing his fellow-man.  Hear
now, ye Manichæans, the customs and notable continence of perfect
Christians, who have thought it right not only to praise but also to
practise the height of chastity, that you may be restrained, if there is
any shame in you, from vaunting your abstinence before uninstructed
minds as if it were the hardest of all things.  I will speak of things
of which you are not ignorant, though you hide them from us.  For who
does not know that there is a daily increasing multitude of Christian
men of absolute continence spread all over the world, especially in the
East and in Egypt, as you cannot help knowing?

<span id="iv.iv.xxxiii-p3"></span>66.  I will say nothing of those to
whom I just now alluded, who, in complete seclusion from the view of
men, inhabit regions utterly barren, content with simple bread, which is
brought to them periodically, and with water, enjoying communion with
God, to whom in purity of mind they cleave, and most blessed in
contemplating His beauty, which can be seen only by the understanding of
saints.  I will say nothing of them, because some people think them to
have abandoned human things more than they ought, not considering how
much those may benefit us in their minds by prayer, and in their lives
by example, whose bodies we are not permitted to see.  But to discuss
this point would take long, and would be fruitless; for if a man does
not of his own accord regard this high pitch of sanctity as admirable
and honorable, how can our speaking lead him to do so?  Only the
Manichæans, who make a boast of nothing, should be reminded that the
abstinence and continence of the great saints of the Catholic Church has
gone so far, that some think it should be checked and recalled within
the limits of humanity,—so far above men, even in the judgment of those
who disapprove, have their minds soared.

<span id="iv.iv.xxxiii-p4"></span>67.  But if this is beyond our
tolerance, who can but admire and commend those who, slighting and
discarding the pleasures of this world, living together in a most chaste
and holy society, unite in passing their time in prayers, in readings,
in discussions, without any swelling of pride, or noise of contention,
or sullenness of envy; but quiet, modest, peaceful, their life is one of
perfect harmony and devotion to God, an offering most acceptable to Him
from whom the power to do those things is obtained?  No one possesses
anything of his own; no one is a burden to another.  They work with
their hands in such occupations as may feed their bodies without
distracting their minds from God.  The product of their toil they give
to the decans or tithesmen,—so called from being set over the tithes,—so
that no one is occupied with the care of his body, either in food or
clothes, or in anything else required for daily use or for the common
ailments.  These decans, again, arranging everything with great care,
and meeting promptly the demands made by that life on account of bodily
infirmities, have one called "father," to whom they give in their
accounts.  These fathers are not only more saintly in their conduct, but
also distinguished for divine learning, and of high character in every
way; and without pride they superintend those whom they call their
children, having themselves great authority in giving orders, and
meeting with willing obedience from those under their charge.  At the
close of the day they assemble from their separate dwellings before
their meal to hear their father, assembling to the number of three
thousand at least for one father; for one may have even a much larger
number than this.  They listen with astonishing <span id="page_60">p.
60</span> <span id="iv.iv.xxxiii-Page_60"></span>eagerness in perfect
silence, and give expression to the feelings of their minds as moved by
the words of the preacher, in groans, or tears, or signs of joy without
noise or shouting.  Then there is refreshment for the body, as much as
health and a sound condition of the body requires, every one checking
unlawful appetite, so as not to go to excess even in the poor,
inexpensive fare provided.  So they not only abstain from flesh and
wine, in order to gain the mastery over their passions, but also from
those things which are only the more likely to whet the appetite of the
palate and of the stomach, from what some call their greater cleanness,
which often serves as a ridiculous and disgraceful excuse for an
unseemly taste for exquisite viands, as distant from animal food. 
Whatever they possess in addition to what is required for their support
(and much is obtained, owing to their industry and frugality), they
distribute to the needy with greater care than they took in procuring it
for themselves.  For while they make no effort to obtain abundance, they
make every effort to prevent their abundance remaining with them,—so
much so, that they send shiploads to places inhabited by poor people.  I
need say no more on a matter known to all. <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140)

<span id="iv.iv.xxxiii-p6"></span>68.  Such, too, is the life of the
women, who serve God assiduously and chastely, living apart and removed
as far as propriety demands from the men, to whom they are united only
in pious affection and in imitation of virtue.  No young men are allowed
access to them, nor even old men, however respectable and approved,
except to the porch, in order to furnish necessary supplies.  For the
women occupy and maintain themselves by working in wool, and hand over
the cloth to the brethren, from whom, in return, they get what they need
for food.  Such customs, such a life, such arrangements, such a system,
I could not commend as it deserves, if I wished to commend it; besides,
I am afraid that it would seem as if I thought it unlikely to gain
acceptance from the mere description of it, if I considered myself
obliged to add an ornamental eulogium to the simple narrative.  Ye
Manichæans, find fault here if you can.  Do not bring into prominence
our tares before men too blind to discriminate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_140"></span>[60:141](1040052.htm#fr_140) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxiii-p5"></span> \[This picture of cœnobitic life,
even in its purest form, is doubtless idealized.  It is certain that the
monasteries very soon became hot-beds of vice, and the refuge of the
scum of society.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](1040053)
