[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040126)  [Next](1040128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—Omnipotence Creates Good
Things Differing in Degree.  In Every Description Whatsoever of the
Junction of the Two Regions There is Either Impropriety or
Absurdity.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxvi-p2"></span>27.  If, then, you are now convinced
that God is able to create some good thing out of nothing, come into the
Catholic Church, and learn that all the natures which God has created
and founded in their order of excel<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>
<span id="iv.viii.xxvi-Page_141"></span>lence from the highest to the
lowest are good, and some better than others; and that they were made of
nothing, though God, their Maker, made use of His own wisdom as an
instrument, so to speak, to give being to what was not, and that as far
as it had being it might be good, and that the limitation of its being
might show that it was not begotten by God, but made out of nothing.  If
you examine the matter, you will find nothing to keep you from agreeing
to this.  For you cannot make your region of light to be what God is,
without making the dark section an infringement on the very nature of
God.  Nor can you say that it was generated by God, without being
reduced to the same enormity, from the necessity of concluding that as
begotten of God, it must be what God is.  Nor can you say that it was
distinct from Him, lest you should be forced to admit that God placed
His kingdom in what did not belong to Him, and that there are three
natures.  Nor can you say that God made it of a substance distinct from
His own, without making something good besides God, or something evil
besides the race of darkness.  It remains, therefore that you must
confess that God made the region of light out of nothing:  and you are
unwilling to believe this; because if God could make out of nothing some
great good which yet was inferior to Himself, He could also, since He is
good, and grudges no good, make another good inferior to the former, and
again a third inferior to the second, and so on, in order down to the
lowest good of created natures, so that the whole aggregate, instead of
extending indefinitely without number or measure should have a fixed and
definite consistency.  Again, if you will not allow this either, that
God made the region of light out of nothing, you will have no escape
from the shocking profanities to which your opinions lead.

<span id="iv.viii.xxvi-p3"></span>28.  Perhaps, since the carnal
imagination can fancy any shapes it likes, you might be able to devise
some other form for the junction of the two regions, instead of
presenting to the mind such a disagreeable and painful description as
this, that the region of God, whether it be of the same nature as God or
not, where at least God’s kingdoms are founded, lies through immensity
in such a huge mass that its members stretch loosely to an infinite
extent, and that on their lower part that wedge of the region of
darkness, itself of boundless size encroaches upon them.  But whatever
other form you contrive for the junction of these two regions, you
cannot erase what Manichæus has written.  I refer not to other treatises
where a more particular description is given,—for perhaps, because they
are in the hands of only a few, there might not be so much difficulty
with them,—but to this Fundamental Epistle which we are now considering,
with which all of you who are called enlightened are usually quite
familiar.  Here the words are:  "On one side the border of the shining
and sacred region was the region of darkness, deep and boundless in
extent."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1040128.md)
