[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040606)  [Next](1040608) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.x"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—</span>11.  Let these things
suffice you, my beloved Christian brethren of the Catholic Church, so
far as the present business is concerned; and if you hold fast to this
in Catholic affection, so long as you are one sure flock of the one
Shepherd, I am not too much concerned with the abuse that any enemy may
lavish on me, your partner in the flock, or, at any rate, your
watch-dog, so long as he compels me to bark rather in your defense than
in my own.  And yet, if it were necessary for the cause that I should
enter on my own defense, I should do so with the greatest brevity and
the greatest ease, joining freely with all men in condemning and bearing
witness against the whole period of my life before I received the
baptism of Christ, so far as relates to my evil passions and my errors,
lest, in defending that period, I should seem to be seeking my own
glory, not His, who by His grace delivered me even from myself. 
Wherefore, when I hear that life of mine abused, in whatever spirit he
may be acting who abuses it, I am not so thankless as to be grieved. 
However much he finds fault with any vice of mine, I praise him in the
same degree as my physician.  Why then should I disturb myself about
defending those past and obsolete evils in my life, in respect of which,
though Petilianus has said much that is false, he has yet left more that
is true unsaid?  But concerning that period of my life which is
subsequent to my baptism, to you who know me I speak unnecessarily in
telling of those things which might be known to all mankind; but those
who know me not ought not to act with such unfairness towards me as to
believe Petilianus rather than you concerning me.  For if one should not
give credence to the panegyrics of a friend, neither should one believe
the detraction of an enemy.  There remain, therefore, those things which
are hidden in a man, in which conscience alone can bear testimony, which
cannot be a witness before men.  Herein Petilianus says that I am a
Manichæan, speaking of the conscience of another man; I, speaking of my
own conscience, aver that I am not.  Choose which of us you had sooner
believe.  Notwithstanding, since there is not any need even of this
short and easy defense on my part, where the question at issue is not
concerning the merits of any individual, whoever he may be, but
concerning the truth <span id="fr_2359"></span>[2360](#fn_2359) of the
whole Church, I have more <span id="page_602">p. 602</span> <span
id="v.v.v.x-Page_602"></span>also to say to any of you, who, being of
the party of Donatus, have read the evil words which Petilianus has
written about me, which I should not have heard from him if I had had no
care about the loss of your salvation; but then I should have been
wanting in the bowels of Christian love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2359"></span>[601:2360](1040607.htm#fr_2359) <span
id="v.v.v.x-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.x-p2"></span> Some editors have *"unitate,"* but
Amerbach and the <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.x-p2.1"></span>Mss</span>. *"veritate;"* and this is supported
by c. 24, 28 below:  *"De ecclesiæ vel baptismi veritate;"* and c. 13,
22 of the treatise *de Unico Baptismo:  "Ambulantibus in ecclesiæ
veritate."*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1040608)
