[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040124)  [Next](1040126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—The Anthropomorphites Not So
Bad as the Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxiv-p2"></span>25.  Compare, now, not spiritual men
of the Catholic faith, whose mind, as far as is possible in this life,
perceives that the divine substance and nature has no material
extension, and has no shape bounded by lines, but the carnal and weak of
our faith, who, when they hear the members of the body used
figuratively, as, when God’s eyes or ears are spoken of, are accustomed,
in the license of fancy, to picture God to themselves in a human form;
compare these with the Manichæans, whose custom it is to make known
their silly stories to anxious inquirers as if they were great
mysteries:  and consider who have the most allowable and respectable
ideas of God, —those who think of Him as having a human form which is
the most excellent of its kind, or those who think of Him as having
boundless material extension, yet not in all directions, but with three
parts infinite and solid, while in one part He is cloven, with an empty
void, and with undefined space above, while the region of darkness is
inserted wedge-like below.  Or perhaps the proper expression is, that He
is unconfined above in His own nature, but encroached on below by a
hostile nature.  I join with you in laughing at the folly of carnal men,
unable as yet to form spiritual conceptions, who think of God as having
a human form.  Do you too join me, if you can, in laughing at those
whose unhappy conceptions represent God as having a shape cloven or cut
in such an unseemly and unbecoming way, with such an empty gap above,
and such a dishonorable curtailment below.  Besides, there is this
difference, that these carnal people, who think of God as having a human
form, if they are content to be nourished with milk from the breast of
the Catholic Church, and do not rush headlong into rash opinions, but
cultivate in the Church the pious habit of inquiry, and there ask that
they may receive, and knock that it may be opened to them, begin to
understand spiritually the figures and parables of the Scriptures, and
gradually to perceive that the divine energies are suitably set forth
under the name, sometimes of ears, sometimes of eyes, sometimes of hands
or feet, or <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xxiv-Page_140"></span>even of wings and feathers a shield
too, and sword, and helmet, and all the other innumerable things.  And
the more progress they make in this understanding, the more are they
confirmed as Catholics.  The Manichæans, on the other hand, when they
abandon their material fancies, cease to be Manichæans.  For this is the
chief and special point in their praises of Manichæus, that the divine
mysteries which were taught figuratively in books from ancient times
were kept for Manichæus, who was to come last, to solve and demonstrate;
and so after him no other teacher will come from God, for he has said
nothing in figures or parables, but has explained ancient sayings of
that kind, and has himself taught in plain, simple terms.  Therefore,
when the Manichæans hear these words of their founder, on one side and
border of the shining and sacred region was the region of darkness, they
have no interpretations to fall back on.  Wherever they turn, the
wretched bondage of their own fancies brings them upon clefts or sudden
stoppages and joinings or sunderings of the most unseemly kind, which it
would be shocking to believe as true of any immaterial nature, even
though mutable, like the mind, not to speak of the immutable nature of
God.  And yet if I were unable to rise to higher things, and to bring my
thoughts from the entanglement of false imaginations which are impressed
on the memory by the bodily senses, into the freedom and purity of
spiritual existence, how much better would it be to think of God as in
the form of a man, than to fasten that wedge of darkness to His lower
edge, and, for want of a covering for the boundless vacuity above to
leave it void and unoccupied throughout infinite space!  What notion
could be worse than this?  What darker error can be taught or imagined?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1040126)
