[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040423)  [Next](1040425) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ix.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—</span>48.  Therapius of
Bulla <span id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826) said:  "If a man gives
up and betrays the baptism of Christ to heretics, what else can he be
said to be but a Judas to the Bride of Christ?" <span
id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827)

<span id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p4"></span>49.  How great a condemnation have we
here of all schismatics, who have separated themselves by wicked
sacrilege from the inheritance of Christ dispersed throughout the whole
world, if Cyprian held communion with such as was the traitor Judas, and
yet was not defiled by them; or if he was defiled, then were all made
such as Judas; or if they were not, then the evil deeds of those who
went before do not belong to those who came after even though they were
the offspring of the same communion.  Why, therefore, do they cast in
our teeth the *traditores*, against whom they did not prove their
charge, and do not cast in their own teeth Judas, with whom Cyprian and
his colleagues held communion?  Behold the Council in which these men
are wont to boast!  We indeed say, that he who approves the baptism of
Christ even in heretics, does not betray to heretics the baptism of
Christ; just in the same way as he does not betray to murderers the
baptism of Christ who approves the baptism of Christ even in murderers: 
but inasmuch as they profess to prescribe to us from the decrees of this
Council what opinions we ought to hold, let them first assent to it
themselves.  See how therein were compared to the traitor Judas, all who
said that heretics, although baptized in heresy, should not be baptized
again.  Yet with such Cyprian was willing to hold communion, when he
said, "Judging no man, nor depriving any of the right of communion if he
entertain a contrary opinion."  But that there had been men of such a
sort in former times within the Church, is made clear by the sentence in
which he says:  "But some one will say, What, then, shall be done with
these men who in times past were admitted into the Church without
baptism?" <span id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828)   That such had
been the custom of the Church, is testified again and again by the very
men who compose this Council.  If, therefore, any one who does this "can
be said to be nothing else but a Judas to the Bride of Christ,"
according to the terms in which the judgment of Therapius is couched;
but Judas, according to the teaching of the gospel, was a traitor; then
all those men held communion with traitors who at that time uttered
those very judgments, and before they uttered them they all had become
traitors through that custom which at that time was retained by the
Church.  All, therefore—that is to say, both we and they themselves who
were the offspring of that unity—are traitors.  But we defend ourselves
in two ways:  first, because without prejudice to the right of unity, as
Cyprian himself declared in his opening speech, we do not assent to the
decrees of this Council in which this judgment was pronounced; and
secondly, because we hold that the wicked in no way hurt the good in
Catholic unity, until at the last the chaff be separated from the
wheat.  But our opponents, inasmuch as they both shelter themselves as
it were under the decrees of this Council, and maintain that the good
perish as by a kind of infection from communion with the wicked, have no
resource to save them from allowing both that the earlier Christians,
whose offspring they are, were traitors, inasmuch as they are convicted
by their own Council; and that the deeds of those who went before them
do reflect on them, since they throw in our teeth the deeds of our
ancestors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[506:1827](1040424.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p2"></span> Bulla (Vulla) was in ecclesiastical
province of Africa Proconsularis.  For Therapius cp. Cypr. *Ep*. lxiv.
1.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[506:1828](1040424.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p3"></span> Conc. Carth. sec. 61.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[506:1829](1040424.htm#fr_1828) <span
id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ix.xxv-p5"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1040425)
