[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040141)  [Next](1040143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xli"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter 40.—Corruption Tends to
Non-Existence.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xli-p2"></span>46.  But if any one does not believe
that corruption comes from nothing, let him place before himself
existence and non-existence—one, as it were, on one side, and the other
on the other (to speak so as not to outstrip the slow to understand);
then let him set something, say the body of an animal, between them, and
let him ask himself whether, while the body is being formed and
produced, while its size is increasing, while it gains nourishment,
health, strength, beauty, stability, it is tending, as regards its
duration and permanence, to this side or that, to existence or
non-existence.  He will see without difficulty, that even in the
rudimentary form there is an existence, and that the more the body is
established and built up in form, and figure and strength, the more does
it come to exist, and to tend to the side of existence.  Then, again,
let the body begin to be corrupted; let its whole condition be
enfeebled, let its vigor languish, its strength decay, its beauty be
defaced, its framework be sundered, the consistency of its parts give
way and go to pieces; and let him ask now where the body is tending in
this corruption, whether to existence or non-existence:  he will not
surely be so blind or stupid as to doubt how to answer himself, or as
not to see that, in proportion as anything is corrupted, in that
proportion it approaches decease.  But whatever tends to decease tends
to non-existence.  Since, then, we must believe that God exists
immutably and incorruptibly, while what is called nothing is clearly
altogether non<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xli-Page_150"></span>existent; and since, after setting
before yourself existence and non-existence, you have observed that the
more a visible object increases the more it tends towards existence,
while the more it is corrupted the more it tends towards non-existence,
why are you at a loss to tell regarding any nature what in it is from
God, and what from nothing; seeing that visible form is natural, and
corruption against nature?  The increase of form leads to existence, and
we acknowledge God as supreme existence; the increase of corruption
leads to non-existence, and we know that what is non-existent is
nothing.  Why then, I say, are you at a loss to tell regarding a
corruptible nature, when you have both the words *nature* and
*corruptible*, what is from God, and what from nothing?  And why do you
inquire for a nature contrary to God, since, if you confess that He is
the supreme existence, it follows that non-existence is contrary to
Him? <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_291"></span>[150:292](1040142.htm#fr_291) <span
id="iv.viii.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xli-p3"></span> \[We have already encountered in the
treatise *Concerning two Souls*, substantially the same course of
argumentation here pursued.  The doctrine of the negativity of evil may
be said to have been fundamental with Augustin, and he uses it very
effectually against Manichæan dualism.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41](1040143)
