[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040013)  [Next](1040015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—The Relation of Manichæism to
Judaism.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p2"></span>So far as a relation existed it was one
of the intensest hostility.  Like the Gnostics in general, Manichæism
looked upon the God of the Old Testament as an evil, or at least
imperfect being.  On this matter we do not learn so much from the
Oriental as from the Western sources, but even from the former the
radical antagonism is manifest.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p3"></span>The statement in the *Fihrist’s*
narrative, that "Mani treated all the prophets disparagingly in his
books, degraded them, accused them of lying, and maintained that devils
had possessed them and that these spoke out of their mouths; nay, he
goes so far as expressly to assert in some passages of his books that
the prophets were themselves devils," is precisely in the line of the
later Manichæan polemics against the Judaistic element in Christianity.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p4"></span>The Manichæan account of the creation
shows some acquaintance with the Jewish Scriptures or with Jewish
tradition, yet the complete perversion of the Biblical account is <span
id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="iv.ii.vii-Page_24"></span>one of the
clearest indications of hostility.  It may be said in general that it is
impossible to conceive of two systems of religion that have less in
common, or more that is sharply antagonistic.  One of the principal
points of controversy between Manichæans and Christians was the defense
of the Jewish Scriptures and religion by the latter.  The Manichæan
demanded the elimination from the current Christianity, and from the New
Testament itself, of every vestige of Judaism.  Their objections to the
Old Testament Scriptures and religion were in general substantially the
same as those made by other Gnostics, especially by the Marcionites. 
The Old Testament anthropomorphic representations seem to have been
offensive to them, notwithstanding their own crude conceptions of the
conflict between light and darkness, of the creation, etc.  The relation
of God to the conquest of Canaan is a point that those inclined to cavil
have never failed to make the most of.  The Old Testament encouragement
of race propagation, the narratives of polygamy as practised by those
that enjoyed the favor of the God of the Old Testament, the seeming
approval of prevarication in several well-known cases, the institution
of animal sacrifices, the allowing of the use of animal food, were among
the standard objections that they raised against Judaism and against
Christians who accepted the Old Testament.  Judaism had, since the
captivity, had many representatives in Mesopotamia, and Mani was
doubtless brought up to abominate the Jews.  Some of his extreme
positions may have been primarily due to his radical anti-Judaistic
tendencies.  We shall see hereafter how Augustin met the Manichæan
objections to the Old Testament.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](1040015.md)
