[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040255)  [Next](1040257) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—</span>22.  It is to no
purpose, then, that they say to us, "If you acknowledge our baptism,
what do we lack that should make you suppose that we ought to think
seriously of joining your communion?"  For we reply, We do not
acknowledge any baptism of yours; for it is not the baptism of
schismatics or heretics, but of God and of the Church, wheresoever it
may be found, and whithersoever it may be transferred.  But it is in no
sense yours, except because you entertain false opinions, and do
sacrilegious acts, and have impiously separated yourselves from the
Church.  For if everything else in your practice and opinions were true,
and still you were to persist in this same separation, contrary to the
bond of brotherly peace, contrary to the union of all the brethren, who
have been manifest, according to the promise, in all the world; the
particulars of whose history, and the secrets of whose hearts, you never
could have known or considered in every case, so as to have a right to
condemn them; who, moreover, cannot be liable to condemnation for
submitting themselves to the judges of the Church rather than to one of
the parties to the dispute,—in this one thing, at least, in such a case,
you are deficient, in which he is deficient who lacks charity.  Why
should we go over our argument again?  Look and see yourselves in the
apostle, how much there is that you lack.  For what does it matter to
him who lacks charity, whether he be carried away outside the Church at
once by some blast of temptation, or remain within the Lord’s harvest,
so as to be separated only at the final winnowing?  And yet even such,
if they have once been born in baptism, need not be born again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1040257)
