[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040631)  [Next](1040633) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xxxv"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 35.—</span>Was the water
administered by this man not lying? or is the oil of the fornicator not
the oil of the sinner? or must we hold what the Catholic Church says,
and what is true, that that water and that oil are not his by whom they
were administered, but His whose name was then invoked?  Why did they
who were baptized by that hypocrite, whose sins were concealed, fail to
try the spirit, to prove that it was not of God?  For the Holy Spirit of
discipline was even then fleeing from the hypocrite. <span
id="fr_2398"></span>[2399](#fn_2398)   Was it that He was fleeing from
him, but at the same time not deserting His sacraments, though
ministered by him?  Lastly, since you do not deny that those men have
been already cleansed, whom you take no care to have cleansed now that
he is condemned, see whether, after shedding over the subject so many
mists in so many different ways, Petilianus, after all, in any place
gives any answer to the question by what means these men have been
cleansed, if what we look for to cleanse the conscience of the recipient
is the conscience of one that gives in holiness, such as the man who was
secretly unclean could not have had.

<span id="v.v.v.xxxv-p3"></span>41.  Making then, no answer to this
which is so urgently asked of him, and, in the next place, even seeking
for himself a latitude of speech, he says, "since both prophets and
apostles have been cautious enough to fear these things, with what face
do you say that the baptism of the sinner is holy to those who believe
with a good conscience?"  Just as though I or any Catholic maintained
that that baptism was of the sinner which is administered or received
with a sinner to officiate, instead of being His in virtue of belief in
whose name the candidate is baptized!  Then he goes off to an invective
against the traitor Judas, saying against him whatever he can, quoting
the testimony of the prophets uttered concerning him so long a time
before, as though he would steep the Church of Christ dispersed
throughout the world, whose cause is involved in this discussion, in the
impiety of the traitor Judas,—not considering what this very thing
should have recalled to his mind, that we ought no more to doubt that
that is the Church of Christ which is spread abroad throughout the
world, since this was prophesied with truth so many years before, than
we ought to doubt that it was necessary that Christ should be betrayed
by one of His disciples, because this was prophesied in like manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2398"></span>[613:2399](1040632.htm#fr_2398) <span
id="v.v.v.xxxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xxxv-p2"></span> [Wisd. i.
5](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#005)<span id="v.v.v.xxxv-p2.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](1040633)
