[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040149)  [Next](1040151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>Book II.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p2"></span>Faustus claims to believe the Gospel, yet
refuses to accept the genealogical tables on various grounds which
Augustin seeks to set aside.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  Do I believe the
gospel?  Certainly.  Do I therefore believe that Christ was born? 
Certainly not.  It does not follow that because I believe the gospel, as
I do, I must therefore believe that Christ was born.  This I do not
believe; because Christ does not say that He was born of men, and the
gospel, both in name and in fact, begins with Christ’s preaching.  As
for the genealogy, the author himself does not venture to call it the
gospel.  For what did he write?  "The book of the generation of Jesus
Christ the Son of David." <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299)   The
book of the generation is not the book of the gospel.  It is more like a
birth-register, the star confirming the event.  Mark, on the other hand,
who recorded the preaching of the Son of God, without any genealogy,
begins most suitably with the words, "The gospel of Jesus Christ the Son
of God."  It is plain that the genealogy is not the gospel.  Matthew
himself says, that after John was put in prison, Jesus began to preach
the gospel of the kingdom; so that what is mentioned before this is the
genealogy, and not the gospel.  Why did not Matthew begin with, "The
gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God," but because he thought it sinful
to call the genealogy the gospel?  Understand, then, what you have
hitherto overlooked —the distinction between the genealogy and the
gospel.  Do I then admit the truth of the gospel?  Yes; understanding by
the gospel the preaching of Christ.  I have plenty to say about the
generations too, if you wish.  But you seem to me now to wish to know
not whether I accept the gospel, but whether I accept the generations.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p5"></span>2.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p5.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  Well, in answer to
your <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_157"></span>own questions, you tell us first that you
believe the gospel, and next, that you do not believe in the birth of
Christ; and your reason is, that the birth of Christ is not in the
gospel.  What, then, will you answer the apostle when he says, "Remember
that Christ Jesus rose from the dead, of the seed of David, according to
my gospel?" <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300)   You surely are
ignorant, or pretend to be ignorant, what the gospel is.  You use the
word, not as the apostle teaches, but as suits your own errors.  What
the apostles call the gospel you depart from; for you do not believe
that Christ was of the seed of David.  This was Paul’s gospel; and it
was also the gospel of the other apostles, and of all faithful stewards
of so great a mystery.  For Paul says elsewhere, "Whether, therefore, I
or they, so we preach, and so ye believed." <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301)   They did not all write the gospel,
but they all preached it.  The name evangelist is properly given to the
narrators of the birth, the actions, the words, the sufferings of our
Lord Jesus Christ.  The word gospel means good news, and might be used
of any good news, but is properly applied to the narrative of the
Saviour.  If, then, you teach something different, you must have
departed from the gospel.  Assuredly those babes whom you despise as
semi-Christians will oppose you, when they hear their mother Charity
declaring by the mouth of the apostle, "If any one preach another gospel
than that which we have preached to you, let him be accursed." <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302)   Since, then, Paul, according to his
gospel, preached that Christ was of the seed of David, and you deny this
and preach something else, may you be accursed!  And what can you mean
by saying that Christ never declares Himself to have been born of men,
when on every occasion He calls Himself the Son of man?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p9"></span>3.  You learned men, forsooth, dress up
for our benefit some wonderful First Man, who came down from the race of
light to war with the race of darkness, armed with his waters against
the waters of the enemy, and with his fire against their fire, and with
his winds against their winds.  And why not with his smoke against their
smoke, and with his darkness against their darkness?  According to you,
he was armed against smoke with air, and against darkness with light. 
So it appears that smoke and darkness are bad, since they could not
belong to his goodness.  The other three, again—water, wind, and
fire—are good.  How, then, could these belong to the evil of the enemy? 
You reply that the water of the race of darkness was evil, while that
which the First Man brought was good; and so, too, his good wind and
fire fought against the evil wind and fire of the adversary.  But why
could he not bring good smoke against evil smoke?  Your falsehoods seem
to vanish in smoke.  Well, your First Man warred against an opposite
nature.  And yet only one of the five things he brought was the opposite
of what the hostile race had.  The light was opposed to the darkness,
but the four others are not opposed to one another.  Air is not the
opposite of smoke, and still less is water the opposite of water, or
wind of wind, or fire of fire.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p10"></span>4.  One is shocked at your wild fancies
about this First Man changing the elements which he brought, that he
might conquer his enemies by pleasing them.  So you make what you call
the kingdom of falsehood keep honestly to its own nature, while truth is
changeable in order to deceive.  Jesus Christ, according to you, is the
son of this First Man.  Truth springs, forsooth, from your fiction.  You
praise this First Man for using changeable and delusive forms in the
contest.  If you, then, speak the truth, you do not imitate him.  If you
imitate him, you deceive as he did.  But our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, the true and truthful Son of God, the true and truthful Son of
man, both of which He testifies of Himself, derived the eternity of His
godhead from true God, and His incarnation from true man.  Your First
Man is not the first man of the apostle.  "The first man," he says, "was
of the earth, earthy; the second man is from heaven, heavenly.  As is
the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; as is the heavenly, such
are they also that are heavenly.  As we have borne the image of the
earthy, let us also bear the image of the heavenly." <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303)   The first man of the earth, earthy,
is Adam, who was made of dust.  The second man from heaven, heavenly, is
the Lord Jesus Christ; for, being the Son of God, He became flesh that
He might be a man outwardly, while He remained God within; that He might
be both the true Son of God, by whom we were made, and the true Son of
man, by whom we are made anew.  Why do you conjure up this fabulous
First Man of yours, and refuse to acknowledge the first man of the
apostle?  Is this not a fulfillment of what the apostle says:  "Turning
away their ears from the truth, they will give heed to fables?" <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304)   According to Paul, the first man is
of the earth, earthy; according to Manichæus, he is not earthy, and is
equipped with five elements of some unreal, unintelligible kind.  Paul
says:  "If any one should <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_158"></span>have announced to you differently from
what we have announced let him be accursed."  Therefore lest Paul be a
liar, let Manichæus be accursed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p13"></span>5.  Again, you find fault with the star
by which the Magi were led to worship the infant Christ, which you
should be ashamed of doing, when you represent your fabulous Christ, the
son of your fabulous First Man not as announced by a star, but as bound
up in all the stars. <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305)   For you
say that he mingled with the principles of darkness in his conflict with
the race of darkness, that by capturing these principles the world might
be made out of the mixture.  So that, by your profane fancies, Christ is
not only mingled with heaven and all the stars, but conjoined and
compounded with the earth and all its productions, <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) —a Saviour no more, but needing to be
saved by you, by your eating and disgorging Him.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p16"></span>This foolish custom of making your
disciples bring you food, that your teeth and stomach may be the means
of relieving Christ, who is bound up in it, is a consequence of your
profane fancies.  You declare that Christ is liberated in this way—not,
however, entirely; for you hold that some tiny particles of no value
still remain in the excrement, to be mixed up and compounded again and
again in various material forms, and to be released and purified at any
rate by the fire in which the world will be burned up, if not before. 
Nay, even then, you say, Christ is not entirely liberated; but some
extreme particles of His good and divine nature, which have been so
defiled that they cannot be cleansed, are condemned to stay for ever in
the horrid mass of darkness.  And these people pretend to be offended
with our saying that a star announced the birth of the Son of God, as if
this were placing His birth under the influence of a constellation;
while they subject Him not to stars only, but to such polluting contact
with all material things, with the juices of all vegetables, and with
the decay of all flesh, and with the decomposition of all food, in which
He is bound up, that the only way of releasing Him, at least one great
means, is that men, that is the Elect of the Manichæans, should succeed
in digesting their dinner.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p17"></span>We, too, deny the influence of the stars
upon the birth of any man; for we maintain that, by the just law of God,
the free-will of man, which chooses good or evil, is under no constraint
of necessity.  How much less do we subject to any constellation the
incarnation of the eternal Creator and Lord of all!  When Christ was
born after the flesh, the star which the Magi saw had no power as
governing, but attended as a witness.  Instead of assuming control over
Him, it acknowledged Him by the homage it did.  Besides, this star was
not one of those which from the beginning of the world continue in the
course ordained by the Creator.  Along with the new birth from the
Virgin appeared a new star, which served as a guide to the Magi who were
themselves seeking for Christ; for it went before them till they reached
the place where they found the Word of God in the form of a child.  But
what astrologer ever thought of making a star leave its course, and come
down to the child that is born, as they imagine, under it?  They think
that the stars affect the birth, not that the birth changes the course
of the stars; so, if the star in the Gospel was one of those heavenly
bodies, how could it determine Christ’s action, when it was compelled to
change its own action at Christ’s birth?  But if, as is more likely, a
star which did not exist before appeared to point out Christ, it was the
effect of Christ’s birth, and not the cause of it.  Christ was not born
because the star was there; but the star was there because Christ was
born.  If there was any fate, it was in the birth, and not in the star. 
The word fate is derived from a word which means to speak; and since
Christ is the Word of God by which all things were spoken before they
were, the conjunction of stars is not the fate of Christ, but Christ is
the fate of the stars.  The same will that made the heavens took our
earthly nature.  The same power that ruled the stars laid down His life
and took it again.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p18"></span>6.  Why, then, should the narrative of
the birth not be the gospel, since it conveys such good news as heals
our malady?  Is it because Matthew begins, not like Mark, with the
words, "The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ," but, "The book of
the generation of Jesus Christ?"  In this way, John, too, might be said
not to have written the gospel, for he has not the words, Beginning of
the gospel, or Book of the gospel, but, "In the beginning was the
Word."  Perhaps the clever word-maker Faustus will call the introduction
in John a *Verbidium*, as he called that in Matthew a *Genesidium*.  The
wonder is, that you are so impudent as to give the name of gospel to
your silly stories.  What good <span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_159"></span>news is there in telling us that, in the
conflict against some strange hostile nation, God could protect His own
kingdom only by sending part of His own nature into the greedy jaws of
the former, and to be so defiled, that after all those toils and
tortures it cannot all be purged?  Is this bad news the gospel?  Every
one who has even a slender knowledge of Greek knows that gospel means
good news.  But where is your good news, when your God himself is said
to weep as under eclipse till the darkness and defilement are removed
from his members?  And when he ceases to weep, it seems he becomes
cruel.  For what has that part of him which is to be involved in the
mass done to deserve this condemnation?  This part must go on weeping
for ever.  But no; whoever examines this news will not weep because it
is bad, but will laugh because it is not true.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p19"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[156:300](1040150.htm#fr_299) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p4"></span> [Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[157:301](1040150.htm#fr_300) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p6"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[157:302](1040150.htm#fr_301) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p7"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[157:303](1040150.htm#fr_302) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p8"></span> [Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[157:304](1040150.htm#fr_303) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
47-49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[157:305](1040150.htm#fr_304) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p12"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[158:306](1040150.htm#fr_305) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p14"></span> \[This mixture of the substance of
Primordial Man, with the kingdom of darkness, and the formation of stars
out of portions thereof, was probably a part of primitive Manichæan
teaching.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_306"></span>[158:307](1040150.htm#fr_306) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p15"></span> \[Compare Book xx. 2, where Faustus
states the Manichæan doctrine of the *Jesus patabilis*.  Beausobre,
Mosheim and Baur agree in thinking that Augustin has not distinguished
accurately in these two passages between names *Christ* and *Jesus*, as
used by the Manichæans.  See <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p15.1"></span>Baur</span>:  *<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p15.2"></span>Das Manichäische Religionssystem*, p.
72.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](1040151)
