[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040506)  [Next](1040508) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—</span>44.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xx-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"The Lord Christ cries again from heaven to Paul, ‘Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?  It is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks.’ <span id="fr_2034"></span>[2035](#fn_2034)   He was then called
Saul, that he might afterwards receive his true name in baptism.  But
for you it is not hard so often to persecute Christ in the persons of
His priests, though the Lord Himself cries out, ‘Touch not mine
anointed.’ <span id="fr_2035"></span>[2036](#fn_2035)   Reckon up all
the deaths of the saints, and so often have you murdered Christ, who
lives in each of them. <span id="fr_2036"></span>[2037](#fn_2036)  
Lastly, if you are not guilty of sacrilege, then a saint cannot be a
murderer."

<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p5"></span>45.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  Defend yourselves
from the charge of the persecution which those men suffered at the hands
of your party who separated themselves from you with the followers of
Maximianus, and therein you will find our defence.  For if you say that
you committed no such deeds, we simply read to you the records of the
pro-consular province and the state.  If you say that you were right in
persecuting them, why are you unwilling to suffer the like yourselves? 
If you say, "But we caused no schism," then let this be inquired into,
and, till it is decided whether it be so or not, let no one make
accusation against persecutors.  If you say that even schismatics ought
not to have suffered persecution, I ask whether it is also the case that
they ought not to have been driven out of the basilicas, in which they
lay snares for the leading astray of the weak, even though it were done
by duly constituted authorities?  If you say that this also should not
have been done, first restore the basilicas to the followers of
Maximianus, and then discuss the point with us.  If you say that it was
right, then see what they ought to suffer at the hands of duly
constituted authority, who, in resisting it, "resist the ordinance of
God."  Wherefore the apostle expressly says, "For he beareth not the
sword in vain:  for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute
wrath on him that doeth evil."  <span
id="fr_2037"></span>[2038](#fn_2037)   But even if this had been
discovered after the truth had been searched out with all diligence,
that not even after public trial ought schismatics to undergo any
punishment, or be driven from the positions which they have occupied,
for their treachery and deceit; and if you should say that you are vexed
that the followers of Maximianus should have suffered such conduct at
the hands of some of you,—why does not the wheat of the Lord cry out
with the more freedom from the whole field of the Lord, that is, from
the world, and say, Neither are we at all affected by what the tares and
the chaff amongst us do, seeing that it is contrary to our wish?  If you
confess that it is sufficient to clear you of responsi<span
id="page_541">p. 541</span> <span id="v.v.iv.xx-Page_541"></span>bility,
that all the evil that is done by men of your party is done in
opposition to your wishes, why then have you separated yourselves?  For
if your reason for not separating from the unrighteous among the party
of Donatus is that each man bears his own burden, why have you separated
yourselves from those throughout the world whom you think, or profess to
think, to be unrighteous?  Is it that you might all share equally in
bearing the burden of schism?

<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p7"></span>46.  And when we ask of you which of your
party you can prove to have been slain by us, I indeed can remember no
law issued by the emperors to the effect that you should be put to
death.  Those indeed whose deaths you quote most frequently to bring us
into odium, Marculus and Donatus, present a great question,—whether they
threw themselves down a precipice, as your teaching does not hesitate to
encourage by examples of daily occurrence, or whether they were thrown
down by the true command of some authority.  For if it is a thing
incredible that the leaders of the Circumcelliones should have wrought
upon themselves a death in accordance with their custom, how much more
incredible it is that the Roman authorities should have been able to
condemn them to a punishment at variance with custom!  Accordingly, in
considering this matter, which you think excessive in its hatefulness,
supposing what you say is true, what is there in it which bears upon the
Lord’s wheat?  Let the chaff which flew away outside accuse the chaff
which yet remained within for it is not possible that it should all be
separated till the winnowing at the last day.  But if what you say is
false, what wonder is it if, when the chaff is carried away as it were
by a light blast of dissension, it even attacks the wheat of the Lord
with false accusations?  Wherefore, on the consideration of all such
odious accusations, the wheat of Christ, which is ordered to grow
together with the tares throughout the field, that is, throughout the
whole world, makes this answer to you with a free and fearless voice: 
If you cannot prove what you say, it has no application to any one; and
if you prove it, it yet does not apply to me.  The result of which is,
that whosoever has separated himself from the unity of the wheat on
account of the offenses chargeable against the tares, or against the
chaff, is unable to defend himself from the charge of murder which is
involved in the mere offense of dissension and schism, as the Scripture
says, "Whoso hateth his brother is a murderer." <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2034"></span>[540:2035](1040507.htm#fr_2034) <span
id="v.v.iv.xx-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p2"></span> [Acts
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005)<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2035"></span>[540:2036](1040507.htm#fr_2035) <span
id="v.v.iv.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p3"></span> [Ps. cv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#015)<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2036"></span>[540:2037](1040507.htm#fr_2036) <span
id="v.v.iv.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p4"></span> *Vivacem Christum*.

<span id="fn_2037"></span>[540:2038](1040507.htm#fr_2037) <span
id="v.v.iv.xx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p6"></span> [Rom.
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[541:2039](1040507.htm#fr_2038) <span
id="v.v.iv.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p8"></span> [1 John iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015)<span id="v.v.iv.xx-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1040508)
