[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040497)  [Next](1040499.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—</span>25.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xi-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"Yet some will be found to say, We are not the sons of a *traditor*. 
Any one is the son of that man whose deeds he imitates.  For those are
most assuredly sons, and at the same time bear a strong resemblance to
their parents, who are born in the likeness of their parents, not only
as being of their flesh and blood, but in respect of their characters
and deeds."

<span id="v.v.iv.xi-p2"></span>26.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  A little while ago
you were saying nothing contrary to us, now you even begin to say
something in our favor.  For this proposition of yours binds you to as
much as this, that if you shall fail to-day to convict us, with whom you
are arguing, of being *traditors* and murderers, and anything else with
which you charge us, you will then be wholly powerless to hurt us by any
charge of the kind which you may prove against those who have gone
before us.  For we cannot be the sons of those to whose deeds our
actions bear no resemblance.  And see to what you have committed
yourself.  If you should be so successful as to convict some man, even
of our own times, and living with us, of any guilt of the kind, that is
in no way to the prejudice of all the nations of the earth who are
blessed in the seed of Abraham, by separating yourself from whom you are
found to be guilty of sacrilege.  Accordingly, unless (as is altogether
impossible) you are acquainted with all men that exist throughout the
world, and have not only made yourself familiar with all their
characters and deeds, but have also proved that they are as bad as you
describe, you have no ground for reproaching all the world, which is
among the saints, with parentage of I know not what description, to whom
you prove that they are like.  Nor will it help you at all, even if you
are able to show that those who are not of the same character take the
holy sacraments in common with those who are.  In the first place,
because you ought yourselves to look at those with whom you celebrate
those sacraments, to whom you give them, from whom you receive them, and
whom you would be unwilling to have cast up against you as a reproach. 
And again, if all those are the sons of Judas, who was the devil among
the apostles, who imitate his deeds, why do we not call those of the
sons of the apostles who make such men partakers, not in their own
deeds, but in the sacraments of the Lord, as the apostles partook of the
supper of the Lord in company with that traitor? and in this way they
are very different from you, who cast in the teeth of men who are
striving for the preservation of unity the very thing that you do to the
rending asunder of unity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1040499.md)
