[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040112)  [Next](1040114.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Manichæus Promises Truth, But
Does Not Make Good His Word.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p2"></span>12.  "These," he says, "are wholesome
words from the perennial and living fountain; and whoever shall have
heard them, and shall have first believed them, and then shall have
observed the truths they set forth, shall never suffer death, but shall
enjoy eternal life in glory.  For he is to be judged truly blessed who
has been instructed in this divine knowledge, by which he is made free
and shall abide in everlasting life."  And this, as you see, is a
promise of truth, but not the bestowal of it.  And you yourselves can
easily see that any errors whatever might be dressed up in this fashion,
so as under cover of a showy exterior to steal in unawares into the
minds of the ignorant.  Were he to say, These are pestiferous words from
a poisonous fountain; and whoever shall have heard them, and shall have
first believed them, and then have observed what they set forth, shall
never be restored to life, but shall suffer a woful death as a
criminal:  for assuredly he is to be pronounced miserable who falls into
this infernal error, in which he will sink so as to abide in everlasting
torments;—were he to say this, he would say the truth; but instead of
gaining any readers for his book, he would excite the greatest aversion
in the minds of all into whose hands the book might come.  Let us then
pass on to what follows; nor let us be deceived by words which may be
used alike by good and bad, by learned and unlearned.  What, then, comes
next?

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p3"></span>13.  "May the peace," he says, "of the
invisible God, and the knowledge of the truth, be with the holy and
beloved brethren who both believe and also yield obedience to the divine
precepts."  Amen, say we.  For the prayer is a most amiable and
commendable one.  Only we must bear in mind that these words might be
used by false teachers as well as by good ones.  So, if he said nothing
more than this, all might safely read and embrace it.  Nor should I
disapprove of what follows:  "May also the right hand of light protect
you, and deliver you from every hostile assault, and from the snares of
the world."  In fact, I have no fault to find with the beginning of this
epistle, till we come to the main subject of it.  For I wish not to
spend time on minor points.  Now, then, for this writer’s plain
statement of what is to be expected from him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1040114.md)
