[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040055)  [Next](1040057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 35.—Marriage and Property Allowed
to the Baptized by the Apostles.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p2"></span>77.  Meanwhile, why do you rage? why
does party spirit blind your eyes?  Why do you entangle yourselves in a
long defence of such great error?  Seek for fruit in the field, seek for
wheat in the floor:  they will be found easily, and will present
themselves to the inquirer.  Why do you look so exclusively at the
dross?  Why do you use the roughness of the hedge to scare away the
inexperienced from the fatness of the garden?  There is a proper
entrance, though known to but a few; and by it men come in, though you
disbelieve it, or do not wish to find it.  In the Catholic Church there
are believers without number who do not use the world, and there are
those who "use it," in the words of the apostle, "as not using
it," <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) as was proved in those
times when Christians were forced to worship idols.  For then, how many
wealthy men, how many peasant householders, how many merchants, how many
military men, how many leading men in their own cities, and how many
senators, people of both sexes, giving up all these empty and transitory
things, though while they used them they were not bound down by them,
endured death for the salutary faith and religion, and proved to
unbelievers that instead of being possessed by all these things they
really possessed them?

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p4"></span>78.  Why do you reproach us by saying
that men renewed in baptism ought no longer to beget children, or to
possess fields, and houses, and money?  Paul allows it.  For, as cannot
be denied, he wrote to believers, after recounting many kinds of
evil-doers who shall not possess the kingdom of God:  "And such were
you," he says:  "but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-Page_63"></span>the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and
by the Spirit of our God."  By the washed and sanctified, no one,
assuredly, will venture to think any are meant but believers, and those
who have renounced this world.  But, after showing to whom he writes,
let us see whether he allows these things to them.  He goes on:  "All
things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient:  all things
are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any. 
Meat for the belly, and the belly for meats:  but God will destroy both
it and them.  Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and
the Lord for the body.  But God raised up the Lord, and will raise us up
also by His own power.  Know ye not that your bodies are the members of
Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of an harlot?  God forbid.  Know ye not that he which is joined
to an harlot is made one body? for the twain, saith He, shall be one
flesh.  But he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.  Flee
fornication.  Whatever sin a man doeth is without the body:  but he that
committeth fornication sinneth against his own body.  Know ye not that
your members are the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye
have of God, and ye are not your own?  For ye are bought with a great
price:  glorify God, and carry Him in your body." <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md)   "But of the things concerning which
ye wrote to me:  it is good for a man not to touch a woman. 
Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and
let every woman have her own husband.  Let the husband render unto the
wife due benevolence:  and likewise also the wife unto the husband.  The
wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband:  and likewise also
the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife.  Defraud ye
not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may
have leisure for prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you
not for your incontinency.  But I speak this by permission, and not of
commandment.  For I would that all men were even as I myself:  but every
man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another
after that." <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md)

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p7"></span>79.  Has the apostle, think you, both
shown sufficiently to the strong what is highest, and permitted to the
weaker what is next best?  Not to touch a woman he shows is highest when
he says, "I would that all men were even as I myself."  But next to this
highest is conjugal chastity, that man may not be the prey of
fornication.  Did he say that these people were not yet believers
because they were married?  Indeed, by this conjugal chastity he says
that those who are united are sanctified by one another, if one of them
is an unbeliever, and that their children also are sanctified.  "The
unbelieving husband," he says, "is sanctified by the believing wife, and
the unbelieving woman by the believing husband:  otherwise your children
would be unclean; but now are they holy." <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md)   Why do you persist in opposition to
such plain truth?  Why do you try to darken the light of Scripture by
vain shadows?

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p9"></span>80.  Do not say that catechumens are
allowed to have wives, but not believers; that catechumens may have
money, but not believers.  For there are many who use as not using.  And
in that sacred washing the renewal of the new man is begun so as
gradually to reach perfection, in some more quickly, in others more
slowly.  The progress, however, to a new life is made in the case of
many, if we view the matter without hostility, but attentively.  As the
apostle says of himself, "Though the outward man perish, the inward man
is renewed day by day." <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md)   The
apostle says that the inward man is renewed day by day that it may reach
perfection; and you wish it to begin with perfection!  And it were well
if you did wish it.  In reality, you aim not at raising the weak, but at
misleading the unwary.  You ought not to have spoken so arrogantly, even
if it were known that you are perfect in your childish precepts.  But
when your conscience knows that those whom you bring into your sect,
when they come to a more intimate acquaintance with you, will find many
things in you which nobody hearing you accuse others would suspect, is
it not great impertinence to demand perfection in the weaker Catholics,
to turn away the inexperienced from the Catholic Church, while you show
nothing of the kind in yourself to those thus turned away?  But not to
seem to inveigh against you without reason, I will now close this
volume, and will proceed at last to set forth the precepts of your life
and your notable customs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[62:155](1040056.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[63:156](1040056.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p5"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
11-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[63:157](1040056.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[63:158](1040056.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p8"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[63:159](1040056.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p10"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Morals of the Manichæans.](1040057.md)
