[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040509)  [Next](1040511) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—</span>51.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"But if you say that we give baptism twice over, truly it is rather you
who do this, who slay men who have been baptized; and this we do not say
because you baptize them, but because you cause each one of them, by the
act of slaying him, to be baptized in his own blood.  For the baptism of
water or of the Spirit is as it were doubled when the blood of the
martyr is wrung from him.  And so our Saviour also Himself, after being
baptized in the first instance by John, declared that He must be
baptized again, not this time with water nor with the Spirit, but with
the baptism of blood, the cross of suffering, as it is written, ‘Two
disciples, the sons of Zebedee, came unto Him, saying, Lord, when thou
comest into thy kingdom grant that we may sit, one on Thy right hand,
and the other on Thy left hand.  But Jesus said unto them, Ye ask a
difficult thing:  can ye drink of the cup that I drink of, and be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?  They said unto Him,
We are able.  And He said unto them, Ye can indeed drink of the cup that
I drink of; and with the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be
baptized,’ <span id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044) and so forth.  If
these are two baptisms, you commend us by your malice, <span
id="page_543">p. 543</span> <span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-Page_543"></span>we
must needs confess.  For when you kill our bodies, then we do celebrate
a second baptism; but it is that we are baptized with our baptism and
with blood, like Christ.  Blush, blush, ye persecutors.  Ye make martyrs
like unto Christ, who are sprinkled with the baptism of blood after the
water of the genuine baptism."

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>52.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  In the first
place, we reply without delay that we do not kill you, but you kill
yourselves by a true death, when you cut yourselves off from the living
root of unity.  In the next place, if all who are killed are baptized in
their own blood, then all robbers, all unrighteous, impious, accursed
men, who are put to death by the sentence of the law, are to be
considered martyrs, because they are baptized in their own blood.  But
if only those are baptized in their own blood who are put to death for
righteousness’ sake, since theirs is the kingdom of heaven, <span
id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045) you have already seen that the
first question is why you suffer, and only afterwards should we ask what
you suffer.  Why therefore do you puff out your cheeks before you have
shown the righteousness of your deeds?  Why, does your tongue resound
before your character is approved?  If you have made a schism, you are
impious; if you are impious, you die as one guilty of sacrilege, when
you are punished for impiety; if you die as one guilty of sacrilege, how
are you baptized in your blood?  Or do you say, I have not made a
schism?  Let us then inquire into this.  Why do you make an outcry
before you prove your case?

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p5"></span>53.  Or do you say, Even if I am
guilty of sacrilege, I ought not to be slain by you?  It is one question
as to the enormity of my action, which you never prove with any truth,
another as to the baptism of your blood, from whence you derive your
boast.  For I never killed you, nor do you prove that you are killed by
any one.  Nor even if you were to prove it would it in any way affect
me, whoever it was that killed you, whether he did it justly in virtue
of power lawfully given by the Lord, or committed the crime of murder,
like the chaff of the Lord’s harvest, through some evil desire; just as
you are in no way concerned with him who in recent times, with an
intolerable tyranny, attended even by a company of soldiers, not because
he feared any one, but that he might be feared by all, oppressed widows,
destroyed pupils, betrayed the patrimonies of other men, annulled the
marriages of other men, contrived the sale of the property of the
innocent, divided the price of the property when sold with its mourning
owners.  I should seem to be saying all this out of the invention of my
own head, if it were not sufficiently obvious of whom I speak without
the mention of his name. <span id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046)  
And if all this is undoubtedly true, then just as you are not concerned
with this, so neither are we concerned with anything you say, even
though it were true.  But if that colleague of yours, being really a
just and innocent man, is maligned by a lying tale, then should we also
learn in no way to give credit to reports, which have been spread abroad
of innocent men, as though they had delivered up the sacred books, or
murdered any of their fellow-men.  To this we may add, that I refer to a
man who lived with you, whose birthday you were wont to celebrate with
such large assemblies, with whom you joined in the kiss of peace in the
sacraments, in whose hands you placed the Eucharist, to whom in turn you
extended your hands to receive it from his ministering, whose ears, when
they were deaf amid the groanings of all Africa, you durst not offend by
free speech; for paying to whom, even indirectly, a most witty
compliment, by saying that in the Count  <span
id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047) he had a god for his companion,
some one of your party was extolled to the skies.  But you reproach us
with the deeds of men with whom we never lived, whose faces we never
saw, in whose lifetime we were either boys, or perhaps as yet not even
born.  What is the meaning, then, of your great unfairness and
perversity, that you should wish to impose on us the burdens of those
whom we never knew, whilst you will not bear the burdens of your
friends?  The divine Scriptures exclaim:  "When thou sawest a thief,
then thou consentedst with him." <span
id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048)   If he whom you saw did not
pollute you, why do you reproach me with one whom I could not have
seen?  Or do you say, I did not consent with him, because his deeds were
displeasing to me?  But, at any rate, you went up to the altar of God
with him.  Come now, if you would defend yourself, make a distinction
between your two positions, and say that it is one thing to consent
together for sin, as the two elders consented together when they laid a
plot against the chastity of Susannah, and another thing to receive the
sacrament of the Lord in company with a thief, as the apostles received
even that first supper in company with Judas.  I am all in favor of your
defense.  But why do you not consider how much more easily, in the
course of your <span id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-Page_544"></span>defense, you have acquitted all the
nations and boundaries of the earth, throughout which the inheritance of
Christ is dispersed?  For if it was possible for you to see a thief, and
to share the sacraments with the thief whom you saw, and yet not to
share his sin, how much less was it possible for the remotest nations of
the earth to have anything in common with the sins of African
*traditors* and persecutors, supposing your charges and assertions to be
true, even though they held the sacraments in common with them?  Or do
you say, I saw in him the bishop, I did not see in him the thief?  Say
what you will.  I allow this defense also, and in this the world is
acquitted of the charges which you brought against it.  For if it was
permitted you to ignore the character of a man whom you knew, why is the
whole world not allowed to be ignorant of those it never knew, unless,
indeed, the Donatists are allowed to be ignorant of what they do not
wish to know, while the nations of the earth may not be ignorant of what
they cannot know?

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p9"></span>54.  Or do you say, Theft is one
thing, delivery of the sacred books or persecution is another?  I grant
there is a difference, nor is it worth while now to show wherein that
difference consists.  But listen to the summary of the argument.  If he
could not make you a thief, because his thieving was displeasing in your
sight, who can make men *traditors* or murderers to whom such treachery
or murder is abhorrent?  First, then, confess that you share in all the
evil of Optatus, whom you knew, and even so reproach me with any evil
which was found in those whom I knew not.  And do not say to me, But my
charges are serious, yours but trifling.  You must first acknowledge
them, however trifling they may be in your case, not before I on my side
confess the charges against me, but before I can allow you to say these
serious things about me at all.  Did Optatus, whom you knew make you a
thief by being your colleague, or not?  Answer me one or the other.  If
you say he did not, I ask why he did not,—because he was not a thief
himself? or because you do not know it? or because you disapprove of
it?  If you say, Because he himself was not a thief, much more ought we
not to believe that those with whom you reproach us were of such a
character as you assert.  For if we must not believe of Optatus what
both Christians and pagans and Jews, ay, and what both our party and
yours assert, how much less should we believe what you assert of any
one?  But if you say, Because you do not know it, all the nations of the
earth answer you, Much more do we not know of all that you reproach us
with in these men.  But if you say, Because you disapproved of it, they
answer you with the same voice, Although you have never proved the truth
of what you say, yet acts like these are viewed by us with disapproval. 
But if you say, Lo, Optatus, whom I knew, made me a thief because he was
my colleague, and I was in the habit of going to the altar with him when
he committed those deeds; but I do not greatly heed it, because the
fault was trivial, but your party made you a *traditor* and a
murderer,—I answer that I do not allow that I too am made a *traditor*
and a murderer by the sins of other men, just because you confess that
you are made a thief by the sin of another man; for it must be
remembered that you are proved a thief, not by our judgment, but by your
own confession.  For we say that every man must bear his own burden, as
the apostle is our witness. <span id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049)  
But you, of your own accord, have taken the burden of Optatus on your
own shoulders, not because you committed the theft, or consented to it,
but because you declared your conviction that what another did applied
to you.  For, as the apostle says, when speaking of food, "I know, and
am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of
itself:  but to him that esteemeth anything to be unclean, to him it is
unclean;" <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050) by the same rule,
it may be said that the sins of others cannot implicate those who
disapprove of them; but if any one thinks that they affect him, then he
is affected by them.  Wherefore you do not convict us of being
*traditors* or murderers, even though you were to prove something of the
sort against those who share the sacraments with us; but the guilt of
theft is fastened on you, even if you disapprove of everything that
Optatus did, not in virtue of our accusation, but by your own decision. 
And that you may not think this a trivial fault, read what the apostle
says, "Nor shall thieves inherit the kingdom of God." <span
id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051)   But those who shall not inherit
the kingdom of God will certainly not be on His right hand among those
whom it shall be said, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world."  If they are
not there, where will they be except on the left hand?  Therefore among
those to whom it shall be said, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052)   In vain, therefore, do you
indulge in your security, thinking it a trivial fault which separates
you from the kingdom of God, and sends you into everlast<span
id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-Page_545"></span>ing
fire.  How much better will you do to betake yourself to true confusion,
saying, Every one of us shall bear his own burden, and the winnowing fan
at the last day shall separate the chaff from the wheat!

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p14"></span>55.  But it is evident that you are
afraid of its being forthwith said to you, "Why then, whilst you attempt
to place on some men’s backs the burdens of their neighbors, have you
dared to separate yourselves from the Lord’s corn, dispersed throughout
the world, before the winnowing at the last day?"  Accordingly, you who
disapprove of the deeds of your party, whilst you are taking precautions
against being charged with the schism which you all have made, are
involving yourselves also in their sins which you did not commit; and
while the shrewd Petilianus is afraid of my being able to say that am I
not such as he thinks Cæcilianus was, he is obliged to confess that he
himself is such as he knows Optatus to have been.  Or are you not such
as the common voice of Africa proclaims him to have been?  Then neither
are we such as those with whom you reproach us are either suspected to
have been by your mistake, or calumniously asserted to have been by your
madness, or proved to have been by the truth.  Much less is the wheat of
the Lord in all the nations of the earth of such a character, seeing
that it never heard the names of those of whom you speak.  There is
therefore no reason why you should perish in such sin of separation and
such sacrilege of schism.  And yet, if you are made to suffer for this
great impiety by the judgment of God, you say that you are even baptized
in your blood; so that you are not content with feeling no remorse for
your division, but you must even glory in your punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[542:2045](1040510.htm#fr_2044) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p2"></span> [Mark x.
35-39](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[543:2046](1040510.htm#fr_2045) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p4"></span> [Matt. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[543:2047](1040510.htm#fr_2046) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p6"></span> Optatus Gildonianus is the person to
whom he refers.

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[543:2048](1040510.htm#fr_2047) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p7"></span> Gildo, from subservience to whom
Optatus received the name Gildonianus, was "Comes Africæ."  The play on
the meanings of "Comes," in the expression "*quod Comitem haberet
Deum*," is incapable of direct translation.  Cp. 37, 88; 103, 237.

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[543:2049](1040510.htm#fr_2048) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p8"></span> [Ps. l.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#018)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[544:2050](1040510.htm#fr_2049) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p10"></span> [Gal. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[544:2051](1040510.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p11"></span> [Rom. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[544:2052](1040510.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p12"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[544:2053](1040510.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p13"></span> [Matt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span
id="v.v.iv.xxiii-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1040511)
