[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040134)  [Next](1040136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33.—Every Nature, as Nature, is
Good.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxiv-p2"></span>36.  But the consideration we wish
most to urge is the truth of the Catholic doctrine, if they can
understand it, that God is the author of all natures.  I urged this
before when I said, I join with you in your condemnation of
destructiveness, of blindness, of dense muddiness, of terrific violence,
of perishableness, of the ferocity of the princes, and so on; join with
me in commending form, classification, arrangement, harmony, unity of
structure, symmetry and correspondence of members, provision for vital
breath and nourishment, wholesome adaptation, regulation and control by
the mind, and the subjection of the bodies, and the assimilation and
agreement of parts in the natures, both those inhabiting and those
inhabited, and all the other things of the same kind.  From this, if
they would only think honestly, they would <span id="page_146">p.
146</span> <span id="iv.viii.xxxiv-Page_146"></span>understand that it
implies a mixture of good and evil, even in the region where they
suppose evil to be alone and in perfection:  so that if the evils
mentioned were taken away, the good things will remain, without anything
to detract from the commendation given to them; whereas, if the good
things are taken away, no nature is left.  From this every one sees, who
can see, that every nature, as far as it is nature, is good; since in
one and the same thing in which I found something to praise, and he
found something to blame, if the good things are taken away, no nature
will remain; but if the disagreeable things are taken away, the nature
will remain unimpaired.  Take from waters their thickness and muddiness,
and pure clear water remains; take from them the consistence of their
parts, and no water will be left.  If then, after the evil is removed,
the nature remains in a purer state, and does not remain at all when the
good is taken away, it must be the good which makes the nature of the
thing in which it is, while the evil is not nature, but contrary to
nature.  Take from the winds their terribleness and excessive force,
with which you find fault, you can conceive of winds as gentle and mild;
take from them the similarity of their parts which gives them continuity
of substance, and the unity essential to material existence, and no
nature remains to be conceived of.  It would be tedious to go through
all the cases; but all who consider the subject free from party spirit
must see that in their list of natures the disagreeable things mentioned
are additions to the nature; and when they are removed, the natures
remain better than before.  This shows that the natures, as far as they
are natures, are good; for when you take from them the good instead of
the evil, no natures remain.  And attend, you who wish to arrive at a
correct judgment, to what is said of the fierce prince himself.  If you
take away his ferocity, see how many excellent things will remain; his
material frame, the symmetry of the members on one side with those on
the other, the unity of his form, the settled continuity of his parts,
the orderly adjustment of the mind as ruling and animating, and the body
as subject and animated.  The removal of these things, and of others I
may have omitted to mention, will leave no nature remaining.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1040136)
