[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040480)  [Next](1040482) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—</span>26.  But let us turn to
the consideration of your fruits.  I pass over the tyrannous exercise of
authority in the cities, and especially in the estates of other men; I
pass over the madness of the Circumcelliones, and the sacrilegious and
profane adoration of the bodies of those who had thrown themselves of
their own accord over precipices, the revellings of drunkenness, and the
ten years’ groaning of the whole of Africa under the cruelty of the one
man Optatus Gildonanius:  all this I pass over, because there are
certain among you who cry out that these things are, and have ever been
displeasing to them.  But they say that they bore with them in the cause
of peace, because they could not put them down; wherein they condemn
themselves by their own judgment:  for if indeed they felt such love for
peace, they never would have rent in twain the bond of unity.  For what
madness can be greater, than to be willing to abandon peace in the midst
of peace itself, and to be anxious to retain it in the midst of
discord?  Therefore, for the sake of those who pretend that they do not
see the evils of this same faction of Donatus, which all men see and
blame, ignoring them even to the extent of saying of Optatus himself,
"What did he do?"  "Who accused him?"  "Who convicted him?"  "I know
nothing,"  "I saw nothing,"  "I heard nothing,"—for the sake of these, I
say, who pretend that they are ignorant of what is generally notorious,
the party of Maximianus has arisen, through whom their eyes are opened,
and their mouths are closed:  for they openly sever themselves; they
openly erect altar against altar; they are openly in a Council <span
id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960) called sacrilegious and vipers, and
swift to shed blood, to be compared with Dathan and Abiram and Korah,
and are condemned in cutting terms of abhorrence; and are as openly
received again with undiminished honors in company with those whom they
have baptized.  Such are the fruits of these men, who do all this for
the peace of Donatus, that they may clothe themselves in sheep’s
clothing, and reject the peace of Christ throughout the world that they
may be ravening wolves within the fold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[528:1961](1040481.htm#fr_1960) <span
id="v.v.iii.xxiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.xxiv-p2"></span> That of Bagai.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1040482)
