[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040607)  [Next](1040609.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter</span> 11.—12.  What wonder is it
then, if, when I draw in the grain that has been shaken forth from the
threshing-floor of the Lord, together with the soil and chaff, I suffer
injury from the dust that rebounds against me; or that, when I am
diligently seeking after the lost sheep of my Lord, I am torn by the
briars of thorny tongues?  I entreat you, lay aside for a time all
considerations of party feeling, and judge with some degree of fairness
between Petilianus and myself.  I am desirous that you should be
acquainted with the cause of the Church; he, that you should be familiar
with mine.  For what other reason than because he dares not bid you
disbelieve my witnesses, whom I am constantly citing in the cause of the
Church,—for they are prophets and apostles, and Christ Himself, the Lord
of prophets and apostles,—whereas you easily give him credit in whatever
he may choose to say concerning me, a man against a man, and one,
moreover, of your own party against a stranger to you?  And should I
adduce any witnesses to my life, however important the thing he might
say would be, it would not be believed by them, and of this Petilianus
would quickly persuade you; especially when any one would bring forward
a plea for me.  Since he is an enemy of the Donatist party, in virtue of
this fact he would also continually be considered your enemy. 
Petilianus therefore reigns supreme.  Whenever he aims any abuse at me,
of whatever character it may be, you all applaud and shout assent.  This
cause he has found wherein the victory is possible for him, but only
with you for judges.  He will seek for neither proof nor witness; for
all that he has to prove in his words is this, that he lavishes most
copious abuse on one whom you most cordially hate.  For whereas, when
the testimony of divine Scripture is quoted in such abundance and in
such express terms in favor of the Catholic Church, he remains silent
amidst your grief, he has chosen for himself a subject on which he may
speak amidst applause from you; and though really conquered, yet,
pretending that he stands unmoved, he may make statements concerning me
like this, and even worse than this.  It is enough for me, <span
id="fr_2360"></span>[2361](#fn_2360.md) in respect of the cause which I am
now pleading, that whatsoever I may be found to be, yet the Church for
which I speak unconquered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2360"></span>[602:2361](1040608.htm#fr_2360.md) <span
id="v.v.v.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xi-p2"></span> *Ubi vobis faventibus loquatur, et victus
verum simulans statum, talia vel etiam sceleratiori dictat in me.  Mihi
sat est ad rem*, etc.  Morel (*Elem. Crit*. pp. 326-328) suggests as an
improvement. *"Ubi vobis faventibus loquatur et victus.  Verum si
millies tantum talia vel etiam sceleratiora dicat in me, mihi sat est"*,
etc.,— "on which he may speak amidst applause from you, even when
beaten.  But if he were to make a thousand times as many statements
concerning me," etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1040609.md)
