[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040135)  [Next](1040137.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 34.—Nature Cannot Be Without Some
Good.  The Manichæans Dwell Upon the Evils.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxv-p2"></span>37.  But perhaps you will say that
these evils cannot be removed from the natures, and must therefore be
considered natural.  The question at present is not what can be taken
away, and what cannot; but it certainly helps to a clear perception that
these natures, as far as they are natures, are good, when we see that
the good things can be thought of without these evil things, while
without these good things no nature can be conceived of.  I can conceive
of waters without muddy commotion; but without settled continuity of
parts no material form is an object of thought or of sensation in any
way.  Therefore even these muddy waters could not exist without the good
which was the condition of their material existence.  As to the reply
that these evil things cannot be taken from such natures, I rejoin that
neither can the good things be taken away.  Why, then, should you call
these things natural evils, on account of the evil things which you
suppose cannot be taken away, and yet refuse to call them natural good
things, on account of the good things which, as has been proved, cannot
be taken away?

<span id="iv.viii.xxxv-p3"></span>38.  You may next ask, as you usually
do for a last resource, whence come these evils which I have said that I
too disapprove of.  I shall perhaps tell you, if you first tell me
whence are those good things which you too are obliged to commend, if
you would not be altogether unreasonable.  But why should I ask this,
when we both acknowledge that all good things whatever, and how great
soever, are from the one God, who is supremely good?  You must therefore
yourselves oppose Manichæus who has placed all these important good
things which we have mentioned and justly commended,—the continuity and
agreement of parts in each nature, the health and vigor of the animated
creatures, and the other things which it would be wearisome to
repeat,—(in an imaginary region of darkness, so as to separate them
altogether from that God whom he allows to be the author of all good
things.)  He lost sight of those good things, while taking notice only
of what was disagreeable; as if one, frightened by a lion’s roaring, and
seeing him dragging away and tearing the bodies of cattle or human
beings which he had seized, should from childish pusillanimity be so
overpowered with fear as to see nothing but the cruelty and ferocity of
the lion; and overlooking or disregarding all the other qualities,
should exclaim against the nature of this animal as not only evil, but a
great evil, his fear adding to his vehemence.  But were he to see a tame
lion, with its ferocity subdued, especially if he had never been
frightened by a lion, he would have leisure, in the absence of danger
and terror, to observe and admire the beauty of the animal.  My <span
id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span id="iv.viii.xxxv-Page_147"></span>only
remark on this is one closely connected with our subject:  that any
nature may be in some case disagreeable, so as to excite hatred towards
the whole nature; though it is clear that the form of a real living
beast, even when it excites terror in the woods, is far better than that
of the artificial imitation which is commended in a painting on the
wall.  We must not then be misled into this error by Manichæus, or be
hindered from observing the forms of the natures, by his finding fault
with some things in them in such a way as to make us disapprove of them
entirely, when it is impossible to show that they deserve entire
disapproval.  And when our minds are thus composed and prepared to form
a just judgment, we may ask whence come those evils which I have said
that I condemn.  It will be easier to see this if we class them all
under one name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](1040137.md)
