[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040129)  [Next](1040131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—Manichæus Places Five Natures
in the Region of Darkness.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxix-p2"></span>31.  "There dwelt," he says, "in that
region fiery bodies, destructive races."  By speaking of dwelling, he
must mean that those bodies were animated and in life.  But, not to
appear to cavil at a word, let us see how he divides into five classes
all these inhabitants of this region.  "Here," he says, "was boundless
darkness, flowing from the same source in immeasurable abundance, with
the productions properly belonging to it. <span id="page_143">p.
143</span> <span id="iv.viii.xxix-Page_143"></span>Beyond this were
muddy turbid waters, with their inhabitants; and inside of them winds
terrible and violent, with their prince and their progenitors.  Then,
again, a fiery region of destruction, with its chiefs and peoples.  And,
similarly, inside of this a race full of smoke and gloom, where abode
the dreadful prince and chief of all, having around him innumerable
princes, himself the mind and source of them all.  Such are the five
natures of the pestiferous region."  We find here five natures mentioned
as part of one nature, which he calls the pestiferous region.  The
natures are darkness, waters, winds, fire, smoke; which he so arranges
as to make darkness first, beginning at the outside.  Inside of darkness
he puts the waters; inside of the waters, the winds; inside of the
winds, the fire; inside of the fire, the smoke.  And each of these
natures had its peculiar kind of inhabitants, which were likewise five
in number.  For to the question, Whether there was only one kind in all,
or different kinds corresponding to the different natures; the reply is,
that they were different:  as in other books we find it stated that the
darkness had serpents; the waters swimming creatures, such as fish; the
winds flying creatures, such as birds; the fire quadrupeds, such as
horses, lions, and the like; the smoke bipeds, such as men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1040131)
