[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040458)  [Next](1040460) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—</span>3.  Whence, then, is a man
to be cleansed who receives baptism, when the conscience of the giver is
polluted without the knowledge of him who is to receive it?  Especially
when he goes on to say, "For he who receives faith from the faithless
receives not faith, but guilt."  There stands before us one that is
faithless ready to baptize, and he who should be baptized is ignorant of
his faithlessness:  what think you that he will receive?  Faith, or
guilt?  If you answer faith, then you will grant that it is possible
that a man should receive not guilt, but faith, from him that is
faithless; and the former saying will be false, that "he who receives
faith from the faithless receives not faith, but guilt."  For we find
that it is possible that a man should receive faith even from one that
is faithless, if he be not aware of the faithlessness of the giver.  For
he does not say, He who receives faith from one that is openly and
notoriously faithless; but he says, "He who receives faith from the
faithless receives not faith, but guilt;" which certainly is false when
a person is baptized by one who hides his faithlessness.  But if he
shall say, Even when the faithlessness of the baptizer is concealed, the
recipient receives not faith from him, but guilt, then let them
rebaptize those who are well known to have been baptized by men who in
their own body have long concealed a life of guilt, but have eventually
been detected, convicted, and condemned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1040460)
