[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040021)  [Next](1040023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—How the Pretensions of the
Manichæans are to Be Refuted.  Two Manichæan Falsehoods.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>Enough</span>, probably, has been done in our
other books <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) in the way of answering
the ignorant and profane attacks which the Manichæans make on the law,
which is called the Old Testament, in a spirit of vainglorious boasting,
and with the approval of the uninstructed.  Here, too, I may shortly
touch upon the subject.  For every one with average intelligence can
easily see that the explanation of the Scriptures should be sought for
from those who are the professed teachers of the Scriptures; and that it
may happen, and indeed always happens, that many things seem absurd to
the ignorant, which, when they are explained by the learned, appear all
the more excellent, and are received in the explanation with the greater
pleasure on account of the obstructions which made it difficult to reach
the meaning.  This commonly happens as regards the holy books of the Old
Testament, if only the man who meets with difficulties applies to a
pious teacher, and not to a profane critic, and if he begins his
inquiries from a desire to find truth, and not in rash opposition.  And
should the inquirer meet with some, whether bishops or presbyters, or
any officials or ministers of the Catholic Church, who either avoid in
all cases opening up mysteries, or, content with simple faith, have no
desire for more recondite knowledge, he must not despair of finding the
knowledge of the truth in a case where neither are all able to teach to
whom the inquiry is addressed, nor are all inquirers worthy of learning
the truth.  Diligence and piety are both necessary:  on the one hand, we
must have knowledge to find truth, and, on the other hand, we must
deserve to get the knowledge.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span>2.  But as the Manichæans have two tricks
for catching the unwary, so as to make them take them as teachers,—one,
that of finding fault with the Scriptures, which they either
misunderstand or wish to be misunderstood, the other, that of making a
show of chastity and of notable abstinence,—this book shall <span
id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="iv.iv.iii-Page_42"></span>contain
our doctrine of life and morals according to Catholic teaching, and will
perhaps make it appear how easy it is to pretend to virtue, and how
difficult to possess virtue.  I will refrain, if I can, from attacking
their weak points, which I know well, with the violence with which they
attack what they know nothing of; for I wish them, if possible, to be
cured rather than conquered.  And I will quote such testimonies from the
Scriptures as they are bound to believe, for they shall be from the New
Testament; and even from this I will take none of the passages which the
Manichæans when hard pressed are accustomed to call spurious, but
passages which they are obliged to acknowledge and approve.  And for
every testimony from apostolic teaching I will bring a similar statement
from the Old Testament, that if they ever become willing to wake up from
their persistent dreams, and to rise towards the light of Christian
faith, they may discover both how far from being Christian is the life
which they profess, and how truly Christian is the Scripture which they
cavil at.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[41:47](1040022.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span> \[This is commonly supposed to have been
the first work of any importance written by the Author against
Manichæism.  What he here refers to it is not easy to
conjecture.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040023.md)
