[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040568)  [Next](1040570) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 82.—</span>179.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span>
said:  "But the holy apostle said this:  ‘In any way, whatsoever it may
be,’ he says, ‘let Christ be preached.’"

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p2"></span>180.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p2.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  You speak
against yourself; but yet, since you speak on the side of truth, if you
love it, let what you say be counted for you.  For I ask of you of whom
it was that the Apostle Paul said this?  Let us, if you please, trace
this a little further back.  "Some," he says, "preach Christ even of
envy and strife; and some also of good will, some of love, knowing that
I am set for the defense of the gospel.  But some indeed preach Christ
even of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my
bonds.  What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in
truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice." <span id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190)   We see that they
preached what was in itself holy, and pure, and true, but yet not in a
pure manner, but of envy and contention, without charity, without
purity.  Certainty a short time ago you appeared to be urging the
praises of charity as against us, according to the witness of the
apostle, that where there is no charity, whatever there is is of no
avail; and yet you see that in those there is no charity, and there was
with them the preaching of Christ, of which the apostle says here that
he rejoices.  For it is not that he re<span id="page_572">p. 572</span>
<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-Page_572"></span>joices in what is evil in them,
but in what is good in the name of Jesus Christ.  In him assuredly there
was the charity which "rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the
truth." <span id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191)   The envy, moreover,
which was in them is an evil proceeding from the devil, for by this he
has both killed and cast down.  Where then were these wicked men whom
the apostle thus condemns, and in whom there was so much that was good
to cause him to rejoice?  Were they within, or without?  Choose which
you will.  If they were within, then Paul knew them, and yet they did
not pollute him.  And so you would not be polluted in the unity of the
whole world by those of whom you make certain charges, whether these be
true, or falsehoods invented by yourselves.  Wherefore do you separate
yourself?  Why do you destroy yourself by the criminal sacrilege of
schism?  But if they were without, then you see that even in those who
were without, and who certainly cannot belong to everlasting life, since
they have not charity, and do not abide in unity, there is yet found the
holiness of the name of Christ, so that the apostle joyfully confirms
their teaching, on account of the intrinsic holiness of the name,
although he repudiates them.  We are right, therefore, in not doing
wrong to the actual name, when those come to us who were without; but we
correct the individuals, while we do honor to the name.  Do you
therefore take heed, and see how wickedly you act in the case of those
whose acts as it seems you condemn, by treating as naught the sacrament
of the name of Christ, which is holy in them.  And you, indeed, as is
shown by your words, think that those men of whom the apostle spoke were
outside the limits of the Church.  Therefore, when you fear persecution
from the Catholics, of which you speak in order to create odium against
us, you have confirmed in heretics the name of Christ to which you do
despite by rebaptizing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[571:2191](1040569.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p3"></span> [Phil. i.
15-18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015)<span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[572:2192](1040569.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#006)<span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 83](1040570)
