[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040227)  [Next](1040229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xlvi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.xlvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 44.—Incredible Turpitudes in God
Imagined by Manichæus.</span>

<span id="iv.x.xlvi-p2"></span>But now when they speak of that part of
the nature of God as everywhere mixed up in heaven, in earth, in all
bodies dry and moist, in all sorts of flesh, in all seeds of trees,
herbs, men, and animals:  not as present by the power of divinity, for
administering and ruling all things, undefilably, inviolably,
incorruptibly, without any connection with them, which we say of God;
but fettered, oppressed, polluted, to be loosed and liberated, as they
say, not only through the running to and fro of the sun and the moon,
and through the powers of light, but also through their Elect:  what
sacrilegious and incredible turpitudes this kind of error recommends to
them even if it does not induce them to accept, it is horrible to speak
of.  For they say that the powers of light are transformed into
beautiful males and are set over against the women of the race of
darkness; and that the same powers again are transformed into beautiful
females and are set over against the males of the race of darkness; that
through their beauty they enkindle the foulest lust of the princes of
darkness, and in this manner vital substance, that is, the nature of
God, which they say is held fettered in their bodies, having been loosed
from their members relaxed through lust, flies away, and when it has
been taken up or cleansed, is liberated.  This the wretches read, this
they say, this they hear, this they believe, this they put as follows,
in the seventh book of their *Thesaurus* (for so they call a certain
writing of Manichæus, in which these blasphemies stand written):  "Then
the blessed Father, who has bright ships, little apartments,
dwelling-places, or magnitudes, according to his indwelling clemency,
brings the help by which he is drawn out and liberated from the impious
bonds, straits, and torments of his vital substance.  And so by his own
invisible nod he transforms those powers of his, which are held in this
most brilliant ship, and makes them to bring forth adverse powers, which
have been arranged in the various tracts of the heavens.  Since these
consist of both sexes, male and female, he orders the aforesaid powers
to bring forth partly in the form of beardless youths, for the adverse
race of females, partly in the form of bright maidens, for the contrary
race of males:  knowing that all these hostile powers on account of the
deadly and most foul lust innate in them, are very easily taken captive,
delivered up to these most beautiful forms which appear, and in this
manner they are dissolved.  But you may know that this same blessed
Father of ours is identical with his powers, which for a necessary
reason he transforms into the undefiled likeness of youths and maidens. 
But these he uses as his own arms, and through them he accomplishes his
will.  But there are bright ships full of these divine powers, which are
stationed after the likeness of marriage <span id="page_363">p.
363</span> <span id="iv.x.xlvi-Page_363"></span>over against the
infernal races, and who with alacrity and ease effect at the very moment
what they have planned.  Therefore, when reason demands that these same
holy powers should appear to males, straightway also they show by their
dress the likeness of most beautiful maidens.  Again when females are to
be dealt with, putting aside the forms of maidens, they show the forms
of beardless youths.  But by this handsome appearance of theirs, ardor
and lust increase, and in this way the chain of their worst thoughts is
loosed, and the living soul which was held by their members, relaxed by
this occasion escapes, and is mingled with its own most pure air; when
the souls thoroughly cleansed ascend to the bright ships, which have
been prepared for conveying them and for ferrying them over to their own
country.  But that which still bears the stains of the adverse race,
descends little by little through billows and fires, and is mingled with
trees and other plants and with all seeds, and is plunged into divers
fires.  And in what manner the figures of youths and maidens from that
great and most glorious ship appear to the contrary powers which live in
the heavens and have a fiery nature; and from that handsome appearance,
part of the life which is held in their members having been released is
conducted away through fires into the earth:  in the same manner also,
that most high power, which dwells in the ship of vital waters appears
in the likeness of youths and holy maidens to those powers whose nature
is cold and moist, and which are arranged in the heavens.  And indeed to
those that are females, among these the form of youths appears, but to
the males, the form of maidens.  By his changing and diversity of divine
and most beautiful persons, the princes male and female of the moist and
cold race are loosed, and what is vital in them escapes; but whatever
should remain, having been relaxed, is conducted into the earth through
cold, and is mingled with all the races of darkness"  Who can endure
this?  Who can believe, not indeed that it is true, but that it could
even be said?  Behold those who fear to anathematize Manichæus teaching
these things, and do not fear to believe in a God doing them and
suffering them!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 45](1040229)
