[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040171)  [Next](1040173) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Book XXIV.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p2"></span>Faustus explains the Manichæan denial
that man was made by God as applying to the fleshly man not to the
spiritual.  Augustin elucidates the Apostle Paul’s contrasts between
flesh and spirit so as to exclude the Manichæan view.

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p3.1"></span>Faustus</span> said:  We are asked the
reason for our denial that man is made by God.  But we do not assert
that man is in no sense made by God; we only ask in what sense, <span
id="page_317">p. 317</span> <span id="iv.ix.xxvi-Page_317"></span>and
when, and how.  For, according to the apostle, there are two men, one of
whom he calls sometimes the outer man, generally the earthy, sometimes,
too, the old man:  the other he calls the inner or heavenly or new man.
 <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982)   The question is, Which of
these is made by God?  For there are likewise two times of our nativity;
one when nature brought us forth into this light, binding us in the
bonds of flesh; and the other, when the truth regenerated us on our
conversion from error and our entrance into the faith.  It is this
second birth of which Jesus speaks in the Gospel, when He says, "Except
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." <span
id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983)   Nicodemus, not knowing what Christ
meant, was at a loss, and inquired how this could be, for an old man
could not enter into his mother’s womb and be born a second time.  Jesus
said in reply, "Except a man be born of water and of the Holy Spirit, he
cannot see the kingdom of God."  Then He adds, "That which is born of
the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit." 
Hence, as the birth in which our bodies originate is not the only birth,
but there is another in which we are born again in spirit, an important
question arises from this distinction as to which of those births it is
in which God makes us.  The manner of birth also is twofold.  In the
humiliating process of ordinary generation, we spring from the heat of
animal passion; but when we are brought into the faith, we are formed
under good instruction in honor and purity in Jesus Christ, by the Holy
Spirit.  For this reason, in all religion, and especially in the
Christian religion, young children are invited to membership.  This is
hinted at in the words of His apostle:  "My little children, of whom I
travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you." <span
id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984)   The question, then, is not whether
God makes man, but what man He makes, and when, and how.  For if it is
when we are fashioned in the womb that God forms us after His own image,
which is the common belief of Gentiles and Jews, and which is also your
belief, then God makes the old man, and produces us by means of sensual
passion, which does not seem suitable to His divine nature.  But if it
is when we are converted and brought to a better life that we are formed
by God, which is the general doctrine of Christ and His apostles, and
which is also our doctrine, in this case God makes us new men, and
produces us in honor and purity, which would agree perfectly with His
sacred and adorable majesty.  If you do not reject Paul’s authority, we
will prove to you from him what man God makes, and when, and how.  He
says to the Ephesians, "That ye put off according to your former
conversation the old man, which is corrupt through deceitful lusts; and
be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and holiness of truth." <span
id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985)   This shows that in the creation of
man after the image of God, it is another man that is spoken of, and
another birth, and another manner of birth.  The putting off and putting
on of which he speaks, point to the time of the reception of the truth;
and the assertion that the new man is created by God implies that the
old man is created neither by God nor after God.  And when he adds, that
this new man is made in holiness and righteousness and truth, he thus
points to another manner of birth of which this is the character, and
which, as I have said, differs widely from the manner in which bodily
generation is effected.  And as he declares that only the former is of
God, it follows that the latter is not.  Again, writing to the
Colossians, he uses words to the same effect:  "Put off the old man with
his deeds, and put on the new man, which is renewed in the knowledge of
God according to the image of Him who created Him in you."  Here he not
only shows that it is the new man that God makes, but he declares the
time and manner of the formation, for the words in the knowledge of God
point to the time of believing.  Then he adds, according to the image of
Him who created him, to make it clear that the old man is not the image
of God, nor formed by God.  Moreover, the following words, "Where there
is neither male nor female, Jew nor Greek, Barbarian nor
Scythian," <span id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) show more plainly
still that the birth by which we are made male and female, Greeks and
Jews, Scythians and Barbarians, is not the birth in which God effects
the formation of man; but that the birth with which God has to do is
that in which we lose the difference of nation and sex and condition,
and become one like Him who is one, that is, Christ.  So the same
apostle says again, "As many as have been baptized in Christ have put on
Christ:  there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither male nor
female, there is neither bond nor free; but all are one in
Christ." <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987)   Man, then, is made by
God, not when from one he is divided into many, but when from many he
becomes one.  The division is in the first birth, or that of the body;
union comes by the second, which is immaterial and divine.  This affords
sufficient <span id="page_318">p. 318</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-Page_318"></span>ground for our opinion, that the birth
of the body should be ascribed to nature, and the second birth to the
Supernal Majesty.  So the same apostle says again to the Corinthians, "I
have begotten you in Christ Jesus by the gospel;" <span
id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988) and, speaking of himself, to the
Galatians, "When it pleased Him, who separated me from my mother’s womb,
to reveal His Son in me, that I might preach Him among the Gentiles,
immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood." <span
id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989)  It is plain that everywhere he speaks
of the second or spiritual birth as that in which we are made by God, as
distinct from the indecency of the first birth, in which we are on a
level with other animals as regards dignity and purity, as we are
conceived in the maternal womb, and are formed, and brought forth.  You
may observe that in this matter the dispute between us is not so much
about a question of doctrine as of interpretation.  For you think that
it is the old or outer or earthy man that is said to have been made by
God; while we apply this to the heavenly man, giving the superiority to
the inner or new man.  And our opinion is not rash or groundless, for we
have learned it from Christ and His apostles, who are proved to have
been the first in the world who thus taught.

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p12"></span>2.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p12.1"></span>Augustin</span> replied:  The Apostle Paul
certainly uses the expression the inner man for the spirit of the mind,
and the outer man for the body and for this mortal life; but we nowhere
find him making these two different men, but one, which is all made by
God, both the inner and the outer.  However, it is made in the image of
God only as regards the inner, which, besides being immaterial, is
rational, and is not possessed by the lower animals.  God, then, did not
make one man after His own image, and another man not after that image;
but the one man, which includes both the inner and the outer, He made
after His own image, not as regards the possession of a body and of
mortal life, but as regards the rational mind with the power of knowing
God, and with the superiority as compared with all irrational creatures
which the possession of reason implies.  Faustus allows that the inner
man is made by God, when, as he says, it is renewed in the knowledge of
God after the image of Him that created him.  I readily admit this on
the apostle’s authority.  Why does not Faustus admit on the same
authority that "God has placed the members every one in the body, as it
has pleased Him"? <span id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990)   Here we
learn from the same apostle that God is the framer of the outer man
too.  Why does Faustus take only what he thinks to be in his own favor,
while he leaves out or rejects what upsets the follies of the
Manichæans?  Moreover, in treating of the earthy and the heavenly man,
and making the distinction between the mortal and the immortal, between
that which we are in Adam and that which we shall be in Christ, the
apostle quotes the declaration of the law regarding the earthy or
natural body, referring to the very book and the very passage where it
is written that God made the earthy man too.  Speaking of the manner in
which the dead shall rise again, and of the body with which they shall
come, after using the similitude of the seeds of corn, that they are
sown bare grain, and that God gives them a body as it pleases Him, and
to every seed his own body,—thus, by the way, overthrowing the error of
the Manichæans, who say that grains and plants, and all roots and
shoots, are created by the race of darkness, and not by God, who,
according to them, instead of exerting power in the production of these
objects, is Himself subject to confinement in them,—he goes on, after
this refutation of Manichæan impieties, to describe the different kinds
of flesh.  "All flesh," he says, "is not the same flesh."  Then he
speaks of celestial and terrestrial bodies, and then of the change of
our body by which it will become spiritual and heavenly.  "It is sown,"
he says, "in dishonor, it shall rise in glory; it is sown in weakness,
it shall rise in power; it is sown a natural body, it shall rise a
spiritual body."  Then, in order to show the origin of the animal body,
he says, "There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body; as it
is written, The first man, Adam, was made a living soul." <span
id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991)   Now this is written in
Genesis, <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) where it is related how
God made man, and animated the body which He had formed of the earth. 
By the old man the apostle simply means the old life, which is a life in
sin, and is after the manner of Adam, of whom it is said, "By one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon
all men, in that all have sinned." <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993)   Thus the whole of this man, both the
inner and the outer part, has become old because of sin, and liable to
the punishment of mortality.  There is, however, a restoration of the
inner man, when it is renewed after the image of its Creator, in the
putting off of unrighteousness—that is, the old man, and putting on
righteousness—that is, the new man.  But when that which is sown a
natural body shall rise a spiritual body, the outer man too shall attain
the dignity of a <span id="page_319">p. 319</span> <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-Page_319"></span>celestial character; so that all that
has been created may be created anew, and all that has been made be
remade by the Creator and Maker Himself.  This is briefly explained in
the words:  "The body is dead because of sin; but the spirit is life
because of righteousness.  But if the Spirit of Him who raised up Jesus
from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead will
also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit dwelling in you."  <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994)   No one instructed in the Catholic
doctrine but knows that it is in the body that some are male and some
female, not in the spirit of the mind, in which we are renewed after the
image of God.  But elsewhere the apostle teaches that God is the Maker
of both; for he says, "Neither is the woman without the man, nor the man
without the woman, in the Lord; for as the woman is of the man, so is
the man by the woman; but all things are of God." <span
id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995)   The only reply given to this, by the
perverse stupidity of those who are alienated from the life of God by
the ignorance which is in them, on account of the blindness of their
heart, is, that whatever pleases them in the apostolic writings is true,
and whatever displeases them is false.  This is the insanity of the
Manichæans, who will be wise if they cease to be Manichæans.  As it is,
if they are asked whether it is He that remakes and renews the inner man
(which they acknowledge to be renewed after the image of God, and they
themselves quote the passage in support of this; and, according to
Faustus, God makes man when the inner man is renewed in the image of
God), they will answer, yes.  And if we then go on to ask when God made
what He now renews, they must devise some subterfuge to prevent the
exposure of their absurdities.  For, according to them, the inner man is
not formed or created or originated by God, but is part of His own
substance sent against His enemies; and instead of becoming old by sin,
it is through necessity captured and damaged by the enemy.  Not to
repeat all the nonsense they talk, the first man they speak of is not
the man of the earth earthy that the apostle speaks of, <span
id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996) but an invention proceeding from their
own magazine of untruths.  Faustus, though he chooses man as a subject
for discussion, says not a word of this first man; for he is afraid that
his opponents in the discussion might come to know something about him.

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p20"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_982"></span>[317:983](1040172.htm#fr_982) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p4"></span> [Rom.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#000), [Rom.
7:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#000), [1 Cor.
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000), [2 Cor.
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#000), [Eph.
3:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#000), [Eph.
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#000), [Col.
3:0](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#000)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[317:984](1040172.htm#fr_983) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p5"></span> [John iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[317:985](1040172.htm#fr_984) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p6"></span> [Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[317:986](1040172.htm#fr_985) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p7"></span> [Eph. iv.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[317:987](1040172.htm#fr_986) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p8"></span> [Col. iii.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[317:988](1040172.htm#fr_987) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p9"></span> [Gal.
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[318:989](1040172.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p10"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[318:990](1040172.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p11"></span> [Gal.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[318:991](1040172.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p13"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#018)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[318:992](1040172.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
33-45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[318:993](1040172.htm#fr_992) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p15"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[318:994](1040172.htm#fr_993) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p16"></span> [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[319:995](1040172.htm#fr_994) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p17"></span> [Rom.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[319:996](1040172.htm#fr_995) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p18"></span> [1 Cor.
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[319:997](1040172.htm#fr_996) <span
id="iv.ix.xxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span id="iv.ix.xxvi-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXV](1040173)
