[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040659)  [Next](1040661) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—</span>1.  I must express my
satisfaction, and congratulations, and admiration, my son
Boniface, <span id="fr_2467"></span>[2468](#fn_2467) in that, amid all
the cares of wars and arms, you are eagerly anxious to know concerning
the things that are of God.  From hence it is clear that in you it is
actually a part of your military valor to serve in truth the faith which
is in Christ.  To place, therefore, briefly before your Grace the
difference between the errors of the Arians and the Donatists, the
Arians say that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are different in
substance; whereas the Donatists do not say this, but acknowledge the
unity of substance in the Trinity.  And if some even of them have said
that the Son was inferior to the Father, yet they have not denied that
He is of the same substance; whilst the greater part of them declare
that they hold entirely the same belief regarding the Father and the Son
and the Holy Ghost as is held by the Catholic Church.  Nor is this the
actual question in dispute with them; but they carry on their unhappy
strife solely on the question of communion, and in the perversity of
their error maintain rebellious hostility against the unity of Christ. 
But sometimes, as we have heard, some of them, wishing to conciliate the
Goths, since they see that they are not without a certain amount of
power, profess to entertain the same belief as they.  But they are
refuted by the authority of their own leaders; for Donatus himself, of
whose party they boast themselves to be, is never said to have held this
belief.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p3"></span>2.  Let not, however, things like these
disturb thee, my beloved son.  For it is foretold to us that there must
needs be heresies and stumbling-blocks, that we may be instructed among
our enemies; and that so both our <span id="page_634">p. 634</span>
<span id="v.vi.iii-Page_634"></span>faith and our love may be the more
approved,—our faith, namely, that we should not be deceived by them; and
our love, that we should take the utmost pains we can to correct the
erring ones themselves; not only watching that they should do no injury
to the weak, and that they should be delivered from their wicked error,
but also praying for them, that God would open their understanding, and
that they might comprehend the Scriptures.  For in the sacred books,
where the Lord Christ is made manifest, there is also His Church
declared; but they, with wondrous blindness, while they would know
nothing of Christ Himself save what is revealed in the Scriptures, yet
form their notion of His Church from the vanity of human falsehood,
instead of learning what it is on the authority of the sacred books.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p4"></span>3.  They recognize Christ together with us
in that which is written, "They pierced my hands and my feet.  They can
tell all my bones:  they look and stare upon me.  They part my garments
among them, and cast lots upon my vesture;" and yet they refuse to
recognize the Church in that which follows shortly after:  "All the ends
of the world shall remember, and turn unto the Lord; and all the
kindreds of the nations shall worship before Thee.  For the kingdom is
the Lord’s; and He is the Governor among the nations." <span
id="fr_2468"></span>[2469](#fn_2468)   They recognize Christ together
with us in that which is written, "The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten Thee;" and they will not recognize the
Church in that which follows:  "Ask of me, and I shall give Thee the
heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
Thy possession." <span id="fr_2469"></span>[2470](#fn_2469)   They
recognize Christ together with us in that which the Lord Himself says in
the gospel, "Thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead
the third day;" and they will not recognize the Church in that which
follows:  "And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached
in His name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." <span
id="fr_2470"></span>[2471](#fn_2470)   And the testimonies in the sacred
books are without number, all of which it has not been necessary for me
to crowd together into this book.  And in all of them, as the Lord
Christ is made manifest, whether in accordance with His Godhead, in
which He is equal to the Father, so that, "In the beginning was the
Word, and; the Word was with God, and the Word was God;" or according to
the humility of the flesh which He took upon Him, whereby "the Word was
made flesh and dwelt among us;" <span
id="fr_2471"></span>[2472](#fn_2471) so is His Church made manifest, not
in Africa alone, as they most impudently venture in the madness of their
vanity to assert, but spread abroad throughout the world.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p9"></span>4.  For they prefer to the testimonies of
Holy Writ their own contentions, because, in the case of Cæcilianus,
formerly a bishop of the Church of Carthage, against whom they brought
charges which they were and are unable to substantiate, they separated
themselves from the Catholic Church,—that is, from the unity of all
nations.  Although, even if the charges had been true which were brought
by them against Cæcilianus, and could at length be proved to us, yet,
though we might pronounce an anathema upon him even in the grave, <span
id="fr_2472"></span>[2473](#fn_2472) we are still bound not for the sake
of any man to leave the Church, which rests for its foundation on divine
witness, and is not the figment of litigious opinions, seeing that it is
better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. <span
id="fr_2473"></span>[2474](#fn_2473)   For we cannot allow that if
Cæcilianus had erred,—a supposition which I make without prejudice to
his integrity,—Christ should therefore have forfeited His inheritance. 
It is easy for a man to believe of his fellow-men either what is true or
what is false; but it marks abandoned impudence to desire to condemn the
communion of the whole world on account of charges alleged against a
man, of which you cannot establish the truth in the face of the world.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p12"></span>5.  Whether Cæcilianus was ordained by
men who had delivered up the sacred books, I do not know.  I did not see
it, I heard it only from his enemies.  It is not declared to me in the
law of God, or in the utterances of the prophets, or in the holy poetry
of the Psalms, or in the writings of any one of Christ’s apostles, or in
the eloquence of Christ Himself.  But the evidence of all the several
scriptures with one accord proclaims the Church spread abroad throughout
the world, with which the faction of Donatus does not hold communion. 
The law of God declared, "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed." <span id="fr_2474"></span>[2475](#fn_2474)   The Lord said
by the mouth of His prophet, "From the rising of the sun, even unto the
going down of the same, a pure sacrifice shall be offered unto my name: 
for my name shall be great among the heathen." <span
id="fr_2475"></span>[2476](#fn_2475)   The Lord said through the
Psalmist, "He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the ends of the earth." <span
id="fr_2476"></span>[2477](#fn_2476)   The Lord said by His apostle,
<span id="page_635">p. 635</span> <span
id="v.vi.iii-Page_635"></span>"The gospel is come unto you, as it is in
all the world, and bringeth forth fruit." <span
id="fr_2477"></span>[2478](#fn_2477)   The Son of God said with His own
mouth, "Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and in Samaria, and even unto the uttermost part of the
earth." <span id="fr_2478"></span>[2479](#fn_2478)   Cæcilianus, the
bishop of the Church of Carthage, is accused with the contentiousness of
men; the Church of Christ, established among all nations, is recommended
by the voice of God.  Mere piety, truth, and love forbid us to receive
against Cæcilianus the testimony of men whom we do not find in the
Church, which has the testimony of God; for those who do not follow the
testimony of God have forfeited the weight which otherwise would attach
to their testimony as men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2467"></span>[633:2468](1040660.htm#fr_2467) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p2"></span> The correspondence between Augustin and
Boniface is limited to Epp. 185, 189 and 220.  The sixteen smaller
letters are spurious.  For note to Boniface and translations of 189 and
220, see vol. I of this series pp. 552 and 573.

<span id="fn_2468"></span>[634:2469](1040660.htm#fr_2468) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p5"></span> [Ps.
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028)<span id="v.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2469"></span>[634:2470](1040660.htm#fr_2469) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p6"></span> [Ps.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="v.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2470"></span>[634:2471](1040660.htm#fr_2470) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p7"></span> [Luke
24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046),
[47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span id="v.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2471"></span>[634:2472](1040660.htm#fr_2471) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p8"></span> [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)<span id="v.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2472"></span>[634:2473](1040660.htm#fr_2472) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p10"></span> This epistle was produced in the fifth
conference of the fifth ecumenical Synod (553), when the point was under
debate whether Theodorus of Mopsuesta could be condemned after his
death.

<span id="fn_2473"></span>[634:2474](1040660.htm#fr_2473) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p11"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008)<span id="v.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2474"></span>[634:2475](1040660.htm#fr_2474) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p13"></span> [Gen. xxvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004)<span id="v.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2475"></span>[634:2476](1040660.htm#fr_2475) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p14"></span> [Mal. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span id="v.vi.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2476"></span>[634:2477](1040660.htm#fr_2476) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p15"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span id="v.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2477"></span>[635:2478](1040660.htm#fr_2477) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p16"></span> [Col. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006)<span id="v.vi.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2478"></span>[635:2479](1040660.htm#fr_2478) <span
id="v.vi.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p17"></span> [Acts i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008)<span id="v.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040661)
