[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040313)  [Next](1040315.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—</span>24.  Some one says, Does
it then make no difference, if two men, rooted in like error and
wickedness, be baptized without change of life or heart, one without,
the other within the Church?  I acknowledge that there is a difference. 
For he is worse who is baptized without, in addition to his other
sin,—not because of his baptism, however, but because he is without; for
the evil of division is in itself far from insignificant or trivial. 
Yet the difference exists only if he who is baptized within has desired
to be within not for the sake of any earthly or temporal advantage, but
because he has preferred the unity of the Church spread throughout the
world to the divisions of schism; otherwise he too must be considered
among those who are without.  Let us therefore put the two cases in this
way.  Let us suppose that the one, for the sake of argument, held the
same opinions as Photinus  <span id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438.md)
about Christ, and was baptized in his heresy outside the communion of
the Catholic Church; and that another held the same opinion but was
baptized in the Catholic Church, believing that his view was really the
Catholic faith.  I consider him as not yet a heretic, unless, when the
doctrine of the Catholic faith is made clear to him, he chooses to
resist it, and prefers that which he already holds; and till this is the
case, it is clear that he who was baptized outside is the worse.  And so
in the one case erroneous opinion alone, in the other the sin of schism
also, requires correction; but in neither of them is the truth of the
sacrament to be repeated.  But if any one holds the same view as the
first, and knows that it is only in heresy severed from the Church that
such a view is taught or learned, but yet for the sake of some temporal
emolument has desired to be baptized in the Catholic unity, or, having
been already baptized in it, is unwilling on account of the said
emolument to secede from it, he is not only to be considered as
seceding, but his offense is aggravated, in so far as to the error of
heresy and the division of unity he adds the deceit of hypocrisy. 
Wherefore the depravity of each man, in proportion as it is more
dangerous and wanting in straightforwardness, must be corrected with the
more earnestness and energy; and yet, if he has anything that is good in
him, especially if it be not of himself, but from God, we ought not to
think it of no value because of his depravity, or to be blamed like it,
or to be ascribed to it, rather than to His bountiful goodness, who even
to a soul that plays the harlot, and <span id="page_458">p. 458</span>
<span id="v.iv.vi.xvi-Page_458"></span>goes after her lovers, yet gives
His bread, and His wine, and His oil, and other food or ornaments, which
are neither from herself nor from her lovers, but from Him who in
compassion for her is even desirous to warn her to whom she should
return. <span id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[457:1439](1040314.htm#fr_1438.md) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xvi-p2"></span> Various Synods from 345 on
anathematized Photinus, the bishop of Sirmium.  The two of Sirmium, 351
and 357, accused him of constituting two Gods.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[458:1440](1040314.htm#fr_1439.md) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xvi-p3"></span> [Hos. ii.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005.md)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1040315.md)
