[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040339)  [Next](1040341) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vii.xv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—17</span>.  That therefore the
baptism of John was not the same as the baptism of Christ, has, I think,
been shown with sufficient clearness; and therefore no argument can be
drawn from it that baptism should be repeated after heretics because it
was repeated after John:  since John was not a heretic, and could have a
baptism, which, though granted by Christ, was yet not the very baptism
of Christ, seeing that he had the love of Christ; while a heretic can
have at once the baptism of Christ and the perversity of the devil, as
another within the Church may have at once the baptism of Christ and the
envy of the devil.

<span id="v.iv.vii.xv-p2"></span>18.  But it will be urged that baptism
after a heretic is much more required, because John was not a heretic,
and yet baptism was repeated after him.  On this principle, a man may
say, much more must we rebaptize after a drunkard, because John was
sober, and yet baptism was repeated after him.  And we shall have no
answer to make to such a man, save that the baptism of Christ was given
to those who were baptized by John, because they had it not; but where
men have the baptism of Christ, no iniquity on their part can possibly
effect that the baptism of Christ should fail to be in them.

<span id="v.iv.vii.xv-p3"></span>19.  It is not therefore true that "by
baptizing first, the heretic obtains the right of baptism;" <span
id="fr_1506"></span>[1507](#fn_1506) but because he did not baptize with
his own baptism, and though he did not possess the right of baptizing,
yet that which he gave is Christ’s, and he who received it is Christ’s. 
For many things are given wrongfully and yet they are not therefore said
to be non-existent or not given at all.  For neither does he who
renounces the world in word only and not in deed receive baptism
lawfully, and yet he does receive it.  For both Cyprian records that
there were such men in the Church in his day, and we ourselves
experience and lament the fact.

<span id="v.iv.vii.xv-p5"></span>20.  But it is strange in what sense it
can be said that "baptism and the Church cannot in any way be separated
and detached from one another." <span
id="fr_1507"></span>[1508](#fn_1507)   For if baptism remains
inseparably in him who is baptized, how can it be that he can be
separated from the Church, and baptism cannot?  But it is clear that
baptism does remain inseparably in the baptized person; because into
whatever depth of evil, and into whatever fearful whirlpool of sin the
baptized person may fall, even to the ruin of apostasy, he yet is not
bereft of his baptism.  And therefore, if through repentance he returns,
it is not given again, because it is judged that he could not have been
bereft of it.  But who can ever doubt that a baptized person can be
separated from the Church?  For hence all the heresies have proceeded
which deceive by the use of Christian terms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[470:1507](1040340.htm#fr_1506) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xv-p4"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. 25.

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[470:1508](1040340.htm#fr_1507) <span
id="v.iv.vii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.xv-p6"></span> *Ib*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1040341)
