[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040054)  [Next](1040056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 34.—The Church is Not to Be Blamed
for the Conduct of Bad Christians, Worshippers of Tombs and
Pictures.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>74.  Make objections against these, ye
<span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvi-Page_62"></span>Manichæans, if you can.  Look at these
people, and speak of them reproachfully, if you dare, without
falsehood.  Compare their fasts with your fasts, their chastity with
yours; compare them to yourselves in dress, food, self-restraint, and,
lastly, in charity.  Compare, which is most to the point, their precepts
with yours.  Then you will see the difference between show and
sincerity, between the right way and the wrong, between faith and
imposture, between strength and inflatedness, between happiness and
wretchedness, between unity and disunion; in short, between the sirens
of superstition and the harbor of religion.

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>75.  Do not summon against me
professors of the Christian name, who neither know nor give evidence of
the power of their profession. <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151)  
Do not hunt up the numbers of ignorant people, who even in the true
religion are superstitious, or are so given up to evil passions as to
forget what they have promised to God.  I know that there are many
worshippers of tombs and pictures.  I know that there are many who drink
to great excess over the dead, and who, in the feasts which they make
for corpses, bury themselves over the buried, and give to their gluttony
and drunkenness the name of religion.  I know that there are many who in
words have renounced this world, and yet desire to be burdened with all
the weight of worldly things, and rejoice in such burdens.  Nor is it
surprising that among so many multitudes you should find some by
condemning whose life you may deceive the unwary and seduce them from
Catholic safety; for in your small numbers you are at a loss when called
on to show even one out of those whom you call the elect who keeps the
precepts, which in your indefensible superstition you profess.  How
silly those are, how impious, how mischievous, and to what extent they
are neglected by most, nearly all of you, I have shown in another
volume.

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p5"></span>76.  My advice to you now is this: 
that you should at least desist from slandering the Catholic Church, by
declaiming against the conduct of men whom the Church herself condemns,
seeking daily to correct them as wicked children.  Then, if any of them
by good will and by the help of God are corrected, they regain by
repentance what they had lost by sin.  Those, again, who with wicked
will persist in their old vices, or even add to them others still worse,
are indeed allowed to remain in the field of the Lord, and to grow along
with the good seed; but the time for separating the tares will
come. <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152)   Or if, from their having
at least the Christian name, they are to be placed among the chaff
rather than among thistles, there will also come One to purge the floor
and to separate the chaff from the wheat, and to assign to each part
(according to its desert) the due reward. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[62:152](1040055.htm#fr_151) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p4"></span>   \[Augustin says nothing of the
encouragement given to such pagan practices by men regarded in that age
as possessed of almost superhuman sanctity, such as Sulpicius Severus,
Paulinus of Nola, etc.  He speaks of corruptions as if they were
exceptional, whereas they seem to have been the rule.  Yet there is
force in his contention that Christianity be judged by its best products
rather than by the worst elements associated with it.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_152"></span>[62:153](1040055.htm#fr_152) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p6"></span> \[Augustin’s ideal representation of
Christianity and his identification of the organized Catholic Church
with Christianity is quite inconsistent with the practice of the Church
which he here seeks to justify.  No duty is more distinctly enjoined
upon believers in the New Testament than separation from unbelievers and
evil doers.  But such separation is impracticable in an established
Church such as that to which Augustin rejoiced to belong.—A.H.N.\]

<span id="fn_153"></span>[62:154](1040055.htm#fr_153) <span
id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p7"></span> [Matt.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013), [Matt.
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](1040056)
