[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040325)  [Next](1040327.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vii.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—</span>1.  We have the testimony
of the blessed Cyprian, that the custom of the Catholic Church is at
present retained, when men coming from the side of heretics or
schismatics, if they have received baptism as consecrated in the words
of the gospel, are not baptized afresh.  For he himself proposed to
himself the question, and that as coming from the mouth of brethren
either seeking the truth or contending for the truth.  For in the course
of the arguments by which he wished to show that heretics should be
baptized again, which we have sufficiently considered for our present
purpose in the former books, he says:  "But some will say, What then
will become of those who in times past, coming to the Church from
heresy, were admitted without baptism?" <span
id="fr_1468"></span>[1469](#fn_1468.md)   In this question is involved the
shipwreck of the whole cause of the Donatists, with whom our contest is
on this point.  For if those had not really baptism who were thus
received on coming from heretics, and their sins were still upon them,
then, when such men were admitted to communion, either by those who came
before Cyprian or by Cyprian himself, we must acknowledge that one of
two things occurred,—either that the Church perished then and there from
the pollution of communion with such men, or that any one abiding in
unity is not injured by even the notorious sins of other men.  But since
they cannot say that the Church then perished through the contamination
arising from communion with those who, as Cyprian says, were admitted
into it without baptism—for otherwise they cannot maintain the validity
of their own origin if the Church then perished, seeing that the list of
consuls proves that more than forty years elapsed between the martyrdom
of Cyprian and the burning of the sacred books, <span
id="fr_1469"></span>[1470](#fn_1469.md) from which they took occasion to
make a schism, spreading abroad the smoke of their calumnies,—it
therefore is left for them to acknowledge that the unity of Christ is
not polluted by any such communion, even with known offenders.  And,
after this confession, they will be unable to discover any reason which
will justify them in maintaining that they were bound to separate from
the churches of the whole world, which, as we read, were equally founded
by the apostles, seeing that, while the others could not have perished
from any admixture of offenders, of whatsoever kind, they, though they
would not have perished if they had remained in unity with them, brought
destruction on themselves in schism, by separating themselves from their
brethren, and breaking the bond of peace.  For the sacrilege of schism
is most clearly evident in them, if they had no sufficient cause for
separation.  And it is clear that there was no sufficient cause for
separation, if even the presence of notorious offenders cannot pollute
the good while they abide in unity.  But that the good, abiding in
unity, are not polluted even by notorious offenders, we teach on the
testimony of Cyprian, who says that "men in past times, coming to the
Church from heresy, were admitted without baptism;" and yet, if the
wickedness of their sacrilege, which was still upon them, seeing it had
not been purged away by baptism, could not pollute and destroy the
holiness of the Church, it cannot perish by any infection from wicked
men.  Wherefore, if they allow that Cyprian spoke the truth, they are
convicted of schism on his testimony; if they maintain that he does not
speak truth, let them not use his testimony on the question of baptism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[463:1469](1040326.htm#fr_1468.md) <span
id="v.iv.vii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.i-p2"></span> Cypr. *Ep*. lxxiii. *ad Jubaian*. 23.

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[463:1470](1040326.htm#fr_1469.md) <span
id="v.iv.vii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii.i-p3"></span> See below, Book VII. c. 2, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040327.md)
