[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040132)  [Next](1040134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 31.—The Same Subject
Continued.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxii-p2"></span>34.  And even in the prince of smoke
himself, instead of mentioning only his ferocity as a bad quality, ought
you not to have taken notice of the other things in his nature which you
must allow to be commendable?  For he had a soul and a body; the soul
life-giving, and the body endowed with life.  Since the soul governed
and the body obeyed, the soul took the lead and the body followed; the
soul gave consistency, the body was not dissolved; the soul gave
harmonious motion, and the body was constructed of a well-proportioned
framework of members.  In this single prince are you not induced to
express approval of the orderly peace or the peaceful order?  And what
applies to one applies to all the rest.  You say he was fierce and cruel
to others.  This is not what I commend, but the other important things
which you will not take notice of.  Those things, when perceived and
considered,—after advice by any one who has without consideration put
faith in Manichæus,—lead him to a clear conviction that, in speaking of
those natures, he speaks of things good in a sense, not perfect and
un-created, like God the one Trinity, nor of the higher rank of created
things, like the holy angels and the ever-blessed powers; but of the
lowest class, and ranked according to the small measure of their
endowments.  These things are thought to be blameworthy by the
uninstructed when they compare them with higher things; and in view of
their want of some good, the good they have gets the name of evil,
because it is defective.  My reason also for thus discussing the natures
enumerated by Manichæus is that the things named are things familiar to
us in this world.  We are familiar with darkness, waters, winds, fire,
smoke; we are familiar, too, with animals, creeping, swimming, flying;
with quadrupeds and biped.  With the exception of darkness (which, as I
have said already, is nothing but the absence of light, and the
perception of it is only the absence of sight, as the perception of
silence is the absence of hearing; not that darkness is anything, but
that light is not, as neither that silence is anything, but that sound
is not), all the other things are natural qualities and are familiar to
all; and the form of those natures, which is commendable and good as far
as it exists, no wise man attributes to any other author than God, the
author of all good things. <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_283"></span>[144:284](1040133.htm#fr_283) <span
id="iv.viii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxxii-p3"></span> \[This portion of the argument is
conducted with great adroitness.  Augustin takes the inhabitants of the
region of darkness, as Mani describes them, and proves that they possess
so much of good that they can have no other author than God.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](1040134)
