[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040127)  [Next](1040129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—The Manichæans are Reduced to
the Choice of a Tortuous, or Curved, or Straight Line of Junction.  The
Third Kind of Line Would Give Symmetry and Beauty Suitable to Both
Regions.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxvii-p2"></span>What more is to be got? we have now
heard what is on the border.  Make what shape you please, draw any kind
of lines you like, it is certain that the junction of this boundless
mass of the region of darkness to the region of light must have been
either by a straight line, or a curved, or a tortuous one.  If the line
of junction is tortuous the side of the region of light must also be
tortuous; otherwise its straight side joined to a tortuous one would
leave gaps of infinite depth, instead of having vacuity only above the
land of darkness, as we were told before.  And if there were such gaps,
how much better it would have been for the region of light to have been
still more distant, and to have had a greater vacuity between, so that
the region of darkness might not touch it at all!  Then there might have
been such a gap of bottomless depth, that, on the rise of any mischief
in that race, although the chiefs of darkness might have the foolhardy
wish to cross over, they would fall headlong into the gap (for bodies
cannot fly without air to support them); and as there is infinite space
downwards, they could do no more harm, though they might live for ever,
for they would be for ever falling.  Again, if the line of junction was
a curved one, the region of light must also have had the disfigurement
of a curve to answer it.  Or if the land of darkness were curved inwards
like a theatre, there would be as much disfigurement in the
corresponding line in the region of light.  Or if the region of darkness
had a curved line, and the region of light a straight one, they cannot
have touched at all points.  And certainly, as I said before, it would
have been better if they had not touched, and if there was such a gap
between that the regions might be kept distinctly separate, and that
rash evildoers might fall headlong so as to be harmless.  If, then, the
line of junction was a straight one, there remain, of course, no more
gaps or grooves, but, on the contrary, so perfect a junction as to make
the greatest possible peace and harmony between the two regions.  What
<span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xxvii-Page_142"></span>more beautiful or more suitable than
that one side should meet the other in a straight line, without bends or
breaks to disturb the natural and permanent connection throughout
endless space and endless duration?  And even though there was a
separation, the straight sides of both regions would be beautiful in
themselves, as being straight; and besides, even in spite of an
interval, their correspondence, as running parallel, though not meeting,
would give a symmetry to both.  With the addition of the junction, both
regions become perfectly regular and harmonious; for nothing can be
devised more beautiful in description or in conception than this
junction of two straight lines. <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_282"></span>[142:283](1040128.htm#fr_282) <span
id="iv.viii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xxvii-p3"></span> \[This discussion of the lines
bounding the Kingdom of Light and the Kingdom of Darkness seems very
much like trifling, but Augustin’s aim was to bring the Manichæan
representations into ridicule.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1040129)
