[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040119)  [Next](1040121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.viii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—The Understanding Judges of the
Truth of Things, and of Its Own Action.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xix-p2"></span>What, then, must be said of the power
of perceiving truth, and of making a vigorous resistance against these
very images which take their shape from impressions on the bodily
senses, when they are opposed to the truth?  This power discerns the
difference between, to take a particular example, the true Carthage and
its own imaginary one, which it changes as it pleases with perfect
ease.  It <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xix-Page_138"></span>shows that the countless worlds of
Epicurus, in which his fancy roamed without restraint, are due to the
same power of imagination, and, not to multiply examples, that we get
from the same source that land of light, with its boundless extent, and
the five dens of the race of darkness, with their inmates, in which the
fancies of Manichæus have dared to usurp for themselves the name of
truth.  What then is this power which discerns these things?  Clearly,
whatever its extent may be, it is greater than all these things, and is
conceived of without any such material images.  Find, if you can, space
for this power; give it a material extension; provide it with a body of
huge size.  Assuredly if you think well, you cannot.  For of everything
of this corporeal nature your mind forms an opinion as to its
divisibility, and you make of such things one part greater and another
less, as much as you like; while that by which you form a judgment of
these things you perceive to be above them, not in local loftiness of
place, but in dignity of power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1040121)
