[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040296)  [Next](1040298) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—</span>25.  They indeed who say
that baptism is not to be repeated, because only hands were laid on
those whom Philip the deacon had baptized, <span
id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315) are saying what is quite beside the
point; and far be it from us, in seeking the truth, to use such
arguments as this.  Wherefore we are all the further from "yielding to
heretics," <span id="fr_1316"></span>[1317](#fn_1316) if we deny that
what they possess of Christ’s Church is their own property, and do not
refuse to acknowledge the standard of our General because of the crimes
of deserters; nay, all the more because "the Lord our God is a jealous
God," <span id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317) let us refuse, whenever
we see anything of His with an alien, to allow him to consider it his
own.  For of a truth the jealous God Himself rebukes the woman who
commits fornication against Him, as the type of an erring people, and
says that she gave to her lovers what belonged to Him, and again
received from them what was not theirs but His.  In the hands of the
adulterous woman and the adulterous lovers, God in His wrath, as a
jealous God, recognizes His gifts; and do we say that baptism,
consecrated in the words of the gospel, belongs to heretics? and are we
willing, from consideration of their deeds, to attribute to them even
what belongs to God, as though they had the power to pollute it, or as
though they could make what is God’s to be their own, because they
themselves have refused to belong to God?

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p5"></span>26.  Who is that adulterous woman whom
the prophet Hosea points out, who said, "I will go after my lovers, that
give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, and everything that
befits me?" <span id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318)   Let us grant
that we may understand this also of the people of the Jews that went
astray; yet whom else are the false Christians (such as are all heretics
and schismatics) wont to imitate, except false Israelites?  For there
were also true Israelites, as the Lord Himself bears witness to
Nathanael, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile." <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319)   But who are true Christians, save
those of whom the same Lord said, "He that hath my commandments, and
keepeth them, he it is that loveth me?" <span
id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320)   But what is it to keep His
commandments, except to abide in love?  Whence also He says, "A new
commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another;" and again, "By
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another." <span id="fr_1321"></span>[1322](#fn_1321)   But who can doubt
that this was spoken not only to those <span id="page_445">p. 445</span>
<span id="v.iv.v.xix-Page_445"></span>who heard His words with their
fleshly ears when He was present with them, but also to those who learn
His words through the gospel, when He is sitting on His throne in
heaven?  For He came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill. <span
id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322)   But the fulfilling of the law is
love. <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323)   And in this Cyprian
abounded greatly, insomuch that though he held a different view
concerning baptism, he yet did not forsake the unity of the Church, and
was in the Lord’s vine a branch firmly rooted, bearing fruit, which the
heavenly Husbandman purged with the knife of suffering, that it should
bear more fruit. <span id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324)   But the
enemies of this brotherly love, whether they are openly without, or
appear to be within, are false Christians, and antichrists.  For when
they have found an opportunity, they go out, as it is written:  "A man
wishing to separate himself from his friends, seeketh
opportunities." <span id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325)   But even if
occasions are wanting, while they seem to be within, they are severed
from that invisible bond of love.  Whence St. John says, "They went out
from us, but they were not of us; for had they been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us." <span
id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326)   He does not say that they ceased
to be of us by going out, but that they went out because they were not
of us.  The Apostle Paul also speaks of certain men who had erred
concerning the truth, and were overthrowing the faith of some; whose
word was eating as a canker.  Yet in saying that they should be avoided,
he nevertheless intimates that they were all in one great house, but as
vessels to dishonor,—I suppose because they had not as yet gone out.  Or
if they had already gone out, how can he say that they were in the same
great house with the honorable vessels, unless it was in virtue of the
sacraments themselves, which even in the severed meetings of heretics
are not changed, that he speaks of all as belonging to the same great
house, though in different degrees of esteem, some to honor and some to
dishonor?  For thus he speaks in his Epistle to Timothy:  "But shun
profane and vain babblings; for they will increase unto more
ungodliness.  And their word will eat as doth a canker; of whom is
Hymenæus and Philetus; who concerning the truth have erred, saying that
the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some. 
Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth firm, having this seal, The
Lord knoweth them that are His.  And, Let every one that nameth the name
of Christ depart from iniquity.  But in a great house there are not only
vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some
to honor, and some to dishonor.  If a man therefore purge himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the
master’s use, and prepared unto every good work." <span
id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327)   But what is it to purge oneself
from such as these, except what he said just before, "Let every one that
nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity."  And lest any one
should think that, as being in one great house with them, he might
perish with such as these, he has most carefully forewarned them, "The
Lord knoweth them that are His,"—those, namely, who, by departing from
iniquity, purge themselves from the vessels made to dishonor, lest they
should perish with them whom they are compelled to tolerate in the great
house.

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p16"></span>27.  They, therefore, who are wicked,
evildoers, carnal, fleshly, devilish, think that they receive at the
hands of their seducers what are the gifts of God alone, whether
sacraments, or any spiritual workings about present salvation.  But
these men have not love towards God, but are busied about those by whose
pride they are led astray, and are compared to the adulterous woman,
whom the prophet introduces as saying, "I will go after my lovers, that
give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, and my oil, and
everything that befits me."  For thus arise heresies and schisms, when
the fleshly people which is not founded on the love of God says, "I will
go after my lovers," with whom, either by corruption of her faith, or by
the puffing up of her pride, she shamefully commits adultery.  But for
the sake of those who, having undergone the difficulties, and straits,
and barriers of the empty reasoning of those by whom they are led
astray, afterwards feel the prickings of fear, and return to the way of
peace, to seeking God in all sincerity,—for their sake He goes on to
say, "Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a
wall, that she shall not find her paths.  And she shall follow after her
lovers, but she shall not overtake them:  and she shall seek them, but
she shall not find them:  then shall she say, I will go and return to my
first husband; for then was it better with me than now."  Then, that
they may not attribute to their seducers what they have that is sound,
and derived from the doctrine of truth, by which they lead them astray
to the falseness of their own dogmas and dissensions; that they may not
think that what is sound in them belongs to them, he immediately added,
"And she did not know that I gave her corn, and <span id="page_446">p.
446</span> <span id="v.iv.v.xix-Page_446"></span>wine, and oil, and
multiplied her money; but she made vessels of gold and silver for
Baal." <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328)   For she had said
above, "I will go after my lovers, that give me my bread," etc., not at
all understanding that all this, which was held soundly and lawfully by
her seducers, was of God, and not of men.  Nor would even they
themselves claim these things for themselves, and as it were assert a
right in them, had not they in turn been led astray by a people which
had gone astray, when faith is reposed in them, and such honors are paid
to them, that they should be enabled thereby to say such things, and
claim such things for themselves, that their error should be called
truth, and their iniquity be thought righteousness, in virtue of the
sacraments and Scriptures, which they hold, not for salvation, but only
in appearance.  Accordingly, the same adulterous woman is addressed by
the mouth of Ezekiel:  "Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold
and of my silver, which I had given thee, and madest to thyself images
of men, and didst commit whoredom with them; and tookest my <span
id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) broidered garments, and coveredst
them:  and thou hast set mine oil and mine incense before them.  My meat
also which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed
thee, thou hast even set it before thine idols for a sweet savor:  and
this thou hast done." <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330)   For
she turns all the sacraments, and the words of the sacred books, to the
images of her own idols, with which her carnal mind delights to wallow. 
Nor yet, because those images are false, and the doctrines of devils,
speaking lies in hypocrisy, <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331)
are those sacraments and divine utterances therefore so to lose their
due honor, as to be thought to belong to such as these; seeing that the
Lord says," Of my gold, and my silver, and my broidered garments, and
mine oil, and mine incense, and my meat," and so forth.  Ought we,
because those erring ones think that these things belong to their
seducers, therefore not to recognize whose they really are, when He
Himself says, "And she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and
oil, and multiplied her money"?  For He did not say that she did not
have these things because she was an adulteress; but she is said to have
had them, and that not as belonging to herself or her lovers, but to
God, whose alone they are.  Although, therefore, she had her
fornication, yet those things wherewith she adorned it, whether as
seduced or in her turn seducing, belonged not to her, but to God.  If
these things were spoken in a figure of the Jewish nation, when the
scribes and Pharisees were rejecting the commandment of God in order to
set up their own traditions, so that they were in a manner committing
whoredom with a people which was abandoning their God; and yet for all
that, whoredom at that time among the people, such as the Lord brought
to light by convicting it, did not cause that the mysteries should
belong to them, which were not theirs but God’s, who, in speaking to the
adulteress, says that all these things were His; whence the Lord Himself
also sent those whom He cleansed from leprosy to the same mysteries,
that they should offer sacrifice for themselves before the priests,
because that sacrifice had not become efficacious for them, which He
Himself afterwards wished to be commemorated in the Church for all of
them, because He Himself proclaimed the tidings to them all;—if this be
so, how much the more ought we, when we find the sacraments of the New
Testament among certain heretics or schismatics, not to attribute them
to these men, nor to condemn them, as though we could not recognize
them?  We ought to recognize the gifts of the true husband, though in
the possession of an adulteress, and to amend, by the word of truth,
that whoredom which is the true possession of the unchaste woman,
instead of finding fault with the gifts, which belong entirely to the
pitying Lord.

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p21"></span>28.  From these considerations, and
such as these, our forefathers, not only before the time of Cyprian and
Agrippinus, but even afterwards, maintained a most wholesome custom,
that whenever they found anything divine and lawful remaining in its
integrity even in the midst of any heresy or schism, they approved
rather than repudiated it; but whatever they found that was alien, and
peculiar to that false doctrine or division, this they convicted in the
light of the truth, and healed.  The points, however, which remain to be
considered in the letter written by Jubaianus, must, I think, when
looking at the size of this book, be taken in hand and treated with a
fresh beginning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[444:1316](1040297.htm#fr_1315) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p2"></span> [Acts viii.
5-17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[444:1317](1040297.htm#fr_1316) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p3"></span> Because Cyprian, in his letter to
Jubaianus (*Ep.* lxxiii. 10), had urged as following from this, that
"there is no reason, dearest brother, why we should think it right to
yield to heretics that baptism which was granted to the one and only
Church."

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[444:1318](1040297.htm#fr_1317) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p4"></span> [Deut. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[444:1319](1040297.htm#fr_1318) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p6"></span> [Hos. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p6.1"></span>,
cp. LXX.

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[444:1320](1040297.htm#fr_1319) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p7"></span> [John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[444:1321](1040297.htm#fr_1320) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p8"></span> [John xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[444:1322](1040297.htm#fr_1321) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p9"></span> [John
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[445:1323](1040297.htm#fr_1322) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p10"></span> [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[445:1324](1040297.htm#fr_1323) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p11"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[445:1325](1040297.htm#fr_1324) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p12"></span> [John xv.
1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[445:1326](1040297.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p13"></span> [Prov. xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p13.1"></span>,
cp. Hieron, and LXX.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[445:1327](1040297.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p14"></span> [1 John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[445:1328](1040297.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p15"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
16-21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[446:1329](1040297.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p17"></span> [Hos. ii.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p17.1"></span>, cp. LXX.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[446:1330](1040297.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p18"></span> In Hieron, and LXX., as well as in the
English version, this is in the second person, *vestimenta tua
multicolaria;* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p18.1"></span>τὸν ἱματισμὸν τὸν ποικίλον σου</span>.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[446:1331](1040297.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p19"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[446:1332](1040297.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p20"></span> [1 Tim.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](1040298)
