[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040198)  [Next](1040200.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—In the Body of the Ape the Good
of Beauty is Present, Though in a Less Degree.</span>

<span id="iv.x.xvii-p2"></span>But that what we have said may be
understood, and may satisfy those too slow of comprehension, or that
even the pertinacious and those repugnant to the most manifest truth may
be compelled to confess what is true, let them be asked, whether
corruption can harm the body of an ape?  But if it can, so that it may
become more hideous, what diminishes but the good of beauty?  Whence as
long as the nature of the body subsists, so long something will remain. 
If, accordingly, good having been consumed, nature is consumed, the
nature is therefore good.  So also we say that slow is contrary to
swift, but yet he who does not move at all cannot even be called slow. 
So we say that a heavy voice is contrary to a sharp voice, or a harsh to
a musical; but if you completely remove any kind of voice, there is
silence where there is no voice, which silence, nevertheless, for the
simple reason that there is no voice, is usually opposed to voice as
something contrary thereto.  So also lucid and obscure are called as it
were two contrary things, yet even obscure things have something of
light, which being absolutely wanting, darkness is the absence of light
in the same way in which silence is the absence of voice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1040200.md)
