[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040535)  [Next](1040537) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.xlix"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xlix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xlix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 49.—</span>113.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.xlix-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"For, granting that you faithless ones are acquainted with the law,
without any prejudice to the law itself, I may say so much as this, the
devil knows it too.  For in the case of righteous Job he answered the
Lord God concerning the law as though he were himself righteous, as it
is written, "And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my
servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a man without
malice, a true worshipper of God abstaining from every evil; and still
he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to
destroy him without cause?" <span id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131)  
And Satan answered the Lord, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath
will he give for his life.  Behold he speaks in legal phrase, even when
he is striving against the law.  And a second time he endeavored thus to
tempt the Lord Christ with his discourse, as it is written, ‘The devil
taketh Jesus into the holy city, and setteth Him on a pinnacle of the
temple, and saith unto Him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself
down:  for it is written, He shall give His angels charge concerning
thee; and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou
dash thy foot against a stone.  Jesus said unto him, It is written
again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.’ <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132)   You know the law, I say, as did
the devil, who is conquered in his endeavors, and blushes in his deeds."

<span id="v.v.iv.xlix-p4"></span>114.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.xlix-p4.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  I might indeed
ask of you in what law the words are written which the devil used when
he was uttering calumnies against the holy man Job, if the position
which I am set to prove were this, that you yourself are unacquainted
with the law which you assert the devil to have known, but as this is
not the question at issue between us, I pass it by.  But you have
endeavored in such sort to prove that the devil is skilled in the law,
as though we maintained that all who know the law are just. 
Accordingly, I do not see in what manner you are assisted by what you
have chosen to quote concerning the devil,—unless, indeed, it may be
that we should be thereby reminded how you imitate the devil himself. 
For as he brought forward the words of the law against the Author of the
law, so you also out of the words of the law bring accusation against
men whom you do not know, that you may resist the promises of God which
are made in that very self-same law.  Then I should be glad if you would
tell me in whose honor do those confessors of yours achieve their
martyrdom, when they throw themselves over precipices,—in honor of
Christ, who thrust the devil from Him when he made a like suggestion, or
rather in honor of the devil himself, who suggested such a deed to
Christ?  There are two especially vile and customary deaths resorted to
by those who kill themselves,—hanging and the precipice.  You assuredly
said in the earlier part of this epistle, "The traitor hung himself:  he
left this death to all who are like him."  This has no application
whatever to us; for we refuse to reverence with the name of martyr any
who have strangled themselves.  With how much greater show of reason
might we say against you, That master of all traitors, the devil, wished
to persuade Christ to throw Himself headlong down, and was repulsed! 
What, therefore, must we say of those whom he persuaded with success? 
What, indeed, except that they are the enemies of Christ, the friends of
the devil, the disciples of the seducer, the fellow-disciples of the
traitor?  For both have learned to kill themselves from the same
master,—Judas by hanging himself, the others by throwing themselves over
precipices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[560:2132](1040536.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="v.v.iv.xlix-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xlix-p2"></span> [Job
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#004)<span id="v.v.iv.xlix-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[560:2133](1040536.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="v.v.iv.xlix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.xlix-p3"></span> [Matt. iv.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005)<span
id="v.v.iv.xlix-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 50](1040537)
