[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040099)  [Next](1040101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii"></span> <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii-Page_119"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Disputation of the Second Day.</span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p2"></span>The next day, a notary having again been
summoned, the discussion was conducted as follows:

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p3.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  I say that God
Almighty brings forth from Himself nothing evil, and that the things
that are His remain incorrupt, having sprung and being born from an
inviolable source; but other contrary things which have their being in
this world, do not flow from God nor have appeared in this world with
God as their author; that is to say, they do not derive their origin
from God.  These things therefore we have received in the belief that
evil things are foreign to God.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p4"></span>20.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p4.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  And our faith is
this, that God is not the progenitor of evil things, neither has He made
any evil nature.  But since both of us agree that God is incorruptible
and incontaminable, it is the part of the prudent and faithful to
consider, which faith is purer and worthier of the majesty of God; that
in which it is asserted that either the power of God, or some part of
God, or the Word of God, can be changed, violated, corrupted, fettered;
or that in which it is said that Almighty God and His entire nature and
substance can never be corrupted in any part, but that evils have their
being by the voluntary sin of the soul, to which God gave free will. 
Which free will if God had not given, there could be no just penal
judgment, nor merit of righteous conduct, nor divine instruction to
repent of sins, nor the forgiveness of sins itself which God has
bestowed upon us through our Lord Jesus Christ.  Because he who sins not
voluntarily, sins not at all.  This I suppose to be open and perspicuous
to all.  Wherefore it ought not to trouble us if according to our
deserts we suffer some inconveniences in the things God has made.  For
as He is good, that He should constitute all things; so He is just, that
He may not spare sins, which sins, as I have said, unless free will were
in us, would not be sins.  For if any one, so to speak, should be bound
by some one in his other members, and with his hand something false
should be written without his own will, I ask whether if this were laid
open before a judge, he could condemn this one for the crime of
falsehood.  Wherefore, if it is manifest that there is no sin where
there is not free exercise of will, <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) I wish to hear what evil the soul
which you call either part, or power, or word, or something else, of
God, has done, that it should be punished by God, or repent of sin, or
merit forgiveness, since it has in no way sinned?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p6.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  I proposed
concerning substances, that God is to be regarded as creator only of
good things, but as the avenger of evil things, for the reason that evil
things are not of Him.  Therefore for good reason I think this, and that
God avenges evil things because they are not of Himself.  But if they
were from Him, either He would give them license to sin, as you say that
God has given free will, He would be already found a participator in my
fault, because He would be the author of my fault; or ignorant what I
should be, he left me whom he did not constitute worthy of Himself. 
This therefore is proposed by me, and what I ask now is, whether God
instituted evil or not? and whether He Himself instituted the end of
evils.  For it appears from these things, and the evangelical faith
teaches, that the things which we have said were made by God Himself as
God the Creator, as having been created and begotten by Him, are to be
esteemed incorruptible.  These things I also proposed which belong to
our belief, and which can be confirmed by you in that profession of
ours, without prejudice to the authority of the Christian faith.  And
because I can in no way show that I rightly believe, unless I should
confirm that belief by the authority of the Scriptures, this is
therefore what I have insinuated, what I have said.  Either if evil
things have appeared in the world with God as their author, deign to say
so yourself; or if it is right to believe that evil things are not of
God, this also the contemplation of those present ought to honor and
receive.  I have spoken about substances, not about sin that dwells in
us.  For if what we think to make faults had no origin, we should not be
compelled to come to sin or to fault.  For because we sinned
unwillingly, and are compelled by a substance contrary and hostile to
ourselves, therefore we follow the knowledge of things.  By which
knowledge the soul admonished and restored to pristine memory,
recognizes the source from which it derives its existence, in what evil
it dwells, by what good works emending again that in which unwillingly
it sinned, it may be able through the emendation of its faults, for
<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii-Page_120"></span>the sake of good works, to secure for
itself the merit of reconciliation with God, our Saviour being the
author of it, who teaches us also to practice good things and to flee
from evil.  For you ask us to believe that not by some contrary nature,
but by his own choice, man either serves righteousness or becomes
involved in sins; since, no contrary race existing, if the soul, to
which as you say God has given free will, having been constituted in the
body, dwells alone, it would be without sin, nor would it become
involved in sins.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p7"></span>21.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p7.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  I say it is not sin,
if it be not committed by one’s own will; hence also there is reward,
because of our own will we do right.  Or if he who sins unwillingly
deserves punishment, he who unwillingly does well ought to deserve
reward.  But who doubts that reward is only bestowed upon him who does
something of good will?  From which we know that punishment also is
inflicted upon him who does something of ill will.  But since you recall
me to primordial natures and substances, my faith is that God
Almighty—which must especially be attended to and fixed in the mind—that
God Almighty has made good things.  But the things made by Him cannot be
such as is He who made them.  For it is unjust and foolish to believe
that works are equal to the workman, things made to the maker. 
Wherefore if it is reverential to believe that God made all good things,
than which nevertheless He is by far more excellent and by far more
pre-eminent; the origin and head of evil is sin, as the apostle said: 
"Covetousness is the root of all evils; which some following after have
made shipwreck of the faith, and have pierced themselves through with
many sorrows." <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242)   For if you seek
the root of all evils, you have the apostle saying that covetousness is
the root of all evils.  But the root of a root I cannot seek.  Or if
there is another evil, whose root covetousness is not, covetousness will
not be the root of all evils.  But if it is true that covetousness is
the root of all evils, in vain do we seek some other kind of evil.  But
as regards that contrary nature of yours which you introduce, since I
have responded to your objections, I ask that you deign to tell me
whether it is wholly evil, whether there can be no sin apart from it,
whether by this alone punishment is deserved, not by the soul by which
no sin has been committed.  But if you say that this contrary nature
alone deserves punishment, and not the soul, I ask to which is
repentance, which is commanded, vouchsafed.  If the soul is commanded to
repent, sin is from the soul, and the soul has sinned voluntarily.  For
if the soul is compelled to do evil, that which it does is not evil.  Is
it not foolish and most absurd to say that the race of darkness has
sinned and that I repent of the sins.  Is it not most absurd to say that
the race of darkness has sinned and that forgiveness of sins is
vouchsafed to me, who according to your faith may well say:  What have I
done?  What have I committed?  I was with Thee, I was in a state of
integrity, I was contaminated with no pollution.  Thou didst send me
hither, Thou didst suffer necessity, Thou didst protect Thy domains when
great pollution and desolation threatened them.  Since therefore Thou
knowest the necessity by which I have been here oppressed, by reason of
which I could not breathe, which I could not resist; why dost Thou
accuse me as if sinning? or why dost Thou promise forgiveness of sins? 
Reply to this without evasion, if you please, as I have replied to you.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p9"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p9.1"></span>Fortunatus</span>said:  We say this, that
the soul is compelled by contrary nature to transgress, for which
transgression you maintain there is no root save the evil that dwells in
us; for it is certain that apart from our bodies evil things dwell in
the whole world.  For not those things alone that we have in our bodies,
dwell in the whole world, and are known by their names as good; an evil
root also inheres.  For your dignity said that this covetousness that
dwells in our bodies is the root of evils; since therefore there is no
desire of evil out of our bodies, from that source contrary nature
dwells in the whole world.  For the apostle designated that, namely
covetousness, as the root of evils, not one evil which you have called
the root of all evils.  But not in one manner is covetousness, which you
have said is the root of all evils, understood, as if of that which
dwells in our bodies alone; for it is certain that this evil which
dwells in us descends from an evil author and that this root as you call
it is a small portion of evil, so that it is not the root itself, but is
a small portion of evil, of that evil which dwells everywhere.  Which
root and tree our Lord called evil, as never bearing good fruit, which
his Father did not plant, and which is deservedly rooted up and cast
into the fire. <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243)   For as you say,
that sin ought to be imputed to the contrary nature, that nature belongs
to evil; and that this is sin of the soul, if after the warning of our
Saviour and his wholesome instruction, the soul shall have segregated
itself from its contrary and hostile race, adorning itself also <span
id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span id="iv.vii.iii-Page_121"></span>with
purer things; that otherwise it cannot be restored to its own
substance.  For it is said:  "If I had not come and spoken unto them,
they had not had sin.  But now that I have come and spoken, and they
have refused to believe me, they shall have no excuse for their
sin." <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244)  Whence it is perfectly
plain, that repentance has been given after the Saviour’s advent, and
after this knowledge of things, by which the soul can, as if washed in a
divine fountain from the filth and vices as well of the whole world as
of the bodies in which the same soul dwells, be restored to the kingdom
of God whence it has gone forth.  For it is said by the apostle, that
"the mind of the flesh is hostile to God; is not subject to the law of
God, neither indeed can be." <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245)  
Therefore it is evident from these things that the good soul seems to
sin not voluntarily, but by the doing of that which is not subject to
the law of God.  For it likewise follows that "the flesh lusteth against
the spirit and the spirit against the flesh; so that ye may not do the
things that ye will." <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246)   Again: 
"I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind and
leading me captive in the law of sin and of death.  Therefore I am a
miserable man; who shall deliver me from the body of this death, unless
it be the grace of God through our Lord Jesus Christ," <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) "through whom the world has been
crucified to me and I to the world?" <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p16"></span>22.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p16.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  I recognize and
embrace the testimonies of the divine Scriptures, and I will show in a
few words, as God may deign to grant, how they are consistent with my
faith.  I say that there was free exercise of will in that man who was
first formed.  He was so made that absolutely nothing could resist his
will, if he had willed to keep the precepts of God.  But after he
voluntarily sinned, we who have descended from his stock were plunged
into necessity.  But each one of us can by a little consideration find
that what I say is true.  For today in our actions before we are
implicated by any habit, we have free choice of doing anything or not
doing it.  But when by that liberty we have done something and the
pernicious sweetness and pleasure of that deed has taken hold upon the
mind, by its own habit the mind is so implicated that afterwards it
cannot conquer what by sinning it has fashioned for itself.  We see many
who do not wish to swear, but because the tongue has already become
habituated, they are not able to prevent those things from going forth
from the mouth which we cannot but ascribe to the root of evil.  For
that I may discuss with you those words, which as they do not withdraw
from your mouth so may they be understood by your heart:  you swear by
the Paraclete.  If therefore you wish to find out experimentally whether
what I say is true, determine not to swear.  You will see, that that
habit is borne along as it has become accustomed to be.  And this is
what wars against the soul, habit formed in the flesh.  This is indeed
the mind of the flesh, which, as long as it cannot thus be subject to
the law of God, so long is it the mind of the flesh; but when the soul
has been illuminated it ceases to be the mind of the flesh.  For thus it
is said the mind of the flesh cannot be subject to the law of God, just
as if it were said, that snow cannot be warm.  For so long as it is
snow, it can in no way be warm.  But as the snow is melted by heat, so
that it may become warm, so the mind of the flesh, that is, habit formed
with the flesh, when our mind has become illuminated, that is, when God
has subjected for Himself the whole man to the choice of the divine law,
instead of the evil habit of the soul, makes a good habit.  Accordingly
it is most truly said by the Lord of the two trees, the one good and the
other evil, which you have called to mind, that they have their own
fruits; that is, neither can the good tree yield evil fruit, nor the
evil tree good fruit, but so long as it is evil.  Let us take two men, a
good and a bad.  As long as he is good he cannot yield evil fruit; as
long as he is bad he cannot yield good fruit.  But that you may know
that those two trees are so placed by the Lord, that free choice may be
there signified, that these two trees are not natures but our wills, He
Himself says in the gospel:  "Either make the tree good, or make the
tree evil." <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249)   Who is it that can
make nature?  If therefore we are commanded to make a tree either good
or evil, it is ours to choose what we will.  Therefore concerning that
sin of man and concerning that habit of soul formed with the flesh the
apostle says:  "Let no one seduce you;" <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) "Every creature that has been made by
God is good." <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251)   The same apostle
whom you also have cited says:  "As through the disobedience of the one
the many were constituted sinners; so also through the obedience of the
one the many are constituted righteous." <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)   "Since through man is death, through
man also is resurrection of the dead."  As long therefore as we bear the
image of the earthly man, <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) that
is, as long as we live according to the flesh, which is also called the
old man, we have the neces<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii-Page_122"></span>sity of our habit, so that we may not do
what we will.  But when the grace of God has breathed the divine love
into us and has made us subject to His will, to us it is said:  "Ye are
called for freedom," <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) and "the
grace of God has made me free from the law of sin and of death." <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255)   But the law of sin is that whoever
has sinned shall die.  From this law we are freed when we have begun to
be righteous.  The law of death is that by which it was said to man: 
"Earth thou art and into earth thou shalt go." <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256)   For from this very fact we are all
so born, because we are earth, and from the fact that we are all so born
because we are earth, we shall all go into earth on account of the
desert of the sins of the first man.  But on account of the grace of
God, which frees us from the law of sin and of death, having been
converted to righteousness we are freed; so that afterwards this same
flesh tortures us with its punishment so long as we remain in sins, is
subjected to us in resurrection, and shakes us by no adversity from
keeping the law of God and His precepts.  Whence, since I have replied
to your questions, deign to reply as I desire, how it can happen, that
if nature is contrary to God, sin should be imputed to us, who were sent
into that nature not voluntarily, but by God Himself, whom nothing could
injure?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p25"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p25.1"></span>Fortunatus</span>said:  Just as also the
Lord said to His disciples:  "Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of
wolves." <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257)   Hence it must be
known that not with hostile intent did our Saviour send forth His lambs,
that is His disciples, into the midst of wolves, unless there had been
some contrariety, which He would indicate by the similitude of wolves,
where also He had sent His disciples; that the souls which perchance
might be deceived in the midst of wolves might be recalled to their
proper substance.  Hence also may appear the antiquity of our times to
which we return, and of our years, that before the foundation of the
world souls were sent in this way against the contrary nature, that
subjecting the same by their passion, victory might be restored to God. 
For the same apostle said, that not only there should be a struggle
against flesh and blood, but also against principalities and powers, and
the spiritual things of wickedness, and the domination of
darkness." <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258)   If therefore in
both places evils dwell and are esteemed wickednesses, not only now is
evil in our bodies, but in the whole world, where souls appear to dwell,
which dwell beneath yonder heaven and are fettered.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p28"></span>23.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p28.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  The Lord sent His
lambs into the midst of wolves, that is, just men into the midst of
sinners for the preaching of the gospel received in the time of man from
the inestimable divine Wisdom, that He might call us from sin to
righteousness.  But what the apostle says, that our struggle is not
against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, and the
other things that have been quoted, this signifies that the devil and
his angels, as also we, have fallen and lapsed by sin, and have secured
possession of earthly things, that is, sinful men, who, as long as we
are sinners, are under their yoke, just as when we shall be righteous,
we shall be under the yoke of righteousness; and against them we have a
struggle, that passing over to righteousness we may be freed from their
dominion.  Do you also therefore deign to reply to the one question that
I ask:  Could God suffer injury, or not?  But I ask you to reply:  He
could not.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p29"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p29.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  He could not
suffer injury.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p30"></span>24.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p30.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  Wherefore then did
He send us hither, according to your faith?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p31"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p31.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  My profession is
this, that God could not be injured, and that He directed us hither. 
But since this is contrary to your view, do you tell how you account for
the soul being here, which our God desires to liberate both by His
commandments and by His own Son whom He has sent.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p32"></span>25.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p32.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  Since I see that you
cannot answer my inquiries, and wish to ask me something, behold I
satisfy you, provided only that you bear in mind that you have not
replied to my question.  Why the soul is here in this world involved in
miseries has been explained by me not just now, but again and again a
little while ago.  The soul sinned, and therefore is miserable.  It
accepted free choice, used free choice, as it willed; it fell, was cast
out from blessedness, was implicated in miseries.  As bearing upon this
I recited to you the testimony of the apostle who says:  "As through one
man death, so also through one man came the resurrection of the dead." 
What more do you ask?  Hence do you reply, wherefore did He, who could
not suffer injury, send us hither?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p33"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p33.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  The cause must be
sought, why the soul came hither, or wherefore God desires hence to
liberate the soul that lives in the midst of evils?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p34"></span>26.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p34.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  This cause I ask of
you, that is, if God could not suffer injury, wherefore He sent us
hither?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p35"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p35.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  It is inquired of
us, if evil cannot injure God, wherefore the soul was sent hither, or
for what reason was it <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii-Page_123"></span>mingled with the world?  Which is
manifest in what the apostle says:  "Shall the thing formed say to him
that formed it, why hast thou formed me thus?" <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259)   If therefore this cause must be
pleaded, He must be asked, why He sent the soul, no necessity compelling
Him.  But if there was necessity for sending the soul, of right is there
also the will of liberating it.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p37"></span>27.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p37.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  Then God is pressed
by necessity, is He?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p38"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p38.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  Now this is it. 
Do not seek to bring odium upon what has been said because we do not
make God subject to necessity, but to have voluntarily sent the soul.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p39"></span>28.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p39.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  Recall what was said
above.  And it runs:  "But if there was necessity for sending the soul,
of right is there also the will of liberating it.  Augustin said:  We
have heard:  But if there was necessity for sending the soul, of right
is there also the will of liberating it."  You, therefore, said that
there was necessity for sending the soul.  But if you only wish to say
"a will to send," I add this also:  He who could suffer no injury, had
the cruel will to send the soul to so great miseries.  Because I speak
for the sake of refuting this statement, I ask pardon from the mercy of
that One in whom we have hope of liberation from all the errors of
heretics.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p40"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p40.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  You asseverate
that we say that God is cruel in sending the soul, but that God made
man, breathed into him a soul which assuredly He foreknew to be involved
in future misery, and not to be able by reason of evils to be restored
to its inheritance.  This belongs either to one who is ignorant, or who
gives the soul up to these aforesaid evils.  This I have cited because
you said not long since, that God adopted the soul, not that it is from
Him; for to adopt is a different matter.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p41"></span>29.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p41.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  Concerning adoption
I remember that I spoke some days ago according to the testimony of the
apostle, who says that we have been called into the adoption of
sons. <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)   This was not my reply,
therefore, but the apostle’s, concerning which thing, that is, that
adoption, we may inquire, if we please, in its own time; and concerning
that I will reply without delay, when you shall have answered my
objections.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p43"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p43.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  I say that there
was a going forth of the soul against a contrary nature, which nature
could not injure God.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p44"></span>30.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p44.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  What need was there
for that going forth, when God whom nothing could injure had nothing to
protect?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p45"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p45.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  Do you
conscientiously hold that Christ came from God?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p46"></span>31.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p46.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  Again you are
questioning me. Reply to my inquiries.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p47"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p47.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  So I have received
in faith, that by the will of God He came hither.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p48"></span>32.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p48.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  And I say:  Why did
God, omnipotent, inviolable, immutable, whom nothing could injure, send
hither the soul, to miseries, to error, to those things that we suffer?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p49"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p49.1"></span>Fortunatus</span>said:  For it has been
said:  "I have power to lay down my soul and I have power to take it
again." <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261)   Now He said that by
the will of God the soul went forth.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p51"></span>33.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p51.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  I ask for the reason
why God, when He can in no way suffer injury, sent the soul hither?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p52"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p52.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  We have already
said that God can in no way suffer injury, and we have said that the
soul is in a contrary nature, therefore that it imposes a limit on the
contrary nature.  The restraint having been imposed on the contrary
nature, God takes the same.  For He Himself said, "I have power to lay
down my soul and power to take it."  The Father gave to me the power of
laying down my soul, and of taking it.  To what soul, therefore, did God
who spoke in the Son refer?  Evidently our soul, which is held in these
bodies,which came of His will, and of His will is again taken up.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p53"></span>34.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p53.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  Why our Lord said: 
"I have power to lay down my soul and power to take it," is known to
all; because He was about to suffer and to rise again.  But I ask of you
again and again, If God could in no way suffer injury, why did he send
souls hither?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p54"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p54.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  To impose a limit
on contrary nature.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p55"></span>35.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p55.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  And did God
omnipotent, merciful and supreme, that He might impose a restraint on
contrary nature, wish it to be limited so that He might make us
unrestrained?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p56"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p56.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  But so He calls us
back to Himself.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p57"></span>36.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p57.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  If He recalls to
Himself from an unrestrained state, if from sin, from error, from
misery, what need was there for the soul to suffer so great evils
through so long a time till the world ends? since God by whom you say it
was sent could in no way suffer injury.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p58"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p58.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  What then am I to
say?

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p59"></span>37.  <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p59.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  I know that you have
nothing to say, and that I, when I was among <span id="page_124">p.
124</span> <span id="iv.vii.iii-Page_124"></span>you, never found
anything to say on this question, and that I was thus admonished from on
high to leave that error and to be converted to the Catholic faith or
rather to recall it, by the indulgence of Him who did not permit me to
inhere forever in this fallacy.  But if you confess that you have
nothing to reply, I will expound the Catholic faith to all those hearing
and investigating, seeing that they are believers, if they permit and
wish.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p60"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p60.1"></span>Fortunatus</span> said:  Without prejudice
to my profession I might say:  when I shall have reconsidered with my
superiors the things that have been opposed by you, if they fail to
respond to this question of mine, which is now in like manner proposed
to me by you, it will be in my contemplation (since I desire my soul to
be liberated by an assured faith) to come to the investigation of this
thing that you have proposed to me and that you promise you will show.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p61"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p61.1"></span>Augustin</span> said:  Thanks be to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[119:242](1040100.htm#fr_241) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p5"></span> *Liberum voluntatis arbitrium*.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[120:243](1040100.htm#fr_242) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p8"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[120:244](1040100.htm#fr_243) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p10"></span> [Matt.
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013), [Matt.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[121:245](1040100.htm#fr_244) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p11"></span> [John xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[121:246](1040100.htm#fr_245) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p12"></span> [Rom. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[121:247](1040100.htm#fr_246) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p13"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[121:248](1040100.htm#fr_247) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p14"></span> [Rom. vii.
23-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[121:249](1040100.htm#fr_248) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p15"></span> [Gal. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[121:250](1040100.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p17"></span> [Matt. xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[121:251](1040100.htm#fr_250) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p18"></span> [Eph. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[121:252](1040100.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p19"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[121:253](1040100.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p20"></span> [Rom. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[121:254](1040100.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021),
[49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[122:255](1040100.htm#fr_254) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p22"></span> [Gal. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[122:256](1040100.htm#fr_255) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p23"></span> [Rom. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[122:257](1040100.htm#fr_256) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p24"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[122:258](1040100.htm#fr_257) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p26"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[122:259](1040100.htm#fr_258) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p27"></span> [Eph. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#012)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[123:260](1040100.htm#fr_259) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p36"></span> [Rom. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[123:261](1040100.htm#fr_260) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p42"></span> [Eph. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[123:262](1040100.htm#fr_261) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p50"></span> [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span id="iv.vii.iii-p50.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against the Epistle of Manichæus, Called Fundamental.](1040101)
