[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040662)  [Next](1040664) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—</span>15.  And indeed, before those
laws were put in force by the emperors of the Catholic faith, the
doctrine of the peace and unity of Christ was beginning by degrees to
gain ground, and men were coming over to it even from the faction of
Donatus, in proportion as each learned more, and became more willing,
and more master of his own actions; although, at the same time, among
the Donatists herds of abandoned men were disturbing the peace of the
innocent for one reason or another in the spirit of the most reckless
madness.  What master was there who was not compelled to live in dread
of his own servant, if he had put himself under the guardianship of the
Donatists?  Who dared even threaten one who sought his ruin with
pun<span id="page_639">p. 639</span> <span
id="v.vi.vi-Page_639"></span>ishment?  Who dared to exact payment of a
debt from one who consumed his stores, or from any debtor whatsoever,
that sought their assistance or protection?  Under the threat of
beating, and burning, and immediate death, all documents compromising
the worst of slaves were destroyed, that they might depart in freedom. 
Notes of hand that had been extracted from debtors were returned to
them.  Any one who had shown a contempt for their hard words were
compelled by harder blows to do what they desired.  The houses of
innocent persons who had offended them were either razed to the ground
or burned.  Certain heads of families of honorable parentage, and
brought up with a good education were carried away half dead after their
deeds of violence, or bound to the mill, and compelled by blows to turn
it round, after the fashion of the meanest beasts of burden.  For what
assistance from the laws rendered by the civil powers was ever of any
avail against them?  What official ever ventured so much as to breathe
in their presence?  What agents ever exacted payment of a debt which
they had been unwilling to discharge?  Who ever endeavored to avenge
those who were put to death in their massacres?  Except, indeed, that
their own madness took revenge on them, when some, by provoking against
themselves the swords of men, whom they obliged to kill them under fear
of instant death, others by throwing themselves over sundry precipices,
others by waters, others by fire, gave themselves over on the several
occasions to a voluntary death, and gave up their lives as offerings to
the dead by punishments inflicted with their own hands upon themselves.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p2"></span>16.  These deeds were looked upon with
horror by many who were firmly rooted in the same superstitious heresy;
and accordingly, when they supposed that it was sufficient to establish
their innocence that they were ill contented with such conduct, it was
urged against them by the Catholics:  If these evil deeds do not pollute
your innocence, how then do you maintain that the whole Christian world
has been polluted by the alleged sin of Cæcilianus, which are either
altogether calumnies, or at least not proved against him?  How come you,
by a deed of gross impiety, to separate yourselves from the unity of the
Catholic Church, as from the threshing-floor of the Lord, which must
needs contain, up to the time of the final winnowing, both corn which is
to be stored in the garner, and chaff that is to be burned up with
fire? <span id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496)   And thus some were so
convinced by argument as to come over to the unity of the Catholic
Church, being prepared even to meet the hostility of abandoned men;
whilst the greater number, though equally convinced, and though desirous
to do the same, yet dared not make enemies of these men, who were so
unbridled in their violence, seeing that some who had come over to us
experienced the greatest cruelty at their hands.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p4"></span>17.  To this we may add, that in Carthage
itself some of the bishops of the same party, making a schism among
themselves, and dividing the party of Donatus among the lower orders of
the Carthaginian people, ordained as bishop against bishop a certain
deacon named Maximianus, who could not brook the control of his own
diocesan.  And as this displeased the greater part of them, they
condemned the aforesaid Maximinus, with twelve others who had been
present at his ordination, but gave the rest that were associated in the
same schism a chance of returning to their communion on an appointed
day.  But afterwards some of these twelve, and certain others of those
who had had the time of grace allowed to them, but had only returned
after the day appointed, were received by them without degradation from
their orders; and they did not venture to baptize a second time those
whom the condemned ministers had baptized outside the pale of their
communion.  This action of theirs at once made strongly against them in
favor of the Catholic party, so that their mouths were wholly closed. 
And on the matter being diligently spread abroad, as was only right, in
order to cure men’s souls of the evils of schism, and when it was shown
in every possible direction by the sermons and discussions of the
Catholic divines, that to maintain the peace of Donatus they had not
only received back those whom they had condemned, with full recognition
of their orders, but had even been afraid to declare that baptism to be
void which had been administered outside their Church by men whom they
had condemned or even suspended; whilst, in violation of the peace of
Christ, they cast in the teeth of all the world the stain conveyed by
contact with some sinners, it matters little with whom, and declared
baptism to be consequently void which had been administered even in the
very Churches whence the gospel itself had come to Africa;—seeing all
this, very many began to be confounded, and blushing before what they
saw to be mostly manifest truth, they submitted to correction in greater
numbers than was their wont; and men began to breathe with a somewhat
freer sense of liberty from their <span id="page_640">p. 640</span>
<span id="v.vi.vi-Page_640"></span>cruelty, and that to a considerably
greater extent in every direction.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p5"></span>18.  Then indeed they blazed forth with
such fury, and were so excited by the goadings of hatred, that scarcely
any churches of our communion could be safe against their treachery and
violence and most undisguised robberies; scarcely any road secure by
which men could travel to preach the peace of the Catholic Church in
opposition to their madness, and convict the rashness of their folly by
the clear enunciation of the truth.  They went so far, besides, in
proposing hard terms of reconciliation, not only to the laity or to any
of the clergy, but even in a measure to certain of the Catholic
bishops.  For the only alternative offered was to hold their tongues
about the truth, or to endure their savage fury.  But if they did not
speak about the truth, not only was it impossible for any one to be
delivered by their silence, but many were even sure to be destroyed by
their submitting to be led astray; while if, by their preaching the
truth, the rage of the Donatists was again provoked to vent its madness,
though some would be delivered, and those who were already on our side
would be strengthened, yet the weak would again be deterred by fear from
following the truth.  When the Church, therefore, was reduced to these
straits in its affliction, any one who thinks that anything was to be
endured, rather than that the assistance of God, to be rendered through
the agency of Christian emperors, should be sought, does not
sufficiently observe that no good account could possibly be rendered for
neglect of this precaution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[639:2497](1040663.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="v.vi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vi-p3"></span> [Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="v.vi.vi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1040664)
