[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040074)  [Next](1040076.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Disclosure of the Monstrous
Tenets of the Manichæans.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p2"></span>38.  O the obscurity of the nature of
things!  How hard to expose falsehood!  Who that hears these things, if
he is one who has not learned the causes of things, and who, not yet
illuminated by any ray of truth, is deceived by material images, would
not think them true, precisely because the things spoken of are
invisible, and are presented to the mind under the form of visible
things, and can be eloquently expressed?  Men of this description exist
in numbers and in droves, who are kept from being led away into these
errors <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span
id="iv.v.xviii-Page_80"></span>more by a fear grounded on religious
feeling than by reason.  I will therefore endeavor, as God may please to
enable me, so to refute these errors, as that their falsehood and
absurdity will be manifest not only in the judgment of the wise, who
reject them on hearing them, but also to the intelligence of the
multitude.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p3"></span>39.  Tell me then, first, where you get
the doctrine that part of God, as you call it, exists in corn, beans,
cabbage, and flowers and fruits.  From the beauty of the color, say
they, and the sweetness of the taste; this is evident; and as these are
not found in rotten substances, we learn that their good has been taken
from them.  Are they not ashamed to attribute the finding of God to the
nose and the palate?  But I pass from this.  For I will speak, using
words in their proper sense; and, as the saying is, this is not so easy
in speaking to you.  Let us see rather what sort of mind is required to
understand this; how, if the presence of good in bodies is shown by
their color, the dung of animals, the refuse of flesh itself, has all
kinds of bright colors, sometimes white, often golden; and so on, though
these are what you take in fruits and flowers as proofs of the presence
and indwelling of God.  Why is it that in a rose you hold the red color
to be an indication of an abundance of good, while the same color in
blood you condemn?  Why do you regard with pleasure in a violet the same
color which you turn away from in cases of cholera, or of people with
jaundice, or in the excrement of infants?  Why do you believe the light,
shining appearance of oil to be a sign of a plentiful admixture of good,
which you readily set about purifying by taking the oil into your
throats and stomachs, while you are afraid to touch your lips with a
drop of fat, though it has the same shining appearance as oil?  Why do
you look upon a yellow melon as part of the treasures of God, and not
rancid bacon fat or the yolk of an egg?  Why do you think that whiteness
in a lettuce proclaims God, and not in milk?  So much for colors, as
regards which (to mention nothing else) you cannot compare any
flower-clad meadow with the wings and feathers of a single peacock,
though these are of flesh and of fleshly origin.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p4"></span>40.  Again, if this good is discovered
also by smell, perfumes of excellent smell are made from the flesh of
some animals.  And the smell of food, when cooked along with flesh of
delicate flavor, is better than if cooked without it.  Once more, if you
think that the things that have a better smell than others are therefore
cleaner, there is a kind of mud which you ought to take to your meals
instead of water from the cistern; for dry earth moistened with rain has
an odor most agreeable to the sense, and this sort of mud has a better
smell than rain-water taken by itself.  But if we must have the
authority of taste to prove the presence in any object of part of God,
he must dwell in dates and honey more than in pork, but more in pork
than in beans.  I grant that He dwells more in a fig than in a liver;
but then you must allow that He is more in liver than in beet.  And, on
this principle, must you not confess that some plants, which none of you
can doubt to be cleaner than flesh, receive God from this very flesh, if
we are to think of God as mixed with the flavor?  For both cabbages
taste better when cooked along with flesh; and, while we cannot relish
the plants on which cattle feed, when these are turned into milk we
think them improved in color, and find them very agreeable to the taste.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p5"></span>41.  Or must we think that good is to be
found in greater quantity where the three good qualities—a good color,
and smell, and taste—are found together?  Then you must not admire and
praise flowers so much, as you cannot admit them to be tried at the
tribunal of the palate.  At least you must not prefer purslain to flesh,
since flesh when cooked is superior in color, smell, and taste.  A young
pig roasted (for your ideas on this subject force us to discuss good and
evil with you as if you were cooks and confectioners, instead of men of
reading or literary taste) is bright in color, and agreeable in smell,
and pleasant in taste.  Here is a perfect evidence of the presence of
the divine substance.  You are invited by this threefold testimony, and
called on to purify this substance by your sanctity.  Make the attack. 
Why do you hold back?  What objection have you to make.  In color alone
the excrement of an infant surpasses lentils; in smell alone a roast
morsel surpasses a soft green fig; in taste alone a kid when slaughtered
surpasses the plant which it fed on when alive:  and we have found a
kind of flesh in flavor of which all three give evidence.  What more do
you require?  What reply will you make?  Why should eating meat make you
unclean, if using such monstrosities in discussion does not?  And, above
all, the rays of the sun, which you surely think more of than all animal
or vegetable food, have no smell or taste, and are remarkable among
other substances only by their eminently bright color; which is a loud
call to you, and an obligation, in spite of yourselves, to place nothing
higher than a bright color among the evidences of an admixture of good.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p6"></span><span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="iv.v.xviii-Page_81"></span>42.  Thus you are forced into this
difficulty, that you must acknowledge the part of God as dwelling more
in blood, and in the filthy but bright-colored animal refuse which is
thrown out in the streets, than in the pale leaves of the olive.  If you
reply, as you actually do, that olive leaves when burnt give out a
flame, which proves the presence of light, while flesh when burnt does
not, what will you say of oil, which lights nearly all the lamps in
Italy?  What of cow dung (which surely is more unclean than the flesh),
which peasants use when dry as fuel, so that the fire is always at hand,
and the liberation of the smoke is always going on?  And if brightness
and lustre prove a greater presence of the divine part, why do you
yourselves not purify it, why not appropriate it, why not liberate it? 
For it is found chiefly in flowers, not to speak of blood and countless
things almost the same as blood in flesh or coming from it, and yet you
cannot feed on flowers.  And even if you were to eat flesh, you would
certainly not take with your gruel the scales of fish, or some worms and
flies, though these all shine with a light of their own in the dark.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p7"></span>43.  What then remains, but that you
should cease saying that you have in your eyes, nose, and palate
sufficient means of testing the presence of the divine part in material
objects?  And, without these means, how can you tell not only that there
is a greater part of God in plants than in flesh, but that there is any
part in plants at all?  Are you led to think this by their beauty—not
the beauty of agreeable color, but that of agreement of parts?  An
excellent reason, in my opinion.  For you will never be so bold as to
compare twisted pieces of wood with the bodies of animals, which are
formed of members answering to one another.  But if you choose the
testimony of the senses, as those must do who cannot see with their mind
the full force of existence, how do you prove that the substance of good
escapes from bodies in course of time, and by some kind of attrition,
but because God has gone out of it, according to your view, and has left
one place for another?  The whole is absurd.  But, as far as I can
judge, there are no marks or appearances to give rise to this opinion. 
For many things plucked from trees, or pulled out of the ground, are the
better of some interval of time before we use them for food, as leeks
and endive, lettuce, grapes, apples, figs, and some pears; and there are
many other things which get a better color when they are not used
immediately after being plucked, besides being more wholesome for the
body, and having a finer flavor to the palate.  But these things should
not possess all these excellent and agreeable qualities, if, as you say,
they become more destitute of good the longer they are kept after
separation from their mother earth.  Animal food itself is better and
more fit for use the day after the animal is killed; but this should not
be, if, as you hold, it possessed more good immediately after the
slaughter than next day, when more of the divine substance had escaped.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p8"></span>44.  Who does not know that wine becomes
purer and better by age?  Nor is it, as you think, more tempting to the
destruction of the senses, but more useful for invigorating the
body,—only let there be moderation, which ought to control everything. 
The senses are sooner destroyed by new wine.  When the must has been
only a short time in the vat, and has begun to ferment, it makes those
who look down into it fall headlong, affecting their brain, so that
without assistance they would perish.  And as regards health, every one
knows that bodies are swollen up and injuriously distended by new wine? 
Has it these bad properties because there is more good in it?  Are they
not found in wine when old because a good deal of the divine substance
has gone?  An absurd thing to say, especially for you, who prove the
divine presence by the pleasing effect produced on your eyes, nose, and
palate!  And what a contradiction it is to make wine the poison of the
princes of darkness, and yet to eat grapes!  Has it more of the poison
when in the cup than when in the cluster?  Or if the evil remains
unmixed after the good is gone, and that by the process of time, how is
it that the same grapes, when hung up for awhile, become milder,
sweeter, and more wholesome? or how does the wine itself, as already
mentioned, become purer and brighter when the light has gone, and more
wholesome by the loss of the beneficial substance?

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p9"></span>45.  What are we to say of wood and
leaves, which in course of time become dry, but cannot be the worse on
that account in your estimation?  For while they lose that which
produces smoke, they retain that from which a bright flame arises; and,
to judge by the clearness, which you think so much of, there is more
good in the dry than in the green.  Hence you must either deny that
there is more of God in the pure light than in the smoky one, which will
upset all your evidences; or you must allow it to be possible that, when
plants are plucked up, or branches plucked off, and kept for a time,
more of the nature of evil may escape from them than <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="iv.v.xviii-Page_82"></span>of the
nature of good.  And, on the strength of this, we shall hold that more
evil may go off from plucked fruits; and so more good may remain in
animal food.  So much on the subject of time.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p10"></span>46.  As for motion, and tossing, and
rubbing, if these give the divine nature the opportunity of escaping
from these substances, many things of the same kind are against you,
which are improved by motion.  In some grains the juice resembles wine,
and is excellent when moved about.  Indeed, as must not be overlooked,
this kind of drink produces intoxication rapidly; and yet you never
called the juice of grain the poison of the princes of darkness.  There
is a preparation of water, thickened with a little meal, which is the
better of being shaken, and, strange to say, is lighter in color when
the light is gone.  The pastry cook stirs honey for a long time to give
it this light color, and to make its sweetness milder and less
unwholesome:  you must explain how this can come from the loss of good. 
Again, if you prefer to test the presence of God by the agreeable
effects on the hearing, and not sight, or smell, or taste, harps get
their strings and pipes their bones from animals; and these become
musical by being dried, and rubbed, and twisted.  So the pleasures of
music, which you hold to have come from the divine kingdom, are obtained
from the refuse of dead animals, and that, too, when they are dried by
time, and lessened by rubbing, and stretched by twisting.  Such rough
treatment, according to you, drives the divine substance from living
objects; even cooking them, you say, does this.  Why then are boiled
thistles not unwholesome?  Is it because God, or part of God, leaves
them when they are cooked?

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p11"></span>47.  Why mention all the particulars,
when it is difficult to enumerate them?  Nor is it necessary; for every
one knows how many things are sweeter and more wholesome when cooked. 
This ought not to be, if, as you suppose, things lose the good by being
thus moved about.  I do not suppose that you will find any proof from
your bodily senses that flesh is unclean, and defiles the souls of those
who eat it, because fruits, when plucked and shaken about in various
ways, become flesh; especially as you hold that vinegar, in its age and
fermentation, is cleaner than wine, and the mead you drink is nothing
else than cooked wine, which ought to be more impure than wine, if
material things lose the divine members by being moved about and
cooked.  But if not, you have no reason to think that fruits, when
plucked, kept, handled, cooked, and digested, are forsaken by the good,
and therefore supply most unclean matter for the formation of bodies.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p12"></span>48.  But if it is not from their color
and appearance, and smell and taste, that you think the good to be in
these things, what else can you bring forward?  Do you prove it from the
strength and vigor which those things seem to lose when they are
separated from the earth and put to use?  If this is your reason (though
its erroneousness is seen at once, from the fact that the strength of
some things is increased after their separation from the earth, as in
the case already mentioned of wine, which becomes stronger from age),—if
the strength, then, is your reason, it would follow that the part of God
is to be found in no food more abundantly than in flesh.  For athletes,
who especially require vigor and energy, are not in the habit of feeding
on cabbage and fruit without animal food.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p13"></span>49.  Is your reason for thinking the
bodies of trees better than our bodies, that flesh is nourished by trees
and not trees by flesh.  You forget the obvious fact that plants, when
manured with dung, become richer and more fertile and crops heavier,
though you think it your gravest charge against flesh that it is the
abode of dung.  This then gives nourishment to things you consider
clean, though it is, according to you, the most unclean part of what you
consider unclean.  But if you dislike flesh because it springs from
sexual intercourse, you should be pleased with the flesh of worms, which
are bred in such numbers, and of such a size, in fruits, in wood, and in
the earth itself, without any sexual intercourse.  But there is some
insincerity in this.  For if you were displeased with flesh because it
is formed from the cohabitation of father and mother, you would not say
that those princes of darkness were born from the fruits of their own
trees; for no doubt you think worse of these princes than of flesh,
which you refuse to eat.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p14"></span>50.  Your idea that all the souls of
animals come from the food of their parents, from which confinement you
pretend to liberate the divine substance which is held bound in your
viands, is quite inconsistent with your abstinence from flesh, and makes
it a pressing duty for you to eat animal food.  For if souls are bound
in the body by those who eat animal food, why do you not secure their
liberation by being beforehand in eating the food?  You reply, it is not
from the animal food that the good part comes which those people bring
into bondage, but from the vegetables which they take with their meat. 
What will you say then of the souls of lions, who feed only on flesh? 
They drink, is the reply, and so <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="iv.v.xviii-Page_83"></span>the soul is drawn in from the water and
confined in flesh.  But what of birds without number?  What of eagles,
which eat only flesh, and need no drink?  Here you are at a loss, and
can find no answer.  For if the soul comes from food, and there are
animals which neither drink anything nor have any food but flesh, and
yet bring forth young, there must be some soul in flesh; and you are
bound to try your plan of purifying it by eating the flesh.  Or will you
say that a pig has a soul of light, because it eats vegetables, and
drinks water; and that the eagle, because it eats only flesh, has a soul
of darkness, though it is so fond of the sun? <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md)

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p16"></span>51.  What a confusion of ideas!  What
amazing fatuity!  All this you would have escaped, if you had rejected
idle fictions, and had followed what truth sanctions in abstinence from
food, which would have taught you that sumptuous eating is to be
avoided, not to escape pollution, as there is nothing of the kind, but
to subdue the sensual appetite.  For should any one, from inattention to
the nature of things, and the properties of the soul and body, allow
that the soul is polluted by animal food, you will admit that it is much
much more defiled by sensuality.  Is it reasonable, then, or rather, is
it not most unreasonable, to expel from the number of the elect a man
who, perhaps for his health’s sake, takes some animal food without
sensual appetite; while, if a man eagerly devours peppered truffles, you
can only reprove him for excess, but cannot condemn him as abusing your
symbol?  So one who has been induced, not by sensuality, but for health,
to eat part of a fowl, cannot remain among your elect; though one may
remain who has yielded voluntarily to an excessive appetite for comfits
and cakes without animal matter.  You retain the man plunged in the
defilements of sensuality, and dismiss the man polluted, as you think,
by the mere food; though you allow that the defilement of sensuality is
far greater than that of meat.  You keep hold of one who gloats with
delight over highly-seasoned vegetables, unable to keep possession of
himself; while you shut out one who, to satisfy hunger, takes whatever
comes, if suitable for nourishment, ready either to use the food, or to
let it go.  Admirable customs!  Excellent morals!  Notable temperance!

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p17"></span>52.  Again, the notion that it is
unlawful for any one but the elect to touch as food what is brought to
your meals for what you call purification, leads to shameful and
sometimes to criminal practices.  For sometimes so much is brought that
it cannot easily be eaten up by a few; and as it is considered sacrilege
to give what is left to others, or, at least, to throw it away, you are
obliged to eat to excess, from the desire to purify, as you call it, all
that is given.  Then, when you are full almost to bursting, you cruelly
use force in making the boys of your sect eat the rest.  So it was
charged against some one at Rome that he killed some poor children, by
compelling them to eat for this superstitious reason.  This I should not
believe, did I not know how sinful you consider it to give this food to
those who are not elect, or, at any rate, to throw it away.  So the only
way is to eat it; and this leads every day to gluttony, and may
sometimes lead to murder.

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p18"></span>53.  For the same reason you forbid
giving bread to beggars.  By way of showing compassion, or rather of
avoiding reproach, you advise to give money.  The cruelty of this is
equalled by its stupidity.  For suppose a place where food cannot be
purchased:  the beggar will die of starvation, while you, in your wisdom
and benevolence, have more mercy on a cucumber than on a human being! 
This is in truth (for how could it be better designated) pretended
compassion, and real cruelty.  Then observe the stupidity.  What if the
beggar buys bread for himself with the money you give him?  Will the
divine part, as you call it, not suffer the same in him when he buys the
food as it would have suffered if he had taken it as a gift from you? 
So this sinful beggar plunges in corruption part of God eager to escape,
and is aided in this crime by your money!  But you in your great
sagacity think it enough that you do not give to one about to commit
murder a man to kill, though you knowingly give him money to procure
somebody to be killed.  Can any madness go beyond this?  The result is,
that either the man dies if he cannot get food for his money, or the
food itself dies if he gets it.  The one is true murder; the other what
you call murder:  though in both cases you incur the guilt of real
murder.  Again, there is the greatest folly and absurdity in allowing
your followers to eat animal food, while you forbid them to kill
animals.  If this food does not defile, take it yourselves.  If it
defiles, what can be more unreasonable than to think it more sinful to
separate the soul of a pig from its body than to defile the soul of a
man with the pig’s flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_179"></span>[83:180](1040075.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="iv.v.xviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xviii-p15"></span> \[Much of the foregoing, as well as of
what follows, seems to the modern reader like mere trifling, but
Augustin’s aim was by introducing many familiar illustrations to show
the utter absurdity of the Manichæan distinctions between clean and
unclean.  It must be confessed that he does this very
effectively.—A.H.N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1040076.md)
