[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040317)  [Next](1040319) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.xx"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—</span>28.  But on the question
whether we ought to prefer a Catholic of the most abandoned character to
a heretic in whose life, except that he is a heretic, men can find
nothing to blame, I do not venture to give a hasty judgment.  But if any
one says, because he is a heretic, he cannot be this only without other
vices also following,—for he is carnal and natural, and therefore must
be also envious, and hot-tempered, and jealous, and hostile to truth
itself, and utterly estranged from it,—let him fairly understand, that
of those other faults of which he is supposed to have chosen some one
less flagrant, a single one cannot exist by itself in any man, because
he in turn is carnal and natural; as, to take the case of drunkenness,
which people have now become accustomed to talk of not only without
horror, but with some degree of merriment, can it possibly exist alone
in any one in whom it is found?  For what drunkard is not also
contentious, and hot-tempered, and jealous, and at variance with all
soundness of counsel, and at grievous enmity with those who rebuke him? 
Further, it is not easy for him to avoid being a fornicator and
adulterer, though he may be no heretic; just as a heretic may be no
drunkard, nor adulterer, nor fornicator, nor lascivious, nor a lover of
money, or given to witchcraft, and cannot well be all these together. 
Nor indeed is any one vice followed by all the rest.  Supposing,
therefore, two men,—one a Catholic with all these vices, the other a
heretic free from all from which a heretic can be free,—although they do
not both contend against the faith, and yet each lives contrary to the
faith, and each is deceived by a vain hope, and each is far removed from
charity of spirit, and therefore each is severed from connection with
the body of the one dove; why do we recognise in one of them the
sacrament of Christ, and not in the other, as though it belonged to this
or that man, whilst really it is the same in both, and belongs to God
alone, and is good even in the worst of men?  And if of the men who have
it, one is worse than another, it does not follow that the sacrament
which they have is worse in the one than in the other, seeing that
neither in the case of two bad Catholics, if one be worse than the
other, does he possess a worse baptism, nor, if one of them be good and
another bad, is baptism bad in the bad one and good in the good one; but
it is good in both.  Just as the light of the sun, or even of a lamp, is
certainly not less brilliant when displayed to bad eyes than when seen
by better ones; but it is the same in the case of both, although it
either cheers or hurts them differently according to the difference of
their powers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1040319)
