[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040083)  [Next](1040085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—How It is Proved that Every Body
Also is from God.  That the Soul Which is Called Evil by the Manichæans
is Better Than Light.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p2"></span>They also affirm that the light is from
the Father of Christ:  should I then have doubted that every soul is
from Him?  But not even then, as a man forsooth so inexperienced and so
youthful as I was, should I have been in doubt as to the derivation not
only of the soul, but also of the body, nay of everything whatsoever,
from Him, if I had reverently and cautiously reflected on what form is,
or what has been formed, what shape is and what has been endued with
shape.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p3"></span>3.  But not to speak at present concerning
the body, I lament concerning the soul, concerning spontaneous and vivid
movement, concerning action, concerning life, concerning immortality; in
fine, I lament that I, miserable, should have believed that anything
could have all these properties apart from the goodness of God, which
properties, great as they are, I sadly neglected to consider; this I
think, should be to me a matter of groaning and of weeping.  I should
have inwardly pondered these things, I should have discussed them with
myself, I should have referred them to others, I should have propounded
the inquiry, what the power of knowing is, seeing there is nothing in
man that we can compare to this excellency?  And as men, if only they
had been men, would have granted me this, I should have inquired whether
seeing with these eyes is knowing?  In case they had answered
negatively, I should first have concluded, that mental intelligence is
vastly inferior to ocular sensation; then I should have added, that what
we perceive by means of a better thing must needs be judged to be itself
better.  Who would not grant this?  I should have gone on to inquire,
whether that soul which they call evil is an object of ocular sensation
or of mental intelligence?  They would have acknowledged that the latter
is the case.  All which things having been agreed upon and confirmed
between us, I should have shown how it follows, that that soul forsooth
which they execrate, is better than that light which <span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="iv.vi.iv-Page_97"></span>they
venerate, since the former is an object of mental knowledge, the latter
an object of corporeal sense perception.  But here perhaps they would
have halted, and would have refused to follow the lead of reason, so
great is the power of inveterate opinion and of falsehood long defended
and believed.  But I should have pressed yet more upon them halting, not
harshly, not in puerile fashion, not obstinately; I should have repeated
the things that had been conceded, and have shown how they must be
conceded.  I should have exhorted that they consult in common, that they
may see clearly what must be denied to us; whether they think it false
that intellectual perception is to be preferred to these carnal organs
of sight, or that what is known by means of the excellency of the mind
is more excellent than what is known by vile corporeal sensation;
whether they would be unwilling to confess that those souls which they
think heterogenous, can be known only by intellectual perception, that
is, by the excellency itself of the mind; whether they would wish to
deny that the sun and the moon are made known to us only by means of
these eyes.  But if they had replied that no one of these things could
be denied otherwise than most absurdly and most impudently, I should
have urged that they ought not to doubt but that the light whose
worthiness of worship they proclaim, is viler than that soul which they
admonish men to flee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1040085)
