[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040228)  [Next](1040230.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xlvii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.x.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 45.—Certain Unspeakable Turpitudes
Believed, Not Without Reason, Concerning the Manichæans
Themselves.</span>

<span id="iv.x.xlvii-p2"></span>But they say, that through their own
Elect that same commingled part and nature of God is purged, by eating
and drinking forsooth, (because they say that it is held fettered in all
foods); that when they are taken up by the Elect for the nourishment of
the body in eating and drinking, it is loosed, sealed, and liberated
through their sanctity.  Nor do the wretches pay heed to the fact that
this is believed about them not without good reason, and they deny it in
vain, so long as they do not anathematize the books of Manichæus and
cease to be Manichæans.  For if, as they say, a part of God is fettered
in all seeds, and is purged by eating on the part of the Elect; who may
not properly believe, that they do what they read in the *Thesaurus* was
done among the powers of heaven and the princes of darkness; since
indeed they say that their flesh is also from the race of darkness, and
since they do not hesitate to believe and to affirm that the vital
substance fettered in them is a part of God?  Which assuredly if it is
to be loosed, and purged by eating, as their lamentable error compels
them to acknowledge; who does not see, who does not shudder at the
greatness and the unspeakableness of what follows?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](1040230.md)
