[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040262)  [Next](1040264.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—</span>1.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p1.2"></span>How</span> much the arguments make for us,
that is, for catholic peace, which the party of Donatus profess to bring
forward against us from the authority of the blessed Cyprian, and how
much they prove against those who bring them forward, it is my
intention, with the help of God, to show in the ensuing book.  If,
therefore, in the course of my argument, I am obliged to repeat what I
have already said in other treatises (although I will do so as little as
I can,) yet this ought not to be objected to by those who have already
read them and agree with them; since it is not only right that those
things which are necessary for instruction should be frequently
instilled into men of dull intelligence, but even in the case of those
who are endowed with larger understanding, it contributes very much both
to make their learning easier and their powers of teaching readier,
where the same points are handled and discussed in many various ways. 
For I know how much it discourages a reader, when he comes upon any
knotty question in the book which he has in hand, to find himself
presently referred for its solution to another which he happens not to
have.  Wherefore, if I am compelled, by the urgency of the present
questions, to repeat what I have already said in other books, I would
seek forgiveness from those who know those books already, that those who
are ignorant may have their difficulties removed; for it is better to
give to one who has already, than to abstain from satisfying any one who
is in want.

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p2"></span> 2.  What, then, do they venture to say,
when their mouth is closed <span id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208.md) by
the force of truth, with which they will not agree?  "Cyprian," say
they, "whose great merits and vast learning we all know, decreed in a
Council, <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209.md) with many of his
fellow-bishops contributing their several opinions, that all heretics
and schismatics, that is, all who are severed from the communion of the
one Church, are without baptism; and therefore, whosoever has joined the
communion of the Church after being baptized by them must be baptized in
the Church."  The authority of Cyprian does not alarm me, because I am
reassured by his humility.  We know, indeed, the great merit of the
bishop and martyr Cyprian; but is it in any way greater than that of the
apostle and martyr Peter, of whom the said Cyprian speaks as follows in
his epistle to Quintus?  "For neither did Peter, whom the Lord chose
first, and on whom He built His Church, <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210.md) when Paul afterwards disputed with
him about circumcision, claim or assume anything insolently and
arrogantly to himself, so as to say that he held the primacy, and should
rather be obeyed of those who were late and newly come.  Nor did he
despise Paul because he had before been a persecutor of the Church, but
he admitted the counsel of truth, and readily assented to the legitimate
grounds which Paul maintained; giving us thereby a pattern of concord
and patience, <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-Page_426"></span>that we should not pertinaciously love
our own opinions, but should rather account as our own any true and
rightful suggestions of our brethren and colleagues for the common
health and weal." <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211.md)   Here is a
passage in which Cyprian records what we also learn in holy Scripture,
that the Apostle Peter, in whom the primacy of the apostles shines with
such exceeding grace, was corrected by the later Apostle Paul, when he
adopted a custom in the matter of circumcision at variance with the
demands of truth.  If it was therefore possible for Peter in some point
to walk not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, so as to
compel the Gentiles to judaize, as Paul writes in that epistle in which
he calls God to witness that he does not lie; for he says, "Now the
things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not;" <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212.md) and, after this sacred and awful
calling of God to witness, he told the whole tale, saying in the course
of it, "But when I saw that they walked not uprightly, according to the
truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a
Jew, livest after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews,
why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?" <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213.md) —if Peter, I say, could compel the
Gentiles to live after the manner of the Jews, contrary to the rule of
truth which the Church afterwards held, why might not Cyprian, in
opposition to the rule of faith which the whole Church afterwards held,
compel heretics and schismatics to be baptized afresh?  I suppose that
there is no slight to Cyprian in comparing him with Peter in respect to
his crown of martyrdom; rather I ought to be afraid lest I am showing
disrespect towards Peter.  For who can be ignorant that the primacy of
his apostleship is to be preferred to any episcopate whatever?  But,
granting the difference in the dignity of their sees, yet they have the
same glory in their martyrdom.  And whether it may be the case that the
hearts of those who confess and die for the true faith in the unity of
charity take precedence of each other in different points, the Lord
Himself will know, by the hidden and wondrous dispensation of whose
grace the thief hanging on the cross once for all confesses Him, and is
sent on the selfsame day to paradise, <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214.md) while Peter, the follower of our
Lord, denies Him thrice, and has his crown postponed: <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215.md)   for us it were rash to form a
judgment from the evidence.  But if any one were now found compelling a
man to be circumcised after the Jewish fashion, as a necessary
preliminary for baptism, this would meet with much more general
repudiation by mankind, than if a man should be compelled to be baptized
again.  Wherefore, if Peter, on doing this, is corrected by his later
colleague Paul, and is yet preserved by the bond of peace and unity till
he is promoted to martyrdom, how much more readily and constantly should
we prefer, either to the authority of a single bishop, or to the Council
of a single province, the rule that has been established by the statutes
of the universal Church?  For this same Cyprian, in urging his view of
the question, was still anxious to remain in the unity of peace even
with those who differed from him on this point, as is shown by his own
opening address at the beginning of the very Council which is quoted by
the Donatists.  For it is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[425:1209](1040263.htm#fr_1208.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p3"></span> *Præfocantur*.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[425:1210](1040263.htm#fr_1209.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p4"></span> The Council of Carthage, <span
class="c11"><span id="v.iv.iv.i-p4.1"></span> A.D.</span> 256, in which
eighty-seven African bishops declared in favor of rebaptizing heretics. 
The opinions of the bishops are quoted and answered by Augustin, one by
one, in Books vi and vii.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[425:1211](1040263.htm#fr_1210.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p5"></span> [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md)<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[426:1212](1040263.htm#fr_1211.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p6"></span> Cypr. *Ep.* lxxi.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[426:1213](1040263.htm#fr_1212.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p7"></span> [Gal. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020.md)<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[426:1214](1040263.htm#fr_1213.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p8"></span> [Gal. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014.md)<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[426:1215](1040263.htm#fr_1214.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p9"></span> [Luke xxiii.
40-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#040.md)<span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[426:1216](1040263.htm#fr_1215.md) <span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv.i-p10"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
69-75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069.md)<span
id="v.iv.iv.i-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1040264.md)
