[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040567)  [Next](1040569) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxi"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 81.—</span>177.  <span
class="c11"><span id="v.v.iv.lxxxi-p1.2"></span>Petilianus</span> said: 
"But I answer you, on the other hand, that Jesus Christ never persecuted
any one.  And when the apostle found fault with certain parties, and
suggested that He should have recourse to persecution (He Himself having
come to create faith by inviting men to Him, rather than by compelling
them), those apostles say, ‘Many lay on hands in Thy name, and are not
with us:’  but Jesus said, ‘Let them alone; if they are not against you,
they are on your side.’"

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxi-p2"></span>178.  <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxi-p2.1"></span>Augustin</span> answered:  You say truly
that you will bring forth out of your store with greater abundance
things which are not written in the Scriptures.  For if you wish to
bring forth proofs from holy Scripture, will you bring forth even those
which you cannot find therein?  But it is in your own power to multiply
your lies according to your will.  For where is what you quoted written?
or when was that either suggested to our Lord, or answered by our Lord? 
"Many lay on hands in Thy name, and are not with us," are words that no
one of the disciples ever uttered to the Son of God; and therefore
neither could the answer have been made by Him, "Let them alone:  if
they are not against you, they are on your side."  But there is
something somewhat like it which we really do read in the gospel,—that a
suggestion was made to the Lord about a certain man who was casting out
devils in His name, but did not follow Him with His disciples; and in
that case the Lord does say, "Forbid him not:  for he that is not
against us is for us." <span id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189)   But
this has nothing to do with pointing out parties whom the Lord is
supposed to have spared.  And if you have been deceived by an apparent
resemblance of sentiment, this is not a lie, but merely human
infirmity.  But if you wished to cast a mist of falsehood over those who
are unskilled in holy Scripture, then may you be pricked to the heart,
and covered with confusion and corrected.  Yet there is a point which we
would urge in respect of this very man of whom the suggestion was made
to our Lord.  For even as at that time, beyond the communion of the
disciples, the holiness of Christ was yet of the greatest efficacy, even
so now, beyond the communion of the Church, the holiness of the
sacraments is of avail.  For neither is baptism consecrated save in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.  But who will
be so utterly insane as to declare that the name of the Son may be of
avail even beyond the communion of the Church, but that this is not
possible with the names of the Father and of the Holy Ghost? or that it
may be of avail in healing a man, but not in consecrating baptism?  But
it is manifest that outside the communion of the Church, and the most
holy bond of unity, and the most excellent gift of charity, neither he
by whom the devil is cast out nor he who is baptized obtains eternal
life; just as those do not obtain it, who through communion in the
sacraments seem indeed to be within, and through the depravity of their
character are understood to be without.  But that Christ persecuted even
with bodily chastisement those whom He drove with scourges from the
temple, we have already said above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[571:2190](1040568.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv.lxxxi-p3"></span> [Luke
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#049),
[50](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#050)<span
id="v.v.iv.lxxxi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 82](1040569)
