[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1040613)  [Next](1040615) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.v.v.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.v.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—</span>20.  Let him further go
on, in his discourse of many but manifestly empty words, to matters of
which he is wholly ignorant, or in which rather he abuses the ignorance
of the mass of those who hear him, and from the confession of a certain
woman, that she had called herself a catechumen of the Manichæans, being
already a full member of the Catholic Church, let him say or write what
he pleases concerning their baptism,—not knowing, or pretending not to
know, that the name of catechumen is not bestowed among them upon
persons to denote that they are at some future time to be baptized, but
that this name is given to such as are also called Hearers, on the
supposition that they cannot observe what are considered the higher and
greater commandments, which are observed by those whom they think right
to distinguish and honor by the name of Elect.  Let him also maintain
with wonderful rashness, either as himself deceived or as seeking to
deceive, that I was a presbyter among the Manichæans.  Let him set forth
and refute, in whatever sense seems good to him, the words of the third
book of my *Confessions*, which, both in themselves, and from much that
I have said before and since, are perfectly clear to all who read them. 
Lastly, let him triumph in my stealing his words, because I have
suppressed two of them, as though the victory were his upon their
restoration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1040615)
