[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fiwa03)  [Next](fiwa05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

### THE IDEA OF GOD--RELIGION

MISSIONARY PAUL of Tarsus, in the polite exordium of his great address
to the Athenian philosophers on Mars Hill, courteously tells them that
be believes them to be a very"religious" people,--indeed, too much so in
their broad-church willingness to give room for an altar to the worship
of any new immanence of God; and then, with equal courtesy, he tells
them that, with all their civilization, with all their eminence in art
and philosophy, they were ignorant of the true character of a greater
than any deity in their pantheon.

Modern missionaries, also, in studying the beliefs and forms of worship
of the heathen nations among whom they dwell, while they may be shocked
at the immoralities, cruelties, or absurdities of the special cult they
are investigating, have to acknowledge that its followers, in their
practice of it, exhibit a devotion, a persistence, and a faithfulness
worthy of Christian martyrs. They are very "religious." Verily, if the
obtaining of heaven and final salvation rested only on sincerity of
belief and consistency of practice, the multitudinous followers of the
so-called false religions would have an assurance greater than that of
many professors of what is known as Christianity, and much of the
occupation of the Christian missionary would be gone.

I say much; but not all, by any means. For the feeling with which I was
impressed on my very first contact with the miseries of the sociology of
heathenism, entirely aside from its theology and any question of
salvation in a future life, has steadily deepened into the conviction
that, even if I were not a Christian, I still ought to, and would, do
and bear and suffer whatever God has called or allowed me to suffer or
bear or do since 1861--in my proclamation of His gospel, simply for the
sake of the elevation of heathen during their present earthly life from
the wrongs sanctioned by or growing out of their religion. Distinctly is
it true that "Godliness is profitable unto all things, "not only for the
life" which is to come," but also for "the life that now is." Those in
Christian lands who have no sympathy for, or who refuse to take any
interest in, what are known as "Foreign Missions," err egregiously in
their failure to recognize the indisputable fact that they themselves
are debtors for their possession of protected life, true liberty, and
unoppressed pursuit of personal happiness, not to civilization as such,
but to the form of religious belief called Christianity, which made that
civilization possible. And by just so much as divine law has ordained us
each our brother's keeper, we are bound to share the blessings of the
gospel with those whom God has made of one blood with us in the
brotherhood of humanity.

A pursuit of this line of thought would lead me into an argument for the
duty of foreign missions. That is not the direct object of these pages.
True, I pray that, as a result of any reader's following me in this
study of African superstition, his desire will be deepened to give to
Africa the pure truth in place of its falsity. But the special object of
my pen, in following a certain thread of truth, is to show how
degradingly false is that falsity, in its lapse from God, even though I
accord it the name of religion.

For my present purpose it is sufficiently accurate to define theology as
that department of knowledge which takes cognizance of God,--His being,
His character, and His relation to His Cosmos. Whenever any intelligent
unit in that Cosmos looks up to Him as something greater than itself,
under what Schleiermacher describes as "a sense of infinite dependence,"
and utters its need, it has expressed its religion. It may be weak,
superstitious, and mixed with untruth; nevertheless, it is religion.

When a study of God and the thoughts concerning Him crystallize into a
formula of words expressing a certain belief, it is definitely a creed.
When, under a human necessity, a creed clothes itself in certain rites,
ceremonies, and formulas of practice, it is a worship. That worship may
be fearful in its cruelty or ridiculous in its frivolity; nevertheless,
it is a worship. Worship is essential to the vitality of religion;
without it religion is simply a theory.

Theology differentiates itself from other departments of knowledge, as
to its source and its effects. For instance, in the study of geography,
as to its effects, it is comparatively a matter of indifference whether
we believe that the earth is flat or globular, like Booker T.
Washington's teacher who in his district school was prepared to teach
either, "according to the preference of a majority of his patrons"; or,
in astronomy, whether we believe that the sun is the stationary centre
of our planetary system, or whether, with the late Rev. John Jasper, we
assert that the sun "do move" around our earth.

But in theology it matters enormously for this present life, whether we
believe the supreme object of our worship to be Moloch, and infinitely
for our future life, whether Jesus be to us the Son of God.

As to the source of theological knowledge, all our other knowledge is
evolved, systematized, and developed by patient experiment and
investigation. The results of any particular branch of human knowledge
are cumulative, and are enlarged and perfected from generation to
generation. But the source of our knowledge of God is not in us, any
more than our spiritual life had its source in ourselves. It came *ab
extra*. God breathed into the earthly form of Adam the breath of life,
and be became a living creature, essentially and radically different
from the beasts over which he was given dominion. Knowledge of God was
thus an original, donated, component part of us. It grew under
revelations made during the angelic communications before the Fall.
Revelation was continued by the Logos along thousands of years, until
that Logos himself became flesh and dwelt among us in visible form in
His written word, and by His Comforter, who still reveals to us.

I do not feel it necessary here to discuss, or even to express an
opinion as to the evolution of the physical species. I know, simply
because God says so,--and am satisfied with this knowledge,--that "in
the beginning God created." As to *when* that "beginning" was, there may
be respectable difference of opinion; for it is only a human opinion
that asserts *when*. Assertion may have apparently very reliable data;
but these data often are like the bits of glass, factors in the
geometric figures of a kaleidoscope, whose next turn in scientific
discovery dislocates and relocates in an apparently reliable proof of
the existence of another figure.

As to what it was that God created in that beginning, there may be also
respectable difference of opinion. Whether, like Minerva, full armed
from the head of Jove, Adam sprang into his perfect physical, mental,
and moral manhood on the sixth of consecutive days of twenty-four solar
hours each; or whether, created a weakling, he slowly grew up to perfect
development; or whether life began only in protoplasm, and gradually
differentiated itself into the forms of beasts, and finally into that of
man,--back of all was a great First Cause that "created" in the
"beginning." It is all a subject fearfully wonderful.

"My substance was not hid from Thee when I was made in secret, and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see
my substance, yet being unperfeet; and in Thy book all my members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none
of them."

But all such assertion, discussion, and attempt at proof I allow only to
what is physical and finite, and is therefore a legitimate subject of
assertion on merely physical data; for I do not desire to discuss,
beyond simple mention, the Spencerian doctrine of evolution, that
materialism which would make thought and soul only successions in a
series (even if the highest and best) of evoluted developments. To
account for the religious nature in man by evolution I regard as a thing
that cannot be done. It is a tenable position held by evolutionists such
as Dana, Winchell, and the late Professor Le Conte of California, that
"at the creation of man the divine fiat asserted itself, and 'breathed
into man the breath of life, and man became a living soul.' Immortality
cannot be evolved out of mortality. If Spencerian evolution is true,
either everything is immortal or nothing is immortal; man and vermin in
this hypothesis go together."

Man's soul came to him direct from God, a part of His own infinite life,
in His "image," and like Him in His holiness. Man's thoughts of God were
holy. The expression of them in words and acts was his practical
religion, the visible, audible link that "bound" (ligated) him to God.
In this there could be no evolution, unless that, in the many forms and
ceremonies used in the expression of religious thought (which ceremonies
constitute worship), there could be, and were, variation, change,
development, or retrogression.

Therefore I cannot accept the conclusions of those who in their study of
ethnology claim to find that the religious beliefs of the world, and
even the very idea of a Supreme Being, have been evolved by man himself
*ab intra*. They claim that this evolution has been by primitive man,
from low forms of beliefs in spiritual beings, through polytheism and
idolatry, up to the conception of monotheism and its belief in the one
living God. This process they claim to be able to follow on lines racial
and national, under the civilizations of Chaldee, Greek, Roman,
Teutonic, and other stocks.

"Until some human being can be found with a conception of spiritual
existences without his having received instruction on that point from
those who went before him, the claim . . . that primitive man ever
obtained his spiritual knowledge or his spiritual conceptions from
within himself alone, or without an external revelation to him, is an
unscientific assumption in the investigation of the origin of religions
in the world." \[1\]

\[1. Trumbull, Blood Covenant, p. 311.\]

The rather I find, in my own ethnological observations during these more
than forty years in direct contact with aboriginal peoples, that the
initial starting-point of man's knowledge of God was by revelation from
Jehovah himself. This knowledge was to be conserved by man's conscience,
God's implanted witness,--a witness that can be coerced into silence,
that may be nursed into forgetfulness, that may be perverted by abuse,
that may be covered up by superimposed falsities, that may be discolored
by the blackness of foul degradation, but which can never be utterly
destroyed; which on occasions, like the Titans, arouses itself with
volcanic force; which at God's final bar is to be His sufficient proof
for the verities and responsibilities of at least natural religion
("natural" religion, a recognition of certain attributes of God as
revealed in the works of nature). This knowledge of God, a treasure hid
in earthen vessels, rightly used and cherished, was to grow and develop
under subsequdnt divine revelation, so that man might become more and
more like his divine original; or, if abused, neglected, or perverted,
it would carry him even farther away from God.

"Not alone those who insist on the belief that there was a gradual
development of the race from a barbarous beginning, but also those who
believe that man started on a higher plane, and in his degradation
retained vesticres of God's original revelation to him, are finding
profit in the study of primitive Myths, and of aboriginal rites and
ceremonies all the world over." \[1\]

I do not impeach the sincerity of those students of primitive thought
who teach that man in his religious beliefs has reached his present
monotheism by progressive growths from polytheism, or that he has
attained his present conception of the very existence of a Supreme Being
by a gradual emergence from a state of ignorance in which even the idea
of such a being did not exist; but I do discount the

\[1. Trumbull, Blood Covenant, p. 4.\]

competency of many of the witnesses on whose testimony they base their
conclusions.

Whatever may be proved in a complete investigation by science into the
arcana of nature,--of archæology and other channels of research,--a
reverent comparison of these results of finite intelligence will find
them not inconsistent with the statements of God's infinite Word.
Indeed, that Word was not written to make any definite statement on
astronomy or geology, or any other human science. The only science of
the Bible is that of man's relation to his divine Father; its only
history a history of redemption, as promised to Eve and her seed, the
Jewish nation, and as fulfilled in the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.
Apparent conflicts of the Bible with science are not always real; too
often a claim is set up, based on a single observation, perbaps hastily
made, and not verified by a comparison of the variable factors in that
observation.

I suppose that it is true that in the theology of even the worst forms
of religion there is more or less truth, and almost equally true that in
the theology of the best forms there may be somewhat of superstition.
This is so because, as I believe, all religions bad but one source, and
that a pure one. From it have grown perversions varying in their
proportion of truth and error.

In this study of the African theologic ideas I shall endeavor to
separate these two--the false and the true--into two divisions: First,
Beliefs in God more or less true, which have had their birth in
tradition of some divine revelation, which find at least faint echoes in
human conscience, and which among exalted nations would be formulated
into confessions, creeds, and articles of faith. Second, Animism or
beliefs in vague spiritual beings, which, being almost pure
superstitions, cannot, from their very nature, be accurately formulated,
they being the outgrowth of every individual's imagination, and varying
with all the variances of time, place, and human thought.

Eliminating from any theology its superstitious element, we shall find
the highest and truest religion. But if you eliminate from the theology
of the Bantu African its superstition, you will have very little left;
for, among the religions of the world, it comes nearest to being purely
a superstition. So nearly is this true that travellers and other
superficial observers and theorists have asserted that the religious
beliefs of some degraded tribes were simply superstitions, destitute of
reference to any superior being.

I can readily see how the reports of some travellers--even of those who
had no prejudice against the Negro, the precepts of the Bible, or
missionary work--could be made in apparent sincerity, when they state
that native Africans have confessed of themselves that they had no idea
of God's existence; also, their belief that some pygmy and other tribes
were too destitute of intelligence to possess that idea,--that it either
must be given them ab extra by the possessors of a superior
civilization, or must be developed by themselves as they rise in
civilization.

The difficulty about the testimony of these witnesses in this matter is
that, being passers-by in time, they were unable--by reason of lack of
ability to converse fluently, or absence of a reliable interpreter, or
of being out of touch with native mode of thought or speech--to make
their questionings intelligible.

On the heathen side, also, the obsequious natives, unaccustomed to
analytic thought, will answer vaguely on the spur of the moment, and
often as far as possible in the line of what they suppose will best
please the questioner. All native statements must be discounted, must be
sifted.

I am aware that some missionaries are quoted as having said or written
that the people among whom they were laboring "had no idea of God." Even
Robert Moffat is reported to have held this opinion. If so, it must have
been in the earlier days of his ministry, under his first shock at the
depth of native degradation, before he bad become fluent in the native
language, and before he had found out all the secrets of that difficult
problem, an African's native thought. Such an unqualified phrase could
be uttered by a missionary in an hour of depression, in the presence of
some great demonstration of heathen wickedness, and in an effort to
describe how very far the heathen was from God. That the heathen had no
correct idea of God is often true.

Arnot, who among modern African missionaries has lived most closely and
intimately with the rudest tribes in their veriest hovels, writes: \[1\]
"Man is a very fragile being, and be is fully conscious that be requires
supernatural or divine aid. Apart from the distinct revelation given by
God in the first chapter of Romans, there is much to prove that the
heathen African is a man to whom the living God has aforetime revealed
himself. But he had sought after things of his own imagination and
things of darkness to satisfy those convictions and fears which lurk in
his breast, and which have not been planted there by the Evil One, but
by God. Refusing to acknowledge God, \[2\] they have become haters of
God .\[3\] The preaching of the gospel to them, however, is not a mere
beating of the air; there is a peg in the wall upon which something can
be hung and remain. Often a few young men have received the message with
laughter and ridicule, but I have afterwards heard them discuss my words
amongst themselves very gravely. I heard one man say to a neighbor,
'Monare's words pierce the heart.' Another remarked that the story of
Christ's death was very beautiful, but that he knew it was not meant for
him; he was a 'makala' (slave), and such a sacrifice was only for white
men and princes."

Lionel Declè,\[4\] Who certainly is not prejudiced toward missionaries
or the Negro, writes of the Barotse tribe in South Africa and their
worship of ancestors: "They believe in a Supreme Being, Niambe, who is
supl)osed to come and take away the spiritual part of the dead." This

\[1. Garenganze, p. 79.

2 Rom. i. 28, margin.

3\. Rom. i. 30.

4 Three Years in Savage Africa, p. 74.\]

name "Niambe," for the Deity, is almost exactly the same as "Anyambe,"
in Benga, two thousand miles distant.

Illustrative of traveller Declè's baste or inexactitude in the use of
language, he apparently contradicts himself on page 153, in speaking of
a tribe, the Matabele, adjacent to the Barotse: "The idea of a Supreme
Being is utterly foreign, and cannot be appreciated by the native mind.
They have a vague idea of a number of evil spirits always ready to do
harm, and chief among these are the spirits of their ancestors; but they
do not pray to them to ask for their help if they wish to enter on any
undertaking. They merely offer sacrifices to appease them when some evil
has befallen the family."

Perhaps he and other cursory travellers, in making such hasty
assertions, mean that the native has no idea of the true character of
God; in that they would be correct.

The accounts which some travellers have given of tribes without religion
I either set down to misunderstanding, or consider them to be
insufficient to invalidate the assertion that religion is a universal
feature of savage life.

However degraded, every people have a religion. But they are children,
babes in the woods, lost in the forest of ignorance, dense and more
morally malarious than Stanley's forest of Urega. In their helplessness,
under a feeling of their "infinite dependence," they cry out in the
night of their orphanage, "Help us, O Paia Njambe!" Their forefathers
wandered so far from him that only a name is left by which to describe
the All-Father, whose true character has been utterly forgotten,--so
forgotten that they rarely worship him, but have given such honor and
reverence as they do render literally to the supposed spiritual
residents in stocks and stones. "Lo! this only have I found, that God
hath made man--upright; but they have sought out many inventions."

Offering in the following pages a formulation of African superstitious
beliefs and practice, I premise that I have gathered them from a very
large number of native witnesses, very few of whom presented to me all
the same ideas. Any one else, inquiring of other natives in other
places, would not find, as held by every one of them, all that I have
recorded; but parts of all these separate ideas will be found held by
separate individuals everywhere.

After more than forty years' residence among these tribes, fluently
using their language, conversant with their customs, dwelling intimately
in their huts, associating with them in the varied relations of teacher,
pastor, friend, master, fellow-traveller, and guest, and, in my special
office as missionary, searching after their religious thought (and
therefore being allowed a deeper entrance into the arcana of their soul
than would be accorded to a passing explorer), I am able unhesitatingly
to say that among all the multitude of degraded ones with whom I have
met, I have seen or heard of none whose religious thought was only a
superstition.

Standing in the village street, surrounded by a company whom their chief
has courteously summoned at my request, when I say to him, "I have come
to speak to your people," I do not need to begin by telling them that
there is a God. Looking on that motley assemblage of villagers,--the
bold, gaunt cannibal with his armament of gun, spear, and dagger; the
artisan with rude adze in hand, or hands soiled at the antique bellows
of the village smithy; women who have hasted from their kitchen fire
with hands white with the manioc dough or still grasping the partly
scaled fish; and children checked in their play with tiny bow and arrow
or startled from their dusty street pursuit of dog or goat,--I have yet
to be asked, "Who is God?"

Under the slightly varying form of Anyambe, Anyambie, Njambi, Nzambi,
Anzam, Nyam, or, in other parts, Ukuku, Suku, and so forth, they know of
a Being superior to themselves, of whom they themselves inform me that
he is the *Maker* and *Father*. The divine and human relations of these
two names at once give me ground on which to stand in beginning my
address.

If suddenly they should be asked the flat question, "Do you know
Anyambe?" they would probably tell any white visitor, trader, traveller,
or even missionary, under a feeling of their general ignorance and the
white man's superior knowledge, "No! What do we know? You are white
people and are spirits; you come from Njambi's town, and know all about
him!" (This will help to explain, what is probably true, that some
natives have sometimes made the thoughtless admission that they "know
nothing about a God.") I reply, "No, I am not a spirit; and, while I do
indeed know about Anyambe, I did not call him by that name. It's your
own word. Where did you get it?" "Our forefathers told us that name.
Njambi is the One-who-made-us. He is our Father." Pursuing the
conversation, they will interestedly and voluntarily say, "He made these
trees, that mountain, this river, these goats and chickens, and us
people."

That typical conversation I have had hundreds of times, under an immense
variety of circumstances, with the most varied audiences, and before
extremes of ignorance, savagery, and uncivilization, utterly barring out
the admission of a probability that the tribe, audience, or individual
in question bad obtained a previous knowledge of the name by hearsay
from adjacent more enlightened tribes. For the name of that Great Being
was everywhere and in every tribe before any of them had become
enlightened; varied in form in each tribe by the dialectic difference
belonging to their own, and not imported from others,--for, where tribes
are hundreds of miles apart or their dialects greatly differ, the
variation in the name is great, *e.g.*, "Suku," of the Bihe country,
south of the Kongo River and in the interior back of Angola, and "Nzam"
of the cannibal Fang, north of the equator.

But while it is therefore undeniable that a knowledge of this Great
Being exists among the natives, and that the belief is held that he is a
superior and even a supreme being, that supremacy is not so great as
what we ascribe to Jehovah. Nevertheless, I believe that the knowledge
of their Anzam or Anyambe has come down-clouded though it be and
fearfully obscured and marred, but still a revelationfrom Jehovah
Himself. Most of the same virtues which we in our enlightened
Christianity commend, and many of the vices which we denounce, they
respectively commend and denounce. No one of them praises to me theft or
falsehood or murder. They speak of certain virtues as "good," and of
other things which are "bad," though, just as do the depraved of
Christian lands, they follow the vices they condemn. True, certain evils
they do defend, *e.g.* (as did some of our New England ancestors)
witchcraft executions, justifying them as judicial acts; and polygamy,
considering it (as our civilized Mormons) a desirable social institution
(but, unlike the Mormons, not claiming for it the sanction of religion);
and slavery, regarded (as only a generation ago in the United States) as
necessary for a certain kind of property. But theft, falsehood, and some
other sins, when committed by others, their own consciences
condemn,--closely covered up and blunted as those consciences may
be,--thus witnessing with and for God.

While all this is true, their knowledge of God is almost simply a
theory. It is an accepted belief, but it does not often influence their
life. "God is not in all their thought." In practice they give Him no
worship. God is simply "counted out."

Resuming my street-preaching conversation: Immediately after the
admission by the audience of their knowledge of Anzam as the Creator and
Father, I say, "Why then do you not obey this Father's commands, who
tells you to do so and so? Why do you disobey his prohibitions, who
forbids you to do so and so? Why do you not worship him?" Promptly they
reply: "Yes, he made us; but, having made us, be abandoned us, does not
care for us; he is far from us. Why should we care for him? He does not
help nor harm us. It is the spirits who can harm us whom we fear and
worship, and for whom we care."

Another witness on this subject is the Rev. Dr. J. L. Wilson.\[1\]
Speaking of Africa and its Negro inhabitants, he says: "The belief in
one great Supreme Being is universal. Nor is this idea held imperfectly
or obscurely developed in their minds. The impression is so deeply
engraved upon their moral and mental nature that any system of atheism
strikes them as too absurd and preposterous to require a denial.
Everything which transpires in the natural world beyond the power of man
or of spirits, who are supposed to occupy a place somewhat higher than
man, is at once and spontaneously ascribed to the agency of God. All the
tribes in the country with which the writer has become acquainted (and
they are not few) have a name for God; and many of them have two or
more, significant of His character as a Maker, Preserver, and
Benefactor. (In the Grebo country Nyiswa is the common name for God; but
He is sometimes called Geyi, indicative of His character as Maker. In
Ashanti He has two names: viz., Yankumpon, which signifies 'My Great
Friend,' and Yemi, 'My Maker.') The people, however, have no correct
idea. of the character or attributes of the Deity. Destitute of (a
written) revelation, and without any other means of forming a correct
conception of His moral nature, they naturally reason up from their own
natures, and, in consequence, think of Him as a being like themselves.

"Nor have they any correct notion of the control which God exercises
over the affairs of the world. The prevailing notion seems to be that
God, after having made the world and filled it with inhabitants, retired
to some remote corner of the universe, and has allowed the affairs of
the world to come under the control of evil spirits; and hence the only
religious worship that is ever performed is directed to these spirits,
the object of which is to court their favor, or ward off the evil
effects of their displeasure.

"On some rare occasions,as at the ratification of an important treaty,
or when a man is condemned to drink the 'redwater ordeal,' the name of
God is solemnly invoked; and, what is worthy of note, is invoked *three
times* with marked

\[1.Western Africa, p. 209.\]

precision. Whether this involves the idea of a Trinity we shall not
pretend to decide; but the fact itself is worthy of record. Many of the
tribes speak of the 'Son of God.' The Grebos call him 'Greh,' and the
Amina people, according to Pritchard, call him 'Sankombum.'"

The following testimony I gather from conversations with the late Rev.
Ibia j'Ikenge, a native minister and member of the Presbytery of
Corisco, who himself was born in heathenism. He stated:

That his forefathers believed in many inferior agencies who are under
the control of a Superior Being; that they were therefore primitive
monotheists. Under great emergencies they looked beyond the lower
beings, and asked help of that Superior; before doing so, they prayed to
him, imploring him as Father to help;

That the people of this country believed God made the world and
everything in it; but be did not know whether they had had any ideas
about creation from dust of the ground or in God's likeness;

That they believed in the existence, in the first times, of a great man,
who had simply to speak, and all things were made by the word of his
power. As to man's creation, a legend states it thus: Two eggs fell from
on high. On striking the ground and breaking, one became a man and the
other a woman. (Apparently there is no memory of any legend indicating
the name, character, or work of the Holy Spirit.)

That there is a legend of a great chief of a village who always warned
people not to eat of the fruit of a certain tree. Finally, he himself
ate of it and died;

That there was no legend, but, among a few persons, a vague tradition of
a once happy period, and of a coming time of good; but he knew of
nothing corresponding to the story of Cain and Abel;

That there is a fable that a woman brought to the people of her village
the fruit of a forbidden tree. In order to hide it she swallowed it; and
she became possessed of an evil spirit, which was the beginning of
witchcraft;

That there was some tradition of a Deluge (he was not aware of any about
the Dispersion at the Tower of Babel);

That all men believed they were sinners, but that they knew of no remedy
for sin;

That sacrifices are made constantly, their object being to appease the
spirits and avert their anger;

That many of the tribes are, and probably all, before they emerged on
the seacoast, were cannibal (of the origin of cannibalism he did not
know, but he was certain it had no religious idea associated with
it\[1\]);

That there was a legend that a "Son" of God, by name Ilongo ja Anyambe,
was to come and deliver mankind from trouble and give them happiness;
but as he had not as yet come, the heathen were no longer expecting him;

That there was a division of time, six months, making an "upuma," or
year, and a rest day, which came two days after the new moon, and was
called Buhwa bwa Mandanda,--it was a day for dancing and feasting;

That the dead were usually buried; but persons held in superstitious
reverence, as twins, Udinge, etc., were not buried, but left at the foot
of a ceiba, or silk-cotton tree, or other sacred tree;

That burial-places are regarded with a mixed feeling of reverence and
awe;

That the immortality of the soul is believed in, but that there is no
tradition of the resurrection of the body;

That they believe God gave law to mankind, and that, for those who keep
this law, there is reserved in the future a "good place," and for the
bad a "bad place," but no definite ideas about what that "good" or that
"bad" will be, or as to the locality of those places;

That they believe in a distinction of spirits,--that some are demons, as
in the old days of demoniacal possession, this distinction following the
Jewish idea of diaboloi and daimonai.

\[1. I am strongly disposed to think that, in its origin, there was a
sacrificial idea connected with cannibalism.--R. H. N.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Polytheism--Idolatry](fiwa05.md)
