[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dth04) 
[Next](dth06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dynamic Thought, by Henry Thomas Hamblin \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DYNAMIC THOUGHT

### Success and Character Building

### PART IV

WE now have to deal with that part of your Mind which is the center of
all action and the seat of all memory. Not only the memory of this life,
but the race memory of all mankind.

This division of the mind we will call the sub-conscious mind, we will
do so in order to distinguish it from the mind of creation, intuition,
and inspiration, which we have already considered, and also from the
objective or conscious mind which will be described later.

This sub-division is not orthodox according to the ordinary teachings of
psychology. The usual practice is to term the whole of the submerged
mind sub-conscious. That this is not correct must, if we

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

think for a moment, be apparent. The sub-conscious mind acts only
according to instruction and instinct. Thoughts and commands flow from
the seat of the Will through the conscious mind down into the
sub-conscious mind and are immediately acted upon. The sub-conscious
mind is a blind intelligence. It cannot reason--it can remember, it can
act--but it cannot think, plan or reason.

Yet we have a mind within us that can inspire, create, and bring forth
the most wonderful thoughts. A mind which can solve our most complicated
problems, that can guide us through the most difficult situations if we
will but trust it. This cannot be the sub-conscious mind because we have
already seen that this is a blind intelligence acting only upon
instruction, suggestion and animal instinct. Therefore, there must be a
mind or minds other than the sub-conscious, and this I have termed, for
the want of a better word, the subliminal.

The sub-conscious mind is a kind of a sleepy giant, or a slumbering
volcano. It

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

only requires arousing to cause it to manifest extraordinary power.

It is a vast and wonderful intelligence, so wonderful that our
consciousness cannot form any conception of its wonders. All that we
know is that this wonderful center of life and action is as far above
our understanding as our own consciousness is beyond the comprehension
of a beetle.

Yet this sub-conscious mind of ours is subject to our will and guidance.
Within us is this wondrous power--the almost infinite intelligence; yet
its use and control are in our own hands.

Unto us is given the ability to govern a power whose extent we cannot
gauge, to direct an intelligence so great that it is impossible for us
to grasp its full significance.

The sub-conscious mind is the center of all action. It is by this mind
that everything that we do is accomplished.

It is the personification of tireless energy. It works constantly, it
never sleeps; for while WE sleep the sub-conscious mind is busily
engaged in repairing and rebuilding the body.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

Whatever thought we allow to pass into the sub-conscious mind is
translated into action. This is why a thought has been described as "an
action in the process of being born."

The great lesson for you, dear reader, to learn is this, that if the
sub-conscious mind translates each thought into action, then thought
control is the one great transcendental fact of life. If you possess the
power to control your thoughts, you have at once the power to control
your actions. If you can control your actions what a life of possibility
opens before you!

One of the principal causes of failure in life is due to inability to
control the thoughts. Wrong thoughts each the sub-conscious mind, these
are translated into wrong actions and these bring failure and disaster
in their train.

When the thoughts are uncontrolled, then the sub-conscious mind will act
upon any thought or suggestion that may "float" in.

Now thoughts and suggestions are born

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

not only within the consciousness, they are also received from without.
Like a wireless apparatus which receives messages through vibrations in
the ether, so does the human mind receive impressions from without.

Thoughts are things, are entities, have form and substance and are
eternal. Thoughts impinge upon your consciousness and unless you are
able to reject them they will enter the sub-conscious mind and bring
forth action in your life and conduct.

If therefore the thought be evil, then evil will result, if of weakness
then failure will follow, you cannot prevent the action once you have
entertained the thought.

In the same way if you entertain a noble thought, a noble action will
result. If thoughts of success and power are dwelt upon, then success
and power to accomplish will be manifested in your life, and
circumstances. It is thought that rules your life, therefore if you
govern your thoughts you control your life.

Suggestion meets you at every turn. Kind friends with the best of
motives "suggest"

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

ill-health to you when they remark on your pallor. Their well meant
remarks of "How ill you look" send a suggestion of sickness to your
sub-conscious mind, which later manifests itself in real sickness in the
body.

Articles in your daily paper on diet, Influenza and other topics again
suggest illness to you; even the advertisements suggest that you have
Kidney disease or worse, and that to save your life it is necessary for
you to take certain tablets or pills. The newspapers themselves do their
best to suggest evil to you. The columns are full of the seamy sordid
side of life. If any man commits a crime, it is reported in the papers.
If however he resists temptation and instead does a good deed, no notice
is

taken. Therefore newspapers give an entirely false presentation of life.
The press closes its eyes to the good and presents the evil and thus
suggests evil to you, which if you do not watch it, will produce evil in
your life.

For every bad deed reported in the papers, a thousand good actions go
unrecorded.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The world is full
of noble deeds and gracious thoughts, and they can be seen and realized
by those who look for them.

Therefore be very careful what newspapers you read and how you read
them.

Avoid reading of the evil, seamy side of life; instead, look for the
good, and you will find it. When reading your paper devote your
attention to the large things, those which will go down in history.
Avoid that which is mean and petty--thus will you avoid unwholesome and
dangerous suggestion.

Newspapers, periodicals and some books would have you believe that life
is an unlovely thing. Even some hymn writers have dared to describe the
world as a vale of tears and life as a long drawn out woe. Do not
believe these wicked suggestions. Life is a gracious and lovely thing.
It is full of beauty and love and peace and happiness. Life is what we
make it, we can make it sublime or we can make it savor of Hell. It is
in our own hands. Therefore do not read either papers, books or

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

magazines that do not present life in a joyous and optimistic way. Avoid
low class scrappy reading. Read instead good books by great minds.
Imbibe noble thoughts. Read good poetry if you can. Seek the beautiful,
the noble, the true, in your reading and in your fellow men, and you
will find them and be richly blest thereby.

"How then," you ask, "can I escape all this harmful suggestion'? I am
conscious of evil in my life. I do not know what to expect next. How
then can I cast out evil and avoid all these harmful suggestions that
impinge upon my consciousness from a thousand different sources?"

The answer is,

**BY DENIALS**

First of all I want you to understand that your life consists only of
that which is in your mind. Your world also is really nothing more than
a ref action of your own mind and what is in your own mind. It is
because of this that two people in precisely the same circumstances will
each find life and the world very different. One will see In life great
joy and much cause for [thankfulness](errata.htm#12),

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and the other may experience only unhappiness and disappointment. The
difference is not in circumstances but in the mind. The mind is the real
thing, the world is transient and fleeting, and has, philosophically
speaking, no REAL existence, but MIND endures.

The natural or "mortal mind" view of life and the world is almost always
the exact opposite of what is the real spiritual truth and fact.
Metaphysics tell us that the visible world is an inverted reflection of
the real. If then it is inverted, it is natural, until our spiritual or
inner eyes are opened to the truth, for us to see things as the exact
opposite of what they really are. Therefore it is not surprising to find
that, whereas the mortal or animal mind of the senses, thinks the world
is the real thing and the mind only a shadow, the real TRUTH is, that
mind and spirit are real and eternal, and the visible world but a
transient and impermanent thing which has no actual reality.

Such being the case then the only thing that really matters is what is
in the mind

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

or what is not in the mind. If we have a belief in evil, and thoughts of
evil, in our mind, then we have evil in our life. If, however, we can
cast the thought of, and belief in, evil out of our mind then it will
cease to appear in our life.

By raising ourselves above the sensuous life and realizing our permanent
world of Mind and there denying evil, poverty, failure, pain, sickness,
unhappiness, or whatever our trouble may be, we kill the thought which
is the cause of all our troubles. Then whatever we affirm will take
their place. If we deny "evil," then we follow by affirming "good," if
we deny sickness, then we affirm prosperity and affluence. By denials we
can take out all the evil, care, fear and worry out of our lives and
build up in their place by means of affirmations, perfect good, success,
affluence, happiness, health, love, peace and courage.

Everything being in the mind, then everything that is taken out of the
mind is taken out of the life, and everything that is put into the mind,
comes into the life.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

Thus it is possible with mathematical accuracy and certainty to recreate
the life, to cast out all the undesirable and to build up in its place
only the beautiful, the good, the true.

Life is what we like to make it. We can make it like heaven itself, full
to the brim with all that is good and beautiful, or we can turn it into
a perfect hell. Therefore do not accept the suggestions of those, who
having failed in life, proceed to call it hard names. We can make life a
continual joy, if we create a heaven within us by the quality of our
thinking and mental processes. All that we see in life, all that we
experience, yea, even life itself, is but the outward expression of the
life within. The life within is built up by our thinking.

You will have seen by this time the purpose and value of affirmations.

Affirmations are concentrated thoughts. Back of each affirmation is a
strong emotion and this gives it tremendous driving force.

Not only do affirmations impress the sub-conscious mind thus producing
action in

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

accordance with the Will, but they project outwards from the mind into
space, attract forces and help from other sources and bring them to
minister and to bless.

Not only so but they also arouse the subliminal mind to inspire, to
create, to impart wisdom.

By the use of affirmations all the finer forces are aroused to action
and the life is transformed from weakness or ineffectiveness to strength
or purposefulness.

By the use of affirmations, the Will is strengthened until it becomes so
strong all else has to bend to it.

By the use of affirmations, the body is strengthened and made healthy,
and exercise and body culture become a pleasure instead of a duty.

By the use of affirmations difficult tasks and unpleasant duties become
easy of accomplishment.

By the use of affirmations it is possible to break bad habits of a
life-long standing, and replace them with good ones.

By the use of affirmations we can build up character, mould our
circumstances,

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

shape our destiny, captain our soul, we can be what we will, do whatever
we desire attain to all our ideals.

Therefore it is of the utmost importance that you should be most
diligent in practicing the affirmations--always. Never let a single
night or morning pass without spending several minutes in quiet
concentration on the affirmation given you in this course.

Reading this course through will do you but little good, it is DOING
what it teaches that is going to make you strong and successful.

Mental and Physical lethargy must be overcome. It is by sustained action
that you can accomplish, you cannot dream yourself to success, you have
to win it.

Therefore you must concentrate, concentrate, concentrate, upon the
affirmations

and visualizing exercises. The latter are form of affirmation and are of
equal importance.

### A WORD OF WARNING

Do not keep changing your affirmations. Do not affirm one thing one day
and another

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

the next; it causes confusion in your mental World, and makes "confusion
worse confounded" in your life. Of course as you overcome weaknesses and
bad habits you will alter your affirmations accordingly. You will always
find some defect that wants eradicating. Otherwise keep to the
affirmations given in these lessons.

By this l: do not mean that you are not to make denials, reversions and
affirmations at all times adapted to all the varying circumstances and
difficulties of life, because these are, for your own protection,
necessary.

Thus, if you see a sight that suggests evil to you, a drunken man, an
act of hate, a quarrel, an act of immorality; or if you read that which
is lowering and depressing and suggestive of lower things, then, for
your own protection, you must reverse it.

For instance if you see an angry violent man, if you do not reverse
this, the suggestion of evil conveyed to you by this sight will sink
into your sub-conscious mind and cause cells to vibrate in sympathy,
thus

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

making YOU more susceptible to anger thoughts, besides lowering the tone
of your mind generally. Therefore you must raise yourself to your
perfect Mental World and deny anger, by saying, "Man being a perfect
mental creature, can never be angry. There is no anger in this perfect
world of Mind, all is love and goodwill." By so doing not only will you
stop the suggestion of evil from harming you, you will also at the same
time make yourself stronger than ever before, and, strange as it may
seem to you now, you will reduce the anger in the mind of the angry man.
The reason of this is, that there is really only one Mind, we are all
inlets of the same sea, and if we cast evil out of our own mind, then we
also make the world and the minds of others the better by so doing. Thus
by purifying himself does man become a savior of the world.

These reversals of denials and affirmations, made in your perfect World
of MIND, must be taking place all day; it is in this way that every evil
is transmuted into good, every difficulty into accomplishment, every
threat of failure into success,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

and every pain or sickness or disease thought changed into perfect
health. This must go on continually, thus will you grow in power daily.

But apart from this you will doubtless have some plan towards which you
are moving. You have some ambition to be realized, some creative purpose
in your mind which you wish to accomplish. To attain to this end you
deny failure, you affirm success, you visualize a picture of that which
you wish to achieve. That being so, and having made up your mind, now
STICK TO IT. Do not change your affirmation, do not alter your mental
image. KEEP IT UNCHANGED until it is accomplished. If you vary it and
change it you will bring the utmost confusion into your life. Therefore
do not change, modify or alter the main creative plan of your life, see
to it that the image remains unimpaired, getting clearer and more
sharply defined from day to day. If you do this you will see it working
out with mathematical precision in your life.

This course has been prepared so as to

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

guide students by a sure and safe path to the goal of their ambitions.

It will guide you if you follow the lessons exactly. Therefore while
taking this course, do not read any other metaphysical literature.
Concentrate on this teaching, persevere with the "doing" of this
teaching, and you will be able, like the writer, to prove and
demonstrate its truth in yaw life and circumstances.

I want you to start seriously to develop your visualizing powers. By
this you will improve your memory out of all knowledge, but that is
quite a minor matter. What is of importance is that what you create in
the form of a mental vision, if persistently held in the mind, will
assuredly manifest itself in your life. Thus you have two methods by
which you can alter your life, create better circumstances, and achieve
success. 1st, by Denials and Affirmations, and, 2nd, by Meditation,
Concentration and Visualizing. The two should work together. For
instance, you make an affirmation, preceded by a denial, next, you
conjure

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

up a mental picture of what you have affirmed yourself to be.

You wish to be successful, therefore first of all you must deny evil and
affirm Good, because evil is the general cause of all your troubles and
lack of success; next you will affirm Success and follow this by
visualizing either yourself in your perfect mental world, radiant and
successful, or else dwell only on the perfect world of MIND where there
is no failure or limitation of any description.

First you clear away the mist of evil which clouds your vision and numbs
your faculties and crowds your life with difficulty, this you do by
killing it by the use of the denial "There is no evil." Use this denial
until the mist clears away and you get a clear view of your perfect
world of Mind, then affirm "There is only Infinite Good." Then deny
poverty and failure, because they have no part in a perfect world,
neither can they affect you, who are in essence, a perfect mental
creature.

Having killed failure and poverty by denial, then affirm "I am Success,
I am a perfect

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

mental creature, one with the Source of all Good, part of the Universal
Mind." "I am Success, like a magnet I attract to me all that I need." "A
thousand invisible forces hasten to do my bidding." I am carried along
by an irresistible power, I am Success, Success, Success.

Make this affirmation preceded by the denials, night and morning, always
making the affirmation in "Your perfect mental world," buttress it up by
repeating it during the day, each time raising yourself to your higher
world; do this, and you **will revolutionize your life**.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

In order to increase your powers of mental imagery, do the following
exercise:

Take a simple flower, or picture, and gaze at it very attentively for
several minutes. Examine it in every possible way. Impress every detail
upon your mind, then close your eyes and call up an exact mental image
of the thing you have been looking at. If the image is crisp and sharply
defined with no details missing you will have

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

done well, if not, keep on trying until you succeed.

When you go into a strange room or office examine carefully every
detail; where each piece of furniture is, what pictures are on the
walls, what is on the floor, the kind of fireplace and everything else
that forms part of the furnishing. After you get home or when in the
train, close your eyes and recall, by making a mental image, as much as
you can, of what you saw. Practice this visualizing as much as possible
during the coming week, and make affirmations to suit your growing
developments. Whatever your need may be, you can make a denial and
affirmation to supply that need. Whatever difficulty you have to face
you can overcome it by denial and affirmation made in your perfect World
of Mind.

This course seeks first to build a firm foundation of character upon
which you can later erect the superstructure of success. Seek first to
eradicate all weaknesses of character and in their place install their
opposites. For instance, if you have been a procrastinator, become
instead noted for

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

your instant action. If you have been pessimistic, become cheerful and
optimistic instead. If unpunctual, become the most punctual person who
ever lived. If you have been sullen and morose, seek to be bright and
cheerful. All this is possible and really quite easy of accomplishment,
by the use of denials, affirmations and mental imagery.

When you have built up your character, the road of success will become
comparatively easy, because success is principally a matter of
character.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The elementary general affirmation has now served its purpose and must
now be strengthened. You have progressed sufficiently to join us in the
greatest denial and affirmation of all, which is

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>There is NO EVIL<br />
Only INFINITE GOOD</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

It is very difficult for the beginner to realize that "There is no
evil." There are entities in your mind which prevent you

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

from understanding this truth, but they will be cast out by the denial.
So powerful is this denial that it makes some people quite ill at first.
But this only proves how great is the cleansing work that is going on in
the depths of the mind. Keep on making the denial night and day; keep
looking up into your perfect world of mind, and after a time you will
suddenly realize that FOR YOU there is no evil, only Infinite Perfection
and everything that is beautiful and true. Precede every other
affirmation by this denial and affirmation. Before starting any
important work make use of them; and previous to engaging in any
meditation, always use them; raising, at the same time, your mind into
its perfect world.

By this means you will so cleanse and strengthen your mind that you will
transform your life.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

For meditation this week think upon these words of James Allen:

"The soul that is impure, sordid and selfish, is gravitating with
unerring precision

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

toward misfortune and catastrophe; the soul that is pure, unselfish, and
noble, is gravitating with equal precision toward happiness and
prosperity. Every soul attracts its own, and nothing can come to it that
does not belong to it. To realize this is to recognize the Universality
of Divine Law."

And also upon these words of Buddha:

"All that we are is the result of what we have thought; it is founded on
our thoughts; it is made up of our thoughts."

And again, these further words of James Allen: "Your own thoughts,
desires and aspirations comprise your world, and, to you, all that there
is in the Universe of beauty and joy and bliss, or of ugliness and
sorrow and pain, is contained within yourself. By your own thoughts you
make or mar your life your world, your Universe."

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Referring to page 92 of this lesson, third paragraph from the bottom, it
should be stated that quicker results will be obtained if in addition to
visualizing yourself radiantly successful, you will create a sharply
defined picture of the exact success that you wish to achieve. If it is
money that you want then "see" the money falling in showers upon your
desk, if it is service to others that you desire, then "see" yourself
nursing the sick and ministering to the broken-hearted, whatever you
picture in this way persistently, will, in time, be brought to pass in
your life. Nothing ever "happens," it is always "brought to pass." You
cannot get what you want merely by a pious wish, you have to work for it
by mental imagery, then in time the way will open for you in a most
marvelous manner.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Continue to practice concentration on one thought or mental image,
inhibiting all ether thoughts until the senses are entirely stilled.
Then say as before: "My Subliminal Mind draws upon the All-Wisdom and
solves my every problem."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V](dth06)
