[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dth12) 
[Next](dth14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dynamic Thought, by Henry Thomas Hamblin \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p><strong><em>(1) Look within for Power. Man has, in his subliminal mind, transcendental faculties, but to the multitude, these are unsuspected and midis covered. To you has been given the knowledge that has put you in touch with the Great Within. This is the key to all wisdom, knowledge, truth, understanding, <a href="errata.htm#23">achievement</a> and power. It unlocks for you the Treasure House of the Universe, opens up to you the Wisdom of the Ages, it links you up to the Power House of the Infinite. If you are perplexed, look within, and light and leading will come, for you are one with, and form a part of, the Great Universal Mind. Have you a great task to perform? Look within, and you will find all the strength, energy, perseverance and ability that you require. No matter what your need you will find within you every quality necessary for your success.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>(2) Look up. "Two men looked through prison bars. The one saw mud, the other stars." Alas that the majority of men see only mud, whereas they might, by looking up, see stars. It has been my aim to get you to look up and to keep looking up. Now let my closing words be, "look up." Hold ever before you a vision of infinite perfection and in the radiance of that vision you will find health, happiness, true success and lasting satisfaction.</em></strong></p>
<p><strong><em>With every good wish for your continued unfoldment and the greater realization of the Power that is within you</em></strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

# DYNAMIC THOUGHT

### Success and Character Building

### PART XII

SAID Charles Godfrey Leyland, when over seventy years of age, "Man has
within him, if he would but know it, tremendous powers or transcendental
faculties of which he has never had any conception." These powers are
within YOU, and by the use of affirmations and the power of mental
imagery, you can arouse these vast potencies, and harness them to your
service, for the enrichment of your life and the accomplishment of your
ambitions.

Every act of life can be influenced by affirmations, but do not confuse
yourself by

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

employing too many at once. Seek to progress by steps, not by huge
bounds which may land you anywhere but in the right place. Day by day,
and step by step, is the sure road to success. Do not attempt too much,
a little at a time well done is better far than a huge and ambitious
scheme that may have to be abandoned. If you have a little shop do not
attempt to turn it, all at once, into a huge department store. Seek
first to make it by far the best small shop in the district. Make
yourself very efficient in your small shop, and it will not be very long
before the opportunity comes for you to take a large one, or to buy a
bigger business. As you outgrow that, other opportunities for expansion
will come your way, and thus will you grow from small beginnings to
great things. Suppose you have a small law practice, do not try to
blossom out all at once into a high class, lucrative, exclusive
practice. Seek first to make yourself so exceedingly efficient in your
small practice that you will be prepared for the high class practice
when it comes. Affirm success and keep visualized in your mind

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

the exact kind of success that you desire, and ways and means will in
time be provided. But remember to travel step by step, to grow
gradually, to develop, like a plant, on natural lines. Remember Nature
is never in a hurry; all her vast works are accomplished slowly,
methodically, step by step, cell by cell, but whatever she seeks to do
is ultimately accomplished. So will it be with you. You have the
knowledge by which you can develop your success with mathematical
exactitude. All you have to do is to put the Law into action and to
advance step by step. Begin with small things; when you have conquered
in small things you can pass to greater, and from greater things to
[boundless](errata.htm#24) power.

Do not expect the maximum of success at once. If you get only partial
success at first, be satisfied, knowing that you will keep on improving.
Even if you fail utterly you will be stronger and better for having
tried. "It is the law of the reflex nerve system that whenever one does,
or endeavors to do, any given thing in a certain

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

way, a modicum of power is added whereby it is a trifle easier at the
next effort, an added trifle at the next and the next, until that which
is difficult and is done only with great effort in the beginning becomes
easy of accomplishment--that which we do haltingly and stumblingly at
first, by-and-by, so to speak, does itself, with scarcely or even
without any conscious effort on our part. This is the law; it is the
secret of habit forming, character building, of all attainment."

If you set out on a certain course, to accomplish a certain work, to
overcome an evil habit, to repair and strengthen a weak part of your
character, or whatever it may be, NEVER LEAVE OFF UNTIL YOU HAVE
ACCOMPLISHED THAT WHICH YOU SET OUT TO DO. To leave off before you have
conquered is to play fast and loose with your mental powers and to do
them irreparable harm. Never leave off one thing and start another;
instead concentrate, concentrate, concentrate upon what you have decided
to achieve.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

Above all, live your life according to a principle. This will steady the
most vacillating character. It is possible for a simple person to
estimate with mathematical exactness the result of a right action, but
the wisest and cleverest cannot foretell the result of an unprincipled
one. The first is according to Law and produces certain results; the
second, i.e., an unprincipled action, is against the Law and no one can
tell where the evil effect will end.

Live your life to a principle and you will always know how to act in all
cases of uncertainty. Set up as your standard the highest aspect of
Truth of which you know and bring everything into line with it. When
confronted with two or three courses of action and you do not know which
to follow, compare each line of action with your principle, and adopt
that one which is in harmony with it.

When once you have learned to live your life according to a principle,
you will feel a great load lifted from your mind. For the first time
there will be certainty and precision

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

in your life and absolute peace of mind. You will have nothing to worry
about because you know that your line of action will always be right,
and can only bring the highest good into your life.

Never wrong any man, never take advantage of one with less knowledge
that yourself, never sacrifice your principles, never give up your
ideals. See that you are known for your integrity and absolute honesty,
as well as for your cleverness and capacity. It may look, on the face of
things, that this course of action is not going to lead to success. You
see so many of your competitors making money by sharp practice, and you
feel that by adopting an honest line of action you are simply putting
yourself up as a target for people of less principle to shoot at. That
is what it looks like, but I can assure you, speaking from experience,
that the reverse is the case. It is the man of probity and honor who
scores in the long run. When in business I was more successful than
anyone in my line had ever been before, and I never found it necessary
to be "sharp" or "over-reaching.'' I never

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

practiced "salesmanship" yet I had more business than I wanted; I never
went out of my way to get customers, yet they swarmed into my place from
morning till night.

I once knew a theatre manager who suddenly began to live his life to a
principle. Instead of covering up occasional defects in his shows as he
had formerly done, he made it a principle to point them out to his
customers. Many of his friends said he was a fool and prophesied his
ruin and failure, but instead his business grew and flourished His
friends were very surprised at his success, but they need not have been.
The theatre manager was simply coming into line with eternal law, he was
putting into action forces which could not fail to bring him success and
prosperity. Do not misunderstand me, it is not enough to be honest or to
live one's life to a high principle, but all other things being equal,
it will be the man of integrity who will win in the end.

Therefore live your life to a principle, and persevere with the course
which you have laid out for yourself. Be constant, be

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

true, be faithful, be strong, be persevering, be fair to yourself, be
fair to the wondrous inward powers which are seeking to find expression
in your life.

Remember the law of compensation; if you are to receive the highest good
in your life, you must give the world your best service.

You cannot cheat life, you must give your very best if you are to
receive the best in return. It is useless to potter along and copy other
people, or to do as your father did, just because he did it. There is
nothing more nauseating than to see a man copying, or trying to copy,
another man's success. BE ORIGINAL, BE YOURSELF. See where other men are
lacking and supply what is necessary. It is the man who comes along with
a fresh idea, who breaks new ground, who discovers a want which other
people have never seen, who inaugurates a better service; in other
words, it is the one who gets ahead with his ideas, and is the first in
the field, who gets the business and makes a fortune. Therefore be

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

original, do not copy other people. Do not be a feeble reflection of
someone else; be yourself. Remember that there is something you can do
better than anyone else, that no one can do it as well as you, or in
precisely the same way--in other words you [have](errata.htm#25)
personality. Therefore, develop your personality; let all your work be
distinctive; make it different from that of your competitors. Let your
personality be written all over your business; let there be a personal
touch about everything that you do. This will distinguish both you and
your business from other people and other people's businesses; this will
be a reason why the public, or a large portion of it, will come to you,
or will buy your goods rather than go elsewhere.

If people are to prefer your business or your professional services to
those of others there must be a sufficient reason. They are not going to
do this simply because you affirm that they will. The only way to get
them is by supplying better goods, more perfect service, higher skill,
greater probity and trustworthiness.

Another great factor in winning success

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

is the mental attitude of cheerfulness and brightness. People are
attracted to the cheerful, optimistic person, and repelled by one who is
gloomy and pessimistic. Be cheerful and bright under all circumstances
and this alone will be worth a king's ransom to you. These qualities
alone will bring you in more money every year than most people get by
hard work, to say nothing of the joy and cheeriness which this attitude
of mind will attract to you. By your brightness, cheerfulness, and
optimism, by your appearance and personality, you will create a good
impression wherever you go. I mention appearance advisedly, because the
face becomes in time an index of the soul. Just as vice becomes deeply
marked on the faces of its devotees, so does the face of one whose mind
and thoughts are directed into right channels, reflect the calm and
peace and courage of the mind within. As time goes on the face as well
as the attitude and carriage of the body alter considerably, and this
makes one more attractive; thus do you attract success, because if you
attract to yourself people of the right kind

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

they bring potential success with them.

One word of warning and it is this: exercise a wise business prudence.
Do not, just because you feel within you the fluttering of a new and
wondrous power, rush thoughtlessly into business speculation, which may
either ruin you or seriously jeopardize your business. Be prudent, be
wise, be not carried away by your enthusiasm; instead, go slowly and
feel your way, as it were, step by step. Be sure and steady; do not risk
failure for the sake of getting on more quickly.

Keep your expenditure within your income. Ile is a happy man who spends
less than he earns. The troubles of many families are due to their
expenditure being in excess of their income. This leads them into
endless difficulties and cares.

Success is no success that does not extend to the home. By scientific
right thinking, happiness, peace and harmony can be made to reign
supreme where formerly there were misunderstandings, friction,
bickerings

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

and great unhappiness; while ever-increasing health will manifest,
instead of intermittent sickness.

Cleanse your own heart and mind by denials, build up your own character
by affirmations, calm your own spirit by dwelling in the perfect purity
of the transcendental World of Mind, and yon will find, strange though
it may seem, that everybody else in your household will get more
lovable, and helpful, and restful, in their attitude toward you.

Remember to "reverse" every undesirable thought, suggestion, sight, or
impression that comes to you. Deny them each and all in your perfect
World of Mind, and affirm their opposite. For instance, two members of
your family may be getting angry with one another and the air becomes
electric. Immediately raise yourself into your higher World of Mind and
say: Perfect man is never angry. He is a perfect mental creature
dwelling in the pure atmosphere of the Infinite Mind and can never get
angry"; then affirm: "Man is

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

love, perfect love; he dwells in the atmosphere of the Infinite Love."
If by so doing you get a clear concept of that perfect World of Mind,
which IS perfect, and IS real, and IS permanent, and a clear realization
of the perfect Love of this Perfect World, then the quarreling ones will
cease to quarrel, will love one another instead, and ever afterwards
will quarrel less.

Remember the three great Laws: (1) The Law of Love and Attraction. "Give
love, and love to YOUR heart will flow, a strength in your utmost need."
(2) The Law of Compensation. "Then give to the World the best you have,
and the best will come back to you." (3) The Law of Absolute Justice.
"For with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again."
Therefore the ability to win the highest and truest success, to draw to
yourself the greatest happiness, to create in your life the highest
good, all depend upon giving. The mistaken idea of the animal mind that,
to be happy and successful, one must seize and grab, is entirely false,
and leads to bitter

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

disappointment. The voice of Wisdom that is heard in the "Silence" tells
us that only as we give do we receive. That if we give of our best--our
best thoughts, emotions, service, love--then the best will come back to
us in the exact proportion, no more, no less.

Again let me emphasize the necessity for "stickability" and
perseverance. Keep at it, never know failure, let this word be expurged
from your vocabulary. It is the man with the greatest staying power who
wins through hard times.

Again, possess your soul in courage. Remember that if you use your
inward mental powers aright, and bring your business and your life and
your conduct into harmony with the Law, you can never fail. Great are
the possibilities of your life, because great, beyond all human ken, is
the Infinite Power within you. You have nothing to be afraid of. Big
corporations cannot smash you. You fan always beat them by personal
service, by individuality and originality. By straight dealing, by
integrity, by

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

honesty combined with efficiency, and businesslike procedure, you can
make for yourself an enduring reputation. When faced by problems,
difficulties and perplexities, you can at once raise yourself into your
perfect World of Mind, and realize that you, your real self, can never
be perplexed, because being one with the Universal Mind all wisdom is
yours. You know that in the "Silence," having hushed the loud voices of
the surface, material mind, you can hear the still small voice of
intuition, of infinite wisdom. For you, having learnt how to raise
yourself above the life of the senses, to the perfect World of Mind,
there is wisdom, understanding and illumination; there can be no
perplexity or worry, only infinite calm and peace.

By being calm and unflurried, by dwelling in an atmosphere of peace, you
can preserve your nervous system and your health, tine while your "sharp
practice" competitor is tearing his nerves to pieces and breaking down
his constitution.

Above all, remember to deny every

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

thought, sight, influence and suggestion that is evil, or pessimistic,
or material, or fearing, or selfish, and create in its place its exact
opposite. Deny evil constantly, and affirm Infinite Good, deny fear just
as frequently and earnestly, and affirm confidence and courage; do this
persistently and you will transform your life.

Now that you have finished the lessons do not lay them lightly aside,
and forget them. This Course is not for three months merely, it is for
your life. You have gone diligently through the Course and probably
think that you have mastered it, but it is highly improbable that you
have. If you w ill now begin again and start with Lesson 1 and work
steadily through the Course you will find fresh light and understanding,
and many hidden and deeper meanings, unsuspected before, will come to
light. Study the lessons and practice their teachings for the rest of
your life. Do not expect immediate results. The effects of thought are
slow in manifesting. It is my experience that what we think today
becomes manifest in about two year's time. By that I

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

do not mean that by affirming certain qualities I do not immediately
begin to develop these qualities, because I do right from the first
affirmation. What I do mean is this, that suppose I want to demonstrate
a big business, a large practice, or say a house in the country all
bought and paid for, a perfect recovery from life-long ill-health, or a
greater advancement in spiritual unfoldment, then if I hold in my mind a
sharply defined picture of what I want, and vitalize it by joyful
emotion, and confident affirmations, and spend at least a quarter of an
hour every night and morning holding this picture in my mind besides
calling it up at intervals during the day, then in about two years' time
what has been held in the mind will become an actual accomplished fact
in my life. I may have many setbacks and disappointments but if I
persevere and persist and concentrate, then whatever I desire MUST
objectify in my life. Actually, of course, I have been progressing all
the time towards the realization of my desire, but it is in about two
years' time that tangible results usually are seen. After that one can

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

never look back, because success attracts success and once one has
"demonstrated," one becomes so full of success vibrations that success
becomes the habit of one's life.

Therefore, keep on persevering, persisting. Never cease mentally to
picture and affirm confidently. It is by this mental activity that you
win success, it is not done by striving so much as "thinking" and
visualizing. Of course one must work, but it is the mental activity that
crowns the work with lasting success.

By bringing into play, as taught in these lessons, the illimitable
powers of your subliminal mind, by the use of denials and affirmations,
by harmonizing with Immutable Law, and by the art of visualizing, you
can accomplish all that you desire. There is no height to which you
cannot climb, no success that you cannot achieve, no happiness that you
cannot attract into your life. All things are yours. Everything has been
delivered into your hands. You can do whatever you please, you can
achieve what you will, you can be all that you desire. Act

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

according to the teachings of this course, making in future your own
denials and affirmations as are required, extemporizing your own
meditations, and you will have set your feet in a path that leads ever
upward. Where it ends, if it ever does end, no one can say, but this I
know, it is a path of joy and blessing and happiness and success; it
leads to heights the grandeur of which cannot be described.

If I have helped you to take this road of scientific right-thinking,
which leads to your eternal joy and satisfaction, I am rewarded above
measure.

I affirm for you Success in its richest and fullest sense, and all the
joys of overcoming.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Advanced Postgraduate Lesson](dth14)
