[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dth09) 
[Next](dth11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dynamic Thought, by Henry Thomas Hamblin \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

# DYNAMIC THOUGHT

### Success and Character Building

### PART IX

MANKIND is divided into two types, positive and negative. Let me try and
describe each to you.

Positive man is magnetic, attractive, courageous, happy, cheerful,
healthy, energetic, is full of vitality, power and ability to succeed.
He never doubts his ability to win, he never worries when things go
wrong; he does not complain when things are not smooth. If he meets with
a temporary set-back he becomes the more determined to succeed. He does
not lay upon other people the blame of his own mistakes, but instead
learns a lesson from his temporary

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

failure which shall be a guide and beacon in all future undertakings.
The positive man can always find people to believe in him and to finance
his operations. He never lacks friends, for just the type of people he
wants are always anxious to be his friends. Consequently men, and with
them, opportunities, are always coming his way. He is an optimist, but
is not foolish or blind in his optimism. He is above being petty or
mean, or selfish or cruel; neither does he let hate or anger sway him or
influence his life or business. He inspires confidence, compels
attention, is a leader rather than a follower, and literally exudes an
atmosphere of success.

A negative man is, of course, the antithesis of this type. He is
fearful, given to worry, apt to look on the dark side of things. Is
afraid to act too much on his own responsibility and seeks the help and
advice of other people. Has [difficulty](errata.htm#17) in making up his
mind, and when he has made it up he often changes it. He lets others
pass him in the race of life and then worries because

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

he fails to get on. He is never much of a success in life, no matter
what he achieves he might have done very much better. He seldom realizes
that his failures are due to his own failings but, instead, lays the
blame upon other people's shoulders or ascribes his troubles to chance
or ill fortune. His company is not cheerful and is not sought by other
people, except one or two as miserable as himself.

All his thought and conversation are tinged with pessimism and his face,
in course of time, becomes lugubrious and miserable, an accurate index
of the state of mind within. He has no belief in himself. He believes in
fate and the influence of outside circumstances. He is, so he says, as
God made him and as environment has shaped him. If he is a failure it
is, he thinks, not his fault, and if his character is not all that it
might be it is due to heredity and environment.

There are, of course, infinite degrees of positiveness and also of
negativeness.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Therefore one may
be said to be more positive or less positive according to one's stage of
development, or one can be more negative or less negative according to
the degree of helplessness and misery in which one may be steeped; but
the essential difference is this, that whereas the positive man looks
within for his power to achieve, and looks forward with confidence to
the future, the negative person, on the contrary, having no confidence
in himself, looks to others and outside sources for help and assistance
and fears what fate may bring him. The positive man believes in himself
completely and absolutely, the negative person does not; that is the
great difference.

It is hardly necessary to point out that all successful people are of
the positive type and all the failures belong to the negative class. If
you were able to make an examination of the minds of numbers of
successful men ranging from such as Lord Northcliffe, Lord Haig and
Lloyd George down to the successful tradesman in your own village or
suburb, you would find them

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

to be all of this positive type. If you could examinee the minds of the
leaders of the professions, the surgeons, physicians, lawyers, counsel,
artists, journalists and poets, you would find them all of the positive
type. On the other hand, if you get into conversation with a failure it
does not matter what station in life he may belong to or what his
education may have been--he may be a discredited politician, or a tramp
on the road--you will find that his mind is of the negative type.

It is obvious then that he who desires to succeed must belong to the
positive type. If he belongs to the wrong class how can it be remedied?

We are what we are as a result of past thinking. Our mental attitude is
built up by the thoughts we habitually harbor or cultivate. Thus if we
entertain positive thoughts only, and deny negative thoughts, replacing
them by their opposites whenever they intrude, we gradually build up a
positive attitude of mind, which means that we

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

become positive men or women, and as such cannot fail to be successful
in life. Therefore it all comes back to the old question of thought
control. "For one to govern his thinking, then, is to determine his
life."

Thoughts are positive if they dwell upon the following: Success,
achievement, accomplishment, overcoming, conquering, mastering,
prosperity, power, courage, calmness, dignity, perseverance,
purposefulness, patience, wisdom, faithfulness, confidence, faith, hope,
cheerfulness, love, joy, peace, health and happiness.

Thoughts are negative if they dwell upon the following: Failure,
difficulty, bad luck, hard lines, I can't, fear, dread, grief, worry,

care, anxiety, loss, fate unfaithfulness, grievances, criticising
others, imputing bad motives to others, hate, envy, covetousness,
brooding, lust, impurity immorality, selfishness, sensuality, misery,
unhappiness, disease, ill-health and death.

The former build up character of mind

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

and health of body; they create serenity and peace. The latter break
down the nervous system, produce ill health and disease, rob the life of
nearly all its joys and destroy all hopes of success.

If you concentrate your thoughts upon the former for a few minutes and
let the imagination play round each word, and call up in the mind just
what it means, a sense of power, unlimited and all comprehensive will
pervades one's being. This is the infinite powers of the subliminal mind
being aroused. All these positive qualities which these words represent
are within you, otherwise you could not arouse this sense of power. If,
by concentrating your thoughts for a few minutes upon Success, a sense
of unlimited powers of accomplishment stir within you, then you have
actually within you unlimited powers of accomplishment. If, by thinking
only of Joy for a few minutes, a sense of intense Joy pervades the mind,
then you have simply called into activity an inexhaustible reservoir of
Joy that already existed within you. You cannot call

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

into activity that which does not exist. In the same way if you
concentrate your thoughts upon a negative quality, such as misery, you
will after a few minutes become gloomy and depressed, or if your mind
dwells on fear, you will soon become full of dread and apprehension.

Therefore your success, health and happiness all depend upon the type of
thought that you entertain. If your mind dwells upon positive thoughts
only, then you become positive and by sustained action, successful. If,
however, you think negative thoughts you become negative and
consequently a failure.

How then shall you so control your thinking that only positive thoughts
are allowed? The answer is, by eternal vigilance, constant watch and
guard, and by incessant denials and affirmations. Whenever a weak or
vile or unworthy thought attempts to enter your mind, deny its existence
in your perfect Mental World, and affirm in its place a thought the
exact opposite of the

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

one which you have denied. For instance, the thought may come to you
that you will fail at the examination for which you have shortly to sit
or that a certain important interview will end disastrously for you, or
that you will not be able to pay the rent next quarter day. Whatever the
thought may be, if it is negative, deny it from the mind. Raise yourself
into your perfect World of Mind and say "There is and can be no failure,
man is a perfect mental creature, potentially all the powers of the
Infinite are his, therefore he can never fail." And then affirm:

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>I AM SUCCESS</p>
<p>EVERYTHING THAT I ATTEMPT</p>
<p>I COMPLETELY ACCOMPLISH</p>
<p>I AM SUCCESS</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

Then visualize yourself successful in that which you have attempted, the
examination passed, the interview successfully ended, the rent paid. See
yourself radiant with success, feel [yourself](errata.htm#18) lifted up
by the power

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

within. Let the thought, "I am success," sink deeply into your
sub-conscious mind; let this be projected into the space to gather unto
itself thoughts of similar quality and power, which shall come back with
it to minister to your joy, and you will find the negative fearing
thought will flee away. Thus will you become master in your own house
and captain of your soul. Thus will you be built up in character and
strengthened with determination and ability to accomplish. Thus will you
be enabled to go forward with joy and confidence to possess your
glorious heritage.

The following affirmation used at night just as you are falling asleep
will be helpful; after a few weeks it will have become unnecessary and
should be discarded:

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>WHEN NEGATIVE THOUGHTS<br />
ASSAIL ME I WILL DENY<br />
THEM AND REPLACE THEM<br />
BY THOUGHTS OF POWER.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

Then visualize yourself pursuing the path of achievement which you have
so often before seen in your mind's eye. Imagine that you see people
trying to drag you from the path and seeking to persuade you to travel
down a side turning. See yourself shake them off easily and firmly,
continuing your journey to that bright vision which to you is Success.

I have said that there are varying degrees of Positiveness, just as
there are degrees of Negativeness. For instance, the lowest form of
"success" thought is "I can succeed." A student may have all his life
thought that he could not succeed. He may have thought that others might
succeed because they were "clever" or had better opportunities, or were
blest with "luck"; but he, poor fellow, being neither clever, lucky nor
presented with opportunities, cannot succeed; he must forever be content
to remain a mere hewer of wood and drawer of water. But one day, we will
imagine, he reads a "Pass me on" pamphlet and reads for the first time
that he has within him the

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

power to succeed and accomplish, and like a flash he realizes his true
inward powers, and cries "I can succeed."

That, of course, is the first step. Very soon he says to himself, "I
will succeed," and thus finds himself on the second step, and, for some
time, progresses on these lines. This is a rugged and stony path because
progress depends almost entirely upon Will-power and progress by
Will-power alone is exhausting and trying to a degree, but soon the
student realizes that he has acquired a new or wider consciousness and
says with joy and wonder, "I am success." He has now reached a higher
region of the mind, he is now exercising a larger and deeper faith. He
realizes for the first time that success is not something that is
outside himself, or that has to be searched for or chased. He realizes
that not only is success within him, but that he himself is Success. I
cannot explain it further. I am dealing with a state of mind which
cannot be described, but which can be [experienced](errata.htm#19). When
the student has attained to this stage

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

of consciousness he can no longer fail in life. His life henceforth
becomes a constant progression, a passing onwards to higher heights and
more glorious achievements.

This is the reason why I have made the affirmation to read "I am
Success" instead of "I will be successful." To say that you will be
successful is good, but it puts off your success to a future time. To
affirm that you are success or successful **now** is to make your
success to begin here and now.

Conscientious readers will say at once: "How can I say truthfully that I
am success when all the time failure enters so much into my life? I have
just failed to pass an examination, and through lack of energy and
perseverance have let the opportunity of a lifetime slip by; how then
can I affirm myself success?" The answer is that you are success in
reality. In your inward inner self you are success, because you are a
mental creature and have all the elements of unbounded success inherent
within you. **You**, your real mental inner

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

to be. If you affirm that you are Success, and will persist and
persevere with that affirmation, then in your inner self you **are**
success, and later this will be translated into your outward life. What
is created in the Unseen is later manifested in the Seen. By the
affirmation "I am Success," you create Success "within"; later this
finds expression in your outward life, in the form of achievement,
accomplishment and material prosperity.

Therefore when a thought or suggestion of failure attempts to gain
admission to the citadel of your mind, kill it by denial, and affirm in
its place the "Success" formula that I have given you. Thus will the
attitude of your mind be built up into a definite form. By affirming "I
am Success" and by visualizing yourself as the embodiment of success. By
seeing, with your mental eyes, yourself with your ambitions realized,
and with all things at your feet, you will construct a concrete image in
your mind, which will form a matrix, out of which will proceed

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

the material success and accomplishment which are its visible
expression.

It cannot be emphasized too much that success is not a something to be
won, instead it is rather a mental state, an attitude of the mind. The
mind itself has unlimited power, and mental power or thought is the
power or force that is greater than all power or forces, therefore the
power to accomplish all things is within us. This potent power however,
cannot find expression in the life if the attitude of the mind is wrong.
When the mind is naturally of the success type or is made so by
training, then its intense powers become focussed into one powerful
beam, which shapes and moulds the outward life, on the form of the
inward pattern. There is nothing of "magic" about this, it is capable of
the simplest explanation. When your mind is of this type, the impulses
sent to the sub-conscious mind can only result in successful actions. As
we have already seen, the sub-conscious mind is the seat of all action
and contains unlimited power and energy. This

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

power and energy only needs directing into the right channel to
accomplish anything that we may desire to accomplish. When, therefore,
the mind is cast in the "Success" mould, then only "success" thoughts
and suggestions can go to the sub-conscious mind, and these in turn must
of necessity be translated into successful actions.

The only difference between a successful type of man and an unsuccessful
type, provided they are of equal energy, is one of mind--of thought. The
successful man's attitude of mind is such that he generates the right
kind of thought, which passing to his sub-conscious mind, is transmuted
into the right type of action. The unsuccessful man, on the other hand,
through his mind being of a negative type, generates the wrong kind of
thought and this in turn results in the wrong type of action. This is
why it is impossible to keep the "success" type of man down for any
length of time. You can bankrupt him, bereave him, maim him, cast him
into the gutter and jump on him, and he will come to the top again. It

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

is impossible to keep such a man down for long, simply because his mind
will not allow it. This also is why it is impossible to help a man of a
negative type. The more one helps such a man the weaker and more
hopeless he becomes, and the more helplessly he clings round one's neck
for sustenance and support. Place him in affluent circumstances, find
him work, prospects, influence, friends, place in his hands everything
possible with which to aid him, and he will let it all slip through his
fingers and come right down to want and penury. Therefore, success in
life is the result of "success" actions, which are the result of
"success" thoughts, which are the result of a "success" attitude of
mind, and this is the result of the affirmation "I am success."

As the attitude of the mind alters from negative to positive there is
developed what is called personal magnetism; one radiates an influence
which attracts people. It is impossible to estimate the difference which
this alone makes to one's prospects of success. If a man is in business
for himself,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

what an enormous difference the drawing influence of a well-ordered mind
will make to that business. His clients or customers will increase a
hundredfold in number, and a better type of client or customer will
gradually be attracted. Thus does success and prosperity crowd in upon
the man or woman who cultivates the right type of mind. Once the right
attitude of mind has been built up the trouble is not how to get
business, but how to execute it. It comes crowding in so rapidly it is
difficult to cope with.

Again, in all businesses difficulties appear from time to time, and
although these may and do extinguish men of negative type, they cause
only temporary trouble to one whose mind has been trained on "success"
lines.

As explained in other parts of this course there are ways by which all
difficulties can be overcome by the power of the mind, but it is only
those whose minds are controlled aright who can make use of them.

Again, as the mind becomes more positive,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the Will is greatly strengthened, the staying power is increased, and
the powers of concentration vastly strengthened. Anyone acquainted with
the difficulties and trials of establishing a business or professional
practice will appreciate the value of this. Success generally comes to
those with the greatest staying power. The power to "stick to it" is
often the deciding factor in the struggle. Most men give up the struggle
when they are just at the turning of the corner, and only a little more
push and staying power would ensure success. Instead they give up
through lack of "stickability" just when success is ready to crown their
efforts.

Many other illustrations could be given to show how it is that success
is really more an attitude or quality of the mind than something outside
of us, but these will suffice. The great thing to aim at is to build up
within you this "success" attitude of mind. When this is established and
the habit of action well developed, there is nothing that can stay your
success. Affirm that you are success now, steep yourself in the

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

success idea, visualize yourself successful and all conquering, breathe
the success atmosphere, live, dream and be success, and nothing can
prevent you from being successful, because you, yourself, are success.

Do not, however, strain after success; rather realize that you yourself
are "Success" and that you therefore attract to you all that you desire.
Go about your duties calmly and with confidence, **knowing** that you
are "success" and therefore must succeed. A hundred times a day, if
necessary, affirm "I am success." The last thing at night, just as you
fall to sleep; the first minute of your waking day, affirm it and affirm
it again, always picturing yourself happy, successful and
all-conquering.

The special visualizing exercise for this week is as follows: Sit
upright in a quiet place and, closing your eyes, send out to all mankind
the best and noblest thoughts of which you are capable, thoughts of
good-will and love to everybody in all the wide world. Now feel these
thoughts being projected from you in all directions, and mentally

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

see them being sent forth like the beams of light from the light-house.
See them penetrating further and further, all over your own country and
then through every other country. Do this for some time and then reverse
the process. Feel the thoughts coming back laden with other thoughts of
a like nature. See innumerable beams of light pouring into you from all
over the world. Feel yourself filled up and overflowing with the riches
of all the most glorious thoughts which the world has ever known. The
first part of the exercise may exhaust you, but the latter part will
fill you with courage, confidence, calm, serenity and peace.

Persevere and endeavor to make this exercise as real as possible. By
this exercise you enrich the world by your own noble thoughts, you
lessen its pain and sorrow, and help to assuage its griefs. In return
you are blessed and strengthened in a way which could never otherwise be
possible. The more freely you give of your best thoughts the more
bountifully you will receive.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

### MEDITATION

Meditate daily upon the following words of James Allen: "You say you are
chained by circumstances; you cry out for better opportunities, for a
wider scope, for improved physical conditions, and perhaps you inwardly
curse the fate that binds you hand and foot. It is for you that I write:
it is to you that I speak. Listen, and let my words burn themselves into
your heart, for that which I say to you is the truth: You may bring
about that improved condition in your outward life which you desire, if
you will unswervingly resolve to improve your inner life. I know that
pathway looks barren at its commencement (truth always does, it is only
error and delusion which are at first inviting and fascinating), but if
you undertake to walk it; if you perseveringly discipline your mind,
eradicating your weaknesses, and allowing your soul-forces and spiritual
powers to unfold themselves, you will be astonished at the magical
changes which will be brought about in your inward life. As you proceed,
golden

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

opportunities will be strewn across your path, and the power and
judgment to properly utilize them will spring up within you. Genial
friends will come unbidden to you; sympathetic souls will be drawn to
you as the needle is to the magnet, and books and all outward aids that
you require will come to you unsought."

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

### APPENDIX

Continue to deny evil, illness, sickness, disease, failure, poverty,
limitation and all negative states. The more perfectly you expunge them
from your mind the more blessed will your life become. Constantly affirm
health, success, prosperity, freedom and all positive states, and carry
a vision of them always before you.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Spend as much time as possible in the Silence, for in quietness and
confidence shall be your strength. Also whenever, during the day, you
have to make a decision, mentally retire into the Silence and gain
wisdom and inspiration from the Infinite. Thus shall you be kept from
all mistakes and blunders, and your life become rich with blessing,
because it is lived in obedience to Universal Law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part X](dth11)
