[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku07)  [Next](tku09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V.

1\. (It is written) Isa. i. 4: "Woe unto the sinful nation, unto the
people heavy with iniquity, unto the seed of evildoers, &c." (Here the
author of the "Siphra Dtzenioutha" reasoneth concerning the small word
HVI, "woe," which also is a form of the name. And this word is alone
separated from the following portions of the sentence.)

2\. Seven are the paths (if the Tetragrammaton, be written in this way
partially complete), IVD, HH, V, H, (where the father and mother are
written in full, Microprosopus and his bride are written uncovered. If
here the last and first letters be combined, and the penultimate and
second, and therefore the paths at either extremity, so that they may
form the letters) HI and VV (mother and son), then are produced (the
three middle letters) HH, D (which are the symbols of the queen, heavy
with judgments. But if mother and daughter be combined) HVI and HH,
(then) is produced forth VV (or Microprosopus)as well as DV (or the
androgyn, who also is a condition of judgments), for occultly Adam is
denoted, or the male and female, who are that DV concerning whom it is
written (in the place cited above) "corrupt children."

3\. (When it is said) BRAShITh, BRA, *Berashith bera*, "In the beginning
created," (the supernal paths are under

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

stood. For) BRAShITh, *Berashith*, is the speech (one of the ten rules
of Genesis), but BRA, *Bera*, is the speech halved. (But there are here
understood) Father and Son, the hidden and the manifest. (And also)

4 The superior Eden is hidden and concealed. (That is, no mention is
made of the crown.) The inferior Eden cometh forth so that it may be
transferred (towards the inferiors) and manifested (through the voice of
its original, which denoteth wisdom.)

\["No mention made of the crown"--*i.e.*, Kether, the first Sephira,
Macroprosopus.\]

5\. For the name (Tetragrammaton) IHVH, *Yod*, *He*, *Vau*, *He*,
includeth the name IH, *Yah*, (which is of the father, and the name)
ALHIM, *Elohim* (which here followeth in the text, and pertaineth unto
the mother).

6\. ATh, *Ath* (the fourth word of this text, which in another manner
signifieth the name) ADNI, *Adonaï*, "Lord" (namely, the path of the
kingdom; also the name) AHIH, *Eheieh* (that is, the path of the crown,
and this symbolizeth in itself the two extreme paths; here denoteth) the
right and the left (that is, benignity and severity), which are united
in one (equilibrium).

\[*Ath*, ATh, means "the," "the very substance of." Qabalistically it
signifies "the beginning and the end," and is like the term "Alpha and
Omega" used in the Apocalypse. For as Alpha and Omega are respectively
the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, so are Aleph and Tau
of the Hebrew. The "two extreme paths" are the crown, Kether, and the
kingdom, Malkuth, the first and tenth Sephiroth. the highest and the
lowest, Macroprosopus, and the queen. If the reader turn to the
introduction, to the Table showing the Sephiroth arranged in three
pillars, he will see that Malkuth is, as it were, the antithesis of
Kether; and hence it is said that "Malkuth is Kether after another
manner." And this recalls the precept of Hermes in the Smaragdine Tablet
"That which is below is like that which is above, and that which is
above is like that which is below."\]

7\. HShMIM, *Ha-Shamaim*, "the heavens" (the fifth word of this text,
and) VATh, Vaath, "and the substance

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of" (the sixth word; they are referred unto the paths of beauty and
victory) like as it is written, 1 Chron. xxix. 11: "And the beauty and
the victory." These paths are joined together in one.

\["The beauty and the victory" are Tiphereth and Netzach, the sixth and
seventh Sephiroth.\]

8\. HARTz, *Haaretz*, "the earth" (the seventh word of this beginning
denoteth the queen joined together with the glory and the foundation),
like as it is written, Ps. Viii. 2: "How magnificent (this is the path
of glory) is Thy name in all the world" (whereby is symbolized the
foundation); the earth which is the kingdom. Also) Isa. vi. 3: "The
whole earth is full of His glory" (where these three paths again
concur).

9\. "Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters," "to make a
distinction between the Holy Place and between the Holy of Holies."
(That is, between Microprosopus and Macroprosopus.)

10\. The Most Ancient One is expanded into Microprosopus (or the Crown
into the Beauty), and adhereth (unto it, so that it may receive
increase. If) it be not perfectly expanded (so that Microprosopus as it
were existeth by himself, but instead is retained in his mother's womb)
the mouth speaking great things moveth in that place (that
Microprosopus, so that he may be fully born), and he is crowned with the
lesser crowns under the five divisions of the waters. (That is,
Microprosopus receiveth the influx of the five benignities, which are
called "crowns," because they descend from the crown, or Macroprosopus;
but "lesser crowns," because they take their rise from benignity in the
*Microprosopic Path*; and they are called the five divisions of the
waters, because the water belongeth unto the benignity, and in this
verse, (Gen. i. 6, 7, the word MIM, Meim, waters, filleth the fifth
place).

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

11\. Like as it is written, Num. xix. 17: "And shall pour upon him
living waters in a vessel." (But the life looketh towards the mother;
and it) is (understood to be that path which is called) ALHIM
[ChIIM](errata.htm#1), *Elohim Chiiim*, "the Elohim of life;" and the
king of the universe (that is, the understanding. Whereunto belong also
the following sayings:--) Ps. cxvi. v. 9: "I will walk before the Lord
in the lands of life." Also 1 Sam. 29: "And the soul of my Lord shall be
bound in the quiver of life." Also Gen. ii. 9: "And the tree of life in
the midst of the garden." (All these, I say, refer unto the
understanding, from which the six members receive the influx. And to it
also pertain the following names, namely, the name) IH, *Yah*
(whensoever it is written in full with A in this manner:) IVD HA, *Yod
Ha* (and containeth the number of the numeral powers of the letters of
the Tetragrammaton, namely, 26; unto which also is referred that form of
the name belonging unto the intelligence), AHII, *Eheii* (where in the
place of the final *He*, *Yod* is put, as in a former instance. (See
Chap. I, § 32.)

\[In the Hebrew, ChIIM, Chiim, "living"; in our version of the Old
Testament it is translated "running water." Chiim is plural.\]

12\. Between the waters and the waters. (Since there are the superior)
perfect waters, and (those which are in Microprosopus) imperfect waters
(or those mingled with severities; because in another manner it is said)
perfect compassion, imperfect compassion. (Now followeth a mystical
explanation of Gen. vi. 3.)

13\. And the Tetragrammaton hath said: "My spirit shall not strive with
man for ever, seeing that he also is in the flesh." (In this passage,
when it is said:) "And the Tetragrammaton hath said," (it is to be noted
that) after that there was formed (the supernal structure), in the last
place concerning Microprosopus (this name is

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

understood). For when it is said, "He calleth this also by the name,"
the Ancient One speaketh occultly in a hidden manner.

\[The Ancient One is symbolized by the pronoun He in the sentence, "He
calleth this also by the name."\]

14\. "My spirit shall not strive with man." (Here is understood, not the
spirit of Microprosopus, but) that which is from the supernals, because
from that spirit which rusheth forth from the two nostrils of the nose
of Macroprosopus the influx is sent down unto the inferiors.

15\. And because it is written (in the same place) "And his days shall
be a hundred and twenty years," I, *Yod*, is either perfect (whensoever
its singular parts exist in the form of decads) or imperfect (when they
are in monads or units). When (therefore *Yod* (is placed by itself)
alone (it is understood to be perfect, because in itself it containeth)
a hundred. (But if) two letters (are put, then are understood the ten
units) twice reckoned; (hence are produced) the hundred and twenty
years.

\[The "singular parts" of Yod are the numbers from one to ten, for the
number of Yod is ten. But when Yod is taken as its square I x I = 10 x
10 = 100. But II = I x I + I + I (or the two letters both multiplied and
added together) = 10 x 10+ 10+ 10 = 120. But when Yod = 100, its digits
are tens and not units--namely, the numbers 10, 20, 30, &c., instead of
1, 2, 3, &c.\]

16\. *Yod* is alone whensoever he is manifested in Microprosopus (that
is when the lights of Macroprosopus descend into Him, then indeed the
paths of the decads are increased, and this decad) is increased into ten
thousands (by the paths joined with the four letters of the
Tetragrammaton) of years. (But) hence (if it be conceived only according
unto the power of Macroprosopus, it hath that position) which is
written, Ps. cxxxix. 5; "And thou shalt place upon me thine hand:" KPKH,
*Khephakha*. (Where this word KPKH, if it be written according to the
usual

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

custom KPK, *Khephakh*, yieldeth the number 120. But now by adding the
paragogic H of the female, there is given the number 125, on account of
the five severities.)

\["This decad is increased into ten thousand by the paths joined with
the four letters of the Tetragrammaton "*--i.e.*, the paths are the
Sephiroth = the numbers from one to ten; and they are said to be joined
with the four letters by multiplying the decad to the fourth power, or
10<sup>4</sup>. Hence for I, the first letter, we have 10 x 1 = 10; for
H, the second letter, we have 10 x 10= 100: for V. the third letter, 10
x 10 x 10 = 1,000; and for H, the fourth letter, 10 x 10 x 10 x 10 =
10,000.

In the Shemitic languages, a paragogic letter is one which is added to a
word to give it additional emphasis.\]

17, "There were giants in the earth," Gen. vi. 4. (If this word HIV,
*Hayu*, is considered, which also is a form of the often varied name, it
taketh its rise from the kingdom.) This is that which is written, Gen.
ii. 10: "And thence is it divided, and is in four heads." (Where is
understood the end of that emanation which the separated universe
followeth. Nevertheless) from the place where the body is divided, they
are called those trees (or, as the Mantuan Codex correcteth the passage:
Where the garden is divided, and the seven inferior emanations are
understood; where then it divideth the universe into the inferior worlds
and provideth a habitation for the shells or spirits of matter). Hence
it is written: "And from hence is it divided."

\["The shells" = elemental spirits. The Qabalah always calls the evil
elemental spirits of matter "shells."\]

18\. They were in the earth in those days, but not in the following
time, until Joshua came. (That is, they are applicable unto the path of
the bride, which also is called the land of Canaan, wherein Joshua found
the giants. For the word NPILIM, *Nephilim*, occurreth not fully, except
when it is used in the incident of the spies, Num. xiii. 33.)

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

19\. And the sons of the Elohim are guarded (nor is mention made of a
similar case) until Solomon came and joined himself with the daughters
of men; like as it is written, Eccles. ii. 8: VThONVGVTh, *Ve-Thonogoth*
"And the *delights* of the sons of men," &c. Where (in the feminine
gender) he calleth the word ThONVGVTh, *Thonogoth*, and not (as
elsewhere in the masculine gender) ThONVGIM, *Thonogim*, "sons of Adam;"
so that it is intimated in an occult manner that the latter (the sons of
the Elohim) are of those other spirits who are not contained under the
supernal wisdom; concerning which it is written, 1 Kings v. 12: "And the
Lord gave wisdom unto Solomon." (Concerning these matters, further see
the "Treatise of the Revolutions)."

\["The Treatise of the Revolutions" is not published in this volume.\]

20\. Also it is written, *ibid*. iv. 31: "And He was wise above every
man." Because these are not classed with man.

21\. (But when it is said) "And the Tetragrammaton gave him wisdom,"
then is understood the supernal *He*. (Because he gave unto him the
influx of the wisdom of the queen.) "And he was wise before every man,"
because from her he received the wisdom here below (through the path to
the kingdom).

22\. Those (spirits) are powerful who exist from eternity. That is, from
(eternity or) the supernal world (the understanding, namely, whence are
excited severity and rigour). The men of the name (that is) who
exercised themselves in the name.

23\. In what name? In the Holy Name, wherein they exercised themselves
(for the performing of various wonders), and not the holy inferiors. Yet
(these) did not exercise themselves save in the name (and not in
holiness).

24\. It is said openly "the men of the name," and not

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "the men of the Tetragrammaton." Not (therefore
used they the name) with respect unto the mystery of the Arcanum, or in
a diminutive form; nor yet with any diminution of the (name itself).

25\. (And because) the men of the name (are) openly (spoken of, hence)
are they shut out from the general conception of man.

26\. It is written, Ps. xlix. 12: "Man being in honour, abideth not."
(When it is said) "man being in honour" (the same is as if also it were
said, a man such as was Solomon) shall not remain long in the honour of
the King without the spirit. (That is, in the influx from the King,
Microprosopus, to whom, or to the beautiful path, the spirit belongeth.)

27\. Thirteen kings (that is, the twelve metatheses of the
Tetragrammaton with its radix, which are the measures of mercies) wage
war with seven (with the Edomite kings; because, while the lights of the
former flowed down, these could not maintain themselves, and, besides,
they are the classes of the most rigorous judgments which are opposed to
the mercies. For) seven kings are seen in the land (Edom), and now after
that their vessels are broken, they are called shells, who have fallen
down among the inferiors. (These) nine vanquished in war (the measures
of Microprosopus, concerning which see the "Idra Rabba"; through which
David conquered his enemies), which ascend in the paths of those which
pass downward, on account of His ruling power (that is, which make
thirteen, as they are in Macroprosopus and his beard, which is called
his influence, and freely floweth down), and there is none who can
withhold their hand. (For whilst the supernal measures permit the
increase in the inferiors, all judgments are subdivided.)

\[Concerning the "twelve banners of the sacred Name," the metatheses of
the Tetragrammaton, see Introduction, § 62; also concerning the Edomite
kings. I have before remarked that the

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

demons are called Qliphoth, or "shells," by the Qabalists. The thirteen
in Microprosopus is composed of nine manifest and four hidden.

28\. Five kings (that is, the five letters MNTzPK, *Me*, *Nun*,
*Tzaddi*, *Pe*, *Kaph*, which are the roots of the judgments), betake
themselves into swift flight before four (the four letters of the
Tetragrammaton which bear with them the influx of benignity. They cannot
remain (since the judgments and rigours cease and flee).

\[The letters of the Hebrew alphabet are divided into three classes, the
three mothers as they are called, AMSh; the seven duplex letters,
BGDKPRTh, so called because they are sometimes tenues and sometimes
aspirates, according to whether they are written with or without the
Daghesh point; and the twelve simple letters, HVZChTILNSOTzQ. They are
also divided into the three categories of *Chesed*, *Din*, and
*Rachmim*, or mercy, judgment, and mildness. Now these five letters
MNTzPK denote the severest judgments, and their number = 280 = PR = the
name of the angel *Sandalphon*, SNDLPVN, the angel IOR, or of the wood
of the world of Asiah, since the greatest part of it are sterile
trees.\]

29\. Four kings slay four (that is, the four letters of the
Tetragrammaton are bound together with the four letters ADNI, *Adonaï*,
which) depend from them like grapes in a cluster (in the concatenation
of these two names, thus, IAHDVNHI).

30\. Among them are set apart (that is, among these paths of the Divine
names a selection of holiness is made from these broken vessels) seven
channels (that is, seven broken vessels, which now are like the shells,
and contain in themselves a great part of the lights and souls); they
testify testimony (that is, the souls thus selected, thence having been
born into the universe, testify that they are freed from impurity) and
they do not remain in their place (and are no longer detained under the
shells).

31\. The tree which is mitigated (that is, the path of the kingdom or
Schechinah, which is the tree of the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

knowledge of good and evil, which in itself existeth from the judgments,
but is mitigated by the bridegroom through the influx of mercies)
resideth within (within the shells; because the kingdom hath its
dominion over all things, and its feet descend into death). In its
branches (in the inferior worlds) the birds lodge and build their nests
(the souls and the angels have their place). Beneath it those animals
which have power seek the shade (that is, the shells, "for in it every
beast of the forest doth walk forth," Ps. civ. 20).

\[See the Introduction for the Sephiroth arranged in the three pillars,
or tree of life.\]

32\. This is the tree which hath two paths (for thus is this passage
restored in the corrected Codex) for the same end (namely, good and
evil, because it is the tree of the knowledge of good and evil). And it
hath around it seven columns (that is, the seven palaces), and the four
splendours (that is, the four animals) whirl around it (in four wheels)
on their four sides (after the fourfold description of the chariot of
Yechesqiel (Ezekiel).

\[The seven palaces answer to the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th
Sephiroth, operating through the respective orders of the angels into
the spheres of the seven planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus,
Mercury, and Luna. The four animals, or *Chaioth Ha-Qadesch*, are the
vivified powers of the four letters of the Tetragrammaton operating
under the presidency of the first Sephira as the mainspring of *primum
mobile* of creation. The four wheels are their correlatives under the
second Sephira, on their four sides--namely, the four elements of the
air, fire, water, and earth, which are the abodes of the spirits of the
elements, the sylphs, salamanders, undines, and gnomes, under the
presidency of the tenth Sephira.\]

33\. The serpent (which was made from the rod of Moses--that is, the
shell--NVOH, *Nogah*, or splendour) which rusheth forth with three
hundred and seventy leaps (the thirty-two names together with the five
letters of ALHIM, *Elohim*, which make 37, multiplied by the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

decad 370, and the judgments of the bride are denoted, to which that
shell directeth his springs, because he is of middle nature betwixt the
holy and the profane). "He leapeth upon the mountains, and rusheth
swiftly over the hills," like as it is written (Cant. ii. 8. That is, he
leapeth high above the rest of the shells). He holdeth his tail in his
mouth between his teeth (that is, his extremity, by which he is linked
to the shells, turneth towards his other extremity wherewith he looketh
towards holiness). He is pierced through on either side (so that he may
seek to receive the superior and inferior nature). When the chief
ariseth (who is [Metatron](errata.htm#2)) he is changed into three
spirits (that is, he assumeth the nature of three inferior shells).

\["Nogah" is also the qabalistical title of the sphere of the planet
Venus. MTTRVN, *Metatron*, or Methraton, is the particular intelligence
of the first Sephira, and is called the "Prince of Faces;" he is said
also to have been the "ruler of Moses." Methraton has the same
numeration as ShDI, *Shaddai*, the Almighty.\]

34\. (But concerning Metatron) it is written, Gen. v. 22: "And Enoch
walked with the Elohim" (because out of Enoch, Metatron is formed). And
it is written, Prov. xxii. 6: "Enoch hath been made into a boy,
according to his path." (That is, "hath been changed into") the boy
(namely, Metatron, who is spoken of under his name NOR, *Nour*, which
meaneth a "boy").

\["Enoch hath been made into a boy," &c. This peculiar rendering of the
passage, "Train up a child in the way," &c., arises from reading in the
Hebrew text ChNVK, *Chanokh*, Enoch, instead of ChNK, *Chanekh*, "train
up," or "instruct."\]

35\. With the Elohim, and not with the Tetragrammaton (because he
himself is referred unto the path of the queen, to whom is attributed
this name of Rigour). "And he existed not" (longer) under this name
(Enoch), because the Elohim took him in order that he might be called by
this name. (For this name is communicable unto the angels,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

and in the first instance unto this chief among them, namely, Metatron.)

36\. There are three houses of judgment given, which are four (that is,
the three letters IHV, referred into the understanding, which yield the
four letters of the Tetragrammaton, pointed with the vowel points of the
name Elohim. For) there are four superior houses of judgment (the four
said Tetragrammatic letters) and four inferior (which are the four
letters ADNI, *Adonaï*, belonging unto the kingdom). For it is written,
Lev. xix. 35: "Ye shall not do iniquity in judgment, in dimension, in
weight, and in measure." (Where these four are mystically intimated.)

37\. (There is one) rigorous judgment (of severity),another that is not
rigorous (that is, of the kingdom). There is one judgment by balance
(wherein are the two scales of merit and error), another judgment which
is not made by balance; (and this is) the gentle judgment (whereby the
Israelites are judged. But also there is given) the judgment which is
neither of the one nature nor of the other. (Namely, the beautiful
path.)

\[Of course the "beautiful path" is Tiphereth, the sixth Sephira.\]

38\. (Further on it is written), Gen. vi. 1. "And it came to pass when
man began to multiply upon the face of the earth." (Where by these
words) ADM, Adam, began to multiply (there is understood Daath, or the
knowledge, the soul of the beautiful path, to which Moses is referred;
which sendeth down many lights into the bride, the earth, when the
spouse ascendeth thither). This is that which is written (*ibid*. 3):
BShGM, *Beshegam*, "in that also, he is flesh" (which word *Beshegam*,
"in that also," by equality of numeration equalleth MShH, *Moses*) Adam
(namely) the supernal (Daath, or knowledge). And it is written: "Upon
the face of the earth" (which face of the earth is this, that the
highest representation of the queen is the understanding, the mother,
unto whose gates Moses ascended).

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

39\. (Concerning this face, it is written) Exod. xxxiv. 29: "And Moses
knew not that the skin of his face shone" (where by the face the mother
is understood; by the skin, the queen.) This is that which is said, Gen.
iii. 21: "Tunics of skin" (because by itself the kingdom is wanting in
light).

40\. To shine (but when it is said "the face of Moses," the mother is
understood, according to that passage, 1 Sam. xvi. 13: "And Samuel took
the horn of oil" (where by the oil, the wisdom, by the horn, or the
splendour of the oil, the understanding is denoted). For there is no
anointing except by the horn (that is, every descent of unction is
through the mother). Hence it is said, Ps. lxxxix. 18: "And in thy
favour our horn shall be exalted." (Also) Ps. cxxxii. 17: "There shall
the born of David flourish" (that is, the queen shall receive the influx
from the mother). This is the tenth of the kings (that is, the path of
the kingdom), and originateth from jubilee, who is the mother.

41\. For it is written, Josh. vi. 5: "And it shall be when the horn of
jubilee is sounded." This is the splendour of the jubilee, and the tenth
(path) is crowned by the mother.

42\. (This is) the horn which receiveth the horn and the spirit, that it
may restore the spirit of *Yod He* unto *Yod He*. (That is, when the
spirit is to be given unto Microprosopus, his mother contributed as
much, which is QRN, *Qaran*, "the horn," the brilliancy, as the increase
which he receiveth from the father.) And this is the horn of jubilee.
And IVBL, *Yobel*, "jubilee," is H, *He* (the first *He* of the
Tetragrammaton); and *He* is the spirit rushing forth over all (because
the mother is the world to come, when in the resurrection all things
will receive the spirit); and all things shall return unto their place
(like as in the jubilee, so in the world to come).

43\. For it is written, AHH, IHVH, ALHIM, *Ahah Tetragrammaton Eloim!*
"Ah Tetragrammaton Elohim!"

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When the H, *He*, appeareth (first), and H, *He*
(in the second place); then is Tetragrammaton called Elohim (like as a
judge; because in the world to come there will be work for much
strength. This is) the full name. And it is written, Isa. ii. 11: "And
Tetragrammaton alone shall be exalted in that day." When the one *He* is
turned towards the other *He*, and *Yod* is taken away, then cometh
vengeance into the universe; and except for that Adam who is called
Tetragrammaton, the universe would not exist; but all things would be
destroyed. Hence it is written: "And the Tetragrammaton alone," &c.

44\. Hereunto is the hidden and involved Mystery of the King, that is
"The Book of Concealed Mystery," Blessed is he who entereth into and
departeth therefrom, and knoweth its paths and ways.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: The Ingress and the Preface](tku09)
