[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku10)  [Next](tku12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

# CHAPTER III.

### CONCERNING THE ANCIENT ONE, OR MACROPROSOPUS, AND CONCERNING HIS PARTS, AND ESPECIALLY CONCERNING HIS SKULL.

34\. AND after a certain time was that veil entirely disunited in
formless separation, and recomposed according to its conformation.

35\. And this is the tradition: The Absolute desired within Himself to
create the essence of light (*the law--that is, the letters of the
alphabet, from whose transpositions the law was formed*), hidden for two
thousand years, and produced Her. And She answered thus unto Him: "He
who wisheth to dispose and to constitute other things, let Him first be
disposed according unto a proper conformation."

36\. This is the tradition described in the "Concealed Book of the
King," <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_14) that the Ancient of the
Ancient Ones, the Concealed of the Concealed Ones, hath been constituted
and prepared as in various members (*for future knowledge*).

37\. Like as if it were said, "He is found (that is, He may in some way
to a certain extent be known), and He is not found;" for He cannot be
clearly comprehended; but He hath as it were been formed; neither yet is
He to be known of any, since He is the Ancient of the Ancient Ones.

38\. But in his conformation is He known; as also He is the Eternal of
the Eternal Ones, the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, the Concealed of the
Concealed Ones; and in His symbols is He knowable and unknowable.

39\. White are His garments, and His appearance is the likeness of a
Face vast and terrible.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

40\. Upon the throne of flaming, light is He seated, so that He may
direct its (flashes).

41\. Into forty thousand superior worlds the brightness of the skull of
His head is extended, and from the light of this brightness the just
shall receive four hundred worlds in the world to come.

42\. This is that which is written, Gen. xxiii. 16. "Four hundred
skekels of silver, current money with the merchant."

43\. Within His skull exist daily thirteen thousand myriads of worlds,
which draw their existence from Him, and by Him are upheld.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[115:1](tku11.htm#fr_15) "The Siphra
Dtzenioutha," cap. i. § 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Concerning the Dew, or Moisture of the Brain, of the
Ancient One, or Macroprosopus](tku12)
