[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku14)  [Next](tku16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII.

### CONCERNING THE HAIR OF MACROPROSOPUS.

65\. This is the tradition. From the skull of His head hang down a
thousand thousand myriads; seven thousand and five hundred curling
hairs, white and pure, like as wool when it is pure; which have not been
mingled confusedly together less inordinate disorder should be shown in
His conformation; but all are in order, so that no one lock may go
beyond another lock, nor one hair before another.

66\. And in single curls are four hundred and ten locks

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

of hair, according unto the number of the word, QDVSh, *Qadosch*,
Holy. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_19)

67\. But these hairs, all and singular, radiate into four hundred and
ten worlds.

68\. But these worlds alone are hidden and concealed, and no man knoweth
them, save himself.

69\. And he radiateth in seven hundred and twenty directions (*others
say four hundred and twenty*).

70\. And in all the hairs is a fountain, which issueth from the hidden
brain behind the wall of the skull.

71\. And it shineth and goeth forth through that hair unto the hair of
Microprosopus, and from it is His brain formed; and thence that brain
goeth forth into thirty and two paths.

72\. And each curl radiateth and hangeth down arranged in beautiful
form, and adorned with ornament, and they enshroud the skull.

73\. But the curls of the hair are disposed on each side of the skull.

74\. Also we have said: Each hair is said to be the breaking of the
hidden fountains, issuing from the concealed brain.

75\. Also this is the tradition: From the hair of a man it is known what
he is, whether rigorous or merciful, when he passeth over forty years;
thus also when he is perfect in hair, in beard, and in the eyebrows of
his eyes.

76\. The curls of His hair hang down in order, and pure like unto (pure)
wool, even unto his shoulders. Say we unto His shoulders? Nevertheless,
even unto the rise of His shoulders, so that His neck may not be seen,
because of that which is written, Jer. ii. 27: "Because they have turned
away from Me the neck and not the face."

77\. And the hair is less close to the ears, lest it should cover them;
because it is written., Ps. cxxx. 2. "As Thine am are open."

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

78\. From hence His hair stretcheth out behind His ears. The whole is in
equilibrium; one hair doth not go beyond another hair, (*they are*) in
perfect disposition, and beautiful arrangement, and orderly condition.

79\. It is the delight and joy of the just, who are in Microprosopus, to
desire to behold and to conform unto that conformation which is in the
Ancient One, the Most Concealed of all.

80\. Thirteen curls of hair exist on the one side and on the other of
the skull; (*they are*) about His face, and through them commenceth the
division of the hair.

81\. There is no left in that Ancient Concealed One, but all is
right. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_20)

82\. He appeareth, and He appeareth not; He is concealed, and He is not
concealed; and that is in His conformation much more so than in Himself.

83\. And concerning this the children of Israel wished to inquire in
their heart, like as it is written, Exod. xvii. 7: "Is the
Tetragrammaton in the midst of us, or the Negatively Existent One?"
(*Where they distinguished*) between Microprosopus, who is called
Tetragrammaton, and between Macroprosopus, who is called AIN, *Ain*, the
Negatively Existent?

84\. But why, then, were they punished? Because they did it not in love,
but in temptation; like as it is written (*ibid*.). "Because they
tempted the Tetragrammaton, saying, Is it the Tetragrammaton in the
midst of us, or is it the Negatively Existent One?"

85\. In the parting of the hair proceedeth a certain path, which shineth
into two hundred and seventy worlds, and from that (*again*) shineth a
path wherein the just of the world to come shall shine.

86\. That is what is written, Prov. iv. 18: "And the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

path of the just shall shine as the light, going forth, and shining more
and more unto the perfect day.

87\. And out of that is the path divided into six hundred and thirteen
paths, which are distributed in Microprosopus.

88\. As it is written concerning Him, Pa. xxv. 6: "All the paths of the
Tetragrammaton are mercy and truth," &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[119:1](tku14.htm#fr_19) Which are the
thirty-two paths of the *Sepher Yetzirah*, or Book of Formation;
symbolised by the ten numbers; and twenty-two letters of the Hebrew
alphabet.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[120:1](tku15.htm#fr_20) For by Gematria Q + D +
V + Sh = 100 + 4 + 6 + 300 = 410.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[121:1](tku15.htm#fr_21) Meaning there is no
evil in Him. but all is good. So that, in the symbolic language of the
Zohar, Macroprosopus is represented by a profile countenance, wherein
one side is not seen. rather than by a full face, as in Microprosopus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Concerning the Forehead of Macroprosopus](tku16)
