[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku23)  [Next](tku25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVI.

### CONCERNING THE FIFTH PART OF THE BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS.

382\. THE fifth conformation. Another path goeth forth beneath the
mouth. This is that which is written in the saying of Micah: "LA HChZIQ
LOD APV, *Lo Hecheziq Lead Apo*, He hath not kept his anger for ever."
"Arise Rabbi Yosi!"

383\. Rabbi Yosi arose, and commencing said, Ps. cxliv. 15: "'Blessed is
the people that is in such a case; blessed is the people whose God is
Tetragrammaton.'

384\. "'Blessed is the people that is in such a case.' What is this
'ShKKH LV, *Shekakah Lo*, That is in such

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

a case?' Like as it is said in Est. vii. 10: 'And the wrath of the king
was appeased,' ShKKH, *Shekakah*; that is, 'Became quiet from his
wrathfulness.'

385\. "Another exposition: He was appeased through his wrath, which is
intimated in these words, Num. xi. 15: 'And if Thou dealest thus with
me, kill me, I pray Thee, out of hand, if I have found grace in Thy
sight.'

"'Kill me, I pray Thee, out of hand;' this is judgment of judgments. But
'Blessed is the people whose God is Tetragrammaton;' this is mercies of
mercies.

387\. "Another exposition: ShKKH, *Shekaka*, is the name which includeth
all names, <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_59) in consequence of which
that Holy Blessed One maketh His wrath to pass away, and caused
Microprosopus to be at peace, and taketh away all those extraneous
(*matters*) from the midst.

388\. "We have learned through Barietha (*or the tradition given forth
without the holy city*), that that path of the conformation of the holy
supernal Ancient of the Ancient Ones, which descendeth in the beard
beneath the nostrils of the nose, and this inferior path, are equal in
every way, in such a manner that that which is below is like that which
is above. <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_60) The superior (*path*) is
called passing over transgression the inferior, 'He hath not kept His
anger for ever.'

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

389\. "Also we have learned this: 'He hath not kept,' *i.e.*, there is
no place *wherein anger can remain*. Like as in the superior there is
opportunity given for taking away (*anger*), so also in the inferior is
the (same opportunity) afforded.

390\. "We have learned this: whensoever in this Ancient One, the most
concealed of all, this path is uncovered, it is well for all the
inferior (*paths*); <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](tku25.htm#fn_61) for
then appeareth counsel for doing good to them all.

391\. "But when it is withdrawn, and is not uncovered, there is no
counsel, neither is there any who knoweth Him, save Himself. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[2](tku25.htm#fn_62)

392\. "Like as also none knoweth the superior Eden, save Himself,. save
Him, the Ancient of the Ancient Ones.

393\. "And concerning this it is written, Ps. xcii. 6: 'O Lord, how
excellent are Thy works! Thy thoughts are very deep!'"

394\. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: "May thy works be reckoned in order
in the world to come by the Ancient of the Ancient Ones!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[155:1](tku24.htm#fr_60) It is not at first
sight evident why this word should be the "name which includeth all
names." But if we examine it by Gematria we shall soon see the reason.
ShKKH, Sh + K + K + H = 300 + 20 + 20 + 5 = 345 = ShMH, *Shemah* = *Ha
Shem*, The Name. This title Shemah is applied to the Tetragrammaton
frequently as being the name of all names, and therefore ShKKH is taken
as concealing Tetragrammaton.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[155:2](tku24.htm#fr_61) Compare the precept in
the Smaragdine tablet of Hermes Trismegistus: "That which is below is
like that which is above, and that which is above is like that which is
below, for the performance of the miracles of the one substance." This
is the fundamental principle of all the ancient mystic doctrines,
whether qabalistical, mythological, alchemical, or magical; and in this
formula all are contained. As is God, so is the universe: as is the
Creator the Supernal Man, so is the created the inferior man; as
Macrocosm, so Microcosm; as eternity, so life!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII: Concerning the Sixth Part of the Beard of
Macroprosopus](tku25)
