[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku19)  [Next](tku21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XII.

### CONCERNING THE BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS IN PARTICULAR; AND, IN THE FIRST PLACE, CONCERNING ITS FIRST PART.

286\. "THE first disposition is that which commenceth almost at the
beginning of the hair.

287\. "Also we have learned: No beard (*i.e.*, no part of this beard) is
found which doth not (virtually) arise from the brain of the head (or
from the heart). <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_39)

288\. "But in this (last section) this (first part of the beard) is not
considered as distinct (from the others). For in this chapter only this
first form (*or portion of the beard*) is to be considered, which
descendeth from the beginning of the hair, and it hath this peculiarity
(*namely, that it riseth directly from the brain, which cannot
altogether be said concerning the other parts of the beard*).

289\. "And this is to be kept perfectly distinct from this
beard--namely, that which exists from the head (formed into), one
thousand worlds, sealed with a most pure seal, with a seal which
includeth all seals.

290\. "The length of that portion of hair descending before the ears is
not equal to the length (of the beard

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

itself); neither doth it twine together, nor hang down far.

291\. "But those hairs, when they flow down, are extended, and depend.

292\. "And the beginning of the first disposition consists of thirty and
one equal locks, extended even unto the beginning of the mouth.

293\. "Also three hundred and ninety hairs are found in each lock.

294\. "Those thirty and one equal locks, which exist in the first
disposition (of the beard) are strong, in order that they may dispose
the inferiors according to the number of AL, *El*. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_40)

295\. "What is this AL, *El*? Mighty and Powerful One.

296\. "And among those single locks are distributed one and thirty
dominating worlds, so that they may be extended <span
id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_41) (correctly) neither on this side nor on
that.

297\. "And out of each one of these worlds a partition is made into a
thousand worlds of desires and of great pleasures.

298\. "And they are all concealed in the commencement of the beard,
which representeth strength; and they are included in that (name) AL.

299\. "And notwithstanding is AL Himself disposed towards mercies,
because in Him the Ancient of Days is mitigated and included and
extended.

300\. "Wherefore even unto the mouth? Because it is written, Dan. vii.
9: 'The judgment was set, and the books were opened.'

301\. "What is this? 'And the judgment was set.' It was set in that
place, so that it might not have dominion.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

302\. "This is that which is written, Isa. ix. 15: "Wonderful,
Counsellor, God the Mighty One.' That is, AL, El, such a one who also is
mighty, but is rendered mild through the holy beard of the Ancient of
Days.

303\. "And an Arcanum is concealed in that place wherein it is written,
Mic. vii. 18: 'What AL, *El*, like unto Thee?' Because of the Ancient of
Days it is spoken in the form of the configuration of the holy supernal
beard.

304\. "The first world, which proceedeth from the first disposition,
hath dominion over, and descendeth and ascendeth in a thousand times a
thousand [myriads](errata.htm#4) of myriads of shield-bearers, and by it
are they comprehended under a great seal.

305\. "The second world, which proceedeth from that disposition, hath
dominion over and descendeth and ascendeth in fifty-seven thousand
bodyguards, who are the lords of lamentations; and these are connected
with it for the purpose of disposing the neck of the spine. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_42)

306\. "The third world, which goeth forth from that arrangement, hath
dominion over and descendeth and ascendeth in sixty-nine thousand
authors of grief, who are upheld by it, like as metal (is upheld) by the
tongs (of the smith).

307\. "And by that conformation all those are subjected, and mitigated
in the bitterness of tears, which become sweet in the great sea. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_43)

308\. "Who is he who beholdeth this conformation of the holy beard,
excellent and venerable, who is not overcome with shame thereby?

309\. "Who can comprehend the mystery of those locks of hair which hang
down from Him, the Ancient One?

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

310\. "He is set on the crown of crowns, which are the crowns of all
crowns, and the crowns which are not comprehended in the other crowns; I
say, of those crowns which are not as the other crowns, for the inferior
crowns are comprehended by them. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_44)

311\. "And therefore are those forms (arranged in) such conformations,
whereunto the inferior forms adhere; and they are the dispositions in
which He <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_45) is disposed Who hath need
that He may be blessed by Him, <span id="fr_47"></span>[3](#fn_46) and
Who desireth blessing.

312\. "For whensoever the dispositions take the form of these, blessings
are found beneath them; and It Is that which It Is. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[4](#fn_47)

313\. "All things are comprehended in those dispositions; all things
raise themselves up in order that they may receive these dispositions of
the Mighty King, of the Ancient One, the most concealed of all. And all
those are mitigated by those ordinations of the King, the Ancient One.

314\. "We have learned: Unless the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, the Holy
of the Holy Ones, were disposed in those conformations, neither the
superiors nor the inferiors would be found, and all things would be as
though they existed not.

315\. "Also we have learned by tradition: how far do those conformations
of the beard radiate splendour? Even unto the thirteen inferiors; and
whensoever those thirteen are found, those shine. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[5](#fn_48)

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

316\. "And all of them are found in the number thirteen.

317\. "Therefore is the beard of the King, the Ancient One, most
venerable among all, at once in its entirety concealed, and most
excellent.

V8. "And because it is most excellent before all things, and concealed,
there is no mention made concerning it in any place in the law, and it
is not manifested.

319\. "But what beard is manifested? The beard of the Great High Priest,
and from that beard descendeth the influx unto the inferior beard of the
inferior high priest. <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_49)

320\. "How is the beard of the high priest disposed? The beard of the
high priest is disposed in eight conformations. Because also the high
priest hath eight vestments, when the ointment descendeth upon his
beard.

321\. "This is that which is Written, Ps. cxxxiii. 2: 'Like the precious
oil upon the head descending upon the beard, the beard of Aaron, which
descendeth according to the proportion of his attributes,' &c.

3231\. "And whence is this to us? Because it is written in the same
place: 'Also for brethren to dwell together in equality.' The word
'also' increaseth the signification of the inferior high priest.

323\. "Seeing that in the same way as the inferior high priest
ministereth in the high priesthood, so also, if it be permitted to say
so, doth the High Priest above minister in His high priesthood.

324\. "This is the first ordination of the beard of the Ancient One, the
most concealed of all."

325\. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: "It is justly thy due, Rabbi Isaac,
that thou shouldest be under the ornament of the conformation of the
beard, and that

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

thou shouldest receive the light of the countenance of the Ancient of
Days, the Ancient of the Ancient Ones. Blessed is thy portion, and
blessed be my lot with thee in the world to come."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[142:1](tku20.htm#fr_40) The heart being
considered as the central motor of the body.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[143:1](tku20.htm#fr_41) AL, *El*, God, the
Mighty One, is equivalent by Gematria to the number 31; for A + L = 1+
30 = 31.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[143:2](tku20.htm#fr_42) For were they extended,
the number would be altered, and it would consequently no longer = AL.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[144:1](tku20.htm#fr_43) This is of course
simply pursuing the symbolism involved in the idea of Macroprosopus,
being typified by a vast countenance or head.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[144:2](tku20.htm#fr_44) By the great sea.
Binah, the third Sephira, is probably meant. (See the "Book of Concealed
Mystery," ch. i. § 28).

<span id="fn_44"></span>[145:1](tku20.htm#fr_45) To comprehend the real
meaning of section 310, the reader should have carefully studied that
part of the introduction which refers to the Sephiroth, which are
symbolised by crowns. In this sense the "crown of crowns" is Kether, the
first Sephira, the Ancient One; the crowns of all crowns will be the
first three Sephiroth; and the inferiors will be the lower Sephiroth,
and those other forms which are dependent on them symbolized by the
crowns of the twenty-four elders in the Apocalypse, which latter is a
purely qabalistical work, and is unintelligible without the qabalistical
keys.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[145:2](tku20.htm#fr_46) Microprosopus.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[145:3](tku20.htm#fr_47) Macroprosopus.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[145:4](tku20.htm#fr_48) Cf. Exodus iii. 14.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[145:5](tku20.htm#fr_49) This section refers to
the statement that Macroprosopus pours forth His splendour upon
Microprosopus, so that the latter shines by reflected light.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[146:1](tku20.htm#fr_50) The Great High Priest
is the son, Microprosopus, symbolized on earth by the High Priest.
Compare what St. Paul says about Christ being our Great High Priest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII: Concerning the Second Part of the Beard of
Macroprosopus](tku21)
