[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku20)  [Next](tku22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XIII.

### CONCERNING THE SECOND PART OF THE BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS.

326\. "ARISE, Rabbi Chisqiah, and stand in thy place, and declare the
worthiness of this part of the holy beard."

327\. Rabbi Chisqiah arose, and began his speech and said, Cant. vii.
10: "I am my beloved's, and his desire is towards me."

328\. "Who is under consideration here, that 'I am my beloved's?' and
because that, 'his desire is toward me?'

329\. "I have meditated, and lo I 1 have beheld the most excellent light
of the supernal lights.

330\. "It shone forth, and ascended on three hundred and twenty-five
sides.

331\. "And in that light was a certain obscurity washed away, like as
when a man batheth in a deep river, whose divided waters flow round him
on every side from that part which is above.

332\. "And that light ascendeth unto the shore of the deep superior
sea, <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_50) for all good openings and
dignities are disclosed in that opening.

333\. "I asked of them what might be the interpretation of that which I
beheld; and, commencing they replied,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 'NVShA OVN, *Nosha Auan*, Thou hast beheld
iniquity being taken away.'"

334\. He said: "This is the second disposition," and sat down.

335\. Rabbi Schimeon said: Now is the universe united together (*or
mitigated*). Blessed be thou, Rabbi Chisqiah, of the Ancient of the
Ancient Ones!

336\. Rabbi Schimeon said: All the lights are congregated together which
come under this holy seal.

337\. I bear witness that the highest heavens from the highest (powers)
are above me, and the highest holy earth from the supernals, because now
I can see what man hath not beheld from that time, when Moses for the
second time ascended the mountain of Sinai.

338\. For I see that my countenance shineth like, the vehement splendour
of the sun, who is about to issue forth for the healing of the
universe. <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_51)

339\. Like as it is written, Mal. iv. 2: "But unto you that fear my name
shall the sun of righteousness arise, and healing in his wings."

340\. Furthermore, I know that my countenance shineth; Moses, neither
knew nor perceived (the fact).

341\. Like as it is written, Exod. xxxiv. 29: "And Moses knew not that
the skin of his face shone."

342\. Furthermore, I behold before me with mine eyes those thirteen
sculptured (forms of the beard of Macroprosopus), and like flaming light
did they shine.

343\. And when the second of those (dispositions) was explained by thy
mouth, that same at once was raised, and conformed, and crowned, and
concealed in the concealment of the forms of the beard, but all the
others were reinstated (in outward form). <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_52)

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

344\. And what is more, that one (formation), whilst it was explained by
thy mouth, flamed forth in splendour, and was crowned with a crown, and
seated upon a throne, like a king in the midst of his army.

345\. And when the explanation ceased it ascended, and was crowned with
a holy crown, and ordained, and concealed, and again placed among the
forms of the holy beard; and thus with (the forms) all and singular.

346\. Be ye glad, O my holy companions I for surely (*the universe*)
shall not be in such a condition until King Messiach shall come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[147:1](tku21.htm#fr_51) Binah. the third
Sephira, which is called the "sea" in the "Book of Concealed Mystery."
It answers to the first letter H, *He*, in the Tetragrammaton. (See
Introduction.)

<span id="fn_51"></span>[148:1](tku21.htm#fr_52) This phrase "splendour
of the sun, who is," &c., evidently refers to the sixth Sephira,
Tiphereth, or beauty, the splendour of the countenance of Microprosopus,
while the "universe" refers to Malkuth.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[148:2](tku21.htm#fr_53) While Rabbi Chisqiah
was speaking Rabbi Schimeon had this vision of the conformations of the
beard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV: Concerning the Third Part of the Beard of
Macroprosopus](tku22)
