[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku29)  [Next](tku31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXII.

### CONCERNING THE TWELFTH PART OF THE BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS.

448\. THE twelfth conformation is that the hairs do not hang over the
mouth, and that the mouth is bare on every part, and that beautiful are
the hairs surrounding it, so that there may be no molestation there, as
is fit.

449\. But wherein consisteth the molestation? Doubtless it is frequently
said, "If judgment exist in the place of judgment (or, "If judgment
follow after judgment"), molestation ariseth."

450\. Therefore are the hairs of the beard either (*symbolical of*)
molestation or judgment, while the other parts appear to (symbolise)
mercy.

451\. Surely it is said for this reason, because the breathings forth of
the Spirit upon Microprosopus are not molestations.

452\. For we have learned that from that holy and excellent mouth of the
Holy of the Holy Ones the Spirit breaketh forth.

453\. What spirit? The Spirit which floweth forth upon Microprosopus,
that it may enshroud Him.

454\. And with that Spirit are all those <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68) veiled which are inferior. And when that
Spirit goeth forth, then is it divided into 37,000 aspects, <span
id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_69) of which each one is expanded, but only in
its proper place.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

455\. And he who is worthy to be enshrouded is en. shrouded by (*the
Spirit*).

456\. And therefore hairs are not found upon the holy mouth, because
thence the Spirit rusheth forth; neither is it necessary that any
(*extraneous things*) whatsoever should be mingled therewith or approach
thereto.

457\. And that (*mouth*) is very secret, because to it nothing adhereth,
nor doth anything touch upon it from above or below; and it is concealed
in the secret of secrets, so that it cannot be known.

458\. In fact, it is not formed, nor doth it exist <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70) (properly speaking) in this conformation.

459\. And because that Spirit which proceedeth unto the exteriors, and
wherewith the true prophets have been overshadowed, is called the mouth
of Tetragrammaton.

460\. But herein, in the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, is it not made
manifest, nor is there any who knoweth His Spirit save Himself.

461\. And therefore are the hairs of (*the beard*) of equal length
around the mouth; and this latter is bare in every part.

462\. And herein have our fathers put their trust, that they might be
overshadowed by that Spirit which is developed in multitudinous aspects,
each in its proper place, wherewith all the equal hairs are surrounded.

463\. This is that which is written in that passage of Micah: "Which
thou has sworn unto our fathers."

464\. And this is the holy and excellent twelfth conformation, from
which, linked together, depend twelve limitations above and twelve
limitations below; even twelve limitations, according unto the twelve
tribes of our fathers.

465\. This is that which is written: "Which Thou hast sworn unto our
fathers."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[164:1](tku30.htm#fr_69) That is, the fourth,
fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Sephiroth which form
Microprosopus; and the tenth, which is the Bride.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[164:2](tku30.htm#fr_70) That is, 37 in the
material, or Asiah = ZL, Zal = profession, LZ, *Laz* = diversion of
force.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[165:1](tku30.htm#fr_71) Meaning that in this
place it is the conformations of the *beard* and not the *mouth* that
are being described.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII: Concerning the Thirteenth Part of the Beard of
Macroprosopus](tku31)
