[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku40)  [Next](tku42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

# CHAPTER XXXIII.

### CONCERNING THE EARS OF MICROPROSOPUS.

707\. This have we learned. It is written, 2 Kings xix. 16: "Incline, O
God, Thine ear and hear;" namely, that ear which is hidden beneath the
hair, and the hair hangeth down over it, and yet the ear is there for
the purpose of hearing.

708\. And from the inner part of the ear, elaborated with strongly
marked concave formations, like a winding spiral ladder, with
incurvation on every side.

709\. But wherefore with curvings? So that He may hear both good and
evil.

710\. Also we have learned: From that curving part within the ears
depend all those Lords of Wings concerning whom it is written, Eccles.
x. 20: "For a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and the Lord of the
Wings shall tell the matter."

711\. Within that ear, (*the Spirit)* floweth from the three hollow
places of the brain into this opening of the ears. And from that afflux
(*the Spirit*) the voice departeth into that profound depth (otherwise,
incurvation) and is conjoined with (*the Spirit*) in that distillation,
as well good as evil.

712\. In good: as it is written, Psa. lxix. 33: "For Tetragrammaton
heareth the poor." In evil; as it is written, Num. xi. i: "And
Tetragrammaton heard, and His wrath arose, and the fire of
Tetragrammaton was kindled against them."

713\. And that ear is closed from without, and a depth otherwise an
incurvation) proceedeth within that gallery of inspiration from the
brain.

714\. So that the voice may be collected together within, neither issue
forth thence, and that it may be guarded and

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

shut in on every side; hence it is in the nature of an Arcanum. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_127)

715\. Woe unto Him who discloseth secrets! For he who revealeth secrets
doth the same thing as if he should deny the superior formation, which
is so arranged that the secrets may be collected together, and that they
may not issue forth without.

716\. Also we have learned in Barietha <span
id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_128): At that time when they call aloud in
their troubles, and the hairs are moved from before the ears, the voice
entereth into the ears through that channel, and the spirit of
distillation from the brain (*entereth into that that channel
likewise*).

717\. And in the brain is it collected (otherwise, and it slideth on
into the brain), and departeth through the nostrils of the nose, and is
bound, and the nose becometh shorter (*that of Microprosopus, namely*)
and gloweth with fire, and fire and smoke issue forth; and from those
nostrils are excited all the severities, and vengeance is exercised.

718\. Truly before that from those nostrils the fire and smoke issue
forth, that voice ascendeth upwards, and slideth into the beginning of
the brain; and the two tears flow down from the eyes.

719\. And by means of that voice the smoke goeth forth, and the fire
from the brightness which openeth those gates; for through that voice
which entereth into the ears all these things are excited and urged
forth (otherwise, are mingled together).

720\. And therefore is it written, Num. xi. 1: "And Tetragrammaton
heard, and His wrath was kindled, and the fire of Tetragrammaton was
kindled against them." For through that hearing of that voice the whole
brain is stirred up.

721\. We have learned. It is written, 2 Kings xix. 16: "Incline, O my
God, Thine ear;" like as if it should be

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

said, "Let six hundred thousand myriads of those wings which depend from
those ears be elongated;" and they are all called the ears of
Tetragrammaton.

722\. When therefore it is said, "Incline, O Tetragrammaton, Thine ear,"
(*this phrase*) "Thine ear," is that of Microprosopus.

723\. From one cavity of the brain do those ears depend; and from the
fifty gates <span id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_129) which proceed from
that cavity, this is one gate, which extendeth and goeth forth and
openeth into that channel of the ear.

724\. Like as it is written, Job xxxiv. 3: "Because the ear trieth
words." Also it is written, Ps. vii. 10: "And He trieth the heart and
reins."

725\. And in proportion to the expansion of that cavity of fifty gates
which proceedeth into the body, so is the latter expanded even in that
place wherein the heart resideth.

726\. Therefore concerning the ear it is said that in it is made
probation; and also concerning the heart it is said that in it is made
probation; because that they proceed (*alike*) from one place.

727\. We have learned in the "Book of Concealed Mystery" that, like as
this ear proveth as well the good as the evil, so all things which are
in Microprosopus have part good and part evil, right and left, Mercy and
Judgment.

728\. And this ear is contiguous unto the brain; and because it is
contiguous unto the brain, hence that voice is directed into a cavity
which entereth into the ear.

729\. Therefore concerning the ear it is called hearing; but in this
hearing, Binah, the Understanding (*the third Sephira*) is comprehended;
for, also, to hear, is the same as to understand, because that thereby
all examinations are examined together.

730\. And those words of the Lord of Lords are given

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

forth so that they may be heard, so that they may be meditated upon and
be understood.

731\. Come, behold I it is written, Hab. iii. 1: "Tetragrammaton! I have
heard Thy voice, and was afraid."

732\. This passage hath this meaning: When that holy prophet heard and
understood and knew, and was occupied with those conformations, it is
written: "I was afraid." Rightly was it (*so written*) that he should be
afraid and be broken before Him, for these words are said concerning
Microprosopus.

733\. When further he understood and knew, what is then written? "O
Tetragrammaton! revive Thy work in the midst of the years." But
concerning the Ancient of Days is this said.

734\. And in every passage wherein is found Tetragrammaton,
Tetragrammaton, with Yod He twice, or with Aleph Daleth and Yod He, the
one belongeth unto Microprosopus, and the other unto the Ancient of the
Ancient Ones. For because all these things are one certain thing, hence
by one name are they called.

735\. Also we have learned. When is the full name expressed? When it is
written, IHVH ALHIM, *Tetragrammaton Elohim*. For that is the full name
of the Most Ancient of all, and of Microprosopus; and when joined
together they are called the full name. But other forms are not called
the full name, like as we have established.

736\. When it is said, Gen. ii. 8: "And Tetragrammaton Elohim planted,"
&c., the name is given in full, where the discourse is concerning the
planting of the garden; and whensoever Tetragrammaton Elohim occurreth
the full name is expressed.

737\. In IHVH IHVH all things generally are comprehended, and then
mercies are stirred up over all things.

738\. (*When it is said*) "O Tetragrammaton! revive Thy work in the
midst of the years," concerning the Ancient of Days is it said.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

739\. What is "Thy work"? Zauir Anpin, Microprosopus.

740\. "In the midst of years." These are the former years, which are
called IMI QDM, *Yemi Qedem*, former days; and not years, OVLM, *Olahm*,
or of the world.

741\. The former years are the former days; the years of the world are
the days of the world. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_130)

742\. And here (*it is said*): "In the midst of the years." What years?
The former years.

743\. "Revive it." Concerning whom is it said, "Revive it"? Concerning
Microprosopus. For all His splendour is preserved by those years, and
therefore is it said, "Revive it."

744\. "In wrath remember mercy." He looketh to that supernal benignity
wherein mercies are excited over all; (*those mercies*) who desire
compassion, and to whom mercy is owing.

745\. We have learned, Rabbi Schimeon said: "I call to witness the
heavens which are above me, towards all those who stand around, that
great joy ariseth in all the worlds because of these words.

746\. "Also these words excite joy in my heart; and in the veil of
excellent expansion are they hidden and do they ascend; and He, the Most
Ancient One of all, preserveth them, He, the Concealed and Hidden of
all.

747\. "And when we began to speak my companions know not that all these
words therein were worthy hereof in any degree.

748\. "O how blessed is your portion, companions of this conclave! and
blessed is my portion with you in this world, and in the world to come!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[200:1](tku41.htm#fr_128) Because in a similar
manner a secret is guarded and shut in.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[200:2](tku41.htm#fr_129) See *ante*, § 388.
Barietha is "Traditio extra urbem."

<span id="fn_129"></span>[201:1](tku41.htm#fr_130) This refers to the
"fifty gates of the Understanding"--alluding to the third Sephira.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[203:1](tku41.htm#fr_131) In connection with §
741. note Ps. lxxvii. 5: "ChShBThI IMIM MQDM ShNVTh OVLMIM, "I have
considered the days of old, the years of ancient times."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV: Concerning the Beard of Microprosopus](tku42)
