[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku39)  [Next](tku41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXXII.

### CONCERNING THE NOSE OF MICROPROSOPUS.

661\. WE have learned it in the "Book of Concealed Mystery." The nose of
Microprosopus. From the nose is the countenance known. In this nose is
diverse symbolism.

662\. For it is written, Ps. xviii. 8: "There went up

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

a smoke out of His nose, <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_115) and fire
out of His mouth devoured; coals were kindled by it."

663\. "There went up a smoke out of His nose." In this smoke are
included both the fire and the burning coals; for there is no smoke
without fire, neither fire without smoke. Truly all things result
(*herefrom*: otherwise, are kindled *herein*) and go forth from His
nose.

664\. Also we have learned that when these three things are associated
together which are included in that smoke which issueth from the nose,
the nose <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_116) is lengthened.

665\. And therein are two colours, for the smoke bloweth and rusheth
forth black and red; and they call it AP, <span
id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_117) *Aph*, wrath; and ChIMH, *Chimah*,
fervour; and MShChITh, *Meshachith*, perdition.

666\. And if thou sayest wrath and fervour, it is well, since it is
written, Deut. ix. 19: "Since I have feared because of wrath and
fervour." For these are the black and red smoke. But whence is added
MShChITh, *Meshachith*, perdition?

667\. Because it is written, Gen. xiii. 10: "Before that Tetragrammaton
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah." But the word ShChTh, *Shachith*, denoted
perdition brought about by burning, kindled fire.

668\. Also we have learned that there are five <span
id="fr_119"></span>[4](#fn_118) GBVRAN, Geboran, severities in this
conformation of Microprosopus, and they ascend in one thousand and four
hundred severities, GBVRAN; and they are extended in

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

\[paragraph continues\] His nose, and in His mouth, and in His arms, and
in His hands, and in His fingers.

669\. And therefore is it written, Ps. cvi. 2: "Who can declare the
GBVRVTh, *Geburoth*, powers of Tetragrammaton?"

670\. Hence it is written, "powers" Geburoth (*in the plural number*);
and it is written, 1 Chron. xxix. ii: "Thine! O Tetragrammaton, are
Gedulah and Geburah," <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_119) in the
singular (*number*).

671\. Assuredly thus have we learned. When all those severities are
amalgamated into one, then are they called one Geburah, GBVRH.

672\. And all those powers, Geboran, commence to descend from the nose.
And from it depend a thousand times a thousand and four hundred myriads
in their single (*form*). <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_120)

673\. And from that smoke which issueth from his nose depend a thousand
times a thousand myriads, and four hundred and five which belong to this
(*idea of*) Severity. <span id="fr_122"></span>[3](#fn_121) For all the
severities depend from this nose.

674\. For it is written, Ps. cxlv. 4: "From generation unto generation
shall they praise thy works, and announce thy GBVRVTh, *Geburoth*."

675\. And when that GBVRH, *Geburah*, Strength, commenceth (*to be
manifested*), all the severities radiate thence, and are sharpened,
until they descend in the form of a swift, whirling fire-flaming sword
(Gen. iii. 24.)

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

676\. It is written, Gen. xix. 13: "For we will destroy this place."
Also it is written, Gen. xiii. 10: "Before that Tetragrammaton destroyed
Sodom and Gomorrah?" And again, Gen. xix. 24: "Tetragrammaton rained
upon Sodom and [Gomorrah](errata.htm#5)."

677\. Assuredly thus have we learned: There is no judge over the wicked,
but they themselves convert the measure of Mercy into a measure of
judgment.

678\. But how do they convert it thus? Also it is written, Mal. iii. 6:
"I, Tetragrammaton, change not."

679\. Assuredly as many times as the Ancient of the Ancient Ones and
that White Head uncovereth the benevolence of benevolences, great
mercies are found everywhere.

680\. But when that is not uncovered, all the judgments of Microprosopus
are prepared; and in this manner, if it be permitted us to say so, Mercy
becometh judgment; that is, the most Ancient One of all.

681\. We have learned in Barietha <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_122):
"When the Ancient of the Ancient Ones uncovereth the benevolence of
benevolences, all those lights which are called by a similar name shine,
and Mercy is found in all things."

682\. But when that Concealed One of the Concealed Ones is not
uncovered, and those lights shine not, judgments are stirred up, and
judgment is exercised.

683\. Who therefore is the cause of that judgment? The benevolence of
the benevolences, because it is not uncovered, and therefore do sinners
change Mercy into judgment (*as regardeth themselves*).

684\. But because this is said, Gen. xix. 24: "From Tetragrammaton out
of heaven," it is said concerning Zauir Anpin, Microprosopus.

685\. And whence is this obtained? Because it is written (*in the
preceding passage*): MN HShMIM, *Men Ha-Shamayim*, out of heaven. (

But the word

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *HShMIM Ha-Shamayim, is equivalent to*) ASh
VMIM, <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_123) *Ash Ve-Mim*, fire and
water, Mercy and judgment, in the antithesis of that (condition) wherein
no Judgment is found at all.

686\. We have learned that this nose (*of Microprosopus*) is
short, <span id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_124) and when the smoke
commenceth to issue therefrom, it departeth thence swiftly, and judgment
is exercised.

687\. But what hindereth that nose that it may not produce smoke? The
nose of the Ancient and Holy One; for He is also called before all
others ARK APIM, *Arikh Aphim*, Long of Nose.

688\. And this is the Arcanum which we have learned: Between the two
words, IHVH, IHVH, Tetragrammaton, Tetragrammaton, an accent is
interpolated <span id="fr_126"></span>[3](#fn_125) (*whensoever these
two are found in juxtaposition in Scripture*).

689\. For wheresoever an y name is repeated twice over, a distinction is
made (*between them*), as when it is said, Gen. xxii. 11, "Abraham,
Abraham;" also, Gen. xlvi. 2, "Jacob, Jacob;" also, 1 Sam. iii. 10,
"Samuel, Samuel;" where, by the *Psiq* accent, these pairs of names are
distinguished; excepting that place, Exod. iii. 4, "Moses, Moses," where
no accent interveneth.

690\. For what reason? "Abraham, Abraham," Gen. xxii. xx (

herein therefore is an accent introduced because

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *that*) the latter (*of these two names*)
denoteth that which is perfect, but the former that which is not as yet
perfect; for at this time he is perfected with ten temptations, and
therefore is the (*Psiq*) accent interpolated, for. at this time he can
hardly be said to be the same man as he was before.

691\. (*When it is said*), "Jacob, Jacob" (Gen. xlvi. 2), the latter
denoteth that which is perfect, the former that which is not as yet
perfect; for now the messenger had come to him from his son Joseph, and
over him was the Schechinah at rest.

692\. Also, now at this time was perfected in the earth the holy tree,
similar unto the Supernal One, in having twelve limitations and seventy
branches, <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_126) which were not hitherto
completed; and therefore the latter denoteth that which is perfect, and
the former that which is not as yet perfect; whence the accent falleth
between them.

693\. In the passage, "Samuel, Samuel" (1 Sam. iii. 10), an accent is
also interpolated: wherefore? The latter name denoteth that which is
perfect; the former that which is not as yet perfect; for now he is a
prophet, whereas before this he was not as yet a prophet.

694\. But when it is said, Exod. iii. 4: "Moses, Moses," no accent is
interpolated, because he was perfect from the very day of his birth,
seeing it is written, Exod. ii. 2: "And she saw him, that he was good."

695\. So also here between these two names of Tetragrammaton, Exod.
xxxiv. 6, the *Psiq* accent is interpolated; for the first is indeed a
perfect name, but the latter is thoroughly and completely perfect.

696\. But Moses speaketh thus in the place of judgment, in order that
for them he may cause Mercy to

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

descend upon Microprosopus from the Most Holy Ancient One.

697\. For thus is the tradition. So great was the virtue of Moses that
he could make the measures of Mercy descend.

698\. And when the Ancient One is uncovered toward Microprosopus all
things are beheld in the light of Mercy, and the nose is appeased, and
fire and smoke issue not therefrom.

699\. Like as it is written, Isa. xlviii. 9: "And with my praise will I
defer mine anger for thee."

700\. Also we have learned: The nose hath two nostrils. From the one
issueth a flaming smoke, and it entereth into the opening of the Great
Abyss.

701\. And from the other nostril issueth afire which is kindled by its
flame; and it floweth into four thousand worlds, which are upon His left
side.

702\. Truly, he who is the cause of war is called the fire of
Tetragrammaton, the consuming fire, the fire which consumeth all other
fires.

703\. And that fire is not mitigated save by the fire of the altar.

704\. And that smoke which issueth forth from the other nostril is not
mitigated unless by the smoke of the sacrifice of the altar. But all
things depend from the nose.

705\. Therefore is it written, Gen. viii. 12: "And Tetragrammaton
smelled a sweet savour." For all these are attributed unto the nose, to
smell a savour, and to emit smoke and fire, and red colour, and
therefore is it opposed unto the benevolence (*namely, the forehead*).

706\. And for that cause is it written, Exod. iv. 14: "And the anger of
Tetragrammaton was kindled." Deut. vii. 4: "And the anger of
Tetragrammaton will be kindled." Exod. xxii. 24: "And My wrath is
kindled." Deut. vi. 15: "Lest the wrath of Tetragrammaton be kindled."
Which are all to be understood concerning Zauir Anpin, or Microprosopus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[192:1](tku39.htm#fr_115) Right and left exist
in Microprosopus, while in Macroprosopus all is right. The latter is
rather to be symbolised by a profile, as I have before remarked, than by
a full face, as in the case of the former.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[193:1](tku40.htm#fr_116) The ordinary English
version renders it "nostrils" and not "nose," but in the Hebrew the word
is singular.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[193:2](tku40.htm#fr_117) Isa. xlviii. 9 is
translated in the ordinary English version: "For my name's sake will I
defer mine anger;" but Parkhurst in his Hebrew and Chaldee Lexicon, art.
ChTM, says the correct rendering is "for my name's sake will I lengthen
my nose." Knorr de Rosenroth, in his Latin version of § 664, renders it
by, "corrugatur," which is hardly correct.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[193:3](tku40.htm#fr_118) The word AP, Ath,
stands alike for the words "nose" and "anger."

<span id="fn_118"></span>[193:4](tku40.htm#fr_119) if we carefully
examine this obscure passage, I think we shall find that the number five
is the key to unlock its symbolism; for five is the fifth Sephira,
*Geburah*, GBVRH, Strength or Severity, which operates <span
id="page_194">p. 194</span> through judgment, and ultimately through the
numbers and intelligences of the planet Mars. Now, the 1,400 severities
are the fivefold form of RP, *Raph*, which = the idea of terror. and RP
= 280, which x 5 = 1,400. And the least number of 1,400 is 1 + 4 + 0 + 0
= 5. Also 1,400 = ATh = chaos, or substance of anything. Finally, these
are extended Into five parts of Macroprosopus--viz., nose, mouth, arms,
hands, fingers. And the number 5 = H.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[194:1](tku40.htm#fr_120) See Introduction.
GBVR (the root being GBR) = 211= IAR, a flood. This is of course by
Gematria.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[194:2](tku40.htm#fr_121) This formidable
sounding arrangement is only our previous 1,400 considered on another
plane of operation, in the material world.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[194:3](tku40.htm#fr_122) This is 1,400 again
in its most material forms in Asiah; the number five at the end in
simply the number of the Sephira of Severity added to the other.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[195:1](tku40.htm#fr_123) See *ante*, § 388 of
this book.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[196:1](tku40.htm#fr_124) In the "Sepher
Yetzirah," to which work I have already had occasion to refer more than
once, the letter Sh is aid to symbolize fire, and therefore ShMIM may be
said to be fire and water.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[196:2](tku40.htm#fr_125) In contradistinction
to that of Macroprosopus, who is called also Arikh Aphim, Long of Nose,
as well as Arikh Anpin, Vast of Countenance.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[196:3](tku40.htm#fr_126) This accent is called
*Psiq*, and in the grammar of Gesenius is classed as the twentieth
accent, or the fifth of the third series known as the "lesser
distinctives." It is represented by a vertical line placed between the
two words to which it applies. An example of its use is to be found in
Exod. xxxiv. 6: "Tetragrammaton, Tetragrammaton (*between these two
words a Psiq accent is introduced*), merciful and gracious,
longsuffering and abundant in goodness and truth." It is worthy of note
that the word here translated "long-suffering" is ARK APIM, *Arikh
Aphim*, Long of Nose.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[197:1](tku40.htm#fr_127) That is, the *Autz
Chaiim*, or tree of life, composed of the Sephiroth and the
Schemhamphorasch, the former being ten and the latter seventy-two. The
twelve limitations are the twelve sons of Jacob, and the seventy
branches the total number of the combined families.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII: Concerning the Ears of Microprosopus](tku41)
