[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku41)  [Next](tku43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

# CHAPTER XXXIV.

### CONCERNING THE BEARD OF MICROPROSOPUS.

749\. RABBI SCHIMEON commenced and said, Deut. iv 4: "And ye shall
cleave unto Tetragrammaton your God," &c.

750\. What nation is so holy as Israel? for it is written concerning
them, Deut. xxxiii. 29: "Blessed art thou, O Israel! <span
id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_131) who is like unto thee?" Because that
they are applied unto God in this world through the holy name.

751\. And in the world to come more than here, for therein shall we
never be separated from that conclave wherein the just are assembled.

752\. And this is that which is written: "And ye shall cleave in
Tetragrammaton;" for it is not written "ChDPQIM LIHVH, *Chedebeqim Le
Tetragrammaton*, Ye shall cleave unto Tetragrammaton;" but "BIHVH, *Be
Tetragrammaton*, in Tetragrammaton," properly.

753\. We have learned this. There is a descent from the beard which is
venerable, holy, excellent, hidden and concealed in all (*the beard,
namely, of Macroprosopus*), through the holy magnificent oil, into the
beard of Microprosopus.

754\. And if thou shalt say that this beard is not to be found, for that
even Solomon only spake of the cheeks, <span
id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_132) but not at all of the beard.

755\. Truly thus have we learned (we make answer) in the "Book of
Concealed Mystery." It is that which is hidden and recondite, and of
which mention is not made,

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

neither is it uncovered; it is that which is venerable and excellent
before all things, seeing that it is Concealed and hidden.

756\. And since the beard is the praise and perfection and dignity of
the whole countenance, in these sacred things it is found to be hidden,
neither is it discerned.

757\. And that beard is the perfection and beauty of the countenance in
Microprosopus. In nine conformations is it disposed.

758\. But when the venerable beard of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones
shineth upon this beard of Microprosopus, then the thirteen fountains of
excellent oil flow down upon this beard.

759\. And therein are found twenty-two parts, and thence extend the
twenty-two letters of the holy law.

760\. Also we have learned that this beard departeth from His ears, and
descendeth and ascendeth, and toucheth upon the places of fragrance.

761\. What are the places of fragrance? Like as it is said, Cant. v. 13:
"Like a bed (*singular*) of spices," and not "beds" (*plural*).

762\. But this beard of Microprosopus is disposed in nine conformations.

763\. And also the hairs being black, and in careful order, like a
handsome man, as it is written, Cant. v. 15: "Excellent as the cedars."

764\. The first conformation. The hair is conformed from the portion
which is above, and there goeth forth therefrom a spark which is of most
intense brilliance; and it goeth forth from the Absolute of the pure
ether, and passeth beneath the hair of the head, even beneath those
locks which are above the ears; and it descendeth in front of the
opening of the ears, hair above hair, even unto the beginning of the
mouth.

765\. The second conformation. The hair goeth forth, and ascendeth from
the one part of the mouth even unto the

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

other part of the opening of the mouth; and it descendeth beneath the
mouth unto the other side, hair above hair, in beautiful arrangement.

766\. The third conformation. From the midst, beneath the nose, and
beneath the two nostrils, there goeth forth a certain path, and short
and coarse hairs fill up that path; and the remaining hairs fill up the
place from this side unto that, around this path.

767\. But this path is not clearly seen (*to be continued*) below (*the
mouth*), but only the upper part of it which descendeth even unto the
beginning of the lips, and there is this path applied.

768\. The fourth conformation. The hair goeth forth and is disposed in
order, and ascendeth, and is spread over His cheeks, which are the place
of fragrance of the Ancient One.

769\. The fifth conformation. The hair is wanting, and there are seen
two apples on this side and on that, red as a red rose, and they radiate
into two hundred and seventy worlds, which are enkindled thereby.

770\. The sixth conformation. The hair goeth forth as in a tress about
(*the border of*) the beard, and hangeth down even unto the commencement
of the vital organs, but it descendeth not unto the parts about the
heart.

771\. The seventh conformation. That the hairs do not hang over the
mouth, but that the mouth is uncovered on every side, and that the hairs
are disposed in order about it.

772\. The eighth conformation. That the hairs descend beneath the beard,
and cover the throat, so that it cannot be seen; all those hairs are
slender, hairs above hairs, plentiful in every part.

773\. The ninth conformation. That the hairs are mingled together with
those which are joined unto them; and that they all are in equality from
the cheeks even unto those hairs which hang down; all are in fair

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

equality, like a brave man, and like a hero victorious in war.

774\. Through these nine conformations there proceed and flow down nine
fountains of magnificent oil, and these indeed flow down from that
magnificent supernal oil (*of the heard of Macroprosopus*) into all
those inferiors.

775\. Those nine conformations are found in form herein (otherwise, in
this beard); and in the perfection of the conformation of this beard is
the inferior son of man called the brave man. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_133)

776\. For whosoever seeth (*in sleep*) that his beard existeth in proper
form, <span id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_134) in him is found courage and
strength.

777\. Rabbi Schimeon spake unto Rabbi Eleazar, his son, and said:
"Arise, O my Son, and expound the parts of the holy beard in its
conformations."

778\. Rabbi Eleazar arose, and commenced and said, Ps. cxviii. 5: "'I
called upon IH, *Yah*, in my distress; Yah heard me at large.
Tetragrammaton is on my side, I will not fear; what can man do unto me?
Tetragrammaton taketh my part with them that help me, and I shall see my
desire upon mine enemies. It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton than
to put any confidence in man; it is better to trust in Tetragrammaton
than to put any confidence in princes.'

779\. "Herein are delineated the nine conformations of this beard. For
King David had need of these dispositions, that he might vanquish other
kings and other nations.

780\. "Come, behold! After that he had said these nine conformations, he
added (verse 10): 'All nations compassed me about, but in the name of
Tetragrammaton I win destroy them.'

781\. "Therefore did he rehearse those conformations

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

which we have repeated. But what was the necessity for so doing? Because
that he said: 'All nations compassed me about.' For in this disposition
of those nine conformations which are the name of IHVH,
*Tetragrammaton*, are they cut off from the earth.

782\. "This is that same which is written: 'In the name of IHVH will I
destroy them.'

783\. "Also this have we learned in the 'Book of Concealed Mystery.'
David hath here enumerated the nine conformations; of which six consist
in the holy name, for there are six names; <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_135) and there are three in the word ADM,
*Adam*, or man.

784\. "And if thou shalt say that there are only two (*in the word
Adam*), assuredly there are three, because also the princes pertain unto
the idea of the word Adam. <span id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_136)

785\. "This have we learned. These are the six names, because it is thus
written: 'I called upon Yah in my distress.' The first.

786\. "'Yah heard me at large.' The second.

787\. Tetragrammaton is on my side, I will not fear.' The third.

788\. "'Tetragrammaton taketh my part with them that help me.' The
fourth.

789\. "'It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.' The fifth.

790\. "'It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.' The sixth.

791\. "But in the word ADM, *Adam*, Man, are three; for it is written:
'Tetragrammaton is on my side, I will not fear; what can ADM, *Adam*,
Man, do unto me?' The first.

792\. "'It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton than to put any
confidence in princes.' The second.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

793\. "'It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton than to put any
confidence in ADM, *Adam*, Man.' The third.

794\. "And come, behold! There is an Arcanum hidden in this thing; and
wheresoever in this passage mention is made of the word ADM, *Adam*,
thereunto the Holy name is joined; and truly for a reason, seeing that
man subsisteth only, through that which is analogous unto himself.

795\. "But what is it which is analogous unto him? The Holy Name;
because it is written, Gen. ii. 7: 'And IHVH ALHIM, *Tetragrammaton
Elohim*, created ADM, *Adam*, Man,' with the full Name, which is IHVH
ALHIM, analogous to him (*Adam*), seeing that IHVH, Tetragrammaton,
denoteth the masculine, and ALHIM, *Elohim*, the feminine. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_137)

796\. "And therefore in this passage there is no mention made of ADM,
*Adam*, Man, without the Holy Name.

797\. "Also we have learned this. It is written: 'I called upon IH,
*Yah*, in my distress; IH, *Yah*, heard me at large.' IH is here twice
repeated, IH, IH, in reference to the two jaws unto which the hairs (*of
the beard*) adhere, and from which it is seen that the hairs issue and
depend.

798\. "He hasteneth and saith (*i.e.*, King David): 'IHVH,
*Tetragrammaton*, is on my side; I will not fear; IHVH taketh my part
with them that help me; wherein the Name is not written defectively (IH
as before, but IHVH) which is the Holy Name, and with this Name mention
is also made of man.

799\. "And what is this thing which is said, 'What can ADM, *Adam*, Man,
do unto me?' It is thus, as we have

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

learned by tradition: All those sacred diadems of the King, <span
id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_138) when He is conformed in his dispositions
(*that is, when the letters of Tetragrammaton are all conjoined
together*), are called ADM, *Adam*, Man, which is the Form <span
id="fr_140"></span>[2](#fn_139) which comprehendeth all things.

800\. "But when any portion is taken away therefrom (*that is to say,
when it is said IH, and not IHVH*), then is understood (*Microprosopus*)
the Holy Name (*by the letter I, Yod*) and ThORA, *Tauara*, or the Gate
(*that is, the Bride, to whom is attributed the name ADNI, Adonai, whose
number when written in its Plenitude is* 671, <span
id="fr_141"></span>[3](#fn_140) *as the word ThORA or ThROA exhibiteth
it, summed up in the letter H, He, of the name IH*), and that which is
therein.

801\. "When therefore it is called Tetragrammaton, man is mentioned,
with the Gate Tauara included, and those which are therein \[otherwise,
concerning the inferior worlds. And when it is taken away from the gate
(*that is, when the letters Vau and He are not joined hereunto, of which
the latter denoteth the inferior gate*), then is understood the Holy
Name (*by the Yod*), and the Gate and those which are therein (*by the
He in the name IH*). But when it is called IHVH, it is called the man,
ADM, and all the rest (*conjoined therewith*), namely, the gate and
those (*paths*) which are therein.\] <span
id="fr_142"></span>[4](#fn_141)

802\. "And therefore did David enumerate those nine conformations;
because he unto whom it is allowed

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

to touch the beard of the King can do all which he desireth.

803\. "Wherefore then the beard, and not the body? Because the body is
hidden behind the beard, but the beard hath no place (*of concealment*)
behind the body.

804\. "But he in reckoning it proceedeth in a duplex manner <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_142)--once as we have given it; and next
thus, when he saith: 'I called upon *Yah* in my distress.' The first.

805\. "'Yah heard me at large.' The second.

806\. "'Tetragrammaton is on my side; I will not fear. The third.

807\. "'What can man do unto me?' The fourth.

808\. "'Tetragrammaton taketh my part with them that help me.' The
fifth.

809\. "'And I shall see my desire upon mine enemies.' The sixth.

810\. "'It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.' The seventh.

811\. "'Than to put any confidence in man.' The eighth.

812\. "'It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.' The ninth.

813\. "'Than to put any confidence in princes.' The tenth. <span
id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_143) (Otherwise: 'It is better to trust in
Tetragrammaton than to put any confidence in man.' The seventh. 'It is
better to trust in Tetragrammaton.' The eighth. 'Than to put any
confidence in princes.' The ninth.)

814\. "'I called upon Yah in my distress.' What is this which he saith?
Assuredly doth David say all these things which are here said concerning
the form of the beard."

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

815\. Rabbi Yehudah answered and said: "'I called upon Yah in my
distress.' From the part where the beard beginneth to extend, which is
from the more remote part (is one), before the ears, beneath the hair
(*is the second*). And therefore is it twice said, IH, IH.

816\. "But in that place wherein the beard is expanded, and descendeth
before the ears, in wider extension, the name of ADM, *Adam*, Man, hath
place (that is to say, the complete Tetragrammaton). Also this expansion
was necessary to David when he wished to subject to himself the Icings
and nations through the dignity of this beard. (Otherwise, when
therefore he saith, 'Tetragrammaton is on my side, I will not fear;' for
this is such a one who spareth not the wicked, and this was altogether
necessary, &c.)

817\. "Also we have learned this in the 'Book of Concealed
Mystery' <span id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_144): Whosoever seeth in his
sleep that he toucheth the beard or moustache of the supernal man with
his hand, or extendeth his hand unto it, let him know that he is at
peace with the supernals, and that those who afflict him are about to be
subjected unto him." <span id="fr_146"></span>[2](#fn_145)

818\. "We have learned that the supernal beard is disposed in nine
conformations, and that it is the beard of Microprosopus..

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[204:1](tku42.htm#fr_132) It must not be
forgotten that Israel is a mystical name which was substituted for
Jacob.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[204:2](tku42.htm#fr_133) Namely, in the
description in the Song of Solomon. ch. v.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[207:1](tku42.htm#fr_134) Meaning, that as is
the Supernal Man so is the earthly man.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[207:2](tku42.htm#fr_135) Meaning, if he dreams
that his beard is arranged like that of Microprosopus.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[208:1](tku42.htm#fr_136) *I.e.*, then are six
repetitions of the name of the Deity in the verses under consideration.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[208:2](tku42.htm#fr_137) Meaning, that the
word princes, in the verse "than to put any confidence in princes."
refers also to man.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[209:1](tku42.htm#fr_138) For Elohim is from
the *feminine* root ALH, and is really a FEMININE PLURAL, for while many
masculines form their plural in VTh, many feminines conversely form
theirs in IM. In both these cases. however, the gender of the singular
is retained in the plural. (See Gesenius' Hebrew Grammar, § 86, art 4.)

<span id="fn_138"></span>[210:1](tku42.htm#fr_139) The King--*i.e.*,
Microprosopus. (See Introduction.)

<span id="fn_139"></span>[210:2](tku42.htm#fr_140) For it is said that
the Tetragrammaton, written [vertically top to bottom](errata.htm#6) in
the Hebrew letters, gives the figure of a man. For *Yod* = the head,
*He* = the arms, *Vau* = the body, and *He* final = the legs, (See Table
of Hebrew letters in the Introduction.)

<span id="fn_140"></span>[210:3](tku42.htm#fr_141) That is to say, when
the letters of ADNI are spelt thus: ALP, DLTh, NVN, IVD, Aleph, Daleth,
Nun, Yod; for A + L + P + D + L + Th + N + V + N + I + V + D = 1 + 30 +
80 + 4 + 30 + 400 + 50 + 6 + 50 + 10 + 6 + 4 = 671. And ThORA or ThROA =
400 + 70 + 200 + 1 = 671 also.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[210:4](tku42.htm#fr_142) The long piece above
in brackets, but in ordinary type, is from the Cremona Codex.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[211:1](tku42.htm#fr_143) Referring to the
order of the conformations, and the way in which in the passage those
referring to IHVH and ADM are conjoined.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[211:2](tku42.htm#fr_144) The reader will of
course also observe that these answer to the ten Sephiroth.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[212:1](tku42.htm#fr_145) See *ante*, "Book of
Concealed Mystery." ch. iii. § 17.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[212:2](tku42.htm#fr_146) This is apparently
the end of Rabbi Yehudah's short interpolation regarding the duplicated
IH. Rabbi Eleazar now apparently resumes the discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV: Concerning the First Part of the Beard of
Microprosopus](tku43)
