[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku63)  [Next](tku65) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI.

### CONCERNING THE BRAIN OF MICROPROSOPUS AND ITS CONNECTIONS.

433\. AND when both can be conjoined and bound together mutually
(*i.e.*, the Father and the Mother), there proceedeth thenceforth a
certain hard Skull.

434\. And it is extended on its sides, so that there may be one part on
one side, and another one on another side.

435\. For as the Most Holy Ancient One is found to include equally in
Himself the Three Heads, <span id="fr_268"></span>[2](#fn_265) so all
things

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

are symbolized under the form of the Three Heads, as we have stated.

436\. Into this skull (*of Microprosopus*) distilleth the dew from the
White Head (*of Macroprosopus*), and covereth it.

437\. And that dew appeareth to be of two colours, and by it is
nourished the field of the holy apple trees.

438\. And from this dew of this Skull is the manna prepared for the just
in the world to come. <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_266)

439\. And by it shall the dead be raised to life.

440\. But that manna hath not at any other time been prepared so that it
might descend from this dew, save at that time when the Israelites were
wandering in the wilderness, and the Ancient One supplied them with food
from this place; because that afterwards it did not fall out so more
fully.

44n This is the same which is said, Exod. xvi. 4: "Behold I rain upon
you bread from heaven." And also that passage where it is thus written,
Gen. xxvii. 28: "And the Elohim shall give unto thee of the dew of
heaven."

442\. These things occur in that time. Concerning another time it is
written: "The food of man is from God the Most Holy One--blessed be
He!"--and that dependeth from MZLA, *Mezla*, the Influence; assuredly,
from the Influence rightly so called.

443\. And therefore is it customary to say: "Concerning children, life,
and nourishment, the matter dependeth not from merit, but from the
Influence." For all these things depend from this Influence, as we have
already shown.

444\. Nine thousand myriads of worlds receive influence from and are
uphold by that GVLGLThA, *Golgeltha*, Skull.

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

445\. And in all things is that subtle AVIRA, *Auira*, Ether, <span
id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_267) contained, as It Itself containeth all
things, and as. in It all things are comprehended.

446\. His countenance is extended in two sides, <span
id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_268) in two lights, which in themselves
contain all things.

447\. And when His countenance (*i.e., that of Microprosopus*) looketh
back upon the countenance of the Most Holy Ancient One, all things are
called ARK APIM, *Arikh Aphim*, Vastness of Countenance.,

448\. What is ARK APIM, or Vastness of Countenance? Also it should
rather be called ARVK APIM, *Arokh Aphim*, Vast in Countenance.

449\. Assuredly thus is the tradition, since also He prolongeth His
wrath against the wicked. But the phrase ARK APIM, *Arikh Aphim*, also
implies the same as "healing power of countenance."

450\. Seeing that health is never found in the world save when the
countenances (*of Macroprosopus and Microprosopus*) mutually behold each
other.

451\. In the hollow of the Skull (*of Microprosopus*) shine three
lights. And although thou canst call them three, yet notwithstanding are
there four,  <span id="fr_272"></span>[3](#fn_269) as we have before
said.

452\. He (*Microprosopus*) is the heir of His Father and of his Mother,
and there are two inheritances from Them; all which things are bound
together under the symbol of the Crown of His Head. And they are the
phylacteries of His Head.

453\. After that these are united together after a

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

certain manner they shine, and go forth into the Three Cavities of the
Skull.

454\. (*And then*) singly they are developed each after its own manner,
and they are extended through the whole body.

455\. But they are associated together in two Brains, and the third
Brain containeth the others in itself. <span
id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_270)

456\. And it adhereth as well to the one side as to the other, and is
expanded throughout the whole body.

457\. And therefrom are formed two colours mixed together in one, and
His countenance shineth.

458\. And the colours of His countenance are symbols of Ab (*the
Father*) and Aima (*the Mother*), and are called Däath (*Knowledge*) in
Däath.

459\. As it is written, 1 Sam. ii. 3: "Since El Daoth (*plural*) is
Tetragrammaton," because in him there are two colours.

460\. Unto Him (*Microprosopus*) are works ascribed diversely; but to
the Most Holy Ancient One (*operations*) are not ascribed diversely.

461\. For what reason doth He (*Microprosopus*) admit of variable
disposition? Because He is the heir of two inheritances (*i.e., from
Chokmah and Binah*).

462\. Also it is written, Ps. xviii. 26: "With the merciful man thou
shalt show thyself merciful."

463\. But also truly and rightly have the Companions decided concerning
that saying where it is written, Gen. xxix. 12: "And Jacob declared unto
Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son.

464\. It is written, "Rebekah's son," and not "the son of Isaac." And
all the mysteries are in Chokmah. <span id="fr_274"></span>[2](#fn_271)

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

465\. And therefore is (*Chokmah*) called the Perfection of all: and to
it is ascribed the name of Truth.

466\. And therefore is it written, "And Jacob declared:" and not
written, "and Jacob said."

467\. Those (*two*) colours are extended throughout the whole Body
(*Microprosopus*) and His Body cohereth with them.

468\. In the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments,
(*things*) are not ascribed diversely, and unto Him do they not tend
(*diversely*), since the whole is the same (*with itself*) and (*thus
is*) life unto all (*things*); and from Him judgment dependeth not
(*directly*).

469\. But concerning Him (*Microprosopus*) it is written, that unto Him
are ascribed (*diverse*) works, properly speaking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[302:1](tku63.htm#fr_267) Compare this with
Miölner. the hammer of Thor, of Scandinavian mythology.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[302:2](tku64.htm#fr_268) Chokmah and Binah,
included in Kether.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[303:1](tku64.htm#fr_269) It is to be noted
that this word is MNA, *Manna*, and is a Metathesis of the letters AMN,
*Amen*, which has been shown in the "Book of Concealed Mystery" to be
equal by Gematria to IHVH ADNI.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[304:1](tku64.htm#fr_270) ? Astral Light.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[304:2](tku64.htm#fr_271) Right and left; while
in Macroprosopus "all is right."

<span id="fn_269"></span>[304:3](tku64.htm#fr_272) At first sight this
seems a contradiction, but on careful examination the difficulty
disappears. A triangle is a fit expression of the number 3. It has 3
angles, it has 3 sides; but there is the whole figure itself also, which
is the synthesis of the sides and the angles. So there are the 3 angles
and the whole figure itself which contains them, and thus completes the
Trinity by the Quaternary: in the Tetragrammaton, IHV, and H final,
which forms the synthesis.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[305:1](tku64.htm#fr_273) Thus rigidly
following out the rule of the symbolism before given, that Chokmah and
Binah are contained in Kether, in this is the key of all religions.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[305:2](tku64.htm#fr_274) BChKMThA,
*Be-Chokmatha*; ChKMThA is the emphatic Chaldee form of ChKMA, which is
Chaldee for Hebrew ChKMH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: Concerning the Hair of Microprosopus](tku65)
