[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku64)  [Next](tku66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XII.

### CONCERNING THE HAIR OF MICROPROSOPUS.

470\. FROM the skull of the Head (of *Microprosopus*) depend all those
chiefs and leaders (otherwise, all those thousands and tens of
thousands), and also from the locks of the hair.

471\. Which are black, and mutually bound together, and which mutually
cohere.

472\. But they adhere unto the Supernal Light from the Father, AB, *Ab*,
which surroundeth His Head (*i.e., that of Microprosopus*); and unto the
Brain, which is illuminated from the Father.

473\. Thencefrom, even from the light which surroundeth His Head (*i.e.,
that of Microprosopus*) from the Mother, Aima, and from the second
Brain, proceed long locks upon locks (*of hair*).

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

474\. And all adhere unto and are bound together with those locks <span
id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_272) which have their connection with the
Father.

475\. And because (these locks are) mutually intermingled with each
other, and mutually intertwined with each other, hence all the Brains
are connected with the Supernal Brain (*of Macroprosopus*).

476\. And hence all the regions which proceed from the Three Cavities of
the Skull are mingled mutually together, as well pure as impure, and all
those accents and mysteries are as well hidden as manifest.

477\. And since all the Brains have a secret connection with the ears of
Tetragrammaton, in the same way as they shine in the crown of the Head,
and enter into the hollow places of the Skull.

478\. Hence all these locks hang over and cover the sides of the ears,
as we have elsewhere said.

479\. And therefore is it written, 2 Kings xix. 16: "Incline, O
Tetragrammaton, Thine ear, and hear!"

480\. Hence is the meaning of this passage, which is elsewhere given:
"If any man wisheth the King to incline His ear unto him, let him
raise <span id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_273) the head of the King and
remove the hair from above the ears; then shall the King hear him in all
things whatsoever he desireth."

481\. In the parting of the hair a certain path is connected with the
(same) path of the Ancient of Days, and therefrom are distributed all
the paths of the precepts of the law.

482\. And over these (*locks of hair*) are set all the Lords

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

of Lamentation and Wailing; and they depend from the single locks.

483\. And these spread a net for sinners, so that they may not
comprehend those paths.

484\. This is that which is said, Prov. iv. 18: "The path of the wicked
is as darkness."

485\. And these all depend from the rigid locks hence also these are
entirely rigid, as we have before said.

486\. In the softer (locks) adhere the Lords of Equilibrium, as it is
written, Ps. xxv. 10: "All the paths of Tetragrammaton are ChSD,
*Chesed*, and AMTh, *Emeth*, Mercy and Truth."

487\. And thus when these developments of the Brain emanate from the
Concealed Brain, hencefrom each singly deriveth its own nature.

488\. From the one Brain the Lords of Equilibrium proceed through those
softer locks, as it is written: Ps. xxv. 10: "All the paths of
Tetragrammaton are Chesed and Emeth."

489\. From the second Brain the Lords of Lamentation and Wailing proceed
through those rigid locks and depend (from them). Concerning whom it is
written: Prov. iv. 19: "The path of the wicked is as darkness; they know
not wherein they stumble."

490\. What is this passage intended to imply? Assuredly the sense of
these words, "they know not," is this, "They do not know, and they do
not wish to know."

491\. "Wherein they stumble." Do not read "BMH, *Bameh*, wherein," but
"BAIMA, *Be-Aima*, in Aima, the Mother," they stumble. That is, through
those who are attributed unto the side of the Mother.

492\. What is the side of the Mother? Severe Rigour, whereunto are
attributed the Lords of Lamentation and Wailing.

493\. From the third Brain the Lords of Lords proceed

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

through those locks arranged in the middle condition (*i.e. partly hard
and partly soft*), and depend (*therefrom*); and they are called the
Luminous and the Non-Luminous Countenances.

494\. And concerning these it is written, Prov. iv. 26: "Ponder the path
of thy feet."

495\. And all these are found in those locks of the hair of the Head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_272"></span>[307:1](tku65.htm#fr_275) That is, the locks
which have their origin in the influence of the Great Mother am
interwoven mutually with those which originate from Chokmah.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[307:2](tku65.htm#fr_276) Meaning, let him
supplicate Macroprosopus, developed in the forms of Chokmah and Binah,
which are summed up in Aima the Great Mother, to incline Microprosopus
to be favourable. This is identical with the Catholic custom of invoking
the intercession of the Virgin with Her Son; for Mary = Mare = Sea; and
the Great Sea is Binah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII: Concerning the Forehead of Microprosopus](tku66)
