[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tku73)  [Next](tku75) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXI.

### CONCERNING THE BRIDE OF MICROPROSOPUS.

711\. UNTO His back adhereth closely a Ray of most vehement Splendour,
and it flameth forth and formeth a certain skull, concealed on every
side.

712\. And thus descendeth the Light of the two brains, and is figured
forth therein.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

713\. And She (*the Bride*) adhereth unto the side of the Male;
wherefore also She is called, Cant. v. ii., "My dove, my perfect one."
Read not, "ThMThI, *Thamathi*, My perfect one;" but "ThAVMThI,
*Theomathi*, MY twin sister," more applicably.

714\. The hairs of the Woman contain colours upon colours, as it is
written, Cant. vii. 5: "The hair of Thy head like purple."

715\. But herewith is Geburah, Severity, connected in the five
Severities (*i.e., which are symbolized in the numerical value, 5, of
the letter H final of IHVH, which is the Bride*), and the Woman is
extended on Her side, and is applied unto the side of the Male.

V6. Until She is separated from His side, and cometh unto Him so that
She may be conjoined with Him, face to face.

717\. And when They are conjoined together, they appear to be only one
body.

718\. Hence we learn that the Masculine, taken alone, appeareth to be
only half the body, so that all the mercies are half; and thus also is
it with the Feminine.

719\. But when They are joined together, the (*two together*) appear to
form only one whole body,. And it is so.

720\. So also here. When the Male is joined with the Female, They both
constitute one complete body, and all the Universe is in a state of
happiness, because all things receive blessing from Their perfect body.
And this is an Arcanum.

721\. And therefore it is said, Gen. ii. 3: "Tetragrammaton blessed the
seventh day and hallowed it." For then all things are found (*to exist*)
in the one perfect Body, for MTRVNIThA, *Matronitha*, the Mother (*i.e.,
the Inferior Mother*) is joined unto the King, and is found to form the
one Body with Him.

722\. And therefore are there found to be blessings upon this day.

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

723\. And hence that which is not both Male and Female together is
called half a body. Now, no blessing can rest upon a mutilated and
defective being, but only upon a perfect place and upon a perfect being,
and not at all in an incomplete being. <span
id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_296)

724\. And a semi-complete being cannot live for ever, neither can it
receive blessing for ever.

725\. The Beauty of the Female is completed by the Beauty of the Male.
And now have we established these facts (*concerning the perfect
equality of Male and Female*), and they are made known unto the
Companions.

726\. With this Woman (*the inferior H*) are connected all those things
which are below; from Her do they receive their nourishment, and from
Her do they receive blessing; and She is called the Mother of them all.

727\. Like as a mother containeth the body (*of her child before
birth*), and that whole body deriveth its nourishment from her.
(Otherwise, containeth a garden, and the whole garden is from her.) Thus
is She unto all the other inferiors.

728\. It is written, Prov. vii. 4: "Say unto Chokmah, Thou art my
sister." <span id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_297) For there is given one
Chokmah (*Male*), and there is also given another Chokmah (*Female*).

729\. And this Woman is called the Lesser Chokmah in respect of the
other.

730\. And therefore is it written, Cant. viii. 8: "We have a little
sister and she hath no breasts."

731\. For in this exile (*i.e., separated from the King*) She appeareth
unto us to be "our little sister." At first,

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

indeed, she is small, but she becometh great and greater, until she
becometh the Spouse whom the King taketh unto Himself.

732\. As it is written, Cant. viii. 10: "I am a wall, and my breasts are
like towers."

733\. "And my breasts," &c., since they are full with the nourishment of
all things; <span id="fr_301"></span>[1](tku75.htm#fn_298) "like
towers," because they are the great rivers which flow forth from Aima
the Supernal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_296"></span>[335:1](tku74.htm#fr_299) This section is
another all-sufficient proof of the teachings maintained throughout the
Qabalah, namely, that Man and Woman are from the creation co-equal and
co-existent, perfectly equal one with the other, This fact the
translators of the Bible have been at great pains to conceal by
carefully suppressing every reference to the *Feminine portion of the
Deity*, and by constantly translating feminine nouns by masculine. And
this is the work of so-called religious men!

<span id="fn_297"></span>[335:2](tku74.htm#fr_300) Chokmah. Wisdom, the
second Sephirah, is Male in respect of Binah, but Female in respect of
Kether. This is somewhat analogous to the Greek idea of the birth of
Athena, Wisdom. from the brain of Zeus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII: Concerning the Remaining Members of
Microprosopus](tku75)
