[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48551)  [Next](sbe48553) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_755">p. 755</span>

# FOURTH PÂDA.

1\. (On the soul's) having approached (the highest light) there is
manifestation; (as we infer) from the word 'own.'

The Sûras now proceed to consider the *kind* of superior existence
(ai*s*varya) which the released souls enjoy.--The text says, 'Thus does
that serene being, having risen from the body and having approached the
highest light, manifest itself in its own form' (*Kh*. Up. VIII, 12, 3).
Does this passage mean that the soul having approached the highest light
assumes a new body, to be brought about then, as e.g. the body of a
deva; or that it only manifests its own natural character?--The text
must be understood in the former sense, the Pûrvapakshin holds. For
otherwise the scriptural texts referring to Release would declare what
is of no advantage to man. We do not observe that its own nature is of
any advantage to the soul. In the state of dreamless sleep the body and
the sense-organs cease to act, and you may say the pure soul then abides
by itself, but in what way does this benefit man? Nor can it be said
that mere cessation of pain constitutes the well-being of the soul which
has approached the highest light, and that in this sense manifestation
of its own nature may be called Release; for Scripture clearly teaches
that the released soul enjoys an infinity of positive bliss, 'One
hundred times the bliss of Pra*g*âpati is one bliss of Brahman and of a
sage free from desires'; 'for having tasted a flavour he experiences
bliss' (Taitt. Up. II, 7). Nor can it be said that the true nature of
the soul is consciousness of the nature of unlimited bliss which, in the
Sa*m*sâra condition, is hidden by Nescience and manifests itself only
when the soul reaches Brahman. For, as explained previously,
intelligence which is of the nature of light cannot be hidden; hiding in
that case would be neither more nor less than destruction. Nor can that
which is mere light be of the nature of bliss; for bliss is pleasure,
and to be of the nature

<span id="page_756">p. 756</span>

of pleasure is to be such as to agree with the Self. But, if the Self is
mere light, where is the being by which light is to be apprehended as
agreeable to its own nature? (i.e. where is the knowing subject
conscious of bliss?) He, therefore, who holds the Self to be mere light,
can in no way prove that it is of the nature of bliss. If, moreover,
that which the soul effects on approaching the highest light is merely
to attain to its own true nature, we point out that that nature is
something eternally accomplished, and that hence the declaration that
'it manifests (accomplishes) itself in its own nature' would be
purportless. We hence conclude that on approaching the highest light the
soul connects itself with a new form only then brought about. On this
view the term 'accomplishes itself is taken in its direct sense, and the
expression 'in its own shape' also is suitable in so far as the soul
accomplishes itself in a nature specially belonging to it and
characterised by absolute bliss.--This view the Sûtra rejects. That
special condition into which the soul passes on having, on the path of
the Gods, approached the highest light is a manifestation of its own
true nature, not an origination of a new character. For this is
proved--by the specification implied in the term 'own,' in the phrase
'in its own nature.' If the soul assumed a new body, this specification
would be without meaning; for, even without that, it would be clear that
the new body belongs to the soul.--Against the assertion that the soul's
own true nature is something eternally accomplished, and that hence a
declaration of that nature 'accomplishing itself would be unmeaning, the
next Sûtra declares itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The released one; on account of the promise](sbe48553)
