[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48401)  [Next](sbe48403) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

18\. The new (thing is enjoined); on account of the statement of what
has to be done.

The Sûtra discusses an additional question connected with the meditation
on breath. Both texts--the *Kh*ândogya as well as the
Vâ*g*asaneyaka-declare that water constitutes a dress for pra*n*a, and
refer to the rinsing of the mouth

<span id="page_641">p. 641</span>

with water. The doubt here arises whether what the texts mean to enjoin
is the rinsing of the mouth, or a meditation on prâ*n*a as having water
for its dress.--The Pûrvapakshin maintains the former view; for, he
says, the Vâ*g*asaneyaka uses the injunctive form 'he is to rinse,'
while there is no injunctive form referring to the meditation; and what
the text says in praise of the breath thus not being allowed to remain
naked may be taken as a mere glorification of the act of rinsing. And as
ordinary rinsing of the mouth, subsequent to eating, is already
established by Sm*ri*ti and custom, we must conclude that the text means
to enjoin rinsing of the mouth of a different kind, viz. as auxiliary to
the meditation on prâ*n*a.--To this the Sûtra replies that what the text
enjoins is the new' thing, i.e. the previously non-established
meditation on water as forming the dress of prâ*n*a. 'On account of the
statement of what has to be done,' i.e. on account of the statement of
what is not established--for only on the latter condition Scripture has
a meaning. The beginning as well as the end of the Vâ*g*asaneyaka-text
clearly refers to a meditation on the water used for rinsing as forming
a dress for prâ*n*a; and as rinsing is already established by Sm*ri*ti
and custom, we naturally infer that what the text enjoins is a
meditation on breath as having the water used in rinsing for its dress.
This also explains why the *Kh*ândogya-text does not mention the rinsing
at all, but merely the clothing of breath with water.--Here terminates
the adhikara*n*a of 'the statement of what has to be done."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. And (the qualities) thus being equal, on account of
non-difference](sbe48403)
