[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48261)  [Next](sbe48263.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

16\. If it be said that knowledge and mind (which are mentioned) between
(breath and the elements) (are stated) in order of succession, owing to
an inferential mark of this; we say, not so, on account of
non-difference.

'Knowledge' in the Sûtra denotes the means of knowledge, i.e. the
sense-organs.--An objection is raised against the conclusion arrived at
under the preceding Sûtra. We cannot, the opponent says, admit the
conclusion that the passage from the Mu*nd*ka Up. 'from him is born
breath, mind,' &c., declares the immediate origination from Brahman of
all things, and that hence the passage confirms the view, first
suggested by the inferential mark of 'thought' (see above, Sû. 14), that
everything springs from Brahman direct. For the purport of the text is
to state a certain order of succession, and we hence conclude that all
the beings mentioned were successively created. In the second half of
the text we recognise the series of ether, air, fire, &c., which is
known to us from other texts, and from the fact of their being exhibited
in one and the same text we conclude that knowledge and mind--which are
mentioned between breath on the one side and the elements on the

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

other--must be viewed as created in that order. The text therefore in no
way confirms the direct origination of everything from Brahman. To this
the Sûtra replies, 'Not so, on account of non-difference.' The first
words of the text 'from him is born' connect themselves equally with
breath, and knowledge, and mind, and the scries of elements beginning
with ether; and the meaning of the whole therefore is to declare that
all the entities spring directly from Brahman, not to teach the order of
succession in which they are produced. It moreover cannot have the
purport of teaching a certain order of succession, because the order
stated contradicts the order established by other scriptural passages;
such as the one beginning 'the earth is merged in water,' and ending
'darkness becomes one.' We hence hold to the conclusion that all effects
originate from Brahman only, in so far as embodied in the Unevolved, and
so on, and that the terms 'fire' and so on denote Brahman, which is the
Self of all those substances.--But to interpret all these words as
denoting Brahman is to set aside their special denotative power as
established by etymology!--To this objection the next Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. But that which abides in the things movable and
immovable](sbe48263.md)
