[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48091)  [Next](sbe48093.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

26\. That which the text refers to is an inferential mark--thus.

The text describes the shape of Vai*s*vânara, of whom heaven, &c., down
to earth constitute the several limbs; and it is known from Scripture
and Sm*ri*ti that such is the shape of the highest Self. When,
therefore, we recognise that shape as referred to in the text, this
supplies an inferential mark of Vai*s*vânara being the highest
Self.--The 'thus' (iti) in the Sûtra denotes a certain mode, that is to
say, 'a shape of such a kind being recognised in the text enables us to
infer that Vai*s*vânara is the highest Self.' For in Scripture and
Sm*ri*ti alike the highest Person is declared to have such a shape. Cp.
e.g. the text of the Átha*r*va*n*as. 'Agni is his head, the sun and moon
his eyes, the regions his cars, his speech the Vedas disclosed, the wind
his breath, his heart the Universe; from his feet came the earth; he is
indeed the inner Self of all things' (Mu. Up. II, I, 4). 'Agni' in this
passage denotes the heavenly world, in agreement with the text 'that
world indeed is Agni.' And the following Smr*ri*ti texts: 'He of whom
the wise declare the heavenly world to be the head, the ether the navel,
sun and moon the eyes, the regions the ears, the earth the feet; he
whose Self is unfathomable is the leader of all beings'; and 'of whom
Agni is the mouth, heaven the head, the ether the navel, the earth the

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

feet, the sun the eye, the regions the ear; worship to him, the Self of
the Universe!'--Now our text declares the heavenly world and so on to
constitute the head and the other limbs of Vai*s*vânara. For Kaikeya on
being asked by the *Ri*shis to instruct them as to the Va*s*vânara Self
recognises that they all know something about the Vai*s*vânara Self
while something they do not know(for thus only we can explain his
special questions), and then in order to ascertain what each knows and
what not, questions them separately. When thereupon Aupamanyava replies
that he meditates on heaven only as the Self, Kaikeya, in order to
disabuse him from the notion that heaven is the whole Vai*s*vânara Self,
teaches him that heaven is the head of Vai*s*vânara, and that of heaven
which thus is a part only of Vai*s*vânara, Sute*g*as is the special
name. Similarly he is thereupon told by the other *Ri*shis that they
meditate only on sun, air, ether, and earth, and informs them in return
that the special names of these beings are 'the omniform,' 'he who moves
in various ways,' 'the full one,''wealth and 'firm rest,' and that these
all are mere members of the Vai*s*vânara Self, viz. its eyes, breath,
trunk, bladder, and feet. The shape thus described in detail can belong
to the highest Self only, and hence Vai*s*vânara is none other but the
highest Self.

The next Sûtra meets a further doubt as to this decision not yet being
well established.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. Should it be said that it is not so, on account of the
word...](sbe48093.md)
