[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48159)  [Next](sbe48161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

18\. But *G*aimini thinks that it has another purport,

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

on account of the question and answer; and thus some also.

The 'but' is meant to preclude the idea that the mention made of the
individual soul enables us to understand the whole section as concerned
with that soul.--The teacher *G*aimini is of opinion that the mention
made of the individual soul has another meaning, i.e. aims at conveying
the idea of what is different from the individual soul, i.e. the nature
of the highest Brahman. 'On account of question and answer.' According
to the story told in the Upanishad, A*g*âta*s*atru leads Bâlâki to where
a sleeping man is resting, and convinces him that the soul is different
from breath, by addressing the sleeping person, in whom breath only is
awake, with names belonging to prâ*n*a <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) without the sleeper being awaked thereby,
and after that rousing him by a push of his staff. Then, with a view to
teaching Bâlâki the difference of Brahman from the individual soul, he
asks him the following questions: 'Where, O Bâlâki, did this person here
sleep? Where was he? Whence did he thus come back?' To these questions
he thereupon himself replies, 'When sleeping he sees no dream, then he
becomes one in that prâ*n*a alone.--From that Self the organs proceed
each towards its place, from the organs the gods, from the gods the
worlds.' Now this reply, no less than the questions, clearly refers to
the highest Self as something different from the individual Self. For
that entering into which the soul, in the state of deep sleep, attains
its true nature and enjoys complete serenity, being free from the
disturbing experiences of pleasure and pain that accompany the states of
waking and of dream; and

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

that from which it again returns to the fruition of pleasure and pain;
that is nothing else but the highest Self. For, as other scriptural
texts testify ('Then he becomes united with the True,' *Kh*. Up. VI, 8,
1; 'Embraced by the intelligent Self he knows nothing that is without,
nothing that is within,' B*ri*, Up. IV, 3, 21), the abode of deep sleep
is the intelligent Self which is different from the individual Self,
i.e. the highest Self. We thus conclude that the reference, in question
and answer, to the individual soul subserves the end of instruction
being given about what is different from that soul, i.e. the highest
Self. We hence also reject the Pûrvapakshin's contention that question
and answer refer to the individual soul, that the veins called hita are
the abode of deep sleep, and that the well-known clause as to the
prâ*n*a must be taken to mean that the aggregate of the organs becomes
one in the individual soul called prâ*n*a. For the veins are the abode,
not of deep sleep, but of dream, and, as we have shown above, Brahman
only is the abode of deep sleep; and the text declares that the
individual soul, together with all its ministering organs, becomes one
with, and again proceeds from, Brahman only--which the text designates
as Prâ*n*a.--Moreover some, viz. the Vâ*g*asaneyins in this same
colloquy of Bâlâki and A*g*âta*s*atru as recorded in their text, clearly
distinguish from the vi*g*ñâna-maya, i.e. the individual soul in the
state of deep sleep, the highest Self which then is the abode of the
individual soul. 'Where was then the person, consisting of intelligence,
and from whence did he thus come back?--When he was thus asleep, then
the intelligent person, having through the intelligence of the senses
absorbed within himself all intelligence, lies in the ether that is
within the heart.' Now the word 'ether' is known to denote the highest
Self; cf. the text 'there is within that the small ether'(*Kh*. Up.
VIII, 1, 1). This shows us that the individual soul is mentioned in the
Vâ*g*asaneyin passage to the end of setting forth what is different from
it, viz. the prâ*gñ*a Self, i.e. the highest Brahman. The general
conclusion therefore is that the Kaushîtaki-text under discussion
proposes as

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

the object of knowledge something that is different from the individual
soul, viz. the highest Brahman which is the cause of the whole world,
and that hence the Vedânta-texts nowhere intimate that general causality
belongs either to the individual soul or to the Pradhâna under the
soul's guidance. Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'denotation of the
world.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[383:1](sbe48160.htm#fr_34) The names with which
the king addresses the sleeper are *Great one, clad in white raiment,
Soma, king.* The *S*ru. Pra. comments as follows: *Great one*; because
according to *S*ruti Prâ*n*a is the oldest and best. *Clad in white
raiment*; because *S*ruti says that water is the raiment of Prâ*n*a; and
elsewhere, that what is white belongs to water. *Soma*; because
scripture says 'of this prâ*n*a water is the body, light the form, viz.
yonder moon.' *King*; for *S*ruti says 'Prâ*n*a indeed is the ruler.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. On account of the connected meaning of the
sentences](sbe48161)
