[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48216)  [Next](sbe48218.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

12\. And because owing to the acknowledgment of samavâya, there results
a *regressus in infinitum* from equality.

The Vai*s*eshika doctrine is further untenable on account of the
acknowledgment of samavâya.--Why so?--Because the samavâya also, like
part, quality, and generic characteristics, requires something else to
establish it, and that something else again requires some further thing
to establish it--from which there arises an infinite regress. To
explain. The Vai*s*eshikas assume the so-called samavâya relation,
defining it as 'that connexion which is the cause of the idea "this is
here," in the case of things permanently and inseparably connected, and
standing to each other in the relation of abode and thing abiding in the
abode.' Now, if such a samavâya relation is assumed in order to account
for the fact that things observed to be inseparably connected--as, e.g.,
class characteristics are inseparably connected with the individuals to
which they belong--are such, i.e. inseparably connected, a reason has
also to be searched for why the samavâya, which is of the same nature as
those things (in so far, namely, as it is also inseparably connected
with the things connected by it), is such; and for that reason, again, a
further reason has to be postulated, and so on, *in infinitum*. Nor can
it be said that inseparable connexion must be assumed to constitute the
essential nature of samavâya (so that no further reason need be demanded
for its inseparable connexion); for on this reasoning you would have to
assume the same essential nature for class characteristics, qualities,
and so on (which would render the assumption of a samavâya needless for
them also). Nor is it a legitimate proceeding to postulate an unseen
entity such as the samavâya is, and then to assume for it such and such
an essential nature.--These objections apply to the samavâya whether it
be viewed as eternal or non-eternal. The next Sûtra urges a further
objection against it if viewed as eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. And because the world also would thus be eternal](sbe48218.md)
