[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48213)  [Next](sbe48215.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

9\. And (it is) objectionable on account of the contradictions.

The Sâ<u>n</u>khya-system, moreover, labours from many internal
contradictions.--The Sâ<u>n</u>khyas hold that while Prak*ri*ti is for
the sake of another and the object of knowledge and fruition, the soul
is independent, an enjoying and knowing agent, and conscious of
Prak*ri*ti; that the soul reaches isolation through the instrumentality
of Prak*ri*ti only, and that as its nature is pure, permanent,
unchanging consciousness, absence of all activity and isolation belong
to that nature; that for this reason the accomplishing of the means of
bondage and release and of release belong to Prak*ri*ti only; and that,
owing to Prak*ri*ti's proximity to the unchanging non-active soul,
Prak*ri*ti, by a process of mutual superimposition (adhyâsa), works
towards the creation of a world and subserves the purposes of the soul's
fruition and emancipation.--'Since the aggregate of things is for the
sake of another; since there is an opposite of the three gu*n*as and the
rest; since there is superintendence; since there is an experiencing
subject; and since there is activity for the sake of isolation; the soul
exists' (Sâ<u>n</u>khya Kâ. 17); 'And from that contrast the soul is
proved to be a witness, isolated, neutral, cognising and inactive'
(18).--And after having stated that the activity of the Pradhâna is for
the purpose of the release of the Self, the text says, 'therefore no
(soul) is either bound or released, nor does it migrate; it is
Prak*ri*ti which, abiding in various beings, is bound and released and
migrates' (62). And 'From this connexion therewith (i.e. with the soul)
the non-intelligent appears as intelligent; and although all agency
belongs to the gu*n*as, the indifferent (soul) becomes an agent. In
order that the soul may know the Pradhâna and become isolated, the
connexion of the two takes place like that of the lame and the blind;
and thence creation springs' (20, 21).--Now to that which is eternally
unchanging, non-active and isolated, the attributes of being a witness
and an enjoying and cognising agent can in no way belong. Nor also can
such a being be subject to error resting on

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

superimposition; for error and superimposition both are of the nature of
change. And, on the other hand, they also cannot belong to Prak*ri*ti,
since they are attributes of intelligent beings. For by superimposition
we understand the attribution, on the part of an intelligent being, of
the qualities of one thing to another thing; and this is the doing of an
intelligent being, and moreover a change. Nor is it possible that
superimposition and the like should take place in the soul only if it is
in approximation to Prak*ri*ti.--They may take place just on account of
the non-changing nature of the soul!--Then, we reply, they would take
place permanently. And that mere proximity has no effective power we
have already shown under II, 1, 4. And if it is maintained that it is
Prak*ri*ti only that migrates, is bound and released, how then can she
be said to benefit the soul, which is eternally released? That she does
so the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas distinctly assert, 'By manifold means Prak*ri*ti,
helpful and endowed with the gu*n*as, without any benefit to herself,
accomplishes the purpose of the soul, which is thankless and not
composed of the gu*n*as' (Sâ<u>n</u>khya Kâ. 60).--The Sâ<u>n</u>khyas
further teach that Prak*ri*ti, on being seen by any soul in her true
nature, at once retires from that soul--'As a dancer having exhibited
herself on the stage withdraws from the soul, so Prak*ri*ti withdraws
from the soul when she has manifested herself to it' (59); 'My opinion
is that there exists nothing more sensitive than Prak*ri*ti, who knowing
"I have been seen" does not again show itself to the soul' (61). But
this doctrine also is inappropriate. For, as the soul is eternally
released and above all change, it never sees Prak*ri*ti, nor does it
attribute to itself her qualities; and Prak*ri*ti herself does not see
herself since she is of non-intelligent nature; nor can she wrongly
impute to herself the soul's seeing of itself as her own seeing of
herself, for she herself is non-intelligent and the soul is incapable of
that change which consists in seeing or knowing.--Let it then be said
that the 'seeing' means nothing more than the proximity of Prak*ri*ti to
the soul!--But this also does not help you; for, as said above, from
that there would follow eternal seeing, since the two are in eternal

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

proximity. Moreover, the ever unchanging soul is not capable of an
approximation which does not form an element of its unchanging
nature.--Moreover, if you define the seeing as mere proximity and
declare this to be the cause of Release, we point out that it equally is
the cause of bondage--so that bondage and release would both be
permanent.--Let it then be said that what causes bondage is wrong
seeing--while intuition of the true nature of things is the cause of
Release!--But as both these kinds of seeing are nothing but proximity,
it would follow that both take place permanently. And if, on the other
hand, the proximity of Soul and Prak*ri*ti were held not to be
permanent, then the cause of such proximity would have to be assigned,
and again the cause of that, and so on *ad infinitum*.--Let us then, to
escape from these difficulties, define proximity as nothing more than
the true nature of soul and Prak*ri*ti!--As the true nature is
permanent, we reply, it would follow therefrom that bondage and release
would be alike permanent.--On account of all these contradictory views
the system of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas is untenable.

We finally remark that the arguments here set forth by us at the same
time prove the untenableness of the view of those who teach that there
is an eternally unchanging Brahman whose nature is pure, non-differenced
intelligence, and which by being conscious of Nescience experiences
unreal bondage and release. For those philosophers can show no more than
the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas do how their Brahman can be conscious of Nescience,
can be subject to adhyâsa, and so on. There is, however, the following
difference between the two theories. The Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, in order to
account for the definite individual distribution of birth, death, and so
on, assume a plurality of souls. The Vedântins, on the other hand, do
not allow even so much, and their doctrine is thus all the more
irrational. The assertion that there is a difference (in favour of the
Vedântins) between the two doctrines, in so far as the Vedântins hold
Prak*ri*ti to be something unreal, while the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas consider it
to be real, is unfounded; for pure, homogeneous intelligence, eternally
non-changing, cannot possibly be conscious of anything

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

different from itself, whether it be unreal or real. And if that thing
is held to be unreal, there arise further difficulties, owing to its
having to be viewed as the object of knowledge, of refutation, and so
on.

Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'the impossibility of construction.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. Or in the same way as the big and long from the short and the
atomic](sbe48215.md)
