[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48191)  [Next](sbe48193) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

23\. And as in the analogous case of stones and the like, there is
impossibility of that.

In the same way as it is impossible that the different non-sentient
things such as stones, iron, wood, herbs, &c., which are of an extremely
low constitution and subject to constant change, should be one in nature
with Brahman, which is faultless, changeless, fundamentally antagonistic
to all that is evil, &c. &c.; so it is also impossible that the
individual soul, which is liable to endless suffering, and a mere
wretched glowworm as it were, should be one with Brahman who, as we know
from the texts, comprises within himself the treasure of all auspicious
qualities, &c. &c. Those texts, which exhibit Brahman and the soul in
coordination, must be understood as conveying the doctrine, founded on
passages such as 'of whom the Self is the body,' that as the *g*îva
constitutes Brahman's body and Brahman abides within the *g*îva as its
Self, Brahman has the *g*îva for its mode; and with this doctrine the
co-ordination referred to is not only not in conflict but even confirms
it--as we have shown repeatedly, e.g. under Sû. I, 4, 22. Brahman

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

in all its states has the souls and matter for its body; when the souls
and matter are in their subtle state Brahman is in its causal condition;
when, on the other hand, Brahman has for its body souls and matter in
their gross state, it is 'effected' and then called world. In this way
the co-ordination above referred to fully explains itself. The world is
non-different from Brahman in so far as it is its effect. There is no
confusion of the different characteristic qualities; for liability to
change belongs to non-sentient matter, liability to pain to sentient
souls, and the possession of all excellent qualities to Brahman: hence
the doctrine is not in conflict with any scriptural text. That even in
the state of non-separation-described in texts such as, 'Being only this
was in the beginning'--the souls joined to non-sentient matter persist
in a subtle condition and thus constitute Brahman's body must
necessarily be admitted; for that the souls at that time also persist in
a subtle form is shown under Sûtras II, I, 34; 35. Non-division, at that
time, is possible in so far as there is no distinction of names and
forms. It follows from all this that Brahman's causality is not contrary
to reason.

Those, on the other hand, who explain the difference, referred to in
Sûtra 22, as the difference between the *g*îva in its state of bondage
and the *g*îva in so far as free from avidyâ, i.e. the unconditioned
Brahman, implicate themselves in contradictions. For the *g*iva., in so
far as free from avidyâ, is neither all-knowing, nor the Lord of all,
nor the cause of all, nor the Self of all, nor the ruler of all--it in
fact possesses none of those characteristics on which the scriptural
texts found the difference of the released soul; for according to the
view in question all those attributes are the mere figment of Nescience.
Nor again can the Sûtra under discussion be said to refer to the
distinction, from the individual soul, of a Lord fictitiously created by
avidyâ--a distinction analogous to that which a man in the state of
avidyâ makes between the shell and the silver; for it is the task of the
Vedânta to convey a knowledge of that true Brahman which is introduced
as the object of enquiry in the first Sûtra ('Now then the enquiry into
Brahman')

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

and which is the cause of the origination and so on of the world, and
what they at this point are engaged in is to refute the objections
raised against the doctrine of that Brahman on the basis of Sm*ri*ti and
Reasoning.--The two Sûtras II, 1, 8; 9 really form a complementary
statement to what is proved in the present adhikara*n*a; for their
purport is to show also that things of different nature can stand to
each other in the relation of cause and effect. And the Sûtra II, 1, 7
has reference to what is contained in the previous adhikara*n*a.

Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'designation of the other.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. ... as in the case of milk](sbe48193)
