[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48209)  [Next](sbe48211.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. And if you say--as the man and the stone; thus also.

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

Here the following view might be urged. Although the soul consists of
mere intelligence and is inactive, while the Pradhâna is destitute of
all power of thought; yet the non-sentient Pradhâna may begin to act
owing to the mere nearness of the soul. For we observe parallel
instances. A man blind but capable of motion may act in some way, owing
to the nearness to him of some lame man who has no power of motion but
possesses good eyesight and assists the blind man with his intelligence.
And through the nearness of the magnetic stone iron moves. In the same
way the creation of the world may result from the connexion of
Prak*ri*ti and the soul. As has been said, 'In order that the soul may
know the Pradhâna and become isolated, the connexion of the two takes
place like that of the lame and the blind; and thence creation springs'
(Sâ<u>n</u>khya Kâ. 21). This means--to the end that the soul may
experience the Pradhâna, and for the sake of the soul's emancipation,
the Pradhâna enters on action at the beginning of creation, owing to the
nearness of the soul.

To this the Sûtra replies 'thus also.' This means--the inability of the
Pradhâna to act remains the same, in spite of these instances. The lame
man is indeed incapable of walking, but he possesses various other
powers--he can see the road and give instructions regarding it; and the
blind man, being an intelligent being, understands those instructions
and directs his steps accordingly. The magnet again possesses the
attribute of moving towards the iron and so on. The soul on the other
hand, which is absolutely inactive, is incapable of all such changes.
As, moreover, the mere nearness of the soul to the Pradhâna is something
eternal, it would follow that the creation also is eternal. If, on the
other hand, the soul is held to be eternally free, then there can be no
bondage and no release.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. And on account of the impossibility of the relation of
principal and subordinate matter](sbe48211.md)
