[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48003)  [Next](sbe48005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1\. Then therefore the enquiry into Brahman.

In this Sûtra the word 'then' expresses immediate sequence; the word
'therefore' intimates that what has taken place (viz. the study of the
karmakâ*nd*a of the Veda) constitutes the reason (of the enquiry into
Brahman). For the fact is that the enquiry into (lit.'the desire to
know') Brahman--the fruit of which enquiry is infinite in nature and
permanent--follows immediately in the case of him who, having read the
Veda together with its auxiliary

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

disciplines, has reached the knowledge that the fruit of mere works is
limited and non-permanent, and hence has conceived the desire of final
release.

The compound 'brahma*g*i*gñ*âsâ' is to be explained as 'the enquiry of
Brahman,' the genitive case 'of Brahman' being understood to denote the
object; in agreement with the special rule as to the meaning of the
genitive case, Pâ*n*ini II, 3, 65. It might be said that even if we
accepted the general meaning of the genitive case--which is that of
connexion in general--Brahman's position (in the above compound) as an
object would be established by the circumstance that the 'enquiry'
demands an object; but in agreement with the principle that the direct
denotation of a word is to be preferred to a meaning inferred we take
the genitive case 'of Brahman' as denoting the object.

The word 'Brahman' denotes the hightest Person (purushottama), who is
essentially free from all imperfections and possesses numberless classes
of auspicious qualities of unsurpassable excellence. The term 'Brahman'
is applied to any things which possess the quality of greatness
(b*ri*hattva, from the root 'b*ri*h'); but primarily denotes that which
possesses greatness, of essential nature as well as of qualities, in
unlimited fulness; and such is only the Lord of all. Hence the word
'Brahman' primarily denotes him alone, and in a secondary derivative
sense only those things which possess some small part of the Lord's
qualities; for it would be improper to assume several meanings for the
word (so that it would denote primarily or directly more than one
thing). The case is analogous to that of the term 'bhagavat <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md).' The Lord only is enquired into, for the
sake of immortality, by all those who are afflicted with the triad of
pain. Hence the Lord of all is that Brahman which, according to the
Sûtra, constitutes the object of enquiry. The word '*g*i*gñ*âsâ' is a
desiderative formation meaning 'desire to know.' And as in the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

case of any desire the desired object is the chief thing, the Sûtra
means to enjoin knowledge--which is the object of the desire of
knowledge. The purport of the entire Sûtra then is as follows: 'Since
the fruit of works known through the earlier part of the Mîmâ*m*sâ is
limited and non-permanent, and since the fruit of the knowledge of
Brahman--which knowledge is to be reached through the latter part of the
Mîmâ*m*sâ--is unlimited and permanent; for this reason Brahman is to be
known, after the knowledge of works has previously taken place.'--The
same meaning is expressed by the V*ri*ttikâra when saying 'after the
comprehension of works has taken place there follows the enquiry into
Brahman.' And that the enquiry into works and that into Brahman
constitute one body of doctrine, he (the V*ri*ttikâra) will declare
later on 'this Sârîraka-doctrine is connected with *G*aimini's doctrine
as contained in sixteen adhyâyas; this proves the two to constitute one
body of doctrine.' Hence the earlier and the later Mîmâ*m*sâ are
separate only in so far as there is a difference of matter to be taught
by each; in the same way as the two halves of the Pûrva
Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras, consisting of six adhyâyas each, are separate <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md); and as each adhyâya is separate. The entire
Mîmâ*m*sâ-sâtra--which begins with the Sûtra 'Now therefore the enquiry
into religious duty' and concludes with the Sûtra '(From there is) no
return on account of scriptural statement'--has, owing to the special
character of the contents, a definite order of internal succession. This
is as follows. At first the precept 'one is to learn one's own text
(svâdhyâya)' enjoins the apprehension of that aggregate of syllables
which is called 'Veda,' and is here referred to as 'svâdhyâya.' Next
there arises the desire to know of what nature the 'Learning' enjoined
is to be, and how it is to be done. Here there come in certain
injunctions such as

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 'Let a Brahnmana be initiated in his eighth
year' and 'The teacher is to make him recite the Veda'; and certain
rules about special observances and restrictions--such as 'having
performed the upâkarman on the full moon of *S*rava*n*a or
Praush*th*apada according to prescription, he is to study the sacred
verses for four months and a half--which enjoin all the required
details.

From all these it is understood that the study enjoined has for its
result the apprehension of the aggregate of syllables called Veda, on
the part of a pupil who has been initiated by a teacher sprung from a
good family, leading a virtuous life, and possessing purity of soul; who
practises certain special observances and restrictions; and who learns
by repeating what is recited by the teacher.

And this study of the Veda is of the nature of a sa*m*skâra of the text,
since the form of the injunction 'the Veda is to be studied' shows that
the Veda is the object (of the action of studying). By a sa*m*skâra is
understood an action whereby something is fitted to produce some other
effect; and that the Veda should be the object of such a sa*m*skaâra is
quite appropriate, since it gives rise to the knowledge of the four
chief ends of human action--viz. religious duty, wealth, pleasure, and
final release--and of the means to effect them; and since it helps to
effect those ends by itself also, viz. by mere mechanical repetition
(apart from any knowledge to which it may give rise).

The injunction as to the study of the Veda thus aims only at the
apprehension of the aggregate of syllables (constituting the Veda)
according to certain rules; it is in this way analogous to the recital
of mantras.

It is further observed that the Veda thus apprehended through reading
spontaneously gives rise to the ideas of certain things subserving
certain purposes. A person, therefore, who has formed notions of those
things immediately, i.e. on the mere apprehension of the text of the
Veda through reading, thereupon naturally applies himself to the study
of the Mimâ*m*sa, which consists in a methodical discussion of the
sentences constituting the text of the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Veda, and has for its result the accurate
determination of the nature of those things and their different modes.
Through this study the student ascertains the character of the
injunctions of work which form part of the Veda, and observes that all
work leads only to non-permanent results; and as, on the other hand, he
immediately becomes aware that the Upanishad sections--which form part
of the Veda which he has apprehended through reading--refer to an
infinite and permanent result, viz. immortality, he applies himself to
the study of the Sârîraka-Mîmâ*m*sâ, which consists in a systematic
discussion of the Vedânta-texts, and has for its result the accurate
determination of their sense. That the fruit of mere works is
transitory, while the result of the knowledge of Brahman is something
permanent, the Vedanta-texts declare in many places--'And as here the
world acquired by work perishes, so there the world acquired by merit
perishes' (*Kh*. Up. VIII, 1,6); 'That work of his has an end' (B*ri*.
Up. III, 8, 10); 'By non-permanent works the Permanent is not obtained'
(Ka. Up. I, 2, 10); 'Frail indeed are those boats, the sacrifices' (Mu.
Up. I, 2, 7); 'Let a Brâhma*n*a, after he has examined all these worlds
that are gained by works, acquire freedom from all desires. What is not
made cannot be gained by what is made. To understand this, let the
pupil, with fuel in his hand, go to a teacher who is learned and dwells
entirely in Brahman. To that pupil who has approached him respectfully,
whose mind is altogether calm, the wise teacher truly told that
knowledge of Brahman through which he knows the imperishable true
Person' (Mu. Up. I, 2, 12, l3). 'Told' here means 'he is to tell.'--On
the other hand, 'He who knows Brahman attains the Highest' (Taitt. Up.
II, 1, 1); 'He who sees this does not see death' (*Kh*. Up. VII, 26, 2);
'He becomes a self-ruler' (*Kh*. Up. VII, 25, 2); 'Knowing him he
becomes immortal here' (Taitt. Âr. III, 12, 7); 'Having known him he
passes over death; there is no other path to go' (*S*vet. Up. VI, 15);
'Having known as separate his Self and the Mover, pleased thereby he
goes to immortality' (*S*vet. Up. I, 6).

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

But--an objection here is raised--the mere learning of the Veda with its
auxiliary disciplines gives rise to the knowledge that the heavenly
world and the like are the results of works, and that all such results
are transitory, while immortality is the fruit of meditation on Brahman.
Possessing such knowledge, a person desirous of final release may at
once proceed to the enquiry into Brahman; and what need is there of a
systematic consideration of religious duty (i.e. of the study of the
Purva Mimâ*m*sâ)?--If this reasoning were valid, we reply, tin--person
desirous of release need not even apply himself to the study of the
Sârîraka Mîmâ*m*sâ, since Brahman is known from the mere reading of the
Veda with its auxiliary disciplines.--True. Such knowledge arises indeed
immediately (without deeper enquiry). But a matter apprehended in this
immediate way is not raised above doubt and mistake. Hence a systematic
discussion of the Vedânta-texts must he undertaken in order that their
sense may be fully ascertained--We agree. But you will have to admit
that for the very same reason we must undertake a systematic enquiry
into religious duty!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:1](sbe48004.htm#fr_0.md) 'Bhagavat' denotes
primarily the Lord, the divintiy; secondarily any holy person.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:1](sbe48004.htm#fr_1.md) The first six books of
the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras give rules for the fundamental forms of the
sacrifice; while the last six books teach how these rules are to be
applied to the so-called modified forms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Small Pûrvapaksha](sbe48005.md)
