[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48109)  [Next](sbe48111.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

11\. And on account of the exclusion of (what is of) another nature
(than Brahman).

Another nature, i. e. the nature of the Pradhâna, and so on. A
supplementary passage excludes difference on the part of the
Imperishable from the supreme Person. 'That Imperishable, O Gârgî, is
unseen but seeing; unheard but hearing; unthought but thinking; unknown
but knowing. There is nothing that sees but it, nothing that hears but
it, nothing that thinks but it, nothing that knows but it. In that
Imperishable, O Gârgî, the ether is woven, warp and woof.' Here the
declaration as to the Imperishable being what sees, hears, &c. excludes
the non-intelligent Pradhâna; and the declaration as to its being
all-seeing, &c. while not

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

seen by any one excludes the individual soul. This exclusion of what has
a nature other than that of the highest Self thus confirms the view of
that Self being meant.--Or else the Sûtra may be explained in a
different way, viz. 'On account of the exclusion of the existence of
another.' On this alternative the text 'There is nothing that sees but
it,' &c., is to be understood as follows: 'while this Imperishable, not
seen by others but seeing all others, forms the basis of all things
different from itself; there is no other principle which, unseen by the
Imperishable but seeing it, could form *its* basis,' i.e. the text would
exclude the existence of any other thing but the Imperishable, and thus
implicitly deny that the Imperishable is either the Pradhâna or the
individual Self.--Moreover the text 'By the command of that Imperishable
men praise those who give, the gods follow the Sacrficer, the fathers
the Darvî-offering,' declares the Imperishable to be that on the command
of which there proceed all works enjoined by Scripture and Sm*ri*ti.
such as sacrificing, giving, &c., and this again shows that the
Imperishable must be Brahman, the supreme Person. Again, the subsequent
*passus*, 'Whosoever without knowing that Imperishable,' &c., declares
that ignorance of the Imperishable leads to the Sa*m*sâra, while
knowledge of it helps to reach Immortality: this also proves that the
Imperishable is the highest Brahman.--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a
of 'the Imperishable.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. On account of his being designated as the object of seeing,
the highest Self is that object](sbe48111.md)
