[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48321)  [Next](sbe48323) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. Should it be said, on account of absence of mention in the first
(reply); we say no, for just that (is meant), on the ground of fitness.

An objection is raised to the conclusion arrived at under III, 1, 1; on
the ground that in the first oblation, described in *Kh*. Up. V, 4, 2,
as being made into the heavenly world, water is not mentioned at all as
the thing offered. The text says, 'on that altar the gods offer
*s*raddhâ'; and by *s*raddhâ (belief) everybody understands a certain
activity of mind. Water therefore is not the thing offered.--Not so, we
reply. It is nothing else but water, which there is called *s*raddhâ.
For thus only question and answer have a sense. For the question is, 'Do
you know why in the fifth libation water is called man?' and at the
outset of the reply *s*raddhâ is mentioned as constituting the oblation
made into the heavenly world viewed as a fire. If here the word
*s*raddhâ did not denote water, question and answer would refer to
different topics, and there would be no connexion. The form in which the
final statement is introduced (iti tu pa*ñk*amyâm, &c., 'but thus in the
fifth oblation,' &c.), moreover, also intimates that *s*raddhâ means
water. The word 'iti,' *thus*, here intimates that the answer is meant
to dispose of the question, 'Do you know *how*?' &c. *S*raddhâ becomes
moon, rain, food, seed, embryo in succession, and *thus* the water comes
to be called man. Moreover, the word *s*raddhâ is actually used in the
Veda in the sense of 'water'; 'he carries water, *s*raddhâ indeed is
water' (Taitt. Sa*m*h. I, 6, 8, 1). Aad what the text says as

<span id="page_588">p. 588</span>

to king Soma (the moon) originating from *s*raddhâ when offered, also
shows that *s*raddhâ must mean water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. 'On account of this not being stated by Scripture'; not
so...](sbe48323)
