[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48323)  [Next](sbe48325) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

7\. Or it is metaphorical, on account of their not knowing the Self. For
thus Scripture declares.

He who performs sacrifices, and so on, and thus does not know the Self,
is here below and in yonder world a mere

<span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

means of enjoyment for the devas. He serves them here, by propitiating
them with sacrifices, and so on; and when the gods, pleased with his
service, have taken him up into yonder world, he there is a common means
of enjoyment for them (since they are gratified by the presence of a
faithful servant). That those not knowing the Self serve and benefit the
gods, Scripture explicitly declares, 'He is like a beast for the devas'
(B*ri*. Up. I, 4, 10). Sm*ri*ti also declares, that while those who know
the Self attain to Brahman, those who do not know it are means of
enjoyment for the devas, 'To the gods go the worshippers of the gods,
and they that are devoted to me go to me' (Bha. Gî. VII, 23). When
Scripture speaks of the soul being eaten by the gods, it therefore only
means that the soul is to them a source of enjoyment. That eating the
soul means no more than satisfaction with it, may also be inferred from
the following scriptural passage, 'The gods in truth do not eat nor do
they drink; by the mere sight of that am*ri*ta they are satisfied.'--It
thus remains a settled conclusion that the soul moves enveloped by the
subtle rudiments of the elements.--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of
'the obtaining of another body.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. On the passing away of the works, with a
remainder...](sbe48325)
