[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48128)  [Next](sbe48130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

30\. On account of the impossibility (of qualification for the
madhuvidyâ, &c.) (*G*aimini maintains the non-qualification (of gods,
&c.).

So far it has been proved that also the gods, and so on, are qualified
for the knowledge of Brahman. But a further point here presents itself
for consideration, viz. whether the gods are qualified or not to
undertake those meditations of which they themselves are the objects.
The Sûtra states as a pûrvapaksha view held by *G*aimini, that they are
not so qualified, for the reason that there are no other Âdityas, Vasus,
and so on, who could be meditated on by the Âdityas and Vasus
themselves; and that moreover for the Âdityas and Vasus the qualities
and position of those classes of deities cannot be objects of desire,
considering that they possess them already. The so-called Madhuvidyâ
(*Kh*. Up. III) represents as objects of devout meditation certain parts
of the sun which are being enjoyed by the different classes of divine
beings, Vasus, Âdityas, and so on--the sun being there called 'madhu.'
i.e. honey or nectar, on account of his being the abode of a certain
nectar to be brought about by certain sacrificial works to be known from
the *Ri*g-veda, and so on; and as the reward of such meditation the text
names the attainment of the position of the Vasus, Âdityas, and so on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. And on account of (meditating on the part of the gods) being
in the Light](sbe48130.md)
