[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48425)  [Next](sbe48427.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

42\. Just as in the case of the offerings. This has been explained.

In the daharavidyâ (*Kh*. Up. VIII, 1 ff.) the text, 'those who depart
having known here the Self, and those true desires,' declares at first a
meditation on the small ether, i.e. the highest Self, and separately
therefrom a meditation on its qualities, viz. true desires, and so on.
The doubt here arises whether, in the meditation on those qualities, the
meditation on the highest Self--as that to which the qualities
belong--is to be repeated or not.--It is not to be repeated, the
Pûrvapakshin maintains; for the highest Self is just that which is
constituted by the qualities--freedom from all evil, and so on--and as
that Self so constituted

<span id="page_666">p. 666</span>

can be comprised in one meditation, there is no need of repeating the
meditation on account of the qualities.--This view the Sûtra sets aside.
The meditation has to be repeated. The highest Self indeed is that being
to which alone freedom from evil and the other qualities belong, and it
forms the object of the first meditation; yet there is a difference
between it as viewed in its essential being and as viewed as possessing
those qualities; and moreover, the clause 'free from evil, from old
age,' &c. enjoins a meditation on the Self as possessing those
qualities. It is therefore first to be meditated on in its essential
nature, and then there takes place a repetition of the meditation on it
in order to bring in those special qualities. The case is analogous to
that of 'the offerings.' There is a text 'He is to offer a puro*d*âsa on
eleven potsherds to Indra the ruler, to Indra the supreme ruler, to
Indra the self-ruler.' This injunction refers to one and the same Indra,
possessing the qualities of rulership and so on; but as, through
connexion with those several qualities, the aspects of Indra differ, the
oblation of the puro*d*âsa has to be repeated. This is declared in the
Sânkarsha*n*a, 'The divinities are different on account of
separation.'--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'offerings.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 43. On account of the plurality of indicatory marks...](sbe48427.md)
