[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48439)  [Next](sbe48441) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

56\. (The meditations are) separate, on account of the difference of
words, and so on.

The instances coming under this head of discussion are all those
meditations on Brahman which have for their only result final Release,
which consists in attaining to Brahman--such as the meditation on that
which is, the meditation on the bhûman, the meditation on the small
space within the heart, the Upako*s*ala meditation, the *S*â*nd*ilya
meditation, the meditation on Vai*s*vânara, the meditation on the Self
of bliss, the meditation on the Imperishable, and others--whether they
be recorded in one *s*âkhâ only or in several *s*âkhâs. To a different
category belong those meditations which have a special object such as
Prâ*n*a, and a special result.--The doubt here arises whether the
meditations of the former class are all to be considered as identical,
or as separate--The Pûrvapakshin holds that they are all one; for, he
says, they all have one and the same object of meditation, viz. Brahman.
For the nature of all cognition depends on the object cognised; and the
nature of the meditations thus being one, the meditations themselves are
one.--This view the Sûtra controverts.

<span id="page_680">p. 680</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The meditations are different, on account of the
difference of terms and the rest. The 'and the rest' comprises
repetition (abhyâsa), number (sa*m*khyâ), quality (gu*n*a),
subject-matter (prakriyâ), and name (nâmadheya; cp. Pû. Mî. Sû. II, 2, 1
ff.). We meet in those meditations with difference of connexion,
expressing itself in difference of words, and so on; which causes
difference on the part of the meditations enjoined. The terms enjoining
meditation, 'he knows,' 'he is to meditate' (veda; upâsîta), and so on,
do indeed all of them denote a certain continuity of cognition, and all
these cognitions have for their object Brahman only, but all the same
those cognitions differ in so far as they have for their object Brahman,
as variously qualified by special characteristics mentioned in the
meditation; in one meditation he is spoken of as the sole cause of the
world, in another as free from all evil, and so on. We therefore arrive
at the decision that clauses which describe special forms of meditation
having for their result the attainment to Brahman, and are complete in
themselves, convey the idea of separate independent meditations, and
thus effect separation of the vidyâs. This entire question was indeed
already decided in the Pûrva Mimâ*m*sa-sûtras (II, 2, 1), but it is here
argued again to the end of dispelling the mistaken notion that the
Vedânta-texts aim at knowledge only, and not at the injunction of
activities such as meditation. The meditations, therefore, are separate
ones.--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'difference of words and the
rest.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 57. Option, on account of the non-difference of result](sbe48441)
