[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48190)  [Next](sbe48192) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

22\. But (Brahman is) additional, on account of the declaration of
difference.

The word 'but' sets aside the primâ facie view. To the individual soul
capable of connexion with the various kinds of pain there is additional,
i.e. from it there is different, Brahman.--On what ground?--'Owing to
the declaration of difference.' For Brahman is spoken of as different
from the soul in the following texts:--'He who dwells in the Self and
within the Self, whom the Self does not know, of whom the Self is the
body, who rules the Self within, he is thy Self, the ruler within, the
immortal' (B*ri*. Up. III, 7, 22); 'Knowing as separate the Self and the
Mover, blessed by him he gains Immortality' (*S*vet. Up. I, 6); 'He is
the cause, the Lord of the lords of the organs' (i.e. the individual
souls) (*S*vet Up. VI, 9); 'One of them eats the sweet fruit; without
eating the other looks on' (*S*vet. Up.

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

\[paragraph continues\] IV, 6); 'There are two, the one knowing, the
other not knowing, both unborn, the one a ruler, the other not a ruler'
(*S*vet. Up. I, 9); 'Embraced by the prâ*gñ*a. Self (B*ri*. Up. IV, 3,
21); 'Mounted by the prâ*gñ*a. Self' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 3, 35); 'From that
the ruler of mâyâ sends forth all this, in that the other is bound up
through mâyâ (*S*vet. Up. IV, 9); 'the Master of the Pradhâna and the
souls, the lord of the gu*n*as' (*S*vet. Up. VI, 16);'the eternal among
eternals, the intelligent among the intelligent, who, one, fulfils the
desires of many' (*S*vet. Up. VI, 13); 'who moves within the Unevolved,
of whom the Unevolved is the body, whom the Unevolved does not know; who
moves within the Imperishable, of whom the Imperishable is the body,
whom the Imperishable does not know; who moves within Death, of whom
Death is the body, whom Death does not know; he is the inner Self of all
beings, free from evil, the divine one, the one God, Nârâya*n*a'; and
other similar texts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. And as in the analogous case of stones and the like, there is
impossibility of that](sbe48192)
