[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48234)  [Next](sbe48236) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

31\. Not so, on account of the impossibility in one.

The Bauddhas have been refuted. As now the *G*ainas also hold the view
of the world originating from atoms and similar views, their theory is
reviewed next.--The *G*ainas hold that the world comprises souls
(*g*îva), and non-souls (a*g*îva), and that there is no Lord. The world
further comprises six substances (dravya), viz. souls (*g*îva), merit
(dharma), demerit (adharma), bodies (pudgala), time (kâla), and space
(âkâ*s*a). The souls are of three different kinds-bound (in the state of
bondage), perfected by Yoga (Yogasiddha), and released (mukta). 'Merit'
is that particular world-pervading substance which is the cause of the
motion of all things moving; 'demerit' is that all-pervading substance
which is the cause of stationariness, 'Body' is that substance which
possesses colour, smell, taste, and touch. It is of two kinds, atomic or
compounded of atoms; to the latter kind belong wind, fire, water, earth,
the bodies of living creatures, and so on. 'Time' is a particular atomic
substance which is the cause of the current distinction of past,
present, and future. 'Space' is one, and of infinite extent. From among
these substances those which are not atomic are comprehended under the
term 'the five astikâyas (existing bodies)'--the astikâya of souls, the
astikâya of merit, the astikâya of demerit, the astikâya of matter, the
astikâya of space. This term 'astikâya' is applied to

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

substances occupying several parts of space.--They also use another
division of categories which subserves the purpose of Release;
distinguishing souls, non-souls, influx (âsrava), bondage, ni*g*ara,
sa*m*vara, and Release. *Release* comprises the means of Release also,
viz. perfect knowledge, good conduct, and so on. The soul is that which
has knowledge, seeing, pleasure, strength (vîrya) for its qualities.
Non-soul is the aggregate of the things enjoyed by the souls. 'Influx'
is whatever is instrumental towards the souls having the fruition of
objects, viz. the sense-organs, and so on.--Bondage is of eight
different kinds, comprising the four ghâtikarman, and the four
aghâtikarman. The former term denotes whatever obstructs the essential
qualities of the soul, viz. knowledge, intuition, strength, pleasure;
the latter whatever causes pleasure, pain, and indifference, which are
due to the persistence of the wrong imagination that makes the soul
identify itself with its body.--'Decay' means the austerities (tapas),
known from the teaching of the Arhat, which are the means of
Release.--Sa*m*vara is such deep meditation (Samâdhi) as stops the
action of the sense-organs.--Release, finally, is the manifestation of
the Self in its essential nature, free from all afflictions such as
passion, and so on.--The atoms which are the causes of earth and the
other compounds, are not, as the Vai*s*eshikas and others hold, of four
different kinds, but have all the same nature; the distinctive qualities
of earth, and so on, are due to a modification (pari*n*âma) of the
atoms. The *G*ainas further hold that the whole complex of things is of
an ambiguous nature in so far as being existent and non-existent,
permanent and non-permanent, separate and non-separate. To prove this
they apply their so-called sapta-bha<u>n</u>gî-nyâya ('the system of the
seven paralogisms')--'May be, it is'; 'May be, it is not'; 'May be, it
is and is not'; 'May be, it is not predicable'; 'May be, it is and is
not predicable'; 'May be, it is not, and is not predicable'; 'May be, it
is and is not, and is not predicable.' With the help of this they prove
that all things--which they declare to consist of substance (dravya),
and paryâya--to be existing, one and permanent

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

in so far as they are substances, and the opposite in so far as they are
paryâyas. By paryâya they understand the particular states of
substances, and as those are of the nature of Being as well as
Non-being, they manage to prove existence, non-existence, and so
on.--With regard to this the Sûtra remarks that no such proof is
possible,'Not so, on account of the impossibility in one'; i.e. because
contradictory attributes such as existence and non-existence cannot at
the same time belong to one thing, not any more than light and darkness.
As a substance and particular states qualifying it--and (by the
*G*ainas), called paryâya--are different things (padârtha), one
substance cannot be connected with opposite attributes. It is thus not
possible that a substance qualified by one particular state, such as
existence, should at the same time be qualified by the opposite state,
i.e. non-existence. The non-permanency, further, of a substance consists
in its being the abode of those particular states which are called
origination and destruction; how then should permanency, which is of an
opposite nature, reside in the substance at the same time? Difference
(bhinnatva) again consists in things being the abodes of contradictory
attributes; non-difference, which is the opposite of this, cannot hence
possibly reside in the same things which are the abode of difference;
not any more than the generic character of a horse and that of a buffalo
can belong to one animal. We have explained this matter at length,
when--under Sûtra I, 1--refuting the bhedâbheda-theory. Time we are
conscious of only as an attribute of substances (not as an independent
substance), and the question as to its being and non-being, and so on,
does not therefore call for a separate discussion. To speak of time as
being and non-being in no way differs from generic characteristics
(*g*âti), and so on, being spoken of in the same way; for--as we have
explained before--of *g*âti and the like we are conscious only as
attributes of substances.--But (the *G*aina may here be supposed to ask
the Vedântin), how can you maintain that Brahman, although one only, yet
at the same time is the Self of all?--Because, we reply, the whole
aggregate of sentient and non-sentient

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

beings constitutes the body of the Supreme Person, omniscient,
omnipotent, and so on. And that the body and the person embodied and
their respective attributes are of totally different nature (so that
Brahman is not touched by the defects of his body), we have explained
likewise.--Moreover, as your six substances, soul, and so on, are not
one substance and one paryâya, their being one substance, and so on,
cannot be used to prove their being one and also not one, and so
on.--And if it should be said that those six substances are such (viz.
one and several, and so on), each owing to its own paryâya and its own
nature, we remark that then you cannot avoid contradicting your own
theory of everything being of an ambiguous nature. Things which stand to
each other in the relation of mutual non-existence cannot after all be
identical.--Hence the theory of the (*G*ainas is not reasonable.
Moreover it is liable to the same objections which we have above set
forth as applying to all theories of atoms constituting the universal
cause, without the guidance of a Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. And likewise non-entireness of the Self](sbe48236)
