[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48173)  [Next](sbe48175.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3\. Hereby the Yoga is refuted.

By the above refutation of Kapila's Sm*ri*ti the Yoga-sm*ri*ti also is
refuted.--But a question arises, What further doubt arises here with
regard to the Yoga system, so as to render needful the formal extension
to the Yoga of the arguments previously set forth against the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya?--It might appear, we reply, that the Vedânta should be
supported by the Yoga-sm*ri*ti, firstly, because the latter admits

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

the existence of a Lord; secondly, because the Vedânta-texts mention
Yoga as a means to bring about final Release; and thirdly, because
Hira*n*yagarbha, who proclaimed the Yoga-sm*ri*ti is qualified for the
promulgation of all Vedânta-texts.--But these arguments refute
themselves as follows. In the first place the Yoga holds the Pradhâna,
which is independent of Brahman, to be the general material cause, and
hence the Lord acknowledged by it is a mere operative cause. In the
second place the nature of meditation, in which Yoga consists, is
determined by the nature of the object of meditation, and as of its two
objects, viz. the soul and the Lord, the former does not have its Self
in Brahman, and the latter is neither the cause of the world nor endowed
with the other auspicious qualities (which belong to Brahman), the Yoga
is not of Vedic character. And as to the third point, Hira*n*yagarbha
himself is only an individual soul, and hence liable to be overpowered
by the inferior gu*n*as, i.e. passion and darkness; and hence the
Yoga-sm*ri*ti is founded on error, no less than the Purâ*n*as,
promulgated by him, which are founded on ra*g*as and tamas. The Yoga
cannot, therefore, be used for the support of the Vedânta.--Here
finishes the adhikara*n*a of 'the refutation of the Yoga.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Not, on account of the difference of character of that; and
its being such (appears) from Scripture](sbe48175.md)
