[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48058)  [Next](sbe48060.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

26\. If it be objected that (Brahman is) not (denoted) on account of the
metre being denoted; (we reply) not so, because thus the direction of
the mind (on Brahman) is declared; for thus it is seen.

The previous section at first refers to the metre called Gâyatrî, 'The
Gâyatrî indeed is everything' (III, 12, 1), and then introduces--with
the words 'this is also declared by a *Rik* verse'--the verse, 'Such is
the greatness of it (viz. the Gâyatrî),' &c. Now, as this verse also
refers to the metre, there is not any reference to the highest
Person.--To this objection the second part of the Sûtra replies. The
word 'Gâyatrî' does not here denote the metre only, since this cannot
possibly be the Self of all; but the text declares the application of
the idea of Gâyatrî to Brahman, i.e. teaches, to the end of a certain
result being obtained, meditation on Brahman in so far as similar to
Gâyatrî. For Brahman having four feet, in the sense indicated by the
*rik*, may be compared to the Gâyatrî with its four (metrical) feet. The
Gâyatrî (indeed has as a rule three feet, but) occasionally a Gâyatrî
with four feet is met with; so, e.g., 'Indra*s* *s*a*k*îpati*h* \|
valena pî*d*ita*h* \| du*sk*yavano v*ri*shâ \| samitsu sâsahi*h*.' We
see that in other passages also words primarily denoting metres are
employed in other senses; thus, e.g., in the sa*m*vargavidyâ (*Kh*. Up.
IV, 3, 8), where Virâ*g* (the name of a metre of ten syllables) denotes
a group of ten divine beings.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

For this conclusion the next Sûtra supplies a further argument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. And thus also, because thus only the designation of the
beings...](sbe48060.md)
