[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48407)  [Next](sbe48409) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

24\. And although (they both be) meditations on man; on account of
others not being recorded.

In the Taittiriyaka as well as the *Kh*ândogya we meet with a meditation
on man (purusha-vidyâ), in which parts of the sacrifice are fancifully
identified with the parts of

<span id="page_644">p. 644</span>

the human body.--Here the Pûrvapakshin maintains that these two
meditations are identical; for, he says, both meditations have the same
name (purusha-vidyâ), and the same character as stated above; and as the
Taittirîyaka mentions no fruit of the meditation, the fruit declared in
the *Kh*ândogya holds good for the Taittirîyaka also, and thus there is
no difference of fruit.--This view the Sûtra negatives. Although both
meditations are meditations on man, yet they are separate 'on account of
the others not being recorded,' i.e. on account of the qualities
recorded in one *s*âkhâ not being recorded in the other. For the
Taittirîyaka mentions the three libations, while the *Kh*ândogya does
not, and so on. The character of the two meditations thus differs. And
there is a difference of result also. For an examination of the context
in the Taittirîyaka shows that the purusha-vidyâ is merely a subordinate
part of a meditation on Brahman, the fruit of which the text declares to
be that the devotee reaches the greatness of Brahman; while the
*Kh*ândogya meditation is an independent one, and has for its reward the
attainment of long life. The two meditations are thus separate, and
hence the details of one must not be included in the other.--Here
terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'the meditation on man.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. On account of the difference of sense of
piercing...](sbe48409)
