[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48161)  [Next](sbe48163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

20\. (It is) a mark indicating that the promissory statement is proved;
thus Â*s*marathya thinks.

According to the teacher Â*s*marathya the circumstance that terms
denoting the individual soul are used to denote Brahman is a mark
enabling us to infer that the promissory declaration according to which
through the knowledge of one thing everything is known is well
established. If the individual soul were not identical with Brahman in
so far as it is the effect of Brahman, then the knowledge of the
soul--being something distinct from Brahman--would not follow from the
knowledge of the highest Self. There are the texts declaring the oneness
of Brahman previous to creation, such as 'the Self only was this in the
beginning' (Ait. Âr. II, 4, 1, 1), and on the other hand those texts
which declare that the souls spring from and again are merged in
Brahman; such as 'As from a blazing fire sparks being like unto fire fly
forth a thousandfold, thus are various beings brought forth from the
Imperishable, and return thither also' (Mu. Up. II, 1, 1). These two
sets of texts together make us apprehend that the souls are one with
Brahman in so far as they are its effects. On this ground a word
denoting the individual soul denotes the highest Self as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[391:1](sbe48161.htm#fr_35) If it be insisted
upon that the Self in 'for the desire of the Self' is the individual
Self, we point out that terms denoting the individual Self at the same
time denote the highest Self also. This tenet of his Râmânu*g*a
considers to be set forth and legitimately proved in Sûtra 23, while
Sûtras 21 and 22 although advocating the right principle fail to assign
valid arguments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. Because (the soul) when it will depart is such; thus Audulomi
thinks](sbe48163)
