[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48369)  [Next](sbe48371.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

26\. But on account of twofold designation, as the snake and its coils.

It has been shown in the preceding adhikara*n*a that

<span id="page_619">p. 619</span>

the entire non-sentient universe is the outward form of Brahman. For the
purpose of proving Brahman's freedom from all imperfection, an enquiry
is now begun into the particular mode in which the world may be
conceived to constitute the form of Brahman. Is the relation of the two
like that of the snake and its coils; or like that of light and the
luminous body, both of which fall under the same genus; or like that of
the individual soul and Brahman, the soul being a distinguishing
attribute and for that reason a part (a*ms*a) of Brahman?--On the
assumption of this last alternative, which is about to be established
here, it has been already shown under two preceding Sûtras (I, 4, 23;
II, 1, 14), that from Brahman, as distinguished by sentient and
non-sentient beings in their subtle form, there originates Brahman as
distinguished by all those beings in their gross form.

Which then of the alternatives stated above is the true one?--The
material world is related to Brahman as the coils to the snake, 'on
account of twofold designation.' For some texts declare the identity of
the two: 'Brahman only is all this'; 'The Self only is all this.' Other
texts again refer to the difference of the two: 'Having entered into
these three deities with this *g*îva-self, let me differentiate names
and forms.' We therefore consider all non-sentient things to be special
forms or arrangements of Brahman, as the coils are of a coiled-up snake
or a coiled-up rope.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. Or else like light and its abode, both being fire](sbe48371.md)
