[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48001)  [Next](sbe48003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

In the Introduction to the first volume of the translation of the
'Vedânta-Sûtras with *S*a<u>n</u>kara's Commentary' (vol. xxxiv of this
Series) I have dwelt at some length on the interest which Râmânu*g*a's
Commentary may claim--as being, on the one hand, the fullest exposition
of what may be called the Theistic Vedânta, and as supplying us, on the
other, with means of penetrating to the true meaning of Bâdarâya*n*a's
Aphorisms. I do not wish to enter here into a fuller discussion of
Râmânu*g*a's work in either of these aspects; an adequate treatment of
them would, moreover, require considerably more space than is at my
disposal. Some very useful material for the right understanding of
Râmânu*g*u's work is to be found in the 'Analytical Outline of Contents'
which Messrs. M. Ra<u>n</u>gâ*k*ârya and M. B. Varadarâ*g*a
Aiya<u>n</u>gâr have prefixed to the first volume of their scholarly
translation of the Srîbhâshya (Madras, 1899).

The question as to what the Stûras really teach is a critical, not a
philosophical one. This distinction seems to have been imperfectly
realised by several of those critics, writing in India, who have
examined the views expressed in my Introduction to the translation of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's Commentary. A writer should not be taxed with
'philosophic incompetency,' 'hopeless theistic bias due to early
training,' and the like, simply because he, on the basis of a purely
critical investigation, considers himself entitled to maintain that a
certain ancient document sets forth one philosophical view rather than
another. I have nowhere expressed an opinion as to the comparative
philosophical value of the systems of *S*a<u>n</u>kara and Râmânu*g*a;
not because I have no definite opinions on this point, but because to
introduce them into a critical enquiry would be purposeless if not
objectionable.

The question as to the true meaning of the Sûtras is

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

no doubt of some interest; although the interest of problems of this
kind may easily be over-estimated. Among the remarks of critics on my
treatment of this problem I have found little of solid value. The main
arguments which I have set forth, not so much in favour of the adequacy
of Râmânu*g*a's interpretation, as against the validity of
Sa<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya's understanding of the Sûtras, appear to me not to
have been touched. I do not by any means consider the problem a hopeless
one; but its solution will not be advanced, in any direction, but by
those who will be at the trouble of submitting the entire body of the
Sûtras to a new and detailed investigation, availing themselves to the
full of the help that is to be derived from the study of all the
existing Commentaries.

The present translation of the *S*rîbhâshya claims to be faithful on the
whole, although I must acknowledge that I have aimed rather at making it
intelligible and, in a certain sense, readable than scrupulously
accurate. If I had to rewrite it, I should feel inclined to go even
further in the same direction. Indian Philosophy would, in my opinion,
be more readily and widely appreciated than it is at present, if the
translators of philosophical works had been somewhat more concerned to
throw their versions into a form less strange and repellent to the
western reader than literal renderings from technical Sanskrit must
needs be in many passages. I am not unaware of the peculiar dangers of
the plan now advocated--among which the most obvious is the temptation
it offers to the translator of deviating from the text more widely than
regard for clearness would absolutely require. And I am conscious of
having failed in this respect in more than one instance. In other cases
I have no doubt gone astray through an imperfect understanding of the
author's meaning. The fact is, that as yet the time has hardly come for
fully adequate translations of comprehensive works of the type of the
*S*rîbhâshya, the authors of which wrote with reference--in many cases
tacit--to an immense and highly technical philosophical literature which
is only just beginning to be studied, and comprehended in part, by
European scholars.

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

It gives me great pleasure to acknowledge the help which I have received
from various quarters in preparing this translation. Pa*nd*it
Ga<u>n</u>gâdhara *S*âstrin, C. I. E., of the Benares Sanskrit College,
has, with unwearying kindness and patience, supplied me throughout with
comments of his own on difficult sections of the text. Pa*nd*it Svâmin
Râma Misra *S*âstrin has rendered me frequent assistance in the earlier
portion of my task. And to Mr. A. Venis, the learned Principal of the
Benares Sanskrit College, I am indebted for most instructive notes on
some passages of a peculiarly technical and abstruse character. Nor can
I conclude without expressing my sense of obligation to Colonel G. A.
Jacob, whose invaluable 'Concordance to the Principal Upanishads'
lightens to an incalculable degree the task of any scholar who is
engaged in work bearing on the Vedânta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Pâda](sbe48003.md)
