[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48389)  [Next](sbe48391) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6\. If it be said that there is difference on account of the text; we
say no; on account of non-difference.

So far it has been shown that the non-difference of injunction,

<span id="page_633">p. 633</span>

and so on, establishes the unity of meditations, and that owing to the
latter the special features of meditation enjoined in different texts
have to be combined. Next, an enquiry is entered upon whether in the
case of certain particular meditations there actually exists, or not,
that non-difference of injunction which is the cause of meditations
being recognised as identical. A meditation on the Udgîtha is enjoined
in the text of the *Kh*andogas, as well as in that of the Vâ*g*asaneyins
(*Kh*. Up. I, 2; B*ri*. Up. I, 3); and the question arises whether the
two are to be viewed as one meditation or not. The Pûrvapakshin
maintains the former alternative. For, he says, there is no difference
of injunction, and so on, since both texts enjoin as the object of
meditation the Udgîtha viewed under the form of Prâ*n*a; since there is
the same reward promised in both places, viz. mastering of one's
enemies; since the form of meditation is the same, the Udgîtha being in
both cases viewed under the form of Prâ*n*a; since the injunction is the
same, being conveyed in both cases by the same verbal root (vid, to
know); and since both meditations have the same technical name, viz.
udgîtha-vidyâ. The Sûtra states this view in the form of the refutation
of an objection raised by the advocate of the final view. We do not
admit, the objector says, the unity maintained by you, since the texts
clearly show a difference of form. The text of the Vâ*g*asaneyins
represents as the object of meditation that which is the agent in the
act of singing out the Udgîtha; while the text of the *Kh*andogas
enjoins meditation on what is the object of the action of singing out
(i. e. the Udgîtha itself). This discrepancy establishes difference in
the character of the meditation, and as this implies difference of the
object enjoined, the mere non-difference of injunction, and so on, is of
no force, and hence the two meditations are separate ones.--This
objection the Pûrvapakshin impugns, 'on account of non-difference.' For
both texts, at the outset, declare that the Udgîtha is the means to
bring about the conquest of enemies (Let us overcome the Asuras at the
sacrifices by means of the Udgîtha' (B*ri*. Up.); 'The gods took the
Udgîtha,

<span id="page_634">p. 634</span>

thinking they would with that overcome the Asuras'--*Kh*. Up.). In order
therefore not to stultify this common beginning, we must assume that in
the clause 'For them that breath sang out' (B*ri*. Up.), the Udgîtha,
which really is the object of the action of singing, is spoken of as the
agent. Otherwise the term udgîtha in the introductory passage ('by means
of the Udgîtha') would have to be taken as by implication denoting the
agent (while directly it indicates the instrument).--Hence there is
oneness of the two vidyâs.--Of this view the next Sûtra disposes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Or not, on account of difference of subject-matter; as in the
case of the attribute of being higher than the high](sbe48391)
