[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48127)  [Next](sbe48129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

29\. And on account of the equality of names and forms there is no
contradiction, even in the renovation (of the world); as appears
from--Sruti and Sm*ri*ti.

On account of the sameness of names and forms, as stated before, there
is no difficulty in the way of the origination of the world, even in the
case of total pralayas. For what actually takes place is as follows.
When the period of a great pralaya draws towards its close, the divine
supreme Person, remembering the constitution of the world previous to
the pralaya, and forming the volition 'May I become manifold' separates
into its constituent

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

elements the whole mass of enjoying souls and objects of enjoyment
which, during the pralaya state, had been merged in him so as to possess
a separate existence (not actual but) potential only, and then emits the
entire world just as it had been before, from the so-called Mahat down
to the Brahman-egg, and Hira*n*yagarbha (Pra*g*âpati). Having thereupon
manifested the Vedas in exactly the same order and arrangement they had
had before, and having taught them to Hira*n*yagarbha, he entrusts to
him the new creation of the different classes of beings, gods, and so
on, just as it was before; and at the same time abides himself within
the world so created as its inner Self and Ruler. This view of the
process removes all difficulties. The superhuman origin and the eternity
of the Veda really mean that intelligent agents having received in their
minds an impression due to previous recitations of the Veda in a fixed
order of words, chapters, and so on, remember and again recite it in
that very same order of succession. This holds good both with regard to
us men and to the highest Lord of all; there however is that difference
between the two cases that the representations of the Veda which the
supreme Person forms in his own mind are spontaneous, not dependent on
an impression previously made.

To the question whence all this is known, the Sûtra replies 'from
Scripture and Sm*ri*ti.' The scriptural passage is 'He who first creates
Brahmâ and delivers the Vedas to him' (*S*vet. Up. VI, 18). And as to
Sm*ri*ti we have the following statement in Manu, 'This universe existed
in the shape of darkness, &c.--He desiring to produce beings of many
kinds from his own body, first with a thought created the waters and
placed his seed in them. That seed became a golden egg equal to the sun
in brilliancy; in that he himself was born as Brahmâ, the progenitor of
the whole world' (Manu I, 5; 8-9). To the same effect are the texts of
the Paurâ*n*ikas, 'From the navel of the sleeping divinity there sprung
up a lotus, and in that lotus there was born Brahma fully knowing all
Vedas and Vedângas. And then Brahmâ was told by him (the highest
Divinity),

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

'Do thou create all beings, O Great-minded one'; and the following
passage, 'From the highest Nârâya*n*a there was born the Four-faced
one.'--And in the section which begins 'I will tell the original
creation,' we read 'Because having created water (nâra) I abide within
it, therefore my name shall be Nârâya*n*a. There I lie asleep in every
Kalpa, and as I am sleeping there springs from my navel a lotus, and in
that lotus there is born the Four-faced one, and I tell him "Do thou,
Great-minded one, create all beings."'--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a
of 'the deities.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. On account of the impossibility of
qualification...](sbe48129)
