[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48098)  [Next](sbe48100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

33\. Moreover, they record him in that.

They (i.e. the Vâ*g*asaneyins) speak of him, viz. Vai*s*vânara who has
heaven for his head, &c.--i.e. the highest Self--as within that, i.e.
the body of the devotee, so as to form the abode of the oblation to
Prâ*n*a; viz. in the text,'Of that Vai*s*vânara Self the head is
Sute*g*as,' and so on. The context is as follows. The clause 'He who
meditates on the Vai*s*vânara Self as prâde*s*amâtra,' &c. enjoins
meditation on the highest Self having the three worlds for its body,
i.e. on Vai*s*vânara. The following clause 'he eats food in all worlds'
teaches that the attaining of Brahman is the reward of such meditation.
And then the text proceeds to teach the Agnihotra offered to Prâ*n*a,
which is something subsidiary to the meditation taught. The text here
establishes an identity between the members--fire, sun, &c.--of the
Vai*s*vânara enjoined as object of meditation (which members

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

are called Sute*g*as, Vi*s*varûpa, &c.), and parts--viz. head, eye,
breath, trunk, bladder, feet--of the worshipper's body. 'The head is
Sute*g*as'--that means: the head of the devotee is (identical with)
heaven, which is the head of the highest Self; and so on up to 'the
feet,' i.e. the feet of the devotee are identical with the earth, which
constitutes the feet of the highest Self, The devotee having thus
reflected on the highest Self, which has the three worlds for its body,
as present within his own body, thereupon is told to view his own chest,
hair, heart, mind and mouth as identical with the altar, grass and the
other things which are required for the Agnihotra; further to identify
the oblation to Prâ*n*a with the Agnihotra, and by means of this
Prâ*n*a-agnihotra to win the favour of Vai*s*vânara, i.e. the highest
Self. The final--conclusion then remains that Vai*s*vânara is none other
than the highest Self, the supreme Person.--Here terminates the
adhikara*n*a of 'Vai*s*vânara.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Pâda: 1. The abode of heaven, earth is the highest
Self...](sbe48100.md)
