[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48426)  [Next](sbe48428) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

43\. On account of the plurality of indicatory marks; for that (proof)
is stronger. This also is declared (in the Pûrva Mîmâmsâ).

The Taittirîyaka contains another daharavidyâ, 'The thousand-headed god,
the all-eyed one,' &c. (Mahânâr. Up. XI). Here the doubt arises whether
this vidyâ, as being one with the previously introduced vidyâ, states
qualities to be included in the meditation enjoined in that vidyâ, or
qualities to be included in the meditations on the highest Self as
enjoined in all the Vedânta-texts.--The former is the case, the
Pûrvapakshin holds, on account of the leading subject-matter. For in the
preceding section (X) the meditation on the small ether is introduced as
the subject-matter. 'There is the small lotus placed in the middle of
the town (of the body), free from all evil, the abode

<span id="page_667">p. 667</span>

of the Highest; within that there is a small space, free from
sorrow--what is within that should be meditated upon' (Mahânâr. Up. X,
23). Now, as the lotus of the heart is mentioned only in section X, the
'Nârâya*n*a-section' ('the heart resembling the bud of a lotus, with its
point turned downwards,' XI, 6), we conclude that that section also is
concerned with the object of meditation to which the daharavidyâ
refers.--Against this view the Sûtra declares itself, 'on account of the
majority of indicatory marks'; i.e. there are in the text several marks
proving that that section is meant to declare characteristics of that
which constitutes the object of meditation in all meditations on the
highest being. For that being which in those meditations is denoted as
the Imperishable, *S*iva, *S*ambhu. the highest Brahman, the highest
light, the highest entity, the highest Self, and so on, is here referred
to by the same names, and then declared to be Nârâya*n*a. There are thus
several indications to prove that Nârâya*n*a is none other than that
which is the object of meditation in all meditations on the Highest,
viz. Brahman, which has bliss and the rest for its qualities. By 'linga'
(inferential mark) we here understand clauses (vâkya) which contain a
specific indication; for such clauses have, according to the Pûrva
Mîmâ*m*sâ, greater proving power than leading subject-matter
(prakara*n*a). The argumentation that the clause ' the heart resembling
the bud of a lotus flower,' &c., proves that section to stand in a
dependent relation to the daharavidyâ, is without force; for it being
proved by a stronger argument that the section refers to that which is
the object of meditation in all meditations, the clause mentioned may
also be taken as declaring that in the daharavidyâ also the object of
meditation is Nârâya*n*a. Nor must it be thought that the accusatives
with which the section begins (sahasra*s*irsham, &c.) are to be
connected with the 'meditating' enjoined in the previous section; for
the 'meditating' is there enjoined by a gerundive form ('tasmin yad
antas tad upâsitavyam'), and with this the subsequent accusatives cannot
be construed. Moreover, the subsequent clause ('all this is Nârâya*n*a,'

<span id="page_668">p. 668</span>

\[paragraph continues\] &c., where the nominative case is used) shows
that those accusatives are to be taken in the sense of
nominatives.--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'the plurality of
indicatory marks.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 44. There is option with regard to what precedes...](sbe48428)
