[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48033)  [Next](sbe48035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

#### The Vedântin aiming to ascertain the nature of Brahman from Scripture, need not be disconcerted by the Mîmâ*m*sâ-theory of all speech having informing power with regard to actions only.

Here another primâ facie view <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26)
finally presents itself. The power of words to denote things cannot be
ascertained in any way but by observing the speech and actions of
experienced people. Now as such speech and action always implies the
idea of something to be done (kârya), words are means of knowledge only
with reference to things to be done; and hence the matter inculcated by
the Veda also is only things to be done. From this it follows that the
Vedânta-texts cannot claim the position of authoritative means of
knowledge with regard to Brahman, which is (not a thing to be done but)
an accomplished fact.--Against this view it must not be urged that in
the case of sentences expressive of accomplished facts--as e.g. that a
son is born to somebody--the idea of a particular thing may with
certainty be inferred as the cause of certain outward signs--such as
e.g. a pleased expression of countenance--which are generally due to the
attainment of a desired object; for the possible causes of joy, past,
present, and future, are infinite in number, and in the given case other
causes of joy, as e.g. the birth having taken place in an auspicious
moment, or having been an easy one, &c., may easily be imagined. Nor,
again, can it be maintained that the denotative power of words with
regard to accomplished things may be ascertained in the way of our
inferring either the meaning of one word from the known meaning of other
words, or the meaning of the radical part of a word from the known
meaning of a formative element; for the fact is that we are only able to
infer on the basis of a group of words known to denote a certain thing
to be done, what the meaning of some particular constituent of that
group may be.--Nor, again, when a person, afraid of what he thinks to be
a snake, is observed

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

to dismiss his fear on being told that the thing is not a snake but only
a rope, can we determine thereby that what terminates his fear is the
idea of the non-existence of a snake. For there are many other ideas
which may account for the cessation of his fear--he may think, e.g.,
'this is a thing incapable of moving, devoid of poison, without
consciousness'--the particular idea present to his mind we are therefore
not able to determine.--The truth is that from the fact of all activity
being invariably dependent on the idea of something to be done, we learn
that the meaning which words convey is something prompting activity. All
words thus denoting something to be done, the several words of a
sentence express only some particular action to be performed, and hence
it is not possible to determine that they possess the power of denoting
their own meaning only, in connexion with the meaning of the other words
of the sentence.--(Nor must it be said that what moves to action is not
the idea of the thing to be done, but the idea of the means to do it;
for) the idea of the means to bring about the desired end causes action
only through the idea of the thing to be done, not through itself; as is
evident from the fact that the idea of means past, future, and even
present (when divorced from the idea of an end to be accomplished), does
not prompt to action. As long as a man does not reflect 'the means
towards the desired end are not to be accomplished without an effort of
mine; it must therefore be accomplished through my activity'; so long he
does not begin to act. What causes activity is thus only the idea of
things to be done; and as hence words denote such things only, the Veda
also can tell us only about things to be done, and is not therefore in a
position to give information about the attainment of an infinite and
permanent result, such result being constituted by Brahman, which is
(not a thing to be done, but) an accomplished entity. The Veda does, on
the other hand, actually teach that mere works have a permanent result
('Imperishable is the merit of him who offers the
*k*âturmâsya-sacrifices,' and so on); and hence it follows that to enter
on an

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

enquiry into Brahman for the reason that the knowledge of Brahman has an
infinite and permanent result, while the result of works is limited and
non-permanent, is an altogether unjustified proceeding.

To this we make the following reply.--To set aside the universally known
mode of ascertaining the connexion of words and their meanings, and to
assert that all words express only one non-worldly meaning (viz. those
things to be done which the Veda inculcates), is a proceeding for which
men paying due attention to the means of proof can have only a slight
regard. A child avowedly learns the connexion of words and meanings in
the following way. The father and mother and other people about him
point with the finger at the child's mother, father, uncle, &c, as well
as at various domestic and wild animals, birds, snakes, and so on, to
the end that the child may at the same time pay attention to the terms
they use and to the beings denoted thereby, and thus again and again
make him understand that such and such words refer to such and such
things. The child thus observing in course of time that these words of
themselves give rise to certain ideas in his mind, and at the same time
observing neither any different connexion of words and things, nor any
person arbitrarily establishing such connexion, comes to the conclusion
that the application of such and such words to such and such things is
based on the denotative power of the words. And being taught later on by
his elders that other words also, in addition to those learned first,
have their definite meaning, he in the end becomes acquainted with the
meanings of all words, and freely forms sentences conveying certain
meanings for the purpose of imparting those meanings to other persons.

And there is another way also in which the connexion of words and things
can easily be ascertained. Some person orders another, by means of some
expressive gesture, to go and inform Devadatta that his father is doing
well, and the man ordered goes and tells Devadatta 'Your father is doing
well.' A by-stander who is acquainted with the meaning of various
gestures, and thus knows on what

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

errand the messenger is sent, follows him and hears the words employed
by him to deliver his message: he therefore readily infers that such and
such words have such and such a meaning.--We thus see that the theory of
words having a meaning only in relation to things to be done is
baseless. The Vedânta-texts tell us about Brahman, which is an
accomplished entity, and about meditation on Brahman as having an
unlimited result, and hence it behoves us to undertake an enquiry into
Brahman so as fully to ascertain its nature.

We further maintain that even on the supposition of the Veda relating
only to things to be done, an enquiry into Brahman must be undertaken.
For 'The Self is to be seen, to be heard, to be reflected on, to be
meditated on' (B*ri*. Up. II, 4, 5); 'He is to be searched out, him we
must try to understand' (*Kh*. Up. VIII, 7, 1); 'Let a Brâhma*n*a having
known him practise wisdom' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 21); 'What is within that
small ether, that is to be sought for, that is to be understood' (*Kh*.
Up. VIII, 1,1); 'What is in that small ether, that is to be meditated
upon' (Mahânâr. Up. X, 7)--these and similar texts enjoin a certain
action, viz. meditation on Brahman, and when we then read 'He who knows
Brahman attains the highest,' we understand that the attainment of
Brahman is meant as a reward for him who is qualified for and enters on
such meditation. Brahman itself and its attributes are thus established
thereby only--that they subserve a certain action, viz. meditation.
There are analogous instances in the Karmakâ*nd*a of the Veda. When an
arthavâda-passage describes the heavenly vorld as a place where there is
no heat, no frost, no grief, &c., this is done merely with a view to
those texts which enjoin certain sacrifices on those who are desirous of
the heavenly world. Where another arthavâda says that 'those who perform
certain sattra-sacrifices are firmly established,' such 'firm
establishment' is referred to only because it is meant as the reward for
those acting on the text which enjoins those sattras, 'Let him perform
the râtri-sattras' (Pû. Mî. Sû. IV, 3, 17). And where a text says that a
person threatening a Brâhma*n*a is to be punished with

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

a fine of one hundred gold pieces, this statement is made merely with
reference to the prohibitory passage, 'Let him not threaten a
Brâhma*n*a'(Pû. Mî. Sû. III, 4, 17).

We, however, really object to the whole theory of the meaning of words
depending on their connexion with 'things to be done,' since this is not
even the case in imperative clauses such as 'bring the cow.' For you are
quite unable to give a satisfactory definition of your 'thing to be done
'(kârya). You understand by 'kârya' that which follows on the existence
of action (k*ri*ti) and is aimed at by action. Now to be aimed at by
action is to be the object(karman) of action, and to be the object of
action is to be that which it is most desired to obtain by action
(according to the grammarian's definition). But what one desires most to
obtain is pleasure or the cessation of pain. When a person desirous of
some pleasure or cessation of pain is aware that his object is not to be
accomplished without effort on his part, he resolves on effort and
begins to act: in no case we observe an object of desire to be aimed at
by action in any other sense than that of its accomplishment depending
on activity. The prompting quality (prerakatva) also, which belongs to
objects of desire, is nothing but the attribute of their accomplishment
depending on activity; for it is this which moves to action.--Nor can it
be said that 'to be aimed at by action' means to be that which is
'agreeable' (anukûla) to man; for it is pleasure only that is agreeable
to man. The cessation of pain, on the other hand, is not what is
'agreeable' to man. The essential distinction between pleasure and pain
is that the former is agreeable to man, and the latter disagreeable
(pratikûla), and the cessation of pain is desired not because it is
agreeable, but because pain is disagreeable: absence of pain means that
a person is in his normal condition, affected neither with pain nor
pleasure. Apart from pleasure, action cannot possibly be agreeable, nor
does it become so by being subservient to pleasure; for its essential
nature is pain. Its being helpful to pleasure merely causes the resolve
of undertaking it.--Nor, again, can we define that which is aimed at by
action as that to which action is

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

auxiliary or supplementary (*s*esha), while itself it holds the position
of something principal to be subserved by other things (*s*eshin); for
of the *s*esha and *s*eshin also no proper definition can be given. It
cannot be said that a *s*esha is that which is invariably accompanied by
an activity proceeding with a view to something else, and that the
correlate of such a *s*esha is the *s*eshin; for on this definition the
action is not a *s*esha, and hence that which is to be effected by the
action cannot be the correlative *s*eshin. And moreover a *s*eshin may
not be defined as what is correlative to an action proceeding with a
view to--i. e. aiming at--something else; for it is just this 'being
aimed at' of which we require a definition, and moreover we observe that
also the *s*eshin (or 'pradhâna') is capable of action proceeding with a
view to the *s*esha, as when e.g. a master does something for--let us
say, keeps or feeds--his servant. This last criticism you must not
attempt to ward off by maintaining that the master in keeping his
servant acts with a view to himself (to his own advantage); for the
servant in serving the master likewise acts with a view to himself.--And
as, further, we have no adequate definition of 'kârya,' it would be
inappropriate to define *s*esha as that which is correlative to kârya,
and *s*eshin as that which is correlative to *s*esha.--Nor, finally, may
we define 'that which is aimed at by action' as that which is the final
end (prayo*g*ana) of action; for by the final end of an action we could
only understand the end for which the agent undertakes the action, and
this end is no other than the desired object. As thus 'what is aimed at
by action' cannot be defined otherwise than what is desired, kârya
cannot be defined as what is to be effected by action and stands to
action in the relation of principal matter (pradhâna or *s*eshin).

(Let it then be said that the 'niyoga,' i.e. what is commonly called the
apûrva--the supersensuous result of an action which later on produces
the sensible result--constitutes the prayo*g*ana--the final purpose--of
the action.--But) the apûrva also can, as it is something different from
the direct objects of desire, viz. pleasure and the cessation of pain,
be viewed only as a means of bringing about these

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

direct objects, and as something itself to be effected by the action; it
is for this very reason that it is something different from the action,
otherwise the action itself would be that which is effected by the
action. The thing to be effected by the action-which is expressed by
means of optative and imperative verbal forms such as ya*g*eta, 'let him
sacrifice '--is, in accordance with the fact of its being connected with
words such as svargakâma*h*, 'he who is desirous of heaven', understood
to be the means of bringing about (the enjoyment of) the heavenly world;
and as the (sacrificial) action itself is transitory, there is assumed
an altogether 'new' or 'unprecedented' (apûrva) effect of it which
(later on) is to bring about the enjoyment of heaven. This so-called
'apûrva' can therefore be understood only with regard to its capability
of bringing about the heavenly world. Now it certainly is ludicrous to
assert that the apûrva, which is assumed to the end of firmly
establishing the independent character of the effect of the action first
recognised as such (i.e. independent), later on becomes the means of
realising the heavenly world; for as the word expressing the result of
the action (ya*g*ta) appears in syntactical connexion with
'svargakâma*h*' (desirous of heaven), it does not, from the very
beginning, denote an independent object of action, and moreover it is
impossible to recognise an independent result of action other than
either pleasure or cessation of pain, or the means to bring about these
two results.--What, moreover, do you understand by the apûrva being a
final end (prayo*g*ana)?-You will perhaps reply, 'its being agreeable
like pleasure.'--Is then the apûrva a pleasure? It is pleasure alone
which is agreeable!--Well, let us then define the apûrva as a kind of
pleasure of a special nature, called by that name!--But what proof, we
ask, have you for this? You will, in the first place, admit yourself
that you do not directly experience any pleasure springing from
consciousness of your apûrva, which could in any way be compared to the
pleasure caused by the consciousness of the objects of the
senses.--Well, let us say then that as authoritative doctrine gives us
the notion of an apûrva as

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

something beneficial to man, we conclude that it will be enjoyed later
on.--But, we ask, what is the authoritative doctrine establishing such
an apûrva beneficial to man? Not, in the first place, ordinary, i.e.
non-Vedic doctrine; for such has for its object action only which always
is essentially painful. Nor, in the next place, Vedic texts; for those
also enjoin action only as the means to bring about certain results such
as the heavenly world. Nor again the Sm*ri*ti texts enjoining works of
either permanent or occasional obligation; for those texts always convey
the notion of an apûrva only on the basis of an antecedent knowledge of
the apûrva as intimated by Vedic texts containing terms such as
svargakâma*h*. And we, moreover, do not observe that in the case of
works having a definite result in this life, there is enjoyment of any
special pleasure called apûrva, in addition to those advantages which
constitute the special result of the work and are enjoyed here below, as
e.g. abundance of food or freedom from sickness. Thus there is not any
proof of the apûrva being a pleasure. The arthavâda-passages of the Veda
also, while glorifying certain pleasurable results of works, as e.g. the
heavenly world, do not anywhere exhibit a similar glorification of a
pleasure called apûrva.

From all this we conclude that also in injunctory sentences that which
is expressed by imperative and similar forms is only the idea that the
meaning of the root--as known from grammar--is to be effected by the
effort of the agent. And that what constitutes the meaning of roots,
viz. the action of sacrificing and the like, possesses the quality of
pleasing the highest Person, who is the inner ruler of Agni and other
divinities (to whom the sacrifices are ostensibly offered), and that
through the highest Person thus pleased the result of the sacrifice is
accomplished, we shall show later on, under Sû. III, 2, 37--It is thus
finally proved that the Vedânta-texts give information about an
accomplished entity, viz. Brahman, and that the fruit of meditation on
Brahman is something infinite and permanent. Where, on the other hand,
Scripture refers to the fruit of mere works, such as the
*k*âturmâsya-sacrifices,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

as something imperishable, we have to understand this imperishableness
in a merely relative sense, for Scripture definitely teaches that the
fruit of all works is perishable.

We thus arrive at the settled conclusion that, since the fruit of mere
works is limited and perishable, while that of the cognition of Brahman
is infinite and permanent, there is good reason for entering on an
enquiry into Brahman--the result of which enquiry will be the accurate
determination of Brahman's nature.--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of
'Enquiry.'

What then is that Brahman which is here said to be an object that should
be enquired into?--To this question the second Sûtra gives a reply.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[148:1](sbe48034.htm#fr_26) This view is held by
the Prâbhâkara Mîmâ*m*sakas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Brahman is that from which the origin of this world
proceed](sbe48035)
