[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48537)  [Next](sbe48539) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2\. From the year to Vâyu; on account of non-specification and
specification.

In their description of the path beginning with light the *Kh*andogas
mention the year between the months and the sun, 'from the months to the
year, from the year to the sun' (*Kh*. Up. V, 10, 1); while the
Vâ*g*asaneyins mention, in that very place, the world of the Gods,'from
the months to the world of the Gods, from the world of the Gods to the
sun' (B*ri*. Up. VI, 2. 15). Now, as the two paths are identical, we
have to supplement each by the additional item given in the other (and
the question then arises whether the order of the stages be 1. months,
2. year, 3. world of the Gods, 4. sun; or 1. months, 2. world of the
Gods, 3. year, 4. sun). The year and the world of the Gods are equally
entitled--to the place after the months in so far as textual declaration
goes; for both texts say '*from* the months.' But we observe that the
advance is throughout from the shorter periods of time to the longer
ones ('from the day to the bright fortnight, from the bright fortnight
to the six months of the northern progress'), and as therefore the year
naturally presents itself to the mind immediately after the six months,
we decide that the order is--months, year, world of the Gods, sun.--In
another place (B*ri*. Up. V, 10) the Vâ*g*asaneyins mention the wind as
the stage preceding the sun ('the wind makes room for him--he mounts
upwards; he comes to the sun'). The Kaushîtakins, on the other hand,
place the world of the

<span id="page_746">p. 746</span>

wind subsequent to light, referred to by them as the world of Agni
('Having entered on the path of the Gods he comes to the world of Agni,
to the world of the wind,' &c., Kau. Up. I, 3). Now in this latter text
the fact of the world of the wind following upon light is to be inferred
only from the succession of the clauses ('to the world of Agni'--'to the
world of the wind '), while the 'upwards' in the text of the
Vâ*g*asaneyins is a direct statement of succession given by the text
itself; and as this latter order of succession has greater force than
the former, we have to place, in the series of stages, the world of Vâyu
directly before the world of the sun. But above we have determined that
the same place (after the year and before the sun) has to be assigned to
the world of the Gods also; and hence a doubt arises whether the world
of the Gods and Vâyu are two different things--the soul of the wise man
passing by them in optional succession--or one and the same thing--the
soul coming, after the year, to Vâyu who is the world of the Gods.--They
are different things, the Pûrvapakshin says; for they are generally
known to be so. And there are definite indications in the text that the
world of the Gods as well as Vâyu is to be placed immediately before the
sun--this being indicated for Vâyu by the 'upwards' referred to above,
and for the world of the Gods by the ablative case (devalokât) in the
*Kh*ând. text, 'from the world of the Gods he goes to the sun'--and as
thus there is no difference between the two, we conclude that the soul
passes by them in either order it may choose.--This view the Sûtra
negatives: 'From the year to Vâyu.' The soul, having departed from the
year, comes to Vâyu. This is proved 'by non-specification and
specification.' For the term 'the world of the Gods' is a term of
general meaning, and hence can denote Vâyu in so far as being the world
of the Gods; while on the other hand the term Vâyu specifically denotes
that divine being only. The Kaushîtakins speak of 'the world of Vâyu';
but this only means 'Vâyu who at the same time is a world.' That Vâyu
may be viewed as the world of the Gods is confirmed by another
scriptural passage, viz.

<span id="page_747">p. 747</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 'he who blows (Vâyu) is the houses of the
Gods.'--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'Vâyu.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Beyond lightning there is Varuna](sbe48539)
