[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48527)  [Next](sbe48529) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

12\. If it be said that on account of the denial (it is not so); we deny
this. From the embodied soul; for (that one is) clear, according to
some.

<span id="page_734">p. 734</span>

The contention that the soul of him who knows departs from the body in
the same way as other souls do cannot be upheld, since Scripture
expressly negatives such departure. For B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, at first
describes the mode of departure on the part of him who does not possess
true knowledge ('He taking to himself those elements of light descends
into the heart' up to 'after him thus departing the Prâ*n*a departs');
then refers to his assuming another body ('he makes to himself another,
newer and more beautiful shape'); then concludes the account of him who
does not possess true knowledge ('having attained the end of these works
whatever he does here, he again returns from that world to this world of
action. So much for the man who desires'); and thereupon proceeds
explicitly to deny the departure from the body of him who possesses true
knowledge, 'But he who does not desire, who is without desire, free from
desire, who has obtained his desire, who desires the Self only, of him
(tasya) the prâ*n*as do not pass forth,--being Brahman only he goes into
Brahman.' Similarly a previous section also, viz. the one containing the
questions put by Årtabhâga, directly negatives the view of the soul of
him who knows passing out of the body. There the clause 'he again
conquers death' introduces him who knows as the subject-matter, and
after that the text continues: 'Yâ*gñ*avalkya, he said, when that person
dies, do the prâ*n*as pass out of him (asmât) or not?--No, said
Yâ*gñ*avalkya, they are gathered up in him (atraiva), he swells,
inflated the dead lies' (B*ri*. Up. III, 2, 10-11). From these texts it
follows that he who knows attains to immortality *here* (without his
soul passing out of the body and moving to another place).--This view
the Sûtra rejects. 'Not so; from the embodied soul.' What those texts
deny is the moving away of the prâ*n*as from the embodied individual
soul, not from the body. 'Of him (tasya) the prâ*n*as do not pass
forth'--here the 'of him' refers to the subject under discussion, i.e.
the embodied soul which is introduced by the clause 'he who does not
desire,' not to the body which the text had not previously mentioned.
The sixth case (tasya) here denotes the embodied soul as

<span id="page_735">p. 735</span>

that which is connected with the prâ*n*as ('the prâ*n*as belonging to
that, i.e. the soul, do not pass out'), not as that from which the
passing out takes its start.--But why should the 'tasya ' not denote the
body as the point of starting ('the prâ*n*as do not pass forth from that
(tasya), viz. the body')?--Because, we reply, the soul which is actually
mentioned in its relation of connexion with the prâ*n*as (as indicated
by tasya) suggests itself to the mind more immediately than the body
which is not mentioned at all; if therefore the question arises as to
the starting-point of the passing forth of the prâ*n*as the soul is (on
the basis of the text) apprehended as that starting-point also (i.e. the
clause 'the prâ*n*as of him do not pass forth' implies at the same time
'the prâ*n*as do not pass forth from him, i.e. from the soul').
Moreover, as the prâ*n*as are well known to be connected with the soul
and as hence it would serve no purpose to state that connexion, we
conclude that the sixth case which expresses connexion in general is
here meant to denote the starting-point in particular. And no dispute on
this point is really possible; since 'according to some' it is 'clear'
that what the text means to express is the embodied soul as the
starting-point of the prâ*n*as. The *some* are the Mâdhyandinas, who in
their text of the B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka read 'na tasmât prâ*n*a
utkrâmanti'--'the prâ*n*as do not pass forth *from him*' (the 'tasya'
thus being the reading of the Kâ*n*va *S*âkhâ only).--But, an objection
is raised, there is no motive for explicitly negativing the passing away
of the prâ*n*as from the soul; for there is no reason to assume that
there should be such a passing away (and the general rule is that a
denial is made of that only for which there is a presumption).--Not so,
we reply. The *Kh*ândogya-text 'For him there is delay only as long as
he is not delivered (from the body); then he will be united' declares
that the soul becomes united with Brahman at the time of its separation
from the body, and this suggests the idea of the soul of him who knows
separating itself at that very time (i.e. the time of death) from the
prâ*n*as also. But this would mean that the soul cannot reach union with
Brahman by

<span id="page_736">p. 736</span>

means of proceeding on the path of the gods, and for this reason the
B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka ('of him the prâ*n*as do not pass forth') explicitly
declares that the prâ*n*as do not depart from the soul of him who knows,
before that soul proceeding on the path of the gods attains to union
with Brahman.

The same line of refutation would have to be applied to the arguments
founded by our opponent on the question of Ârtabhâga, if that question
be viewed as referring to him who possesses true knowledge. The fact
however is that that passage refers to him who does *not* possess that
knowledge; for none of the questions and answers of which the section
consists favours the presumption of the knowledge of Brahman being under
discussion. The matters touched upon in those questions and answers are
the nature of the senses and sense objects viewed as graha and atigraha;
water being the food of fire; the non-separation of the prâ*n*as from
the soul at the time of death; the continuance of the fame--there called
*name*--of the dead man; and the attainment, on the part of the soul of
the departed, to conditions of existence corresponding to his good or
evil deeds. The passage immediately preceding the one referring to the
non-departure of the prâ*n*as merely means that death is conquered in so
far as it is a fire and fire is the food of water; this has nothing to
do with the owner of true knowledge. The statement that the prâ*n*as of
the ordinary man who does not possess true knowledge do not depart means
that at the time of death the prâ*n*as do not, like the gross body,
abandon the *g*îva, but cling to it like the subtle body and accompany
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. Smriti also declares this](sbe48529)
