[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48497)  [Next](sbe48499.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_715">p. 715</span>

# FOURTH ADHYÂYA

## FIRST PÂDA.

1\. Repetition, on account of the text teaching (what has to be done
more than once).

The third adhyâya was concerned with the consideration of meditation,
together with its means. The Sûtras now enter on a consideration of the
results of meditation, after a further preliminary clearing up of the
nature of meditation. The question here arises whether the act of
knowledge of Brahman inculcated in Vedânta-texts, such as 'He who knows
Brahman reaches the Highest,' 'Having known him thus he passes beyond
death,' 'He knows Brahman, he becomes Brahman,' is, in the view of
Scripture, to be performed once only, or to be repeated more than
once.--Once suffices, the Pûrvapakshin maintains; for as the text
enjoins nothing more than knowing there is no authority for a repetition
of the act. Nor can it be said that the act of knowing, analogous to the
act of beating the rice-grains until they are freed from the husks, is a
visible means towards effecting the intuition of Brahman, and hence
must, like the beating, be repeated until the effect is accomplished;
for knowing is not a visible means towards anything. Such acts as the
*G*yotish*t*oma sacrifice and the knowledge inculcated in the
Vedânta-texts are alike of the nature of conciliation of the Supreme
Person; through whom thus conciliated man obtains all that is beneficial
to him, viz. religious duty, wealth, pleasure, and final Release. This
has been shown under III, 2, 38. The meaning of Scripture therefore is
accomplished by performing the act of knowledge once only, as the
*G*yotish*t*oma is performed once.--This view the Sûtra sets aside. The
meaning of Scripture is fulfilled only by repeated acts of knowledge 'on
account of teaching,' i.e. because the teaching of Scripture is conveyed

<span id="page_716">p. 716</span>

by means of the term 'knowing' (vedana), which is synonymous with
meditating (dhyâna, upâsana). That these terms are so synonymous appears
from the fact that the verbs vid, upâs, dhyâi are in one and the same
text used with reference to one and the same object of knowledge. A text
begins, e.g. 'Let him meditate (upâsîta) on mind as Brahman,' and
concludes 'he who knows (veda) this shines, warms,' &c. (*Kh*. Up. III,
18). In the same way the knowledge of Raikva is at first referred to by
means of vid, 'He who knows (veda) what he knows is thus spoken of by
me,' and further on by means of upâs,'teach me the deity on which you
meditate' (*Kh*. Up. IV, 1, 2). Similarly texts which have the same
meaning as the text 'He who knows Brahman reaches the Highest'--viz.
'the Self should be seen, be heard, be reflected on, be meditated upon
(nididhyâsitavya)'--'Then he sees him meditating (dhyâyamâna) on him as
without parts' (Mu. Up. III, 1, 8), and others--use the verb dhyâi to
express the meaning of vid. Now dhyâi means to think of something not in
the way of mere representation (sm*ri*ti), but in the way of *continued*
representation. And upâs has the same meaning; for we see it used in the
sense of thinking with uninterrupted concentration of the mind on one
object. We therefore conclude that as the verb 'vid' is used
interchangeably with dhyâi and upâs, the mental activity referred to in
texts such as 'he knows Brahman' and the like is an often-repeated
continuous representation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. And on account of an inferential mark](sbe48499.md)
