[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48197)  [Next](sbe48199) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

29\. And on account of the defects of his view also.

On his view, i.e. on the view of him who holds the theory of the
Pradhâna or something similar, the imperfections observed in ordinary
things would attach themselves to the Pradhâna also, since it does not
differ in nature from those things. The legitimate conclusion therefore
is that Brahman only which differs in nature from all other things can
be held to be the general cause.

The Pradhâna, moreover, is without parts; how then is it possible that
it should give rise to a manifold world, comprising the 'great
principle,' and so on?--But there *are* parts of the Pradhâna, viz.
Goodness, Passion, and Darkness!--This we reply necessitates the
following distinction. Does the aggregate of Goodness, Passion, and
Darkness constitute the Pradhâna? or is the Pradhâna the effect of those
three? The latter alternative is in conflict with your own doctrine
according to which the Pradhâna is cause only. It moreover contradicts
the number of tattvas (viz. 24) admitted by you; and as those three
gu*n*as also have no parts one does not see how they can produce an
effect. On the former alternative, the gu*n*as not being composed of
parts must be held to aggregate or join themselves without any reference
to difference of space, and from such conjunction the production of
gross effects cannot result.--The same objection applies to the doctrine
of atoms being the general cause. For atoms, being without parts and
spatial distinction of parts, can join only without any reference to
such spatial distinction, and hence do not possess the power of
originating effects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. And the divinity is endowed with all powers, because that is
seen](sbe48199)
