[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48152)  [Next](sbe48154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

11\. Not from the mention of the number even, on account of the
diversity and of the excess.

The Vâ*g*asaneyins read in their text 'He in whom the five "five-people"
and the ether rest, him alone I believe to be the Self; I, who know,
believe him to be Brahman' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 17). The doubt here arises
whether this text be meant to set forth the categories as established in
Kapila's doctrine, or not.--The Pûrvapakshin maintains the former view,
on the ground that the word 'five-people,' qualified by the word 'five,'
intimates the twenty-five categories of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas. The
compound 'five-people' (pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h*) denotes groups of five beings,
just as the term pa*ñk*a-pûlya*h* denotes aggregates of five bundles of
grass. And as we want to know how many such groups there are, the
additional qualification 'five' intimates that there are five such
groups; just as if it were said 'five five-bundles, i. e. five
aggregates consisting of five bundles each.' We thus understand that the
'five five-people' are twenty-five things, and as the mantra in which
the term is met with refers to final release, we recognise the
twenty-five categories known from the Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sm*ri*ti which are
here referred to as objects to be known by persons desirous of release.
For the followers of Kapila teach that 'there is the fundamental causal
substance which is not an effect. There are seven things, viz. the
Mahat, and so on, which are causal substances as well as effects. There
are sixteen effects. The soul is neither a causal substance nor an
effect' (Sâ<u>n</u>. Kâ. 3). The mantra therefore is meant to intimate
the categories known from the Sâ<u>n</u>khya.--To this the Sûtra replies
that from the mention of the number twenty-five supposed to be implied
in the expression 'the five five-people,' it does not follow that the
categories of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas are meant. 'On account of the
diversity,' i.e. on account of the five-people further qualified by the
number five being different from the categories of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas.
For in the text 'in whom the five five-people and the ether rest,' the
'in whom' shows the five-people to have their abode, and hence their
Self, in Brahman; and

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

in the continuation of the text, 'him I believe the Self,' the 'him'
connecting itself with the preceding 'in whom' is recognised to be
Brahman. The five five-people must therefore be different from the
categories of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya-system. 'And on account of the excess.'
Moreover there is, in the text under discussion, an excess over and
above the Sâ<u>n</u>khya categories, consisting in the Self denoted by
the relative pronoun 'in whom,' and in the specially mentioned Ether.
What the text designates therefore is the Supreme Person who is the
Universal Lord in whom all things abide--such as he is described in the
text quoted above, 'Therefore some call him the twenty-sixth, and others
the twenty-seventh.' The 'even' in the Sûtra is meant to intimate that
the 'five five-people' can in no way mean the twenty-five categories,
since there is no pentad of groups consisting of five each. For in the
case of the categories of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas there are no generic
characteristics or the like which could determine the arrangement of
those categories in fives. Nor must it be urged against this that there
is a determining reason for such an arrangement in so far as the tattvas
of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas form natural groups comprising firstly, the five
organs of action; secondly, the five sense-organs; thirdly, the five
gross elements; fourthly, the subtle parts of those elements; and
fifthly, the five remaining tattvas; for as the text under discussion
mentions the ether by itself, the possibility of a group consisting of
the five gross elements is precluded. We cannot therefore take the
compound 'five people' as denoting a group consisting of five
constituent members, but, in agreement with Pâ*n*. II, 1, 50, as merely
being a special name. There are certain beings the special name of which
is 'five-people,' and of these beings the additional word 'pañ*k*a'
predicates that they are five in number. The expression is thus
analogous to the term 'the seven seven-*ri*shis'(where the term
'seven-*ri*shis' is to be understood as the name of a certain class of
*ri*shis only).--Who then are the beings called 'five-people?'--To this
question the next Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. The breath, and so on, on the ground of the complementary
passage](sbe48154.md)
