[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48298)  [Next](sbe48300) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_568">p. 568</span>

# FOURTH PÂDA.

1\. Thus the prâ*n*as.

After having taught that Ether and all the other elements are effects,
and hence have originated, the Sûtras had shown that the individual
soul, although likewise an effect, does not originate in the sense of
undergoing a change of essential nature; and had in connexion therewith
clearly set forth wherein the essential nature of the soul consists.
They now proceed to elucidate the question as to the origination of the
instruments of the individual soul, viz. the organs and the vital
breath.

The point here to be decided is whether the organs are effects as the
individual soul is an effect, or as ether and the other elements are. As
the soul is, thus the prâ*n*as are, the Pûrvapakshin maintains. That
means--as the soul is not produced, thus the organs also are not
produced--For the latter point no less than the former is directly
stated in Scripture; the wording of the Sûtra 'thus the prâ*n*as' being
meant to extend to the case of the prâ*n*as also, the authority of
Scripture to which recourse was had in the case of the soul.--But what
is the scriptural text you mean?

'Non-being, truly this was in the beginning. Here they say, what was
that? Those *Ri*shis indeed were that Non-being, thus they say. And who
were those *Ri*shis? The prâ*n*as indeed were those *Ri*shis.' This is
the passage which declares that before the origination of the world the
*Ri*shis existed. As 'prâ*n*â*h*' is in the plural, we conclude that
what is meant is the organs and the vital air. Nor can this text be
interpreted to mean only that the prâ*n*as exist for a very long
time(but are not uncreated); as we may interpret the texts declaring
Vâyu and the atmosphere (antariksha) to be immortal: 'Vâyu and the
atmosphere are immortal'; 'Vâyu is the deity that never sets' (B*ri*.
Up. II, 3, 3; I, 5, 22). For the clause 'Non-being indeed was

<span id="page_569">p. 569</span>

this in the beginning' declares that the prâ*n*as existed even at the
time when the entire world was in the pralaya state. Those texts, then,
which speak of an origination of the prâ*n*as must be explained somehow,
just as we did with the texts referring to the origination of the
individual soul.

To this the Siddhântin replies, 'the prâ*n*as also originate in the same
way as ether, and so on.'--Why?--Because we have scriptural texts
directly stating that before creation everything was one, 'Being only
this was in the beginning,' 'The Self only was this in the beginning.'
And moreover, the text 'from that there is produced the prâ*n*a and the
mind and all organs'(Mu. Up. II, 3, 1) declares that the organs
originated; they therefore cannot have existed before creation. Nor is
it permissible to ascribe a different meaning to the texts which declare
the origination of the sense-organs--as we may do in the case of the
texts declaring the origination of the soul. For we have no texts
directly denying the origination of the sense-organs, or affirming their
eternity, while we *have* such texts in the case of the individual soul.
In the text quoted by the Pûrvapakshin, 'Non-being indeed was this in
the beginning,' &c., the word prâ*n*a can denote the highest Self only;
for from texts such as 'All these beings indeed enter into breath alone,
and from breath they arise'(*Kh*. Up. I, 11, 5), the word prâ*n*a is
known to be one of the designations of the highest Self. And as to the
clause 'the prâ*n*as indeed are those *Ri*shis,' we remark that the term
*Ri*shi may properly be applied to the all-seeing highest Self, but not
to the non-intelligent organs.

But how then is the plural form 'the *Ri*shis are the prâ*n*as' to be
accounted for? This the next Sûtra explains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The scriptural statement of the plural](sbe48300)
