<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mtc33)  [Next](mtc35) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*More Translations from the Chinese*, by Arthur Waley, \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### \[33\] PROSE LETTER TO YÜAN CHĒN

#### (A.D. *818*)

<span class="smallcaps">Night</span> of the tenth day of the fourth
month. Lo-t‘ien <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_14) says: O
Wei-chih, <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_15) Wei-chih, it is three
years since I saw your face and almost two years since I had a letter
from you. Is man's life so long that he can afford such partings? Much
less should hearts joined by glue be set in bodies remote as Hu and
Yüeh. <span id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_16) In promotion we could not be
together; and in failure we cannot forget each other. Snatched and
wrenched apart, separately each of us grows grey. O Wei-chih, what is to
be done? But this is the work of Heaven and there is no use in speaking
of it.

When I first arrived at Hsün-yang, Hsiung Ju-tēng <span
id="fr_19"></span>[4](#fn_17) came with the letter which you had written
the year before, when you were so ill. First you told me of the progress
of your illness, next of your feelings while you were ill and last you
spoke of all our meetings and partings, and of the occasion of your own
difficulties and dangers. You had no time to write more, but sent a
bundle of your writings with a note attached, which said, "Later on I
will send a message by Po Min-chung. <span id="fr_20"></span>[5](#fn_18)
Ask him for news and that will do instead of a letter." Alas! Is it thus
that Wei-chih treats me? But again, I

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

read the poem you wrote when you heard I had been banished:

*The lamp had almost spent its light: shadows filled the room,  
The night I heard that Lo-t‘ien was banished to Kiu-kiang.  
And I that had lain sick to death sat up suddenly in bed;  
A dark wind blowing rain entered at the cold window.*

If even strangers' hearts are touched by these lines, much more must
mine be; so that to this day I cannot recite them without pain. Of this
matter I will say no more, but tell you briefly what has passed of late.

It is more than three years since I came to Kiu-kiang. All this time my
body has been strong and my heart much at peace. There has been no
sickness in my household, even among the servants. Last summer my elder
brother arrived from Hsü-chou, leading by the hand six or seven little
brothers and sisters, orphans of various households. So that I have
under my eyes all those who at present demand my care. They share with
me cold and heat, hunger and satiety. This is my first consolation.

The climate of the River Province is somewhat cool, so that fevers and
epidemics are rare. And while snakes and mosquitoes are few, the fish in
the Pēn are remarkably fat, the River wine is exceedingly good, and
indeed for the most part the food is like that of the North Country.
Although the mouths within my doors are many and the salary of a
Sub-Prefect

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

is small, by a thrifty application of my means, I am yet able to provide
for my household without seeking any man's assistance to clothe their
backs or fill their bellies. This is my second consolation.

In the autumn of last year I visited Lu Shan <span
id="fr_21"></span>[6](#fn_19) for the first time. Reaching a point
between the Eastern Forest and Western Forest Temples, beneath the
Incense-Burner Peak, I was enamoured by the unequalled prospect of
cloud-girt waters and spray-clad rocks. Unable to leave this place, I
built a cottage here. Before it stand ten tall pines and a thousand
tapering bamboos. With green creepers I fenced my garden; with white
stones I made bridge and path. Flowing waters encircle my home; flying
spray falls between the eaves. Red pomegranate and white lotus cluster
on the steps of the pond. All is after this pattern, though I cannot
here name each delight. Whenever I come here alone, I am moved to
prolong my stay to ten days; for of the things that have all my life
most pleased me, not one is missing. So that not only do I forget to go
back, but would gladly end my days here. This is my third consolation.

Remembering that not having had news of me for so long, you might be in
some anxiety with regard to me, I have hastened to set your mind at rest
by recording these three consolations. What else I have to tell shall be
set out in due order, as follows.… <span id="fr_22"></span>[7](#fn_20)

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Wei-chih, Wei-chih! The night I wrote this letter I was sitting at the
mountain-window of my thatched hut. I let my brush run as my hand willed
and wrote at hazard as my thoughts came. When I folded it and addressed
it, I found that dawn had come. I raised my head and saw only a few
mountain-priests, some sitting, some sleeping. I heard the mournful
cries of mountain apes and the sad twitterings of valley birds. O friend
of all my life, parted from me by a thousand leagues, at such times as
this "dim thoughts of the World" <span id="fr_23"></span>[8](#fn_21)
creep upon me for a while; so, following my ancient custom, I send you
these three couplets:

*I remember how once 1 wrote you a letter sitting in the Palace at
night,  
At the back of the Hall of Golden Bells, when dawn was coming in the
sky.  
This night I fold your letter—in what place?  
Sitting in a cottage on Lu Shan, by the light of a late lamp.  
The caged bird and fettered ape are neither of them dead yet;  
In the world of men face to face will they ever meet again?*

O Wei-chih, Wei-chih! This night, this heart—do you know them or not?
Lo-t‘ien bows his head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[61:1](mtc34.htm#fr_16) Other name of Po Chü-i.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[61:2](mtc34.htm#fr_17) Other name of Yüan Chēn.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[61:3](mtc34.htm#fr_18) The extreme North and
South of China.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[61:4](mtc34.htm#fr_19) A poet, several of whose
short poems are well-known.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[61:5](mtc34.htm#fr_20) The son of Po Chü-i's
uncle Po Ch‘i-k‘ang.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[63:6](mtc34.htm#fr_21) A famous mountain near
Kiu-kiang.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[63:7](mtc34.htm#fr_22) What followed is omitted
in the printed text.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[64:8](mtc34.htm#fr_23) This expression is used
by Yüan Chēn in a poem addressed to Po Chü-i. By "the World," he means
their life together at Court.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hearing the Early Oriole](mtc35)

</div>
