[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml00)  [Next](iml02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE

This volume deals with the myths and legends of India, which survive to
us in the rich and abundant store-house of Sanskrit literature, and with
the rise and growth of Brahmanism, Buddhism, Jainism, &c. The reader is
introduced to the various sacred works of the Hindus, including the
ancient invocatory hymns of the four Vedas, the later speculative and
expository "Forest Books" in which "the Absolute is grasped and
proclaimed", and those great epic poems the *Rámáyana*, which is three
times longer than the *Iliad*, and the *Máhábharata*, which is four
times longer than the *Rámáyana*. In no other country have the national
poets given fuller and finer expression to the beliefs and ideals and
traditions of a people, or achieved as a result wider and more enduring
fame. At the present day over two hundred million Hindus are familiar in
varying degrees with the legendary themes and traditional beliefs which
the ancient forest sages and poets of India invested with much beautiful
symbolism, and used as mediums for speculative thought and profound
spiritual teachings. The sacred books of India are to the Hindus what
the Bible is to Christians. Those who read them, or hear them read, are
believed to be assured of prosperity in this world and of salvation in
the next. To students of history, of ethnology, and of comparative
religion they present features of peculiar interest, for they contain an
elaborate sociology of the

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

ancient Aryo-Indians, their political organizations, their codes of
laws, their high ethical code, and above all their conceptions of God,
the soul, and the Universe. Some knowledge of them is necessary for
those who desire to approach with sympathy the investigation of the
religious beliefs of our Hindu fellow men and to understand their
outlook upon life and the world.

The Introduction deals with various aspects of the study of these
ancient myths and legends which have been the inspiration of a national
literature infused with much grandeur and sublimity. The historic Aryan
controversy, of which .the science of comparative mythology is a
by-product, is passed under review, and it is shown to what extent
philological theories regarding race problems have been modified during
recent years as a result of the adoption of broader and more exact
methods of ethnic and archæological research and the ever-extending
study of comparative mythology. There has also been condensed much
important data dealing with the early phases of Aryo-Indian civilization
accumulated for historical purposes by industrious and painstaking
Sanskrit scholars who have been engaged in investigating and
systematizing the internal evidence of the various religious poems and
treatises. It will be found that no general agreement has yet been
reached regarding Aryo-Indian chronology, but it now appears to be well
established that although there were early cultural as well as racial
"drifts", fresh invasions, which had far-reaching results in the social
and religious life of northern India, occurred at a late period in what
is known as the Vedic Age. In consequence, the problem presented by this
ancient civilization tends rather to grow more complex than to become
simplified. Its origin is still wrapped in obscurity. At the very dawn
of history Aryo-Indian culture had attained a comparatively

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

high state of development, and a considerable period must be allowed for
its growth. Even some of the ancient Vedic hymns, addressed by priests
to the deities, are styled "new songs", which suggests the existence of
an older collection. Many of them also afford indications that
immemorial beliefs were in process of change and fusion. The sublime
deities, Varuna and Mitra (Mithra), for instance, were already declining
in splendour. Yet they must have been closely associated with Indra,
king of the gods, in the unknown Aryan homeland, as is made evident by
an inscription recently deciphered at Boghaz Köi, in Asia Minor, which
refers to them as deities of the mysterious Mitanni people who were of
Aryan speech like the settlers in the Punjab. There is no evidence,
however, that the Mitanni rulers gave recognition to the fire god Agni,
who in India was exalted as the twin brother of Indra. The problem
involved may not be devoid of ethnic significance, although the identity
of the Agni-worshipping section of the early raiders remains obscure.

During the early Vedic Age in India prominence was given to the gods:
the social organization was of patriarchal character; the goddesses
remained shadowy and vague, some being, indeed, little more than figures
of speech. A great change took place, however, after the invasions of
the Bharata and other tribes who are now referred to as "late comers".
Profound and speculative thinkers attained to the pantheistic conception
of the world soul; new doctrines, which are not referred to in the Vedic
hymns, regarding the ages of the universe and transmigration of souls,
received wide acceptance as the result of missionary efforts: the Vedic
gods were reduced to the position of minor deities and new goddesses
rose into prominence, one indeed being Bharati,

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

the tribal deity of the Bharatas, who became associated with the
Saraswati river and under her new name was ultimately made the wife of
the supreme god Brahma. It is significant to note that the new culture
radiated from the "Middle Country", the area controlled by the "late
comers". That it contained elements which were not of Indian origin is
made clearly evident when we find that the doctrines of the ages of the
universe and transmigration of souls were shared by other peoples,
including the Greeks and Celts and a section of the ancient Egyptians.
Sumero-Babylonian and Egyptian resemblances may also be traced in
post-Vedic religious literature, the former, for instance, in the Deluge
legend, and the latter in the myth regarding the avenging goddess Kali,
who slaughters the enemies of the gods like Hathor-Sekhet, and has
similarly to be restrained by one of the deities. The worship of
goddesses was also prominent among the Sumerians, Egyptians, Greeks, and
Celts, as contrasted with the worship of gods among broad-headed
mountain and wandering peoples. In this connection special interest
attaches to the conclusions of prominent ethnologists, who include in
the Mediterranean or "Brown" race of brunet "long heads" the early
Egyptians and Neolithic Europeans, the Sumerians and present-day "Aryan"
types in India, and especially in the old "Middle Country" and Bengal.
On the other hand, a broad-headed type is still prominent in the Punjab,
the area occupied by the earliest invaders who worshipped the Vedic
gods. Dr. Haddon suggests that these pioneers of civilization were mixed
with peoples of Mongolian and other affinities. Some such ethnic
explanation must be urged to account for the differences between Vedic
and post-Vedic mythologies. The invasions of the "late comers", who
entered India by a new

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

route, no doubt stimulated thought and promoted culture after settled
conditions were secured, as was undoubtedly the result of the mingling
of races elsewhere.

"It may be put down as an axiom", says Professor Jastrow, "that nowhere
does a high form of culture arise without the commingling of diverse
ethnic elements. Civilization, like the spark emitted by the striking of
steel on flint, is everywhere the result of stimulus evoked by the
friction of one ethnic group upon another": and he supports his theory
with the evidence afforded by Egypt, Babylonia, Greece, Rome, France,
Germany, and Great Britain, as well as the present-day United States of
America, "the melting pot" of many peoples.

Throughout this volume comparative evidence is provided to assist the
reader towards the study of this most interesting aspect of the Aryan
problem. We trace the cremation custom, which has prevailed in India
since Vedic times, to countries as wide apart as Great Britain, into
which it was introduced during the Bronze Age, and Southern Siberia,
where it is still practised by the Mongolian Buriats. Over the areas
occupied by representatives of the Mediterranean race it was unknown
prior to the invasions of unidentified fire-worshippers. Special
interest also attaches to the horse sacrifice, which was also an
Aryo-Indian ceremony even in Vedic times. It is not yet unknown among
the Buriats. At one time the horse sacrifice was widely prevalent. White
horses were sacrificed to the sun in Ancient Greece; the sun horses are
referred to with horror by Ezekiel; the ceremony was also connected with
the mysteries of Aricia grove. Indeed, as is pointed out in Chapter V,
various ancient peoples offered up this domesticated and historic
animal. In the Indian epics and religious treatises there are
illuminating references to the horse sacrifice which

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

throw much light on the significance of the immemorial practice. White
and black horses were alternately favoured, and it is evident that the
practice was not only associated with solar worship, but was also
intended to secure fertility--crops, and therefore rain in the first
place, increase of flocks, herds, human offspring, &c.--as is
undoubtedly the case among the modern- day Buriats. In India the horse
was also offered up as a sin offering, a late conception, evidently. A
prominent feature of this sacrifice in most countries was the
decapitation of the sacrificial victim. Recent evidence from Egypt
suggests that the sacrifice of the ass may have preceded the sacrifice
of the horse. Professor Flinders Petrie has found in a triple tomb in
the early dynastic Tarkhan cemetery the skeletons of three asses with
the heads cut off and placed beside them. He suggests that the animals
were killed to accompany their owner to the other world. The Buriats
still sacrifice horses at graves, professedly for the same reason. As
this custom was not prevalent throughout Ancient Egypt, it may have been
an importation, connected, perhaps, with the myth about the sun-ass
which gallops round a hill-surrounded world followed by the pursuing
night serpent. An isolated reference is also made to the sacrifice of
the ass in a Twelfth Dynasty story about a Naga-like demigod, a fact
which emphasizes the historical importance of the material embedded in
folk tales and mythologies. In this connection it may be noted that
certain developed myths suggest there may have been either a cultural
contact of Ancient Egypt with India, through an unidentified medium, or
an infusion of religious ideas into both countries from a common source.
In an Indian creation myth Prajápati weeps creative tears like the
Egyptian sun-god Ra, whose rays are tears from which all things spring,
as Maspero shows.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

In India the juice of the soma plant was identified with the vital
principle, and the demons were the poisoners of crops and plants; in
Egypt honey-flowers and sacred trees sprang from the fertilizing tears
of deities, while the tears of demons produced poisonous plants,
diseases, &c. Like the Egyptian Horus, the Indian Prajápati, or Brahma,
sprang from a lotus bloom floating on the primordial waters. The
chaos-egg myth is also common to both mythological systems. Brahma
issues from a golden egg like Ra, and a similar myth is connected with
the Egyptian Ptah and Khnumu, and with the Chinese P’an Ku, while the
egg figures in Eur-Asian folk tales which contain the germs of the
various mythologies. All mythologies have animistic bases; they were, to
begin with, systematized folk beliefs which were carried hither and
thither in various stages of development by migrating and trading
peoples. Each separate system bears undoubted traces of racial or local
influences; each reflects the civilization in which it flourished, the
habits of thought and habits of life of the people, and the religious,
ethical, and political ideals of their rulers and teachers. When
well-developed myths of similar character are found in widely separated
districts, an ethnic or cultural contact is suggested. Such myths may be
regarded as evidence of remote racial movements, which, although
unsupported by record or tradition, are also indicated by ethnological
data. It is hoped that the reader will find much suggestive material in
this connection in their study of the myths and legends of India. They
will also find that many of the tales retold in this volume have
qualities which make universal appeal, and that some are among the most
beautiful which survive from the civilizations of the ancient world.

Not a few, we are assured, will follow with interest

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

the development from primitive myths of great and ennobling ideas which
have exercised a culturing influence in India through many long
centuries, and are still potent factors in the domestic, social, and
religious life of many millions of Hindus.

DONALD A. MACKENZIE.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](iml02)
