[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml11)  [Next](iml13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span id="ch07"></span>

#### CHAPTER VII

#### New Faiths: Vishnu Religion, Buddhism, and Jainism

Religious Ages--Influence of the Upanishads--The Inspiration of Great
Teachers--Conception of a Supreme Personal God--Rise of Vishnu and Shiva
Cults--Krishna a Human Incarnation of Vishnu--The
Bhagavad-gita--Salvation by Knowledge--Buddha's Revolt against
Brahmanism--His Gloomy Message to Mankind--Spread of
Buddhism--Jainism--Revival of Brahmanism--The Puranas--Incarnations of
Vishnu--Creator as a Boar--Egyptian and European Conceptions and
Customs--Jagganath--Kalki.

MODERN-DAY Brahman pundits, the cultured apostles of the ancient forest
sages, acknowledge a Trinity composed of Brahma the Creator, Vishnu the
Preserver, and Shiva the Destroyer. A rock carving at Elephanta, which
depicts the supreme god with three heads, indicates that the conception
is of considerable antiquity. To what particular period it must be
assigned, however, we cannot yet definitely decide.

The religious history of India is divided into four Ages: (1) the Vedic
Age; (2) the Brahmanical Age; (3) the Buddhist Age; and (4) the Age of
the reform and revival of Brahmanism.

As we have seen, many gods were worshipped in the Vedic Age, but ere it
had ended Pantheistic ideas found expression in the hymns. Two distinct
currents of thought characterize the Brahmanical Age. On the one hand
there was the growth of priestly influence which is

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the feature of the *Brahmanas*, and on the other the development of the
bold Pantheism of the *Upanishads*, which are permeated with a
catholicity of spirit directly opposed to narrow and pedantic ritualism.
Towards the close of this Age, Vishnu and Shiva were deities of growing
ascendancy.

The Buddhist Age began in the sixth century before Christ, and Buddhism
gradually supplanted Brahmanism as a national religion. In the tenth
century of our era, however, Brahmanism was revived, drawing its
inspiration mainly from the *Upanishads*, and purified by the teachings
of Buddha and other reformers.

These religious movements of the post-Vedic times, which have exercised
a cumulative influence in shaping modern-day Hinduism, were due directly
and indirectly to the speculative reasonings of the unknown authors of
the *Upanishads*. The Pantheistic doctrines of these ancient
philosophers, however, hardly constituted a religion: they were rather
an esoteric system of belief devoid of popular appeal. But they have
been the inspiration of a succession of profound thinkers and eloquent
teachers of revered memory in India, who infused ancient modes of
thought with high philosophic doctrines, and utilized archaic myths to
develop a religion which in its purest form permeates the acts of
everyday life and requires the whole-hearted devotion and service of
pious Hindus to the will of the Supreme Being.

In the Brahmanical Age Upanishadic teachings made limited appeal, but
evidences are not awanting that knowledge of them was not confined to
the Brahmans, because the revolts which gave India Buddhism and Jainism
originated among the Kshatriyas. Meanwhile the gods of the *Vedas*
continued their hold upon the allegiance of the great masses of the
people, although the ancient Vedic

 

<span id="img_12000"></span>

[![THE HINDU TRINITY AT ELEPHANTA](tn/12000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12000.jpg)  
THE HINDU TRINITY AT ELEPHANTA  

(see page [119](#page_119))

 

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

religion had been divested of its simplicity and directness by the
ritualistic priesthood. Gods and men depended upon the Brahmans for
their prosperity and even for their continued existence. It was taught
that the "gods lived in fear of death, the strong Ender", but were
supported and fed by penance and sacrifice. The priests achieved
spiritual dominion over their rivals, the Kshatriyas.

There was, however, more than one "school of thought" among the
Brahmans. The sages who memorized and repeated the older Upanishads, and
composed new ones, could not have failed to pass unrecorded judgments on
the superstitious practices of their ritualistic brethren. Account must
also be taken of the example and teachings of the hands of wandering
devotees, the Bhiksus, who neither performed penances nor offered up
sacrifices, and of the influence exercised by the independent thinkers
among the Kshatriyas, who regarded with disfavour the pretensions of the
powerful priesthood. The elements of revolt could never have been absent
during the two centuries of the Brahmanical Age. Upanishadic teachings
had stirred the minds of thinking men, but they had one marked defect;
they left unsatisfied the religious sense which could find no repose in
a jungle of abstract thought. It was impossible, however, for the
leaders of thought to return to the polytheism of the Vedic Age, or to
worship deities controlled by human beings. A new and higher religion
became a necessity for those who, like the Hebrew Psalmist, appear to
have cried:

"O Lord . . . thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I give it; thou
delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit."--*Psalms*, li, 16, 17.

At any rate, we find that, before the Brahmanical Age

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

had ended, the conception was becoming more prevalent of a supreme
personal god, greater than Indra or Agni, and worthy of minds influenced
by the Upanishads--a god who was the embodiment of the First Cause, an
Infinite Being uncontrolled by the priesthood. One section of the people
appears to have worshipped Vishnu as the Celestial incarnation of the
World Soul, while another gave recognition to Shiva. In the absence of
records, however, it is impossible to ascertain to what extent
monotheistic ideas were developed by unorthodox teachers. The new
doctrines may have degenerated, like Buddhism, as they became
widespread. It is evident, however, that the priesthood were unable to
ignore them, for they are referred to in their "books".

Although the political prominence of Vishnu and Shiva belong to the Age
of reformed Brahmanism, it is undoubted that both deities were
worshipped throughout the long period of Buddhistic ascendancy. The
Greek ambassador Megasthenes, who resided in India between B.C. 311 and
302, and wrote *Ta Indika*, furnishes interesting evidence in this
connection. "By his description of the god Dionysus, whom they
worshipped in the mountains, Shiva", says Professor Macdonell, "must be
intended, and by Herakles, adored in the plains . . . no other can be
meant than Vishnu and his incarnation Krishna. . . . These statements
seem to justify the conclusion that Shiva and Vishnu were already
prominent as highest gods, the former in the mountains, the latter in
the Ganges valley. . . . We also learn from Megasthenes that the
doctrine of the four Ages of the World (Yugas) was fully developed in
India by this time." <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_164)

In the *Rigveda* Vishnu is a god of grace. He is, however, a secondary
deity--an attribute of the sun and

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

a phase of Agni. From the earliest times, it is significant to note, his
benevolent character is emphasized. In one of the hymns <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_165) he is called "the Kinsman"; he welcomed
to his heaven of bliss the faithful worshippers of the gods. An
interesting reference is made to his "highest step". As detailed in
later writings, the myth involved is to the effect that the demon Bali,
one of the dreaded Danavas (Titans), had, in the Treta Yuga, secured
temporary ascendancy over the gods. Vishnu appeared before him in the
form of the dwarf Vamana, and requested as much territory as he could
measure out by taking three strides. The demon granted this request, and
Vishnu immediately assumed the form of a giant; his first step covered
the heavens, the second crossed the entire earth, and the third and
highest reached the abode of the gods. So was the Universe won back from
the Asuras. It is believed that the myth refers to the progress of the
conquering sun by day and by night.

In *Yajurveda* Vishnu is more prominent than in the Rigveda, and in the
*Brahmanas* "there is a growing tendency", remarks Professor Barnett,
"to regard him as a blessed Cosmic Spirit". <span
id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_166) He is fully identified with Brahma in
the *Mahábhárata*. In some of the myths he is the source of Indra's
strength and valour, and he appears to have absorbed the sublime
character of Varuna, the god of sinners; he is similarly associated with
the sea, but the Sea of Milk.

Shiva is a development of the Vedic storm god Rudra, who was not only
dreaded, but also revered as a destroyer of evil-doers, hatred, evil,
and disease, and as a nourisher who gave long life. <span
id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_167)

Both deities inspired love and reverential fear; they

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

won the affections of human hearts and were worshipped emotionally.
Their cults have had independent doctrinal . development, however, and
they divide Hinduism to-day into two great churches, one of which
recognizes Vishnu, and the other Shiva, as the greatest god. Their union
in the Trinity has not yet obliterated sectarian differences.

Many myths have collected round Vishnu, originally a purely abstract
deity, because the faith which he represents had to be imparted to the
masses in "parables". These "parables" were, of course, given literal
interpretation by the people. The majority of the myths belong to the
post-Buddhist Age--the Age of Brahmanical revival, during which came
into existence the sacred poems called the *Puranas*. Many were also
incorporated in the great epics, the *Mahábhárata* and the *Ramáyana*,
which existed in part, at least, before the rise of Buddhism and
Jainism.

When Vishnu, the god of mercy and goodness, received recognition as
Narayana in the Brahmanical Age, he was worshipped as the "unconquerable
preserver" who at the dawn of each Yuga (Age) awoke as the child of the
primordial waters. In one myth he rises from a lotus bloom; in another
he is supposed to sleep, as Brahma, on the coils of the world-serpent
Shesha, which is "a part of a part of Vishnu". This serpent rests on the
tortoise, Kurma, another form of Vishnu. When the tortoise moves its
limbs, Shesha is roused to yawn; thus are earthquakes caused. A creation
myth which teaches the absolute supremacy of Vishnu tells that at the
beginning Brahma sprang from a lotus issuing from the navel of the
Preserver, while Shiva came from his forehead.

Vishnu is a dark god with four arms; in one of his right hands he holds
a warshell, and in the other a

 

<span id="img_12400"></span>

[![VISHNU UPHOLDING THE UNIVERSE&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From a sculpture at
Mamallapuram&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/12400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12400.jpg)  
VISHNU UPHOLDING THE UNIVERSE  
*From a sculpture at Mamallapuram*.  

 

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

flaming discus, which destroys enemies and returns after it is flung; in
one left hand he holds a mace, and in the other a lotus bloom.

The belief that the Supreme Being from time to time "assumes a human
form . . . for the preservation of rectitude and morality" is an
outstanding feature of Vishnuite religion, which teaches that Vishnu was
born among men as Ramachandra, Krishna, Balarama, and Buddha. These are
the Avataras of the Preserver. Avatara means literally "a descent", but
is used in the sense of an "Incarnation".

Rama Chandra is the hero of the *Ramáyana* epic, which is summarized in
our closing chapters; he is the human ideal of devotion, righteousness,
and manliness, the slayer of the demon Ravana, who oppressed and
persecuted mankind.

Krishna and his brother Balarama figure as princes of Dwaraka in the
*Mahábhárata*. Krishna is represented as the teacher of the Vishnuite
faith, the devotional religion which displaced the Vedic ceremonies and
links Upanishadic doctrines with modern Hinduism. It recognizes that all
men are sinful, and preaches salvation by Knowledge which embraces
Works. Sinners must surrender themselves to Krishna, the human
incarnation (Avatara) of Vishnu, the Preserver, the God of Love.

This faith is unfolded in the famous *Bhagavad-gita* <span
id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_168) in the *Bhishma Parva* section of the
*Mahábhárata* epic. Krishna is acting as the counsellor and charioteer
of the Pandava warrior Arjuna. Ere the first day's battle of the Great
War begins, the human Avatara of Vishnu reveals himself to his friend as
the Divine Being, and gives instruction as to how men may obtain
salvation.

Krishna teaches that the soul is "unborn, unchangeable,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

eternal, and ancient"; it is one with the Supreme Soul, Vishnu, the
First Cause, the Source of All. The soul "is not slain when the body is
slain"; it enters new bodies after each death, or else it secures
emancipation from sin and suffering by being absorbed in the World Soul.
. . . All souls have to go through a round of births. "On attaining to
Me, however," says Krishna, "there is no rebirth."

Krishna gives Salvation to those who obtain "Knowledge of self or
Brahma". . . . He says: "The one who hath devoted his Self (Soul) to
abstraction, casting an equal eye everywhere, beholdeth his Self in all
creatures, and all creatures in his Self. Unto him that beholdeth Me in
everything and beholdeth everything in Me, I am never lost and he also
is never lost in Me. He that worshippeth Me as abiding in all creatures,
holding yet that All is One, is a devotee, and whatever mode of life he
may lead, he liveth in Me. . . .

"Even if thou art the greatest sinner among all that are sinful, thou
shalt yet cross over all transgressions by the raft of Knowledge". . . .
Knowledge destroys all sins. It is obtained by devotees who, "casting
off attachment, perform actions for attaining purity of Self, with the
body, the mind, the understanding, and even the senses, free from
desire". To such men "a sod, a stone, and gold are alike".

Krishna, as Vishnu, is thus revealed: "I am the productive cause of the
entire Universe and also its destroyer. There is nothing else that is
higher than myself. . . . I am Om (the Trinity) in all the Vedas, the
sound in space, the manliness in man. I am the fragrant odour in earth,
the splendour in fire, the life in all creatures, and penance in
ascetics. . . . I am the thing to be known, the means by which
everything is cleansed. . . . I am the soul

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (self) seated in
the heart of every being. I am the beginning, the middle, and the end of
all beings. . . . I am the letter A (in the Sanskrit alphabet). . . . I
am Death that seizeth all, and the source of all that is to be. . . . He
that knoweth me as the Supreme Lord of the worlds, without birth and
beginning . . . is free from all sins. . . . He who doeth everything for
me, who hath me for his supreme object, who is freed from attachment,
who is without enmity towards all beings, even he cometh to me. . . . He
through whom the world is not troubled, and who is not troubled by the
world, who is free from joy, wrath, fear, and anxieties, even he is dear
to me."

To Arjuna Krishna says: "Exceedingly dear art thou to me. Therefore I
will declare what is for thy benefit. Set thy heart on Me, become my
devotee, sacrifice to me, bow down to me. Then shalt thou come to me. .
. . Forsaking all (religious) duties, come to me as thy sole refuge. I
will deliver thee from all sins. Do not grieve."

It is, however, added: "This is not to be declared by thee to one who
practiseth no austerities, to one who is not a devotee, to one who never
waiteth on a preceptor, nor yet to one who calumniateth Me."

Unbelievers are those who are devoid of knowledge. Krishna says: "One
who hath no knowledge and no faith, whose mind is full of doubt, is
lost. . . . Doers of evil, ignorant men, the worst of their species . .
. do not resort to Me." . . . Such men "return to the path of the world
that is subject to destruction". He denounces "persons of demoniac
natures" because they are devoid of "purity, good conduct, and truth. .
. . They say that the Universe is void of truth, of guiding principle
and of ruler. . . . Depending on this view

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

these men of lost souls, of little intelligence and fierce deeds, these
enemies of the world, are born for the destruction of the Universe."
They "cherish boundless hopes, limited by death alone", and "covet to
obtain unfairly hoards of wealth for the gratification of their
desires"; they say, "This foe hath been slain by me--I will slay others.
. . . I am lord, I am the enjoyer. . . . I am rich and of noble
birth--who else is there that is like me? . . . I will make gifts, I
will be merry. . . Thus deluded by ignorance, tossed about by numerous
thoughts, enveloped in the meshes of delusion, attached to the enjoyment
of objects of desire, they sink into foul hell. . . Threefold is the way
to hell, ruinous to the Self (Soul), namely, lust, wrath, likewise
avarice. . . . Freed from these three gates of darkness, a man works out
his own welfare, and then repairs to the highest goal." <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_169)

Balarama is an incarnation of the world serpent Shesha. According to the
legend, he and Krishna are the sons of Vasudeva and Devakí. It was
revealed to Kansa, King of Mat´hurã <span
id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_170), who was a worshipper of Shiva, that a
son of Devakí would slay him. His majesty therefore commanded that
Devakí's children should be slain as soon as they were born. Balarama,
who was fair, was carried safely away. Krishna, the dark son, performed
miracles soon after birth. The king had his father and mother fettered,
and the doors of the houses were secured with locks. But the chains fell
from Vasudeva, and the doors flew open when he stole out into the night
to conceal the babe. As he crossed the river Jumna, carrying Krishna on
his head in a basket, the waters rose high and threatened to drown him,
but the child put out a foot and the river immediately fell and

 

<span id="img_12800"></span>

[![KRISHNA AND THE GOPIS (HERDSMAIDS)&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From a modern
sculpture&lt;/i&gt;](tn/12800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12800.jpg)  
KRISHNA AND THE GOPIS (HERDSMAIDS)  
*From a modern sculpture*  

 

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

became shallow. In Mathura the two brothers performed miraculous feats
during their youth. Indeed, the myths connected with them suggest that
their prototypes were voluptuous pastoral gods. Krishna, the
flute-player and dancer, is the shepherd lover of the Gopis or
herdsmaids, his favourite being Radhá. He was opposed to the worship of
Indra, and taught the people to make offerings to a sacred mountain.

King Kansa had resort to many stratagems to accomplish the death of
Krishna, but his own doom could not be set aside; ultimately he was
slain by the two brothers. The *Harivamsa*, an appendix to the
*Mahábhárata*, which is as long as the Iliad and the Odyssey together,
is devoted to the life and adventures of Krishna, who also figures in
the *Puranas*.

Vishnu's Buddha Avatara was assumed, according to orthodox teaching, to
bring about the destruction of demons and wicked men who refused to
acknowledge the inspiration of the Vedas and the existence of deities,
and were opposed to the caste system. This attitude was assumed by the
Brahmans because Buddhism was a serious lay revolt against Brahmanical
doctrines and ceremonial practices.

Buddha, "the Enlightened", was Prince Siddartha of the royal family
Gautama, which, as elsewhere told, ruled over a Sakya tribe. At his
birth marvellous signs foretold his greatness. Reared in luxury, he was
kept apart from the common people; but when the time of his awakening
came, he was greatly saddened to behold human beings suffering from
disease, sorrow, and old age. One night he left his wife and child, and
went away to live the life of a contemplative hermit in the forest, with
purpose to find a solution for the great problem of human sin and
suffering. He came under

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

the influence of Upanishadic doctrines, and at the end of six years he
returned and began his mission.

Buddha, the great psychologist, was one of the world's influential
teachers, because his doctrines have been embraced in varying degrees of
purity by about a third of the human race. Yet they are cold and
unsatisfying and gloomy. The "Enlightener's" outlook on life was
intensely timid and pessimistic; he was an "enemy of society" in the
sense that he made no attempt to effect social reforms so as to minimize
human suffering, which touched him with deepest sympathy, but
unfortunately filled him with despair; his solution for all problems was
Death; he was the apostle of benevolent Nihilism and Idealistic Atheism.

There is no supreme personal god in Buddhism and no hope of immortality.
Gods and demons and human beings are "living creatures"; gods have no
power over the Universe, and need not be worshipped or sacrificed to,
because they are governed by laws, and men have nothing to fear from
them.

Buddha denied the existence of the Self-Soul of the *Upanishads*. Self
is not God, in the sense that it is a phase of the World Soul. The
"self-state" is, according to the "Enlightener", a combination of five
elements--matter, feeling, imagination, will, and consciousness; these
are united by Kamma, <span id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_171) the influence
which causes life to repeat itself. Buddha had accepted, in a limited
sense, the theory of Transmigration of Souls. He taught, however, that
rebirth was the result of actions and desire. "It is the yearning for
existence", he said, "which leads from new birth to new birth, which
finds its desire in different directions, the desire for pleasure, the
desire for existence, the desire for power." Death occurs when

 

<span id="img_13000"></span>

[![BUDDHA EXPOUNDING THE LAW](tn/13000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13000.jpg)  
BUDDHA EXPOUNDING THE LAW  

 

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

the five elements which constitute life are divided; after death nothing
remains but the consequences of actions and thoughts. Rebirth follows
because "the yearning", the essence of "works", brings the elements
together again. The individual exists happily, or the reverse, according
to his conduct in a former life; sorrow and disease are results of wrong
living and wrong thinking in previous states of existence.

The aim of the Buddhist is to become the "master of his fate". Life to
him is hateful because, as the Enlightener taught, "birth is suffering,
death is suffering; to be joined to one thou dost not love is suffering,
to be divided from thy love is suffering, to fail in thy desire is
suffering; in short, the fivefold bonds that unite us to earth--those of
the five elements--are suffering". As there can be no life without
suffering in various degrees, it behoves the believer to secure complete
emancipation from the fate of being reborn. Life is a dismal and tragic
failure. The Buddhist must therefore destroy the influence which unites
the five elements and forms another life. He must achieve the complete
elimination of inclination--of the yearning for existence. Buddha's
"sacred truth", which secures the desired end, is eight-fold--" right
belief; right resolve, right speech, right action, right life, right
desire, right thought, and right self-absorption". The reward of the
faithful, who attains to perfect knowledge, unsullied by works, is
eternal emancipation by Nirvana, undisturbed repose or blissful
extinction <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_172), which is the Supreme
Good. If there had been no belief in rebirth, the solution would have
been found in suicide.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

Buddha taught that the four Noble Verities are: (1) pain, (2) desire,
the cause of pain, (3) pain is extinguished by Nirvana, (4) the way
which leads to Nirvana. The obliteration of Desire is the first aim of
the Buddhist. This involves the renunciation of the world and of all
evil passions; the believer must live a perfect life according to the
Buddhist moral code, which is as strict as it is idealistic in the
extreme. "It does not express friendship, or the feeling of particular
affection which a man has for one or more of his fellow creatures, but
that universal feeling which inspires us with goodwill towards all men
and constant willingness to help them." <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_173)

Belief in the sanctity of life is a prevailing note in Buddhism. The
teacher forbade the sacrifice of animals, as did Isaiah in Judah.

"To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the
Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed
beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of
he goats."                   *Isaiah*, i, 11.

Brahmanism was influenced in this regard, for offerings to Vishnu were
confined to cakes, curds, sweetmeats, flowers, oblations, &c.

Buddha, the enemy of the priesthood, was of the Kshatriya caste, and his
religion appears to have appealed to aristocrats satiated with a
luxurious and idle life, who felt like the Preacher that "all is
vanity"; it also found numerous adherents among the wandering bands of
unorthodox devotees. The perfect Buddhist had to live apart from the
world, and engage for long intervals in introspective contemplation so
as to cultivate by a stern analytic process that frame of mind which
enabled him to obliterate Desire blankly and coldly. Familiar statues of
Buddha

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

show the posture which must be assumed; the legs are crossed and
twisted, and the hands arranged to suggest inaction; the eyes gaze on
the bridge of the nose.

Monastic orders came into existence for men and women, but the status of
women was not raised. From these orders were excluded all officials and
the victims of infectious and incurable diseases. A lower class of
Buddhists engaged in worldly duties. Although Buddha recognized the
caste system, his teaching removed its worst features, for Kshatriyas
and converted Brahmans could accept food from the Sudras without fear of
contamination. Kings embraced the new religion, which ultimately assumed
a national character.

Missionaries were from the earliest times sent abroad, and Buddhism
spread into Burma, Siam, Anam, Tibet, Mongolia, China, Java, and Japan.
The view is suggested that its influence can be traced in Egypt. "From
some source," writes Professor Flinders Petrie, "perhaps the Buddhist
mission of Asoka, the ascetic life of recluses was established in the
Ptolemaic times, and monks of the Serapeum illustrated an ideal to man
which had been as yet unknown in the West. This system of monasticism
continued until Pachomios, a monk of Serapis in Upper Egypt, became the
first Christian monk in the reign of Constantine." <span
id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_174)

Jainism, like Buddhism, was also a revolt against Brahmanic orthodoxy,
and drew its teachers and disciples chiefly from the aristocratic class.
It was similarly influenced in its origin by the *Upanishads*. Jainites
believe, however, in soul and the world soul; they recognize the Hindu
deities, but only as exalted souls in a state of temporary bliss
achieved by their virtues; they also worship a number of "conquerors" or
"openers of the way",

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

as Buddhism, in debased form, recognizes Buddha and his disciples as
gods, and allows the worship here of a tooth and there of a hair of the
Enlightener, as well as sacred mounds connected with his pilgrimages. In
the gloomy creed of the Jainites it is taught that "emancipation" may be
hastened by rigid austerities which entail systematic starvation. Many
Jainites have in their holy places given up their lives in this manner,
but the practice is now obsolete.

In the Age which witnessed the decline of Buddhism in India, and the
rise of reformed Brahmanism, the religious struggle was productive of
the long poems called the *Puranas* (old tales) to which we have
referred. In these productions some of the ancient myths about the  gods
were preserved and new myths were formulated. They were meant for
popular instruction, and especially to make converts among the
unlettered masses. Their authors were chiefly of the Vishnu cult, which
had perpetuated the teachings of the unknown sages who at the close of
the Brahmanical Age revolted against impersonal Pantheism, the
ritualistic practices of the priesthood, and the popular conceptions
regarding the Vedic deities who ensured worldly prosperity, but
exercised little influence on the character of the individual.

Indra and Agni and other popular deities were not, however, excluded
from the Pantheon, but were divested of their ancient splendour and
shown to be subject to the sway of Brahma, their Lord and Creator, whose
attributes they symbolized in their various spheres of activity.
Vishnuites taught that Vishnu was Brahma, and Shivaites that Shiva was
the supreme deity.

In this way, it would appear, the authors of the *Puranas* effected a
compromise between immemorial beliefs and practices and the higher
religious conceptions

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

towards which the people were being gradually elevated. A similar policy
was adopted by Pope Gregory the Great, who in the year 601 caused the
Archbishop of Canterbury to be instructed to infuse Pagan ceremonials
with Christian symbolism. It was decreed that heathen temples should be
changed into churches, and days consecrated to sacrificial ceremonies to
be observed as Christian festivals. The Anglo-Saxons were not to be
permitted to "sacrifice animals to the Devil", but to kill them for
human consumption "to the praise of God", so that "while they retained
some outward joys they might give more ready response to inward joys".
The Pope added: "It is not possible to cut off everything at once from
obdurate minds; he who endeavours to climb to the highest place must
rise not by bounds, but by degrees or steps." <span
id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_175)

It is necessary for us, therefore, in dealing with Puranic beliefs, and
the movement which culminated in modern-day Hinduism, to make a
distinction between the popular faith and the beliefs of the most
enlightened Brahmans, and also between the process of mythology-making
and the development of religious ideas.

In early Puranic times, when Brahmanism was revived, Vishnu's benevolent
character was exalted to so high a degree that, it was taught, even
demons might secure salvation through his grace. Prahlada, son of the
King of the Danavas, worshipped Vishnu. As a consequence, terrible
punishments were inflicted upon him by his angry father. At length
Vishnu appeared in the Danava palace as the Nrisinha incarnation (half
man, half lion), and slew the presumptuous giant king who had aspired to
control the Universe.

Another incarnation of Vishnu was the boar, Varáha. A demon named
Hiranyaksha had claimed the earth,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

when at the beginning of one of the Yugas it was raised from the
primordial deep by the Creator in the form of a boar. Vishnu slew the
demon for the benefit of the human race. Earlier forms of this myth
recognize Brahma, or Prajapati, as the boar. In *Taittiriya Brahmana* it
is set forth: "This Universe was formerly water, fluid; with that
(water) Prajapati practised arduous devotions (saying), 'How shall this
universe be (developed)?' He beheld a lotus leaf standing. He thought,
'There is something on which this rests.' He as a boar--having assumed
that form--plunged beneath towards it. He found the earth down below.
Breaking off (a portion of) her, he rose to the surface."

This treatment of the boar is of special interest. In Egypt the boar was
the demon Set, and the "black pig" is the devil in Wales and Scotland,
and also in a "layer" of Irish mythology. Hatred of pork prevailed in
Egypt and its vicinity, and still lingers in parts of Ireland and Wales,
but especially in the Scottish Highlands. The Gauls, like the Aryans of
India, did not regard the boar as a demon, and they ate pork freely, as
did also the Achæans and the Germanic peoples. Roast pig is provided in
Valhal and in the Irish Danann Paradise, but the Irish "devil", Balor,
who resembles the Asura king of India, had a herd of black pigs.

The struggle between Kshatriyas and Brahmans is reflected in Vishnu's
incarnation as Parasu-rama (Rama with the axe). He clears the earth
twenty-one times of the visible Kshatriyas, but on each occasion a few
survive to perpetuate the caste.

Jagannath <span id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_176) is also regarded as a
form of Vishnu, although apparently not of Brahmanic origin. He is
represented by three forms, representing the dark Krishna,

 

<span id="img_13600"></span>

[![THE BOAR INCARNATION OF VISHNU RAISING THE EARTH FROM THE
DEEP&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From a rock sculpture at
Udayagiri&lt;/i&gt;](tn/13600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13600.jpg)  
THE BOAR INCARNATION OF VISHNU RAISING THE EARTH FROM THE DEEP  
*From a rock sculpture at Udayagiri*  

 

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

the fair Balarama, and their sister, Subhadra. Once a year the idol is
bathed and afterwards taken forth in a great car, which is dragged by
pious worshippers. Some have considered it a meritorious act to commit
suicide by being crushed under its wheels.

It is believed that Vishnu will yet appear as Kalki, riding on a white
horse and grasping a flaming sword. He will slay the enemies of evil and
re-establish pure religion. Many pious Vishnuites in our own day look
forward to the coming of their supreme deity with fear and trembling,
but not without inflexible faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[122:1](iml12.htm#fr_165) A History of Sanskrit
Literature, p. 411.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[123:1](iml12.htm#fr_166) *Rigveda*, i, 154,
155.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[123:2](iml12.htm#fr_167) *Hinduism*, by L. D.
Barnett.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[123:3](iml12.htm#fr_168) *Rigveda*, ii, 33.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[125:1](iml12.htm#fr_169) The "Divine Song".

<span id="fn_169"></span>[128:1](iml12.htm#fr_170) Extracts from Roy's
translation of *Mahábhárata*.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[128:2](iml12.htm#fr_171) Or Muttra.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[130:1](iml12.htm#fr_172) Karma, "works" and
their consequences.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[131:1](iml12.htm#fr_173) Buddha's negative
attitude towards immortality and the conception of a Supreme Being was
departed from by those of his followers who have taught that Nirvana is
a conscious state of eternal bliss.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[132:1](iml12.htm#fr_174) Burnouf, quoted by
Max Müller, *Chips from a German Workshop*, i, 222.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[133:1](iml12.htm#fr_175) Petrie, *The Religion
of Egypt*, pp. 92-3.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[135:1](iml12.htm#fr_176) Bede, *Historia
Ecclesiastica*, lib. i, chap. xxx.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[136:1](iml12.htm#fr_177) Juggernaut.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Divinities of the Epic Period](iml13)
