[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml15)  [Next](iml17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span id="ch11"></span>

### CHAPTER XI

### The Tournament

A Brilliant Assembly--Princes display Feats of Arms--Mimic
Warfare--Duryodhana and Bhima--A Fierce Struggle--Arjuna's Wonderful
Skill--Despondency of Kauravas--The Coming of Karna--He proves Himself
equal to Arjuna--Challenge to Single Combat--The Gods intervene--Queen
Pritha's Emotion--Karna taunted with Low Birth--Kauravas make him a
King--Joy of his Foster Father---Bitter and Angry Rivals.

ON the day of the great tournament, vast multitudes of people from all
parts of the kingdom assembled round the harriers on the wide plain. A
scene of great splendour was unfolded to their eyes. At dawn many flags
and garlands of flowers had been distributed round the enclosure; they
adorned the stately royal pavilion, which was agleam with gold and
jewels and hung with trophies of war; they fluttered above the side
galleries for the lords and the ladies, and even among the clustering
trees. White tents for the warriors occupied a broad green space. A
great altar had been erected by Drona beside a cool, transparent stream,
on which to offer up sacrifices to the gods.

From early morn the murmurous throng awaited the coming of king and
counsellors, and royal ladies, and especially the mighty princes who
were to display their feats of arms and engage in mimic warfare. The
bright sun shone in beauty on that festal day.

The clarion notes of the instruments of war proclaimed the coming of the
king. Then entered the royal procession,

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

and blind Dhritarashtra was led towards his throne in the gleaming
pavilion. With him came the fair queen Gandhari, mother of the Kauravas,
and stately Pritha, widow of King Pandu, the mother of the Pandavas.
There followed in their train many high-born dames and numerous sweet
maidens renowned for their beauty. When all these ladies, attired in
many-coloured robes and glittering with jewels and bright flowers, were
mounting the decorated galleries, they seemed like to goddesses and
heavenly nymphs ascending to the golden summit of the mountain of Meru.
. . . The trumpets were sounding loud, and the clamour which arose from
the surging multitude of people of every caste and every age and every
tribe was like the voice of heaving ocean in sublime tempest.

Next came venerable and white-haired Drona, robed in white, with white
sacrificial cord; his sandals were white, and the garlands he wore were
white also. His valiant son, Aswatthama, followed him as the red planet
Mars follows the white moon in cloudless heaven. The saintly preceptor
advanced to the altar where the priestly choir gathered, and offered up
sacrifices to the gods and chanted holy texts.

Then heralds sounded their trumpets as the youthful princes entered in
bright array, bejewelled and lightly girded for exercise, their left
arms bound with leather. They were wearing breastplates; their quivers
were slung from their shoulders, and they carried stately bows and
gleaming swords. The princes filed in according to their years, and
Yudhishthira came first of all. Each saluted Drona in turn and awaited
his commands.

One by one the youthful warriors displayed their skill at arms, while
the vast crowd shouted their plaudits. The regent Bhishma, sitting on
the right side of the throne,

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

looked down with delight, and Vidura, sitting on the left side, informed
the sightless king of all that took place.

The princes shot arrows at targets, first on foot and then mounted on
rapid steeds, <span id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_229) displaying great
skill; they also rode on elephants and in chariots, and their arrows
ever flew with unerring aim.

Next they engaged in mimic warfare, charging with chariots and on
elephants: swords clamoured on shields, ponderous maces were wielded,
and falchions shimmered like to the flashes of lightning. The movements
of the princes, mounted and on foot, were rapid and graceful; they were
fearless in action and firm-footed, and greatly skilled in thrust and
parry.

But ere long the conflict was waged with more than mimic fury. Proud
Duryodhana and powerful Bhima had sought one another and were drawn
apart from their peers. They towered on the plain with uplifted maces,
and they seemed like two rival elephants about to fight for a mate. Then
they charged with whirling weapons, and the combat was terrible to
behold.

Vidura pictured the conflict to blind Dhritarashtra, as did Pritha also
to the blindfolded Queen Gandhari. Round the barriers the multitudes
swayed and clamoured, some favouring Duryodhana and others mighty Bhima.

The princes fought on, and their fury increased until at length it
seemed that one or the other would be slain. But while yet the issue
hung doubtful, Drona, whose brow was troubled, marked with concern the
menacing crowd, which was suspended with hope and fear, and seemed like
an ocean shaken by fitful gusts of changing wind. Then he interposed,
bidding his son to separate the angry combatants so that the turmoil
might have end.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The princes heard
and obeyed, and they retired slowly like ocean billows, tempest-swollen,
falling apart.

To allay excitement, trumpet and drum were sounded aloud. Then
white-haired Drona stepped forward, and in a voice like thunder summoned
brave Arjuna to come forth.

First of all the valiant hero performed a sacred rite. Thereafter he
came before the multitude in all his splendour, clad in golden armour,
like to a glorious evening cloud. Modestly he strode, while trumpets
blared and the drums bellowed, and he seemed a very god. He was girdled
with jewels, and he carried a mighty bow. As the people applauded and
shouted his praises, Pritha, his mother, looked down, and tears dropped
from her eyes. The blind king spake to Vidura, saying: "Why are the
multitudes shouting now like to the tumultuous sea?"

Said Vidura: "The valiant son of Pritha hath come forth in golden
armour, and the people hail him with joy.

The blind monarch said: "I am well pleased. The sons of Pritha sanctify
the kingdom like to sacrificial fires."

Silence fell upon the people, and Drona bade his favourite pupil to
display his skill. Arjuna performed wonders with magic arms; he created
fire by the *Agneya* weapon, water by the *Varuna* weapon, wind by the
*Vayavya* weapon, clouds by the *Paryanya* weapon, land by the *Bhanma*
weapon, and he caused mountains to appear by the *Parvatya* weapon. Then
by the *Antardhyana* weapon he caused all these to vanish. <span
id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_230)

Arjuna then set up for his target an iron image of

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

a great boar, and at one bending of the bow he shot five arrows into its
gaping jaws. Wondrous was his skill. Next he suspended a cow horn, which
swayed constantly in the wind, and discharged into its hollow with
unerring aim twenty rapid arrows. Heaven and earth resounded with the
plaudits of the people when he leapt into his chariot and discharged
clouds of arrows as he was driven speedily round the grounds. Having
thus displayed his accomplishments as an archer, he drew his sword,
which he wielded so rapidly round and about that the people thought they
beheld lightning and heard thunder. Ere he left the field he cast the
noose with exceeding great skill, capturing horses and cows and
scampering deer at a single throw. Then Drona embraced him, and the
people shouted his praises.

Great was the joy of the Pandavas as they rested around Drona like to
the stars that gather about the white moon in heaven. The Kauravas were
grouped around Aswatthama as the gods gather beside Indra when the giant
Daityas threaten to assail high heaven. Duryodhana's heart burned with
jealous anger because of the triumph achieved by Arjuna.

Evening came on, and it seemed that the tournament was ended; the crowds
began to melt away. Then, of a sudden, a mighty tumult of plaudits broke
forth, and the loud din of weapons and clank of armour was heard all
over the place. Every eye immediately turned towards the gate, and the
warriors and the people beheld approaching an unknown warrior, who shook
his weapons so that they rattled loudly.

So came mighty Karna, son of Surya, the sun god, and of Pritha, the
mother of the three Pandavas--Arjuna, Bhima, and wise Yudhishthira. He
was comely as a shining god, clad in golden armour, and wearing
celestial

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

ear-rings. In his right hand he carried a great many-coloured bow; his
gleaming falchion was on his thigh. Tall as a cliff he strode forward;
he was an elephant in his fury, a lion in his wrath; stately as a palm
tree was that tamer of foemen, so fearless and so proud, so dauntless
and so self-possessed.

He paused in the centre of the plain and surveyed the people with pride.
Stiffly he paid homage to Drona and Kripa. Then he, the eldest son of
Pritha, spake to Pritha's youngest son, Arjuna, the brothers being
unknown one to another, and he said: "Whatever feats thou hast performed
this day with vain boast, Arjuna, these will I accomplish and surpass,
if Drona will permit me."

His voice was like to thunder in heaven, and the multitude of people
sprang up and uttered cries of wonder. Duryodhana and the other sons of
Kuru heard the challenge with glad hearts, but Arjuna remained silent,
while his eyes flashed fire.

Then Drona gave the warrior permission to display his skill. Karna was
well pleased, and he performed every feat which had given Arjuna fame on
that great day.

Duryodhana proclaimed his joy with beaming countenance, and he embraced
Karna, whom he hailed as "'brother", saying: "I bid thee welcome, thou
mighty warrior. Thou hast won the honours of the field. Demand from me
whatsoever thou dost desire in this kingdom, and it will be given unto
thee."

Said Karna: "Thy word is thy bond, O prince. All I seek is to combat
against Arjuna, whom I have equalled so far. Fain would I win the
victor's renown."

Duryodhana said: "Thou dost ask for a worthy boon indeed. Be our ally,
and let the enemy fear thee."

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

Arjuna was moved to great wrath, and cried out: "Uninvited chief!
Boasting thus, thou wouldst fain be regarded as mine equal, but I will
so deal with thee that thou wilt die the death of a braggart who cometh
here an unbidden guest, speaking boastfully ere thou art spoken to."

Said Karna, answering proudly and calm: "Waste not words, Arjuna, nor
taunt me with coming hither uninvited. The field of combat is free to
all warriors; they enter by their valour, and do not await until thou
dost call them; they win their places by strength and skill, and their
warrant is the sword. Wrathful speech is the weapon of a coward. Do not
boast of thy pastimes or be vain of thy bloodless feats. Speak with
thine arrows, O Arjuna, until, in Drona's presence, mine will cause all
men to wonder, flying towards thee."

Drona was stirred to wrath, and spake to Arjuna, saying: "Canst thou
hear him boast in this manner? I give thee leave to fight him here and
now."

Arjuna at once strode forward, fully armed, and he was supported by
Drona and Bhishma. Duryodhana and his band stood by Karna. Then the two
warriors prepared for single combat, but not in mimic warfare.

Thick clouds gathered in the sky; lightning flashed and thunder pealed;
the mighty Indra guarded his son Arjuna, who stood in shadow. Surya, the
sun god, cast a shaft of light athwart the darkening plain, and Karna's
golden armour gleamed bright and fair.

The noble dames looked on, and some praised Arjuna and others praised
Karna. Pritha, the mother of both heroes, was alone divided in her love.
She knew her firstborn by his voice and noble bearing and by his armour,
and her heart was torn with grief to behold the two brothers ready to
slay each other. A cloud blinded

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

her eyes, and, uttering a low cry, she swooned where she sat. Vidura
sprinkled water on her face, and she was revived. Then she wept bitterly
because that she could not reveal the secret of Karna's birth.

Kripa, <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_231) the foster-brother of
Bhishma, performed the duties of herald, and as Arjuna strode forth to
combat he proclaimed: "Behold! this is mighty Arjuna, of Bharata's great
line, son of Pandu and of Pritha, a prince of valour and worth who will
not shrink from battle. Unknown and long-armed chief," he said unto
Karna, "declare now thy name and lineage, the royal house thou dost
adorn, and the names of thy sire and thy mother. Know thou that by the
rules of single combat the sons of kings cannot contend against low-born
or nameless rivals."

Karna heard, but was silent. He hung his head like the dew-laden lotus
bloom; he could claim nor lineage or high rank, as he believed, for he
regarded the charioteer of Anga as his sire.

Duryodhana, perceiving his discomfiture, cried out to Kripa, saying:
"Valour is not reckoned by birth but by deeds. Karna hath already shown
himself to be the peer of princes. I now proclaim him the Rajah of
Anga."

Having spoken thus, the elder of the Kauravas led Karna by the hand and
placed him upon a throne, and the red umbrella was held above his head.
Brahmans chanted the texts for the ceremony and anointed Karna as a
king. Then the fan was waved and the royal umbrella raised on high,
while the Kauravas shouted: "The rajah is crowned; blessings on the
rajah; honour to the valorous warrior!"

Robed in royal attire, Karna then spake to Duryodhana and said: "With
generous heart thou hast conferred upon

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

me a kingdom. O prince, speak and say what service thou wouldst have me
to render unto thee."

Said Duryodhana: "But one boon do I ask of thee, O king. Be my comrade
and, O valiant warrior, be my helper also."

Karna said: "As thou desirest, so be it."

Then Duryodhana and Karna embraced one another to confirm their loyal
friendship.

Lo! now a charioteer drew nigh; he was a scantily-clad and wearied old
man, and he stooped, leaning heavily upon his staff. He was the aged
sire of Karna, and rejoiced in his heart to see his son so highly
honoured among princes. Karna cast aside his weapons, knelt down, and
kissed the old man's feet. The happy sire embraced the crowned head of
the warrior and wept tears of love.

The Pandava brothers gazed upon father and son, amused and scornful. . .
. Bhima spake to Karna, saying: "So thou, with such a sire, hast
presumed to seek combat with a Pandava! . . . Son of a charioteer, what
hast thou to do with weapons of war? Better were it that thou shouldst
find thee a goad and drive a bullock-cart behind thy sire."

Karna grew pale with wrath; his lips quivered, but he answered not a
word. He heaved a deep sigh and looked towards the sun.

Then Duryodhana arose like a proud elephant and spake to Bhima, saying:
"Seek not with insults to give sorrow unto a mighty hero. Taunts come
ill from thee, thou tiger-like chief. The proudest warrior may contend
against the most humble: a hero is known by his deeds. Of Karna's birth
we care naught. Hath Drona other than humble lineage? ’Tis, said, too,
that thou and thy brethren are not sons of Pandu, but of certain amorous

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

deities. . . . Look upon Karna, adorned with jewels and in golden
armour! Do hinds bring forth tigers? . . . Karna was born to he a king;
he hath come to rule by reason of his valour and his worth. If any
prince or warrior among you will deny my words, hear and know, now, that
I will meet him in deadly combat."

The assembled multitude heard these mighty words with joy and shouted
loud applause.

But darkness came on, and lamps were lit upon the plain. . . . Drona and
the sons of Pandu made offerings at the altar, and the king and his
counsellors, the noble dames and the high-born maids, departed in
silence to their homes. . . . Then all the people deserted the harriers,
some shouting, "Arjuna hath triumphed;" others, "Karna is victor;" and
some also, "Duryodhana hath won."

Pritha had rejoiced in her heart to behold her noble son crowned king. .
. .

Duryodhana walked by Karna's side and took him away to his own palace,
glad of heart, for he no longer feared Arjuna's valour and skill at
arms.

Even Yudhishthira doubted Arjuna's worth; he feared that Karna was the
greatest hero in the world of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_229"></span>[187:1](iml16.htm#fr_230) Like the Parthians,
the ancient Hindus were expert archers on horseback.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[188:1](iml16.htm#fr_231) This is a notable
example of the characteristic exaggerations of late Brahmanical
compilers. Other exaggerations are of milder form.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[192:1](iml16.htm#fr_232) Kripa, like Drona,
was of miraculous birth. He and his sister were found in a forest, and
were adopted by King Shantanu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. First Exile of the Pandavas](iml17)
