[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml17)  [Next](iml19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span id="ch13"></span>

### CHAPTER XIII

### The Choice of Draupadi

Drupada's Hope--Conditions for winning his Daughter--The Great Bow and
Whirling Target--The Swayamvara--Pandavas in Disguise--Lovesick Rajahs
put to Shame--Karna strings the Bow--Rejected as a Base-born
Suitor--Arjuna's Triumph--Chosen by Princess--An Angry Scene--Rajahs
seek Vengeance--Warriors attack Supposed Brahmans--Karna and Salya
overcome--Princess taken to Potter's House--Pritha's Command--An Evening
Meal--The Royal Spy.

Now Drupada had long cherished the hope that Arjuna would become his
daughter's husband. He never revealed his wish to any man, but ere he
proclaimed the swayamvara of Draupadi, he thought of the great Pandava
archer, and caused to be made a powerful bow which only a strong man
could bend and string. For a target he had constructed a strange and
curious device: a high pole was erected, and it was surmounted by a
golden fish, which was poised above a swiftly-revolving wheel. Then
Drupada issued a proclamation far and wide summoning the regents and
princes of the world to the swayamvara. He said: "The man who will bend
the bow and shoot an arrow through the wheel which will strike and bring
down the golden fish shall obtain my daughter in marriage." None but a
mighty archer who was Arjuna's equal could hope to win the beautiful
Draupadi, for five arrows only were allowed to each competitor, and the
fish must needs be struck on an eye to be brought down.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

A great field was enclosed for the swayamvara. It was surrounded by a
fosse and barrier and swan-white pavilions, with domes and turrets that
were agleam with gold and jewels, festoons and streamers and bright
gar-lands. The turrets of the royal mansion were lofty and golden like
Himalayan mountain peaks.

For sixteen days there were sports and banquets, and everyone within the
city made merry. Then came the great and festal day. At dawn trumpets
and drums awakened the people, and flags and flowers decorated every
street. The whole populace gathered on the plain and massed around the
barriers. The rajah's soldiers kept order, and wrestlers and jugglers
and dancers and musicians performed merrily until the appointed hour
drew nigh.

At length the people roared their welcome to the king and the high-born
ladies and all the royal guests, who thronged the galleries and
pavilions. The mighty rajahs, frowning defiance one upon another, were
ranged on lofty seats round the throne of King Drupada. Multitudes had
gathered to gaze on the glittering scene, pressing against the barriers,
or clustering on trees and scaffolds, while others looked down from
lofty lattice and high house roofs. . . . A thousand trumpets clamoured;
and the murmuring of the swaying people was like the voice of the
heaving main.

Among others came in all her beauty the Princess Draupadi, stepping
gently and sweet, bearing in a delicate hand the golden bridal garland,
which was adorned with sparkling gems. Tardily she made approach,
blushing with increasing loveliness, and appeared in the presence of the
princes. Mighty and high-born men were there. The Pandavas beheld in the
galleries their enemies Duryodhana, Karna, and all the great Kauravas,
and they

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

saw also Krishna, the amorous and powerful one, and his brother, the
wine-drinking Balarama <span id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_244.md), the Yádava
princes, the Rajah of Sindhu and his sons, the Rajah of Chedi, the Rajah
of Kosala, the Rajah of Madra, and many more. Now the Pandavas were
still disguised as Brahmans, and stood among the holy men.

An aged and white-haired Brahman, clad in white, approached the high
altar, chanting mantras. He spread the holy grass and poured out oil;
then he kindled the sacred fire, and the offering to the gods was
blessed.

Thereafter the thousand trumpets were sounded, and a tense silence fell
upon the buzzing crowd. In the solemn hush all eyes were turned towards
the royal mansion as Drupada's valiant son, Dhrishta-dyumna, led forth
his sister Draupadi, and in a voice like thunder proclaimed his father's
will, saying:

"Here stands the noble princess, my sister. Whosoever can bend this bow,
and strike with an arrow yonder whirling target set on high, may, if his
lineage is noble, claim Draupadi for his bride. My words are truth!"

Having spoken thus, the prince recited to his sister the names of the
royal guests, their lineage and their deeds of fame, and bade her award
the golden garland to the successful archer.

The rajahs then descended from their gorgeous thrones and gathered
around Draupadi as the bright gods gather around Párvati, the mountain
bride of Shiva. Their hearts were filled with love for the maiden and
with hate for one another. Rivals frowned upon rivals. Those who had
been close friends became of a sudden angry enemies because that
Draupadi was so beautiful. Krishna

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and Balarama alone remained aloof; calmly and self-restrained they stood
apart, while rajah opposed rajah like to angry elephants.

Each of the love-sick monarchs gazed upon the mighty bow and upon the
whirling target on high, and for a time no man sought to lift the bow
lest he should be unable to bend it and then be put to shame. At length
a rajah, more bold than the others, picked it up and tried his strength
without avail; another followed and another, but failed to string it.
Soon many rajahs strained their arms in vain, and some fell upon the
ground and groaned, while the laughter of the people pealed around the
barriers. . . . The gods had assembled in mid-air and looked down with
steadfast eyes.

At length proud Karna strode forward; he took the bow and bent it and
fixed the bowstring. Then he seized an arrow. Drupada and his son were
alarmed, fearing he might succeed and claim the bride. Suddenly Draupadi
intervened, for she would not have the son of a charioteer for her lord.
She said, speaking loudly: "I am a king's daughter, and will not wed
with the base-born. . . ."

Karna smiled bitterly, his face aflame. He cast down the bow and walked
away, gazing towards the sun. He said: "O sun! be my witness that I cast
aside the bow, not because I am unable to hit the mark, but because
Draupadi scorns me."

Others sought to perform the feat, but in vain, and many rajahs feared
to make attempt lest they should compel the laughter of the people. A
buzz of merry voices arose from beyond the barriers.

Meanwhile the Pandava brethren, disguised as Brahmans, looked on with
the others.

Then suddenly silence fell upon everyone, for Arjuna

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

advanced from the priestly band to lift the bow. The Brahmans applauded
him, shaking their deerskins.

Said the rajahs: "Can a weakly Brahman, who is a mere stripling,
accomplish a feat which is beyond the strength of mighty warriors."

Others said: "The Brahman knoweth best his own skill. He would not go
forward if he were not confident of success."

An aged priest endeavoured to restrain Arjuna, lest he should by his
failure bring ridicule upon the Brahmans; but the hero would not be
thwarted. He strode forward like to a stately elephant and bared his
broad shoulders and ample chest. He was nimble as a lion, and calm and
self-possessed.

Ere he lifted the bow, he walked round it; then he addressed a prayer to
the gods. . . . He stood up unmoved and serene as a mountain peak, and
he bent the bow and fixed an arrow in it. . . .

All eyes watched him. He drew the cord, and the arrow flew upwards with
a hissing sound; it hit the target eye, and the golden fish fell over
and clashed upon the ground.

Like distant thunder arose the plaudits of the multitude; hundreds of
Brahmans shouted in ecstasy and waved their scarfs; a thousand trumpets
clamoured in triumph, and the drums were beaten loud. . . .

The heart of Draupadi was filled with joy, and, smiling coyly, she
advanced towards Arjuna and flung the golden bridal garland over his
shoulders. Celestial blossoms fluttered, descending through the air, and
the sound of celestial music was heard.

Drupada was well pleased, because he had already recognized the hero in
his Brahman guise; but the jealous rajahs stormed in fury, and each said
unto the other:

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Behold! the king
goeth to greet this youth. To him we are as worthless as jungle grass;
he tramples upon us in his pride. . . . Are we to be humbled by a
Brahman and denied the fruit of our nourished hopes? The daughter of a
rajah must even choose a Kshatriya for her husband. . . . Verily, the
life of a priest is sacred, but the rajah who scorns his peers must
die--he and his son together. Let us seize also this shameless woman who
honours the Brahman--that trespasser of our birthright--so that she may
be burned at the stake!"

Shouting with anger one to another, the rajahs poured from the galleries
with drawn swords and rushed towards Arjuna and the princess. Like
ponderous wild elephants they advanced; but the Pandavas rose against
them. Arjuna bent the great bow, and Bhima, having no weapon, uprooted a
tree and stood defying them like to hell's stern judge wielding his
mighty club. Yudhishthira and the younger brothers were soon beside
them, and the Brahmans hastened also to give their aid.

For a moment the rajahs paused, wondering at the daring of the priestly
band; but impatient Karna and angry Salya, Rajah of Madra, dashed
forward like to infuriated elephants against Arjuna and Bhima. The
brothers sustained the shock, and when Karna had been struck by Arjuna,
he faltered in amaze and said: "Brahman, who art thou? Art thou a god in
human guise? No Brahman could thus attack me, nor dost there live a man
who can thwart me with defiance as thou hast done even now, save Arjuna
alone."

Said Arjuna, "I am nor god nor hero, but a humble Brahman who hath been
trained to use of arms. I have come hither to tame thy pride, thou
haughty youth; therefore be firm."

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

But Karna fell back, deeming it vain to oppose the power of a holy man.

Meanwhile Madra's king fought against peerless Bhima. Both were
long-armed and of gigantic strength. Sharp and fierce was their
conflict. When their clubs were splintered, they leapt one upon the
other and wrestled fiercely, struggling with all their might. Then, of a
sudden, Bhima stopped and swung aloft the mighty rajah and threw him
heavily upon the ground, where he lay unconscious and bleeding before
the eyes of the multitude.

The rajahs drew back, humbled because of Karna's flight and Salya's
downfall.

"Brave, indeed, are the Brahmans," they said. "Who can they be? What is
their lineage? and whence come they?"

The Pandavas scorned to make answer. But Krishna had knowledge of who
they were, and he interposed with gentle words to soothe the angry
rajahs. The monarchs heard him and withdrew, and the tumult was
appeased.

Then Arjuna took Draupadi by the hand and led her away in peace from
that scene of angry strife. So ended the swayamvara, and Krishna
declared that the bride had been fairly won.

The Pandava brethren went towards the house of the potter, and they
entered and addressed their mother Pritha, saying: "A great gift have we
obtained this day."

Said Pritha: "Then share the gift between you, as becomes brethren."

Yudhishthira said: "What hast thou said, O mother? The gift is the
Princess Draupadi whom Arjuna hath won at the swayamvara."

Said Pritha: "Alas! what have I said? I have sinned deeply in saying,
'Then share the gift between you, as

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

becomes brethren.' But, O Yudhishthira, my son, the fatal words have
been spoken; you must devise how they can be obeyed without involving
one another in wrong."

Yudhishthira pondered a time and then spake to Arjuna, saying: "My
brother, thou hast won Draupadi by thine own merit. She must therefore
be thy bride."

Said Arjuna: "Thou, Yudhishthira, art our elder brother and we are thy
servants. The princess is for thee."

Yudhishthira said: "Let this matter be arranged in accordance with the
will of the gods. It is for Drupada to say unto which of us his daughter
will be given."

Now, as hath already been told, each one of the Pandavas yearned in his
secret heart to have Draupadi for his bride. . . .

Meanwhile the evening meal had been prepared, and Pritha desired that
the princess should at once take her place, and serve out the portions
to the brethren. So she said unto Draupadi: "Divide the food, and first
set aside a share for the poor; then cut what is left into two parts,
one part for Bhima, and the rest for my other sons and for thee and me."

The princess smiled when she beheld the great meal which Bhima devoured.

When they had all eaten they retired to rest. Draupadi slept with
Pritha, and the brethren lay at their feet.

King Drupada was sore troubled in heart after his daughter had been led
away to the potter's house, and he sent his valiant son to watch her.
Dhrishta-dyumna went forth in disguise, and, listening at the window, he
discovered to his joy that the Brahmans were no other than the Pandava
brethren. He returned to his royal sire and related all that had
happened, and what had been

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

spoken at the evening meal. The king was well pleased because that the
brethren were Kshatriyas and not Brahmans.

In the morning Drupada sent a priest to the potter's house to ask how it
fared with all the brethren.

Said Yudhishthira: "Inform thou the rajah that his daughter hath been
won by a family who will not bring shame or disgrace upon his royal
name. None but a man of high birth could have shot down the fish of
gold."

Drupada, ere this message was delivered unto him, sent a second
messenger bidding the brethren to come to the palace because that the
nuptial feast was ready. . . . Two chariots awaited them. Then Pritha
and Draupadi entered one of the chariots together, and the five brethren
entered the other, and they were all driven towards the royal palace.

When the people beheld the Pandavas and marked their comely bearing and
royal gait, they knew that they were not Brahmans, but high-born
Kshatriyas.

The Pandava guests were made welcome, and the king and his son and all
his counsellors sat down to feast with them.

Said the rajah at length unto Yudhishthira: "I perceive that you are men
of high birth. Tell me, therefore, I pray thee, who ye are--your names
and your lineage."

Yudhishthira said: "We are of humble birth. Do now with us as is thy
desire."

Said Drupada: "In Indra's name, I adjure thee to reveal yourselves unto
me now."

Yudhishthira said: "Know, then, that we are the Pandava princes. . . .
Our brother Arjuna was the winner of Draupadi. Thy daughter, like to a
lotus,

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

hath been but transferred from one lake to another. I have spoken what
is true."

Drupada glowed with joy and satisfaction. He prevailed upon the brethren
to remain at the palace, and entertained them for many days.

At length Yudhishthira was addressed by Drupada, who said: "Thou art the
elder brother. Speak and say if it is thy desire that Arjuna be given
Draupadi for his bride."

Said Yudhishthira: "I would fain speak with Vyasa, the great Rishi,
regarding this matter."

Now Vyasa was in the city of Panchala at that time, and he was brought
before the rajah, who spake to him regarding Draupadi.

The Rishi said: "The gods have already declared that she will become the
wife of all the five Pandava brethren."

Drupada's son spoke and said: "With reverence I have heard thy words, O
Vyasa, but to me it appears that Draupadi hath been betrothed unto
Arjuna alone."

Said Yudhishthira: "Thou hast spoken truly, but there is wisdom in the
words of Vyasa which in my heart I cannot condemn. Besides, our mother
hath already commanded us to share our gift together."

Then Vyasa told that Draupadi was the re-incarnation of a pious woman
who once prayed unto the god Shiva for a husband: five times she prayed,
and the god rewarded her with the promise of five husbands in her next
existence. Vyasa also revealed that the Pandava brethren were five
incarnations of Indra, and thus were but as one.

Drupada then gave consent for his daughter to become the bride of all
the brethren, and it was arranged that she should be married unto them
all, one after the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

other, according to their ages. So on five successive days she was led
round the holy fire by each of the five Pandava princes.

Drupada thereafter conferred great gifts upon his sons-in-law; he gave
them much gold and many jewels, and he gave them numerous horses and
chariots and elephants, and also a hundred female servants clad in
many-coloured robes, and adorned with gems and bright garlands. Unto the
Pandavas Krishna gave much raiment and ornaments of gold, and rare
vessels sparkling with jewels, besides female servants from various
kingdoms.

Now when Duryodhana came to know that the Pandava brethren were still
alive, and had formed a powerful alliance with Drupada, he was moved to
jealous wrath. A great council was held, at which the young men
clamoured for war and the grave elders spoke in favour of peace. At
length it was agreed that the Pandava princes should be invited to
return to Hastinapur so that the raj might be divided between them and
the sons of Dhritarashtra. Then Vidura was sent to Panchala to speak
with the Rajah Drupada and his sons-in-law regarding this matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_244"></span>[215:1](iml18.htm#fr_245.md) *Pron*. bal-a-rah´ma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Triumph of the Pandavas](iml19.md)
