[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml16)  [Next](iml18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span id="ch12"></span>

### CHAPTER XII

### First Exile of the Pandavas

Princes' First Campaign--Kauravas driven back--Pandavas achieve
Victory--Drupada humbled by Drona--Panchala Kingdom divided--Pandava
Prince made "Little Rajah"--Duryodhana's Plot--Pandavas' First
Exile--Their New Home--Escape in the Night--Wanderings in the
Jungle--Bhima slays a Rakshasa--The Demon Bride--Sojourn in
Ekachakra--Story of the Brahman Family--Bhima overcomes the Asura
King--Miraculous Birth of Drupada's Children--Swayamvara
proclaimed--Pandavas depart to Panchala.

THE Pandavas and Kauravas had now become accomplished warriors, and
Drona, their preceptor, claimed his reward. So he spoke unto his pupils
and said: "Go forth against Drupada, Rajah of Panchala; smite him in
battle and bring him to me."

The cousins could not agree to wage war together by reason of their
jealousies. So the Kauravas, led by Duryodhana, were first to attack
Drupada; they rode in their chariots and invaded the hostile capital,
and slaked their thirst for battle. The warriors of Panchala arose to
fight; their shouting was like the roaring of lions, and their arrows
were showered as thickly as rain dropping from the clouds. The Kauravas
were defeated, and they retired in disorder, uttering cries of despair.

The Pandavas then rushed against the enemies of Drona. Arjuna swept
forward in his chariot like to the fire which consumeth all things at
the end of time, and he destroyed horses and cars and warriors. The
battle-roar of Bhima was like to the roar of ocean stricken

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

by a tempest; wielding his mace, he struck down elephants big as
mountains, and many horses and charioteers also, and he covered the
ground with rivers of blood; as a herdsman driveth his cattle before
him, so did Bhima drive before him with his mace the terror-stricken
hosts of Panchala.

Drupada endeavoured to turn the tide of battle; surrounded by his
mightiest men, he opposed Arjuna. Then a great uproar arose among the
Panchala forces, for as the lion leaps upon the leader of a herd of
elephants, so did Arjuna rush against Drupada. A boastful warrior
intervened, but the strong Pandava overcame him, and at length, after
fierce fighting, Arjuna seized Drupada as Garuda, king of birds, <span
id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_232.md) seizeth a mighty snake after disturbing
the waters of the ocean.

The remnant of the Panchala host then broke and fled, and the Pandavas
began to lay waste the capital. Arjuna, however, cried unto Bhima:
"Remember that Drupada is the kinsman of the Kauravas; therefore cease
slaying his warriors." <span id="fr_234"></span>[2](#fn_233.md)

Drupada was led before Drona, who, remembering the proud words of the
fallen rajah, spoke and said: "At last I have conquered thy kingdom, and
thy life is in my hands. Is it thy desire now to revive our friendship?"

Drona smiled a little and continued thus: "Brahmans are full of
forgiveness; therefore have no fear for thy life, O king. I have not
forgotten that we were children together. So once again I ask for thy
friendship, and I grant thee, unasked, the half of the kingdom; the
other half will be mine, and if it pleaseth thee we will be friends."

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Said Drupada: "Thou art indeed noble and great. I thank thee, and desire
to be thy friend."

So Drona took possession of half of the kingdom. Drupada, who sorrowed
greatly, went to rule the southern Panchalas; he was convinced that he
could not defeat Drona by Kshatriya power alone, which is inferior to
Brahman power, and he resolved to discover means whereby he might obtain
a son who could overcome his Brahman enemy.

Thereafterwards the Pandavas waged war against neighbouring kings, and
they extended the territory over which the blind maharajah held sway.

The Kauravas were rendered more jealous than ever by the successes
achieved by the Pandavas, and also because the people favoured them. Now
Duryodhana desired to become heir to the throne, but the elder prince of
the conquering Pandavas could not be set aside. In the end Yudhishthira
was chosen, although unwillingly, by the blind king, and he became
Yuva-rajah, "Little Rajah", supplanting Bhishma, who had been regent
during the minority. Yudhishthira, accordingly, ruled over the kingdom,
and he was honoured and beloved by the people; for although he was not a
mighty warrior like Arjuna, or powerful like to Bhima, he had great
wisdom, and he was ever just and merciful, and a lover of truth. <span
id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_234.md)

Duryodhana remonstrated with his blind father, the maharajah, and he
spoke to him, saying: "Why, O my father, hast thou thus favoured the
Pandavas and forgotten thine own sons? Thou wert Pandu's elder brother,
and should have reigned before him. Now the children of thy younger
brother are to succeed thee. The kingdom is thine own by right of birth,
and thy sons are thine

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

heirs. Why, then, hast thou lowered us in the eyes of thy subjects?"

Said the blind Dhritarashtra: "Duryodhana, my son, know thou that Pandu,
my brother, was the mightiest ruler in the world. Could I, who have ever
been blind, have set him aside? His sons have great wisdom and worth,
and are loved by the people. How, then, could I pass them over?
Yudhishthira hath greater accomplishments for governing than thou dost
possess, my son. How could I turn against him and banish him from my
council?"

Duryodhana said: "I do not acknowledge Yudhishthira's superiority as a
ruler of men. And this I know full well, I could combat against half a
score of Yudhishthiras on the field of battle. . . . If, my father, thou
wilt set me aside and deny me my right to a share of government in the
kingdom, I will take mine own life and thus end my sorrow."

Said Dhritarashtra: "Be patient, O my son, nor give way to thy vexation.
If such is thy desire, I will divide the kingdom between thee and
Yudhishthira, so that no jealousy may exist between you both."

Duryodhana was well pleased, hearing these words, and he said: "I agree,
O my father, and will accept thine offer. Let the Pandavas take their
own land and rule over it, and I and my brethren will remain at
Hastinapur with thee. If the Kauravas and Pandavas continue to dwell
here together, there will be conflicts and much shedding of blood."

Said Dhritarashtra: "Neither Bhishma, the head of our family, nor
Vidura, my brother, nor Drona, thy preceptor, will consent to the
Pandavas being sent hence."

Duryodhana made answer: "Consult them not; they are beneath thee, my
sire. Command the Pandavas to

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

depart unto the city of Varanavartha <span
id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_235.md) and dwell there; when they have gone no
one will speak to thee regarding this matter."

Dhritarashtra listened to his son and followed his counsel. He commanded
Yudhishthira to depart with his brethren to the city of Varanavartha,
rich in jewels and gold, to dwell there until he recalled them.
Accordingly the Pandava brethren bade farewell to Dhritarashtra and left
Hastinapur, taking with them their mother, the widowed queen Pritha, and
went towards the city of Varanavartha. The people of Hastinapur mourned
for them greatly.

Ere they departed, Vidura spoke to them in secret, bidding them to be
aware of the perils of fire. He repeated a verse to Yudhishthira and
said: "Put thy trust in the man who will recite these words unto thee;
he will be thy deliverer."

Now Duryodhana had plotted with Shakuni, the brother of Queen Gandhari,
to accomplish the destruction of his kinsmen. Then their ally, Kanika
the Brahman, said in secret to Dhritarashtra: "When thine enemy is in
thy power, destroy him by whatever means is at thy disposal, in secret
or openly. Show him no mercy, nor give him thy protection. If thy son,
or brother, or kinsman, or thy father even, should become thine enemy,
do not hesitate to slay if thou wouldst have prosperity. Let him be
overcome either by spells, or by curses, or by deception, or by payment
of money. Do not forget thine enemy, even although thou mayst disdain
him."

The maharajah lent a willing ear thereafter to the counsel of his son,
whom, in his secret heart, he favoured most.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

Ere the Pandavas had left Hastinapur, Duryodhana sent unto Varanavartha
his secret agent, Purochana, to erect a commodious new dwelling for
them. This was accomplished with all speed, and it became known as the
"house of lac". It was built of combustible material: much hemp and
resin were packed in the walls and between the floors, and it was
plastered over with mortar well mixed with pitch and clarified butter.

Purochana welcomed the Pandavas when they arrived at Varanavartha, and
they wondered at the splendour of the great new dwelling. But
Yudhishthira smelt the mortar, and he went over the whole house
examining it closely; then he said unto Bhima: "The enemy hath caused
this mansion to be erected for us, and their trusted workers have done
well for them, for it is full of hemp and straw, resin and bamboo, and
the mortar is mixed with pitch and clarified butter."

In due time a stranger visited the Pandavas, and he repeated the secret
verse which Vidura had communicated to Yudhishthira. He said: "I will
construct for you a secret passage underground which will lead to a
place of safety, lest you should have to escape from this house when the
doors are made secure and it is set on fire."

So the man set to work in secret, and ere long the underground passage
was ready. Then Bhima resolved to deal with Purochana in the very manner
that he had undertaken to deal with the princes.

One evening Pritha gave a feast in the new dwelling to all the poor
people in Varanavartha. When the guests had taken their departure, there
remained behind a poor Bhil woman and her five sons, who had drunken
heavily, as was the custom of their people, and were unable to rise up.
They slumbered on the floor.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

A great windstorm had arisen, and the night was dark. So Bhima deemed
that the time had come to accomplish his purpose. He went outside and
secured the doors of the dwelling of Purochana, which stood beside that
of the Pandavas; then he set it on fire. Soon the flames spread towards
the new mansion which had been erected according to Duryodhana's desire,
and it burned fiercely and speedily. Pritha and her sons made swift
escape by the underground passage and took refuge in the jungle. In the
morning the people discovered among the embers of Purochana's house the
blackened remains of his body and the bodies of his servants. In the
ruins of the Pandavas' dwelling they found that a woman and five men had
perished, and they lamented, believing that Pritha and her sons were
dead. There was great sorrow in Hastinapur when the tidings were borne
thither. All the people bewailed the fate of the Pandavas. Bhishma and
Vidura wept, and blind Dhritarashtra was moved to tears also. But
Duryodhana rejoiced in secret, believing that his enemies had all been
destroyed.

The Pandavas, having escaped through the subterranean passage, hastened
southwards and entered the forest, which abounded with reptiles and wild
animals and with ferocious man-eating Asuras and Rakshasas of gigantic
stature. Weary and footsore were they all, and greatly oppressed with
sleepiness and fear. At length the mighty Bhima lifted up all the others
and hastened on through the darkness: he took his mother on his back,
and Madri's sons on his shoulders, and Yudhishthira and Arjuna under his
arms. He went swifter than the wind, breaking down trees by his breast
and furrowing the ground that he stamped upon. The whole forest was
shaken as with fear.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

At length the Pandavas, fatigued and athirst and heavy with sleep, found
a place to rest in safety; and they all lay down to slumber below a
great and beautiful Banyan tree except mighty Bhima, who kept watch over
them.

Now there lived in the forest on a Shala tree a ferocious Rakshasa named
Hidimva. He was of grim visage and terrible to behold; his eyes were
red, and he was red-haired and red-bearded; his cheeks were of cloud
colour and his mouth was large, with long, sharp-pointed teeth, which
gleamed in darkness; his ears were shaped like to arrows; his neck was
broad as a tree, his belly was large, and his legs were of great length.

The monster was exceedingly hungry on that fateful night. Scenting human
flesh in the forest, he yawned and scratched his grizzly beard, and
spoke to his sister, saying: "I smell excellent food, and my mouth
waters; to-night I will devour warm flesh and drink hot, frothy blood.
Hasten, now, and bring the sleeping men unto me; we will eat them
together, and afterwards dance merrily in the wood."

Then the Rakshasa woman went towards the place where the Pandavas slept.
When she beheld Bhima, the long-armed one, clad in royal garments and
wearing his jewels, she immediately fell in love with him, and she said
to herself: "This man with the shoulders of a lion and eyes like to
lotus blooms is worthy to be my husband. I will not slay him for my evil
brother."

Now a Rakshasa woman has power to transform herself, and this one at
once assumed the shape of a beautiful woman; her face became as fair as
the full moon; on her head was a garland of flowers, her hair hung in
ringlets; delicate was the hue of her skin, and she wore rich ornaments
of gold with many gems. Timidly she approached

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bhima and spoke to
him, saying: "O bull among men, who art thou and whence comest thou? Who
are these fair ones lying in slumber there? Hear and know that this
forest is the abode of the wicked chieftain of the Rakshasas. He is my
brother, and hath sent me hither to kill you all for food, but I desire
to save thee, O long-armed one. Be thou my husband. I will take thee to
a secret place among the mountains, for I can speed through the air at
will."

Said Bhima: "I cannot leave my mother and my brethren to become food for
a Rakshasa."

The woman said: "Let me be thy servant. Awaken thy mother and thy
brethren and I will rescue you all from my fierce brother."

Said Bhima: "I will not awaken them from pleasant and needful slumber,
because I do not fear a Rakshasa. O fair one, thou canst go as it
pleaseth thee, and I care not if thou dost send thy brother unto me."

Meantime the Rakshasa chieftain had grown impatient. He descended from
his tree and hastened after his sister, with gaping mouth and head
thrown back. Darkly blue was his body, like to a raincloud.

The Rakshasa woman said to Bhima: "He cometh hither in wrath. Awaken thy
kinsfolk, and I will carry you all through the air to escape him."

Said Bhima: "Look on my arms, which are strong as the trunks of
elephants; my legs are like iron maces, and my chest is indeed powerful
and broad. I will slay this man-eater, thy brother."

The Rakshasa chieftain heard the boast of Bhima, and he fumed with rage
when he beheld his sister in comely human guise, and said to her: "I
will slay thee and those whom thou wouldst fain help against me." Then
he rushed against her, but Bhima cried: "Thou

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

wilt not kill a woman while I am near. I challenge thee to single combat
now. This night will thy sister behold thee slain by me as an elephant
is slain by a lion."

Said the Rakshasa: "Boast not until thou art the victor. I will kill
thee first of all, then thy friends, and last of all my treacherous
sister."

Having spoken thus, he rushed towards Bhima, who nimbly seized the
monster's outstretched arms and, wrestling violently, cast him on the
ground. Then as a lion drags off his prey, Bhima dragged the struggling
Rakshasa into the depths of the forest, lest his yells should awaken the
sleepers. There they fought together like furious bull elephants,
tearing down branches and overthrowing trees.

At length the dread clamour awoke the Pandavas, and they gazed with
wonder on the beautiful woman who kept watch in Bhima's place.

Said Pritha: "O celestial being, who art thou? If thou art the goddess
of woods or an Apsara, tell me why thou dost linger here?"

The fair demon said: "I am the sister of the chieftain of the Rakshasas,
and I was sent hither to slay you all; but when I beheld thy mighty son
the love god wounded me, and I chose him for my husband. Then my brother
followed angrily, and thy son is fighting with him, and they are filling
the forest with their shouting."

All the brethren rushed to Bhima's aid, and they saw the two wrestlers
struggling in a cloud of dust, and they appeared like two high cliffs
shrouded in mist.

Arjuna cried out: "O Bhima, I am here to help thee. Let me slay the
monster."

Bhima answered: "Fear not, but look on. The Rakshasa will not escape
from my hands."

Said Arjuna: "Do not keep him alive too long. We

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

must hasten hence. The dawn is near, and Rakshasas become stronger at
daybreak; they exercise their powers of deception during the two
twilights. Do not play with him, therefore, but kill him speedily."

At these words Bhima became strong as Vayu, his sire, when he is
angered, <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_236.md) and, raising aloft the
Rakshasa, he whirled him round and round, crying: "In vain hast thou
gorged on unholy food. I will rid the forest of thee. No longer wilt
thou devour human beings."

Then, dashing the monster to the ground, Bhima seized him by the hair
and by the waist, laid him over a knee, and broke his back. So was the
Rakshasa slain.

Day was breaking, and Pritha and her sons immediately turned away to
leave the forest. The Rakshasa woman followed them, and Bhima cried to
her: "Begone! or I will send thee after thy brother."

Said Yudhishthira: "It is unseemly to slay a woman. Besides, she is the
sister of that Rakshasa, and even although she became angry, what harm
can she do us?"

Kneeling at Pritha's feet, the demon wailed: "O illustrious and blessed
lady, thou knowest the sufferings women endure when the love god wounds
them. Have pity upon me now, and command thy son to take me for his
bride, If he continues to scorn me, I will slay myself. Let me be thy
slave, and I will carry you all wheresoever you desire and protect you
from perils."

Pritha heard her with compassion, and prevailed upon Bhima to take her
for his bride. So the two were married by Yudhishthira; then the
Rakshasa took Bhima upon her back and sped through the air to a lonely
place among the mountains which is sacred to the gods. They lived
together beside silvery streams and lakes sparkling with

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

lotus blooms; they wandered through woods of blossoming trees where
birds sang sweetly, and by celestial sea-beaches covered with pearls and
nuggets of gold. The demon bride had assumed celestial beauty, and
ofttimes played sweet music, and she made Bhima happy.

In time the woman became the mother of a mighty son; his eyes were
fiercely bright, like arrows were his ears, and his mouth was large; he
had copper-brown lips and long, sharp teeth. He grew to he a youth an
hour after he was born, but, still remaining bald, his mother named him
Ghatotkacha, which signifies "pot-headed". <span
id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_237.md)

Bhima then returned to his mother and his brethren with his demon bride
and her son. They abode together for a time in the forest; then the
Rakshasa bade all the Pandavas farewell and departed with Ghatotkacha,
who promised to come to aid the Pandavas whenever they called upon him.

One day thereafter Vyasa appeared before the Pandavas and counselled
them to go towards the city of Eka-chakra <span
id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_238.md) and to live there for a time in the
house of a Brahman. Then he vanished from sight, promising to come
again.

The Pandavas went therefore to Eka-chakra and lived with a Brahman who
had a wife and a daughter and an infant son. Disguised as holy men, the
brethren begged for food as alms. Every evening they brought home what
they had obtained, and Pritha divided the whole into two portions; the
one half she gave to wolf-bellied Bhima, and the rest she kept for his
brethren and herself.

Now the city of Eka-chakra was protected against every enemy by a
forest-dwelling Rakshasa named Vaka,

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

who was king of the Asuras. <span id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_239.md) Each
day the people had to supply him with food, which consisted of a
cartload of rice, two bullocks, and the man who conveyed the meal to
him.

One morning a great wailing broke forth in the Brahman's house because
that the holy man was required to supply the demon's feast. He was too
poor to purchase a slave, and he said he would deliver himself unto
Vaka. "Although I reach Heaven," he cried, "I will have no joy, for my
family will perish when I am gone." His wife and his daughter pleaded in
turn to take his place, and the three wept together. Then the little boy
of tender years plucked a long spear of grass, and with glowing eyes he
spoke sweetly and said: "Do not weep, Father; do not weep, Mother; do
not weep, Sister. With this spear I will slay the demon who devours
human beings."

As they wept there they heard him, nor could forbear smiling.

Pritha was deeply moved by the lamentations of the Brahman family, and
she said: "Sorrow not. I will send forth my son Bhima to slay the Asura
king."

The Brahman made answer, saying: "That cannot be. Thy sons are Brahmans
and are under my protection. If I go forth, I will but obey the rajah;
if I send thy son, I will be sin-guilty of his death, for the gods abhor
the man who causeth a guest to be slain, or permits a Brahman to
perish."

Said Pritha: "Bhima is strong and mighty, nor can a demon do him any
harm. He will slay this bloodthirsty Rakshasa and return again in
safety. But, O Brahman, thou must not reveal unto anyone who hath
performed

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

this mighty deed, lest the people should trouble my son and desire to
obtain the secret of his power, for he is skilled in mantras." <span
id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_240.md)

Then was the household made happy, and Bhima prepared to go forth. That
mighty hero collected the rice and drove the bullocks towards the
forest. When he drew nigh to the appointed place, he began to eat the
food himself; and called the Rakshasa by name over and over again. Vaka
heard and came through the trees towards Bhima. Red were his eyes, and
his hair and his beard were red also; his ears were pointed like arrows;
he had a mouth like a cave, and his forehead was puckered in three
lines. Terrible was he to look upon; his body was huge, indeed. <span
id="fr_242"></span>[2](#fn_241.md)

The Rakshasa saw Bhima eating his meal, and approached angrily, biting
his lower lip. "Fool," he cried, "wouldst thou devour my food before my
very eyes?"

Bhima smiled, and continued eating with face averted. The demon smote
him, but the hero only glanced round as if one had touched his shoulder,
and he went on eating as before.

Raging furiously, the Rakshasa tore up a tree, and Bhima rose leisurely
and waited until it was flung at him. When that was done, he caught the
trunk nimbly and hurled it back. Many trees were uprooted and flung by
one at the other. Then Vaka sprung forward to wrestle, but the Pandava
overthrew him and dragged

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

him round and round until the demon gasped with fatigue. The earth
shook; trees were splintered in pieces. Then Bhima began to strike the
monster with his iron fists, and at length he broke Vaka's back across
his knee. Terrible were the loud screams of the Rakshasa while Bhima was
bending him double. He died howling.

A mighty clamour was then awakened in the forest. All the other Asuras
were terror-stricken, and, bellowing horribly, they hastened towards
Bhima and made obeisance before him. Then Bhima made them take vows
never again to eat human flesh or to oppress the people of the city.
They promised willing obedience, and he allowed them to depart.

Thereafter Pritha's son dragged the monster's body to the main gate of
Eka-chakra. He entered the city secretly and hastened to the Brahman's
house, and he told Yudhishthira all that had taken place.

When the people of the city discovered that the Asura king had been
slain, they rejoiced greatly, and hastened towards the house of the
Brahman. But that holy man made evasive answer to them, and said that
his deliverer was a certain high-souled Brahman who had offered to
supply food to the demon. Thereafter the people established a festival
in honour of Brahmans.

The Pandavas remained a time in the city, and they studied the Vedas.
One day there came to their dwelling a saintly man of rigid vows, and he
told the story of the miraculous births of Drupada's son and daughter
from sacrificial fire.

When Drupada had lost half of his kingdom, he paid pilgrimages to holy
places. He promised great rewards to superior Brahmans, so that he might
have offspring, ever desiring greatly to be avenged upon Drona. He

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

offered the austere Upayája a million cows if he would procure a son for
him, and that sage sent him unto his brother Yája. Now Yája was
reluctant to aid the rajah thus; but at length he consented to perform
the sacrificial rite, and prevailed upon Upayája to help him.

So the rite was performed, and when the vital moment came, the Brahmans
called for the queen to partake in it. But Drupada's wife was not
prepared, and said: "My mouth is still filled with saffron and my body
is scented. I am not fit to receive the libation which will bring
offspring. Tarry a little time for me."

But the Brahmans could not delay the consummation of the sacrificial
rite. Ere the queen came, a son sprang forth from the flames: he was
clad in full armour, and carried a falchion and bow, and a diadem
gleamed brightly upon his head. A voice out of the heavens said: "*This
Prince hath come to destroy Drona and to increase the fame of the
Panchalas*".

Next arose from the ashes on the altar a daughter of great beauty. She
was exceedingly dark, with long curling locks and lotus eyes, and she
was deep-bosomed and slender-waisted. A sweet odour clung to her body.

A voice out of heaven said: "*This dusky girl will become the chief of
all women. Many Kshatriyas must die because of her, and the Kauravas
will suffer from her. She will accomplish the decrees of the gods*."

Then the son was called Dhrishta-dyumna <span
id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_242.md) and the daughter Draupadi. <span
id="fr_244"></span>[2](#fn_243.md) Drona thereafter took the Panchala
prince to his palace, and instructed him to become an accomplished
warrior. He knew that he could not thwart destiny, and he desired to
perpetuate his own mighty deeds.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

Having heard these words, Pritha desired to journey towards Panchala,
and she and her sons took leave of their host. Ere they went away, the
high-souled ascetic said that Draupadi had been destined to become a
Pandava queen.

Pritha and her sons wandered from the banks of the Ganges and went
northwards, and soon they fell in with great numbers of people all going
the same way. Yudhishthira spake to a troop of Brahmans, and asked them
whither they were bound, and they answered saying that Drupada of
Panchala was observing a great festival, and that all the princes of the
land were hastening to the swayamvara of his peerless and
slender-waisted daughter, the beautiful Draupadi.

In that great and increasing company were Brahmans who were to perform
the sacred rites, and youths who were to take part in joyous
revelry--dancers and jugglers, boxers and wrestlers, and those who
displayed feats of strength and skill at arms; there were also bards
there and singers to chant the praises of heroes.

The Brahmans praised the beauty of Draupadi, and said to the Pandava
brethren: "Come with us to the festival and the sports and the
swayamvara; you will be feasted and will receive gifts. You are all as
comely as princes and as fair as the bright gods; mayhap Draupadi may
choose from among ye this stalwart and noble youth, strongly armed and
of fearless bearing, and if he should perform mighty feats, the garland
may be thrown upon his shoulders."

Said Yudhishthira: "So be it. We will hasten with you to the swayamvara
and share banquet and bounty."

So the Pandavas went towards Panchala with the troop of Brahmans. When
they reached the city they

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

took up their abode in the humble dwelling of a potter, still disguised
as Brahmans, and they went out and begged food from the people.

In their secret hearts the brethren desired greatly to win the fair
bride whose fame had been bruited abroad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[196:1](iml17.htm#fr_233.md) Half man and half
eagle, and enemy of the serpent race.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[196:2](iml17.htm#fr_234.md) The Kurus and
Panchalas were allies.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[197:1](iml17.htm#fr_235.md) The modern-day Hindu
regards Yudhishthira as an ideal man.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[199:1](iml17.htm#fr_236.md) Allahabad, then
probably a frontier town of the area of Aryan control, pronounced
Var´an-a-vart″ha.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[205:1](iml17.htm#fr_237.md) The god of wind.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[206:1](iml17.htm#fr_238.md) Bald as a pot.
*Pron*. gat-ot-katch´a.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[206:2](iml17.htm#fr_239.md) *Pron*. eka-chak´ra.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[207:1](iml17.htm#fr_240.md) As a rule the Asuras
are the enemies of the gods and the Rakshasas the enemies of mankind.
See [Chapter IV](iml09.htm#ch04.md).

<span id="fn_240"></span>[208:1](iml17.htm#fr_241.md) Charms.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[208:2](iml17.htm#fr_242.md) A man-devouring demon
was supposed to sit under a bridge in Caithness every night. When a late
wayfarer began to walk over, the monster growled, "Tramp, tramp, tramp",
so as to terrify him and obtain him for food. According to local belief,
the demon "had eyes like a saucer, a nose like a poker, and a mouth like
a cave". The Egyptian demon set was red like the Indian Rakshasa.
Red-haired people are disliked in India still; a native girl with auburn
locks is not cared for as a bride.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[210:1](iml17.htm#fr_243.md) *Pron*.
dhrish-ta-dyum´na.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[210:2](iml17.htm#fr_244.md) *Pron*. drow´pa-dee″.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Choice of Draupadi](iml18.md)
