[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml13)  [Next](iml15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span> <span id="ch09"></span>

### CHAPTER IX

### Prelude to the Great Bharata War

Dushyanta and Shakuntala--Romantic Wooing--Birth of
Bharata--Shakuntala's Appeal--Her Claim vindicated--King Bharata's
Reign--King Hastin and King Kuru--King Shantanu's Bride a Goddess--Seven
Babes drowned--Story of Satyavati--Vyasa, Poet and Sage--Bhishma's
Terrible Vow--Fisher Girl becomes Queen--Marriage by Capture--A
Childless King--Origin of Dhritarashtra, Pandu, and Vidura.

Now the sire of the great King Bharata <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_188) was royal Dushyanta of the lunar race,
the descendant of Atri, the Deva-rishi, and of Soma, the moon; his
mother was beautiful Shakuntala, the hermit maiden, and daughter of a
nymph from the celestial regions. And first be it told of the wooing of
Shakuntala and the strange childhood of her mighty son.

One day King Dushyanta, that tiger among men, went forth from his
stately palace to go a-hunting with a great host and many horses and
elephants. He entered a deep jungle and there slew numerous wild
animals; his arrows wounded tigers at a distance; he felled those that
came near with his great sword. Lions fled from before him, wild
elephants stampeded in terror, deer sought to escape hastily, and birds
rose in the air uttering cries of distress.

The king, attended by a single follower, pursued a deer across a desert
plain, and entered a beautiful forest

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

which delighted his heart, for it was deep and shady, and was cooled by
soft winds; sweet-throated birds sang in the branches, and all round
about there were blossoming trees and blushing flowers; he heard the
soft notes of the kokila <span id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_189), and
beheld many a green bower carpeted with grass and canopied by
many-coloured creepers.

Dushyanta, abandoning the chase, wandered on until he came to a
delightful and secluded hermitage, where he saw the sacred fire of that
austere and high-souled Brahman, the saintly Kanva. It was a scene of
peace and beauty. Blossoms from the trees covered the ground; tall were
the trunks, and the branches were far-sweeping. A silvery stream went
past, breaking on the banks in milk-white foam; it was the sacred River
Malini, studded with green islands, loved by water fowl, and abounding
with fish.

Then the king was taken with desire to visit the holy sage, Kanva, he
who is without darkness. So he divested himself of his royal insignia
and entered the sacred grove alone. Bees were humming; birds trilled
their many melodies; he heard the low chanting voices of Brahmans among
the trees--those holy men who can take captive all human hearts. . . .

When he reached the abode of Kanva, he wondered to find that it was
empty, and called out: "Who is here?" and the forest echoed his voice.

Then came towards him a beautiful black-eyed virgin, clad in a robe of
bark. She reverenced the king and said: "What seekest thou? I am thy
servant."

Said the royal Dushyanta to the maiden of faultless form and gentle
voice: "I have come to honour the wise and blessed Kanva. Tell me, O
fair and amiable one, whither he hath gone?"

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

The maiden answered: "My illustrious sire is gathering herbs, but if
thou wilt tarry he will return ere long."

Dushyanta was entranced by the beauty and sweet smiles of the gentle
girl, and his heart was moved towards her, for she was in the bloom of
youth. So he spake, saying: "Who art thou, O fairest one? Whence comest
thou, and why dost thou wander alone in the woods? O comely maiden, thou
hast taken captive my heart."

The bright-eyed one made answer: "I am the daughter of the holy and
high-souled Kanva, the ever-wise and ever-constant."

Said the king: "But Kanva is chaste and austere and hath ever been a
celibate, nor can he have broken his rigid vow. How came it that thou
wert born the daughter of such a one?"

Then the maiden, who was named Shakuntala, because that the birds
(shakunta) had nursed her, revealed unto the king the secret of her
birth. Her real sire was Vishwamitra <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_190), the holy sage who had been a Kshatriya
and was made a Brahman in reward for his austerities. It came to pass
that Indra became alarmed at his growing power, and he feared that the
mighty sage of blazing energy would, by reason of his penances, cast
down even him, the king of the gods, from his heavenly seat. So Indra
commanded Menaka, the beauteous Ap’sara, to disturb the holy meditations
of the sage, for he had already achieved such power that he created a
second world and many stars. The nymph called on the wind god and on the
god of love, and they went with her towards Vishwamitra.

Menaka danced before the brooding sage; then the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

wind god snatched away her moon-white garments, and the love god shot
his arrows at Vishwamitra, whereupon that saintly man was stricken with
love for the nymph of peerless beauty, and he wooed her and won her as
his bride. So was he diverted from his austerities. In time Menaka
became the mother of a girl babe, whom she cast away on the river bank.

Now the forest was full of lions and tigers, but vultures gathered round
the infant and protected her from harm. Then Kanva found and took pity
on the child; he said: "She will be mine own daughter."

Said Shakuntala: "O king, I was that child who was abandoned by the
nymph, and now thou dost know how Kanva came to be my sire."

The king said: "Blessed are thy words, O princess. Thou art of royal
birth. Be thou my bride, O beautiful maid, and thou wilt have garlands
of gold and golden ear-rings and white pearls and rich robes; my kingdom
also will be thine, O timid one; wed thou me in Gandharva mode, which of
all marriages is the best." <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_191)

Then Shakuntala promised to be the king's bride, on condition that he
would choose her son as the heir to his throne.

"As thou desirest, so let it be," said Dushyanta. And the fair one
became his bride.

Ere Dushyanta went away he promised Shakuntala that he would send a
mighty host to escort her to his palace.

When Kanva returned, the maiden did not leave her hiding-place to greet
him; but he searched out and found her, and he read her heart. "Thou
hast not broken the law," he said. "Dushyanta, thine husband, is noble
and

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

true, and a son will be born unto thee who will achieve great renown."

In time fair Shakuntala became the mother of a comely boy, and the wheel
mark <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_192) was on his hands. He grew to
be strong and brave, and when but six years old he sported with young
lions, for he was suckled by a lioness; he rode on the backs of lions
and tigers and wild boars in the midst of the forest. He was called
All-tamer, because that he tamed everything.

Now when Kanva perceived that the boy was of unequalled prowess, he
spake to Shakuntala and said: "The time hath come when he must be
anointed as heir to the throne." So he bade his disciples to escort
mother and son unto the city of Gajasahvaya <span
id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_193), where Dushyanta had his royal palace.

So it came that Shakuntala once again stood before the king, and she
said unto him: "Lo! I have brought unto thee this thy son, O Dushyanta.
Fulfil the promise thou didst make aforetime, and let him be anointed as
thine heir."

Dushyanta had no pleasure in her words, and made answer: "I have no
memory of thee. Who are thou and whence cometh thou, O wicked hermit
woman? I never took thee for wife, nor care I whether thou art to linger
here or to depart speedily."

Stunned by his cold answer, the sorrowing Shakuntala stood there like a
log. . . . Soon her eyes became red as copper and her lips trembled; she
cast burning glances at the monarch. For a time she was silent; then she
exclaimed with fervour: "O king without shame, well dost thou know who I
am. Why wilt thou deny knowledge of me as if thou wert but an inferior
person? Thy heart is a witness against thee. Be not a robber of thine

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

own affections. . . . The gods behold everything: naught is hidden from
them; verily, they will not bless one who doth degrade himself by
speaking falsely regarding himself. Spurn not the mother of thy son;
spurn not thy faithful wife. A true wife beareth a son; she is the first
of friends and the source of salvation; she enables her husband to
perform religious acts, her sweet speeches bring him joy; she is a
solace and a comforter in sickness and in sorrow; she is a companion in
this world and the next. If a husband dies, a wife follows soon
afterwards; if she is gone before, she waiteth for her husband in
heaven. She is the mother of the son who performs the funeral rite to
secure everlasting bliss for his sire, rescuing him from the hell called
Put. Therefore a man should reverence the mother of his son, and look
upon his son as if he beheld his own self in a mirror, rejoicing the
while as if he had found heaven. . . . Why, O king, dost thou spurn
thine own child? Even the ants will protect their eggs; strangers far
from home take the children of others on their knees to be made happy,
but thou hast no compassion for this child, although he is thy son,
thine own image. . . . Alas! what sin did I commit in my former state
that I should have been deserted by my parents and now by thee! . . . If
I must go hence, take thou thy son to thy bosom, O king."

Said Dushyanta: "It has been well said that all women are liars. Who
will believe thee? I know naught regarding thee or thy son. . . .
Begone! O wicked woman, for thou art without shame."

Shakuntala made answer, speaking boldly and without fear: "O king, thou
canst perceive the shortcomings of others, although they may be as small
as mustard seeds; thou art blind to thine own sins, although they may be
big as Vilwa fruit. As the swine loveth dirt even in a

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

flower garden, so do the wicked perceive evil in all that the good
relate. Honest men refrain from speaking ill of others: the wicked
rejoice in scandal. O king! truth is the chief of all virtues. Truth is
God himself. Do not break thy vow of truth: let truth be ever a part of
thee. But if thou wouldst rather be false, I must needs depart, for,
verily, such a one as thee should be avoided. . . . Yet know now, O
Dushyanta, that when thou art gone, my son will be king of this world,
which is surrounded by the four seas and adorned by the monarch of
mountains."

Shakuntala then turned from the king, but a voice out of heaven spoke
softly down the wind, saying:

"*Shakuntala hath uttered what is true. Therefore, O Dushyanta, cherish
thy son, and because thou wilt cherish him by command of the gods, let
his name be Bharata* ('*the cherished*')."

When the king heard these words, he spoke to his counsellors and said:
"The celestial messenger hath spoken. . . . Had I welcomed this my son
by pledge of Shakuntala alone, men would suspect the truth of her words
and doubt his royal birth."

Thereafter Dushyanta embraced his son and kissed him, and he honoured
Shakuntala as his chief rani <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_194); he
said to her, soothingly: "From all men have I concealed our union; and
for the sake of thine own good name I hesitated to acknowledge thee.
Forgive my harsh words, as I forgive thine. Thou didst speak
passionately because thou lovest me well, O great-eyed and fair one,
whom I love also."

The son of Shakuntala was then anointed as heir to the throne, and he
was named Bharata. <span id="fr_196"></span>[2](#fn_195)

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

When Dushyanta died, Bharata became king. Great was his fame, as
befitted a descendant of Chandra. <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_196)
He was a mighty warrior, and none could withstand him in battle; he made
great conquests, and extended his kingdom all over Hindustan, which was
called Bharatavarsha. <span id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_197)

King Bharata was the sire of King Hastin, who built the great city of
Hastinapur; King Hastin begot King Kuru, and King Kuru begot King
Shantanu.

Be it told of the King Shantanu that he was pious and just and
all-powerful, as was meet for the great grandson of King Bharata. His
first wife was the goddess Ganga of the Ganges river, and she was
divinely beautiful like to her kind. Ere she assumed human form for a
time, there came to her the eight Vasus, the attendants of Indra. It
chanced that when the Brahman Vasishtha was engaged in his holy
meditations the Vasus flew between him and the sun, whereupon the
angered sage cursed them, saying: "Be born among men!" Nor could they
escape this fate, so great was the Rishi's power over celestial beings.
So they hastened to Ganga, and she consented to become their human
mother, promising that she would cast them one by one into the Ganges
soon after birth, so that they might return speedily to their celestial
state. For this service Ganga made each of the Vasus promise to confer
an eighth part of his power on her son, who, according to her desire,
should remain among men for many years, but would never marry or have
offspring.

 

<span id="img_16400"></span>

[![SHANTANU MEETS THE GODDESS GANGA&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the painting
by Warwick Goble&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/16400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16400.jpg)  
SHANTANU MEETS THE GODDESS GANGA  
*From the painting by Warwick Goble*.  

 

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

A day came thereafter when King Shantanu walked beside the Ganges.
Suddenly there appeared before him a maiden of surpassing beauty. She
was Ganga in human form. Her celestial garments had the splendour of
lotus blooms; she was adorned with rare ornaments, and her teeth were
radiant as pearls. The king was silenced by her charms, and gazed upon
her steadfastly . . . In time he perceived that the maiden regarded him
with love-lorn eyes, as if she sought to look upon him for ever, and he
spoke to her, saying: "O slender-waisted and fair one, art thou one of
the Danavas, or art thou of the race of Gandharvas, or art thou of the
Apsaras; art thou one of the Yakshas or Nagas, <span
id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_198) or art thou of human kind, O peerless
and faultless one? Be thou my bride."

The goddess made answer that she would wed the king, but said she must
needs at once depart from him if he spoke harshly to her at any time, or
attempted to thwart her in doing as she willed. Shantanu consented to
her terms, and Ganga became his bride.

In time the goddess gave birth to a son, but soon afterwards she cast
him into the Ganges, saying: "This for thy welfare."

The king was stricken with horror, but he spake not a word to his
beautiful bride lest she should leave him.

So were seven babes, one after another, destroyed by their mother in
like manner. When the eighth was born, the goddess sought to drown him
also; but the king's pent-up wrath broke forth in a torrent of speech,
and he upbraided his heartless wife. Thus was his marriage vow broken,
and Ganga given power to depart unto her own place. But ere she went she
revealed unto the king who she was, and also why she had cast the Vasus,
her children, into the Ganges. Then she

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

suddenly vanished from before his eyes, taking the last babe with her.

Ere long the fair goddess returned to Shantanu for a brief space, and
she brought with her for the king a fair and noble son, who was endowed
with the virtues of the Vasus. Then she departed never to come again.
The heart of Shantanu was moved towards the child, who became a comely
and powerful youth, and was named Satanava. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_199)

When Shantanu had grown old, he sought to marry a young and beautiful
bride whom he loved. For one day as he walked beside the Jumna river he
was attracted by a sweet and alluring perfume, which drew him through
the trees until he beheld a maiden of celestial beauty with luminous
black eyes. <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_200) The king spake to her
and said: "Who art thou, and whose daughter, O timid one? What doest
thou here?"

Said the maiden, blessing Shantanu: "I am the daughter of a fisherman,
and I ferry passengers across the river in my boat."

Now, the name of this fair maiden was Satyavati. <span
id="fr_202"></span>[3](#fn_201) Like Shakuntala, she was of miraculous
origin, and had been adopted by her reputed sire. It chanced that a fish
once carried away in its stomach two unborn babes, a girl and a boy,
whose father was a great rajah. This fish was caught by a fisherman, who
opened it and found the children. He sent the manchild unto the rajah
and kept the girl, who was reared as his own daughter. She grew to be
comely and fair, but a fishy odour ever clung to her.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

One day, as she ferried pilgrims across the Jumna, there entered her
boat alone the high and pious Brahman Parashara, who was moved by the
maiden's great beauty. He desired that she should become the mother of
his son, and promised that ever afterwards an alluring perfume would
emanate from her body. He then caused a cloud to fall upon the boat, and
it vanished from sight.

When the fisher girl became the mother of a son, he grew suddenly before
her eyes, and in a brief space was a man. His name was Vyasa <span
id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_202); he bade his mother farewell, and
hastened to the depths of a forest to spend his days in holy meditation.
Ere he departed he said unto Satyavati: "If ever thou hast need of me,
think of me, and I shall come to thine aid."

When this wonder had been accomplished, Satyavati became a virgin again
through the power of the great sage Parashara, and a delicious odour
lingered about her ever afterwards.

On this maiden King Shantanu gazed with love. Then he sought the
fisherman, and said he desired the maiden to be his bride. But the man
refused to give his daughter to the king in marriage until he promised
that her son should be chosen as heir to the throne. Shantanu could not
consent to disinherit Satanava, son of Ganga, and went away with a heavy
heart.

Greatly the king sorrowed in his heart because of his love for the
dark-eyed maiden, and at length Satanava was given his secret. Then that
noble son of Ganga went to search for the beautiful daughter of the
fisher-man, and he found her. The fisherman said unto him, when he had
made known his mission: "If Satyavati bears sons, they will not inherit
the kingdom, for the king hath already a son, and he will succeed him."

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

Satanava thereupon made a vow renouncing his claim to the throne, and
said: "If thou wilt give thy daughter unto my sire to be his queen, I,
who am his heir, will never accept the throne, nor marry a wife, or be
the father of children. If, then, Satyavati will become the mother of a
son, he will surely be chosen rajah." When he had spoken thus, the gods
and Apsaras, the mist fairies, caused flowers to fall out of heaven upon
the prince's head, and a voice came down the wind, saying: "*This one is
Bhishma*."

So from that day the son of Ganga was called Bhishma, which signifies
the "Terrible", for the vow that he had taken was terrible indeed.

Then was Satyavati given in marriage to the king, and she bore him two
sons, who were named Chitrangada and Vichitra-virya. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_203)

In time Santanu sank under the burden of his years, and his soul
departed from his body. Unto Bhishma was left the care of the
queen-mother, Satyavati, and the two princes.

When the days of mourning went past, Bhishma renounced the throne in
accordance with his vow, and Chitrangada was proclaimed king. This youth
was a haughty ruler, and his reign was brief. He waged war against the
Gandhari of the hills <span id="fr_205"></span>[2](#fn_204) for three
years, and was slain in battle by their rajah. Then Bhishma placed
Vichitra-virya on the throne, and, as he was but a boy, Bhishma ruled as
regent for some years.

At length the time came for the young king to marry, and Bhishma set out
to find wives for him. It chanced

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

that the King of Kasi (Benares) had three fair daughters whose
swayamvara <span id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_205) was being proclaimed.
When Bhishma was told of this he at once entered his chariot and drove
from Hastinapur <span id="fr_207"></span>[2](#fn_206) to Kasi to
discover if the girls were worthy of the monarch of Bharatavarsha. He
found that they had great beauty, and he was well pleased thereat. The
great city was thronged with rajahs who had gathered from far and near
to woo the maidens, but Bhishma would not tarry until the day of the
swayamvara. He immediately seized the king's fair daughters and placed
them in his chariot. Then he challenged the assembled rajahs and sons of
rajahs in a voice like thunder, saying:

"The sages have decreed that a king may give his daughter with many
gifts unto one he has invited when she hath chosen him. Others may
barter their daughters for two kine, and some may give them in exchange
for gold. But maidens may also be taken captive. They may be married by
consent, or forced to consent, or be obtained by sanction of their
sires. Some are given wives as reward for performing sacrifices, a form
approved by the sages. Kings ever favour the swayamvara, and obtain
wives according to its rules. But learned men have declared that the
wife who is to be most highly esteemed is she who is taken captive after
battle with the royal guests who attend a swayamvara. Hear and know,
then, ye mighty rajahs, I will carry off these fair daughters of the
king of Kasi, and I challenge all who are here to overcome me or else be
overcome themselves by me in battle."

The royal guests who were there accepted the challenge,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

and Bhishma fought against them with great fury. Bows were bent and ten
thousand arrows were discharged against him, but he broke their flight
with innumerable darts from his own mighty bow. Strong and brave was he
indeed; there was none who could overcome him; he fought and conquered
all, until not a rajah was left to contend against him. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_207)

Thus did Bhishma, the terrible son of the ocean-going Ganga, take
captive after battle the three fair daughters of the King of Kasi; and
he drove away with them in his chariot towards Hastinapur. <span
id="fr_209"></span>[2](#fn_208)

When he reached the royal palace he presented the maidens unto Queen
Satyavati, who was well pleased, and at once gave many costly gifts to
Bhishma. She decided that the captives should become the wives of her
son, King Vichitra-virya.

Ere the wedding ceremony was held, the eldest maiden, whose name was
Amba, pleaded with the queen to be set free, saying:

"I have been betrothed already by my sire unto the Rajah of Sanva. Oh,
send me unto him now, for I cannot marry a second time."

Her prayer was granted, and Bhishma sent her with an escort unto the
Rajah of Sanva. Then the fair Amba related unto him how she had been
taken captive; but the rajah exclaimed, with anger: "Thou hast already
dwelt in the house of a strange man, and I cannot take thee for my
wife."

The maiden wept bitterly, and she knelt before the monarch and said: "No
man hath wronged me, O

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

mighty rajah. Bhishma hath taken a terrible vow of celibacy which he
cannot break. If thou wilt not have me for wife, I pray thee to take me
as thy concubine, so that I may dwell safely in thy palace."

But the rajah spurned the beautiful maiden, and his servants drove her
from the palace and out of the city. So was she compelled to seek refuge
in the lonely forest, and there she practised great austerities with
purpose to secure power to slay Bhishma, who had wronged her. In the end
she threw herself upon a pyre, so that she might attain her desire in
the next life. <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_209)

Her two sisters, Amvika and Amvalika, became the wives of
Vitchitra-virya, who loved them well; but his days were brief, and he
wasted away with sickness until at length he died. No children were born
to the king, and his two widows mourned for him.

The heart of Queen Satyavati was stricken with grief because that her
two sons were dead, and there was left no heir to the throne of King
Bharata.

Now it was the custom in those days that a kinsman should become the
father of children to succeed the dead king. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_210) So Queen Satyavati spake unto Bhishma,
saying: "Take thou the widows of my son and raise up sons who will be as
sons of the king."

But Bhishma said: "That I cannot do, for have I not vowed never to be
the sire of any children."

In her despair Satyavati then thought of her son Vyasa, and he
immediately appeared before her and consented to do as was her
desire. <span id="fr_212"></span>[3](#fn_211)

Now Vyasa was a mighty sage, but, by reason of his

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

austerities in his lonely jungle dwelling, he had grown gaunt and
repulsive of aspect so that women shrank from before him; fearsome was
he, indeed, to look upon.

Amvika closed her eyes with horror when she beheld the sage, and she had
a son who was born blind: he was named Dhritarashtra. Amvalika turned
pale with fear: she had a son who was named Pandu, "the pale one".

Satyavati desired that Vyasa should be the father of a son who had no
defect; but Amvika sent her handmaiden unto him, and she bore a son who
was called Vidura. As it happened, Dharma, god of justice, was put under
the spell of a Rishi at this time, to be born among men, and he chose
Vidura to be his human incarnation.

The three children were reared by Bhishma, who was regent over the
kingdom, and was yet subject to Queen Satyavati. He taught them the laws
and trained them as warriors. When the time came to select a king,
Dhritarashtra <span id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_212) was passed over
because that he was blind, and Vidura because of his humble birth, and
Pandu, "the pale one", was set upon the throne.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_188"></span>[157:1](iml14.htm#fr_189) *Pron*. bah´ra-ta or
bhah´ra-ta.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[158:1](iml14.htm#fr_190) The Indian cuckoo.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[159:1](iml14.htm#fr_191) *Pron*.
vish-wah-mit´ra.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[160:1](iml14.htm#fr_192) The Gandharva
marriage was legalized by Manu, but only for members of the Kshatriya
(kings and warriors) caste.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[161:1](iml14.htm#fr_193) A sign of martial and
royal origin.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[161:2](iml14.htm#fr_194) *Pron*.
Gaj-as-ah-va´ya.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[163:1](iml14.htm#fr_195) Queen.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[163:2](iml14.htm#fr_196) This story is the
plot of "Shakuntala", the Sanskrit drama of the poet Kalidasa, <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> who lived in the fifth century A.D. He makes
the king give the heroine a ring, which she loses while bathing. A fish
swallows the ring, and it is found by a fisherman, who delivers it to
the king. Then suddenly His Majesty remembers his bride, whom he had
forgotten and already denied. The misfortunes of the monarch and maid
resulted from the curse of the sage Durvasas. *Pron*. Sha-koon´-ta-lah.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[164:1](iml14.htm#fr_197) *Pron*. chun´dra
("ch" as in "change"). Also Soma, the moon god.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[164:2](iml14.htm#fr_198) Subsequently the name
for India as a whole.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[165:1](iml14.htm#fr_199) Art thou a demon or
nymph or fairy or dwarf or demi-god?

<span id="fn_199"></span>[166:1](iml14.htm#fr_200) His other names are
Deva-bratta and Ganga-bratta, and he was ultimately known as Bhishma.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[166:2](iml14.htm#fr_201) The Pharaoh of the
Anpu-Bata Egyptian story was similarly attracted by a perfume which
issued from a lock of hair. See *Egyptian Myth and Legend*.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[166:3](iml14.htm#fr_202) *Pron*.
sat´ya-vat-ee.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[167:1](iml14.htm#fr_203) *Pron*. vyas´a (two
syllables). The reputed author of the *Mahá-bhárata*.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[168:1](iml14.htm#fr_204) *Pron*.
chit-ran´gad-a ("ch" as in "change") *and* vi-cheet´ra-veer-ya.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[168:2](iml14.htm#fr_205) An Aryan tribe in the
north-west of India. Part of their territory was included in the Persian
empire. Keith identifies them with the Gandarians who accompanied Xerxes
in his campaign against the Greeks.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[169:1](iml14.htm#fr_206) A festival at which a
princess selected a husband from among the kings and warriors assembled
together.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[169:2](iml14.htm#fr_207) A drive of about 500
miles. Indian poets, however, have never troubled about geographical
difficulties.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[170:1](iml14.htm#fr_208) The Kasi tribe was
Aryan but was disliked by the eastern Aryans because its beliefs were
not according to the standards imposed by the Brahmans. Conflicts were
frequent.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[170:2](iml14.htm#fr_209) *Pron*.
has-teen´a-poor. Marriage by capture was called a Rákshas marriage, and
was sanctioned by Manu.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[171:1](iml14.htm#fr_210) She helps to kill
Bhishma in the great war, having changed her sex with a Yaksha.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[171:2](iml14.htm#fr_211) A similar practice is
referred to in Genesis xxxviii; it was a regular institution among the
ancient Hebrews.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[171:3](iml14.htm#fr_212) This custom is called
"niyoga", and was legalized by Manu, but only for the lower castes.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[172:1](iml14.htm#fr_213) *Pron*.
dreet´a-rash″tra, Pan´doo, *and* Ve-dur´a ("u" as "oo").

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Royal Rivals: the Pandavas and Kauravas](iml15)
