[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml21)  [Next](iml23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="ch17"></span>

### CHAPTER XVII

### Defiance of Duryodhana

The Council at Virata--Speeches of Kings and Princes--Army to be raised
for the Pandavas--Krishna's Attitude--His Army on one side and Himself
on the other--Ambassador visits Kauravas--Pandavas invited to
Hastinapur--A Deadlock--Krishna visits Hastinapur--Elders counsel
Peace--Duryodhana refuses to Yield--Plot to seize Krishna--A Revelation
of Divine Power--Krishna's Interview with Karna--Pritha informs Karna of
his Birth--Karna refuses to desert Duryodhana--His Resolution and
Promise.

ERE the wedding guests departed from Virata, after merrymaking and song
and dance, the elders and princes and chieftains assembled in the
council chamber. Drupada was there with his son, and Krishna with his
brother Balarama and Satyaki his kinsman, and all the Pandava brethren
were there also, and many others both valiant and powerful. Bright and
numerous as the stars were the gems that glittered on the robes of the
mighty warriors. For a time they spake kindly greetings one to another,
and jested and made merry. Krishna sat pondering in silence, and at
length he arose and spake, saying:

"O rajahs and princes, may your fame endure for ever! Thou knowest well
that Yudhishthira was deprived of his kingdom by the evil trickster
Shakuni. He hath endured twelve years of exile, and hath served, like
his brethren, as a humble menial for a further year in the palace of the
Rajah of Virata. After long suffering Yudhishthira desires peace; his
heart is without anger,

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

although he hath endured great shame. The heart of Duryodhana, however,
still burns with hate and jealous wrath; still, as in his youth, he
desires to work evil by deceit against the Pandava brethren. Now,
consider well, O ye monarchs, what Yudhishthira should do. Should he
call many chieftains to his aid and wage war to punish his ancient foes?
Or should he send friendly messengers to Duryodhana, asking him to
restore the kingdom which he still continues to possess?"

Balarama then spoke and said: "Ye pious rajahs! ye have heard the words
of my brother, who loveth Yudhishthira. It is true, indeed, that the
Kauravas have wronged the Pandavas. Yet I would counsel peace, so that
this matter may be arranged between kinsmen. Yudhishthira hath brought
his sufferings upon his own head. He was unwise to play with cunning
Shakuni, and also to continue playing, despite the warnings of the
elders and his friends. He hath suffered for his folly. Now let a
messenger be sent to Duryodhana, entreating him to restore the throne
unto Yudhishthira. I do not advise war. What hath been gambled away
cannot be restored in battle."

Next arose Satyaki, the kinsman of Krishna. He said: "O Balarama, thou
hast spoken like to a woman. Thou remindest me that weaklings are
sometimes born to warriors, like to barren saplings sprung from sturdy
trees. Timid words come from timid hearts. Proud monarchs heed not
counsel so weakly as thine. O Balarama! canst thou justify Duryodhana
and blame the pious-hearted and gracious Yudhishthira? If it had chanced
that Yudhishthira while playing with his brethren had been visited by
Duryodhana, who, having thrown the dice, achieved success, then the
contest would have been fair in the eyes of all men. But Duryodhana
plotted to ruin his kinsman,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

and invited him to Hastinapur to play with the evil-hearted Shakuni, who
threw loaded dice. But that is ended. Yudhishthira hath fulfilled his
obligation; his exile is past, and he is entitled to his kingdom. Why,
therefore, should he beg for that which is his own? A Kshatriya begs of
no man; what is refused him he seizeth in battle at all times. . . .
Duryodhana still clings to Yudhishthira's kingdom, despite the wise
counsel of Bhishma and Drona. Remember, O Balarama, it is not sinful to
slay one's enemies, but it is shameful to beg from them. I now declare
my advice to be that we should give the Kauravas an opportunity to
restore the throne of Yudhishthira; if they hesitate to de so, then let
the Pandavas secure justice on the battlefield."

Drupada, Rajah of Panchala, then arose and said: "Ye monarchs, I fear
that Satyaki hath spoken truly. The Kauravas are a stubborn people.
Methinks it is useless to entreat Duryodhana, whose heart is consumed
with greed. It is vain to plead with Dhritarashtra, who is but as clay
in the hands of his proud son. Bhishma and Drona have already counselled
in vain. Karna thirsts for war, and Duryodhana intrigues with him and
also with false and cunning Shakuni. Methinks it were idle to follow the
advice of Balarama. Duryodhana will never yield up what he now
possesseth, nor doth he desire peace. If we should send to him an
ambassador who will speak mild words, he will think that we are weak,
and become more boastful and arrogant than heretofore. My advice is that
we should gather together a great army without delay: the rajahs will
side with him who asketh first. Meanwhile let us offer peace and
friendship unto Duryodhana: my family priest will carry our message. If
Duryodhana is willing to give up the kingdom of

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yudhishthira,
there will be peace; if he scorns our friendship, he will find us ready
for war."

Krishna again addressed the assembly and said: "Drupada hath spoken
wisely. The Pandavas would do well to accept his counsel. If Duryodhana
will agree to restore the raj unto Yudhishthira, there will be no strife
or bloodshed. . . . You all know that the Pandavas and Kauravas are my
kinsmen; know also that they are equally dear unto me. . . . I will now
go hence. When ye send out messengers of war, let them enter my kingdom
last of all."

After Krishna had returned home, he was visited by Duryodhana and
Arjuna, for both parties desired greatly his help in the war. He spake
to the rival kinsmen and said: "Behold, I stand before you as in the
balance; I have put myself on one side, and all my army is on the other.
Choose now between you whether you desire me or my forces. I shall not
fight, but will give advice in battle."

Then Duryodhana asked for the army, but Arjuna preferred to have Krishna
alone. And Krishna promised to be Arjuna's charioteer.

Duryodhana sought to prevail upon Balarama to aid him, but Krishna's
brother said: "I have no heart for this war. I spake to Krishna in thy
favour, but he answered me not. Well, thou knowest that thou hast
wronged Yudhishthira, and that it would well become thee to act justly
in this matter. Do thy duty, and thy renown will be great."

Duryodhana departed in sullen anger from Balarama.

In time Drupada's priest appeared in the city of Hastinapur, and the
elders and princes sat with Dhritarashtra to hear his message. Said the
Brahman: "Thus speaketh the Pandavas--'Pandu and Dhritarashtra were

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

brothers: why, therefore, should Dhritarashtra's sons possess the whole
kingdom, while the sons of Pandu are denied inheritance? Duryodhana hath
ever worked evil against his kinsman. He invited them to a gambling
match to play with loaded dice, and they lost their possessions and had
to go into exile like beggars. Now they have fulfilled the conditions,
and are prepared to forget the past if their raj is restored to them. If
their rightful claim is rejected, then Arjuna will scatter the Kauravas
in battle.'"

Bhishma said: "What thou hast said is well justified, but it is wrong to
boast regarding Arjuna. It would be wise of thee not to speak of him in
such manner again."

Angrily rose Karna and said: "If the Pandavas have suffered, they are
themselves to blame. It is but fitting that they should plead for peace,
for they are without followers. If they can prove their right to
possessions, Duryodhana will yield; but he will not be forced by vain
threatenings, or because the Rajahs of Panchala and Virata support them.
O Brahman! tell thou the Pandavas that they have failed to fulfil their
obligations, for Arjuna was beheld by us before the thirteenth year of
banishment was completed. Let them return to a jungle for another term,
and then come hither and submit to Duryodhana and beg for his favours."

Said Bhishma: "Thou didst not boast in this manner, O Karna, when Arjuna
opposed thee at the Virata cattle raid. Remember that Arjuna is still
powerful. If war comes, he will trample thee in the dust."

Dhritarashtra reproved Karna for his hasty speech, and said unto
Bhishma: "He is young and unaccustomed to debate; be not angry with
him."

Then the blind old monarch sent his minister and charioteer, Sanjaya, to
the Pandavas to speak thus: "If

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

you desire to have peace, come before me and I will do justice. Except
wicked Duryodhana and hasty Karna all who are here are well disposed to
you."

When Sanjaya reached the Pandavas, he was astonished to behold that they
had assembled together a mighty army. He greeted the brethren and
delivered his message.

Said Yudhishthira: "We honour Dhritarashtra, but fear that he has
listened to the counsel of his son Duryodhana, who desires to have us in
his power. The maharajah offers us protection, but not the fulfilment of
our claims."

Krishna then spake, saying: "The Pandavas have assembled a mighty army,
and cannot reward these soldiers unless they receive their raj. It is
not yet too late to make peace. Deliver unto the Kauravas, O Sanjaya,
this message: 'If you seek peace, you will have peace; if you desire
war, then let there be war.'"

Ere Sanjaya left, Yudhishthira spoke to him and said: "Tell thou
Duryodhana that we will accept that portion of the raj which we
ourselves have conquered and settled: he can retain the rest. My desire
is for peace."

Many days went past, and the Pandavas waited in vain for an answer to
their message. Then Yudhishthira spake to Krishna, saying: "We have
offered to make peace by accepting but a portion of our kingdom, yet the
Kauravas remain silent."

Said Krishna: "I will now journey unto Hastinapur and address the
maharajah and his counsellors on thy behalf."

Yudhishthira said: "Mayst thou secure peace between kinsmen."

Then Draupadi entered and, addressing Krishna, said:

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Yudhishthira is
too generous towards the Kauravas in offering to give up part of his
kingdom unto them. He entreateth them overmuch, as well, to grant him
that which belongs not unto them. If the Kauravas wage war, my sire and
many other rajahs will assist the Pandavas. . . . Oh! can it be
forgotten how Duhsasana dragged me by the hair to the Gambling Pavilion,
and how I was put to shame before the elders and the princes?" . . .

She wept bitterly, and Krishna pitied her. "Why do you sorrow thus?" he
asked with gentle voice. "The time is drawing nigh when all the Kauravas
will be laid low, and their wives will shed tears more bitter than thine
that fall now, O fair one."

Messengers who arrived at Hastinapur announced the coming of Krishna.
Wise Vidura counselled that he should be welcomed in state, whereupon
Duryodhana proclaimed a public holiday, and all the people rejoiced, and
decorated the streets with streamers and flowers.

Vidura was well pleased, and he said to Duryodhana: "Thou hast done
well. But these preparations are in vain if thou art unwilling to do
justice unto the Pandavas."

Duryodhana was wroth, and said: "I will give naught except what they can
win in battle. If the success of the Pandavas depends upon Krishna, then
let us seize Krishna and put him in prison."

Dhritarashtra was horror-stricken, and cried out: "Thou canst not thus
treat an ambassador, and especially an ambassador like unto Krishna."

Bhishma rose up and said: "O maharajah, thy son desireth to work evil
and bring ruin and shame upon us all. Methinks disaster is not now afar
off."

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

So saying, he departed unto his own house, and Vidura did likewise.

All the Kauravas went forth to meet the royal ambassador save
Duryodhana, who scarcely looked upon Krishna when he arrived at the
palace.

Krishna went to the house of Vidura, and there he saw Pritha, who wept
and said: "How fares it with my sons, whom I have not beheld for
fourteen years? How fares it with Draupadi? In sorrow have I heard of
their sufferings in desolate places. Ah! who can understand mine own
misery, for every day is full of weariness and grief unto me?"

Said Krishna: "Be comforted, O widow of Pandu! Thy sons have many
allies, and ere long they will return in triumph to their own land."

Thereafter Krishna went to the house of Duryodhana, who sat haughtily in
the feasting chamber. At length Dhritarashtra's son spake unto his
kinsman, who ate naught. He said: "Why art thou unfriendly towards me?"

Said Krishna: "I cannot be thy friend until thou dost act justly towards
thy kinsmen, the Pandavas."

When Krishna went again to the house of Vidura, the aged counsellor said
to him: "'Twere better if thou hadst not come hither. Duryodhana will
take no man's advice. When he speaketh he doth expect all men to agree
with him."

Said Krishna: "It is my desire to prevent bloodshed. I came to
Hastinapur to save the Kauravas from destruction, and I will warn them
in the council chamber on the morrow. If they will heed me, all will be
well; if they scorn my advice, then let their blood be upon their own
heads."

When the princes and the elders sat with Dhritarashtra

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

in the council chamber, Narada and other great Rishis appeared in the
heavens and were invited to come down and share in the deliberations,
and they came down.

Krishna arose, and in a voice like thunder spake forth, saying: "I have
come hither not to seek war, but to utter words of peace and love. O
maharajah, let not your heart be stained with sin. Thy sons have wronged
their kinsmen, and a danger threatens all: it approacheth now like an
angry comet, and I can behold kinsmen slaying kinsmen, and many noble
lords laid in the dust. All of you here gathered together are already in
the clutch of death. O Dhritarashtra, man of peace, stretch forth thine
hand and avert the dread calamity which is about to fall upon thy house.
Grant unto the Pandavas their rightful claim, and thy reign will close
in glory unsurpassed and in blessed peace. . . . What if all the
Pandavas were slain in battle! Would their fall bring thee joy? Are they
not thine own brother's children? . . . But, know thou, the Pandavas are
as ready for war as they are eager for peace; and if war comes, it will
be polluted with the blood of these thy sons. O gracious maharajah, let
the last years of thy life be peaceful and pleasant, so that thou mayst
be blessed indeed."

Dhritarashtra wept and said: "Fain would I do as thou hast counselled so
wisely, O Krishna, but Duryodhana, my vicious son, will not listen to me
or obey, nor will he give heed unto his mother, nor to Vidura, nor unto
Bhishma."

Next Bhishma spoke, and he addressed Duryodhana, saying: "’Twould be
well with thee if thou wouldst follow the advice of Krishna. Thou art
evil-hearted and a wrongdoer; thou art the curse of our family; thou
takest pleasure in disobeying thy royal sire and in scorning

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

to be guided by Krishna and Vidura. Soon thy sire will be bereft of his
kingdom because of thy deeds; thy pride will bring death to thy kinsmen.
Hear and follow my advice; do not bring eternal sorrow to thine aged
parents."

Duryodhana heard these words in anger, but was silent.

Then Drona spake to him and said: "I join with Bhishma and Krishna in
making appeal unto thee. Those who advise thee to make peace are thy
friends; those who counsel war are thine enemies. Be not too certain of
victory; tempt not the hand of vengeance; leave the night-black road of
evil and seek out the road of light and welldoing, O Duryodhana."

Next Vidura rose up. He spoke with slow, gentle voice, and said: "Thou
hast heard words of wisdom, O Duryodhana. . . . I sorrow deeply in this
hour. My grief is not for thee, but for thine aged sire and thine aged
mother, who will fall into the hands of thine enemies; my grief is for
kinsmen and friends who must die in battle, and for those who will
thereafter be driven forth as beggars, friendless and without a home.
The few survivors of war will curse the day of thy birth, O Duryodhana."

Again Bhishma spoke. He praised the valour of the Pandavas, and said:
"It is not yet too late to avoid calamity. The field of battle is still
unstained by the blood of thousands; thine army hath not yet met the
arrows of death, O Duryodhana. Ere it is too late, make thy peace with
thy kinsmen, the Pandavas, so that all men may rejoice. Banish evil from
thine heart for ever; rule the whole world with the heirs of Pandu."

Dhritarashtra still wept. . . . The Rishis counselled peace like the
elders.

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

Then angry Duryodhana spoke, while his eyes burned bright and his brows
hung darkly, and said: "Krishna counsels me to be just, yet he hateth me
and loveth the Pandavas. Bishma scowls upon me, and Vidura and Drona
look coldly on; my sire weeps for my sins. Yet what have I done that ye,
O elders, should turn my sire's affection from me? If Yudhishthira loved
gambling and staked and lost his throne and freedom, am I to blame? If
he played a second time after being set at liberty, and became an exile,
why should he now call me a robber? Pallid and inconstant is the star of
the Pandavas' destiny: their friends are few, and feeble is their army.
Shall we, who fear not Indra even, he threatened and browbeaten by the
weak sons of Pandu? No warrior lives who can overcome us. A Kshatriya
fears no foeman; he may fall in battle, but he will never yield. So have
the sages spoken. . . . Hear me, my kinsmen all! My sire gifted
Indra-prastha to the Pandavas in a moment of weakness. Never, so long as
I and my brother live, will they possess it again. Never again will the
kingdom of Maharajah Dhritarashtra be severed in twain. It has been
united, and so will remain for ever. My words are firm and plain. So
tell thou the Pandavas, O Krishna, that they ask in vain for territory.
Nor town nor village will they again possess with my consent. I swear by
the gods that I will never humble myself before the Pandavas."

Said Krishna: "How canst thou speak in such a manner, O Duryodhana? How
canst thou pretend that thou didst never wrong thy kinsmen? Be mindful
of thine evil thoughts and deeds."

Duhsasana whispered to his elder brother: "I fear, if thou dost not make
peace with the Pandavas, the elders will seize thee and send thee as a
prisoner to

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yudhishthira. They
desire to make thee and me and Karna to kneel before the Pandavas."

Angry was Duryodhana, and he rose and left the council chamber.
Duhsasana and Karna and Shakuni followed him.

Krishna then turned to Dhritarashtra and said: "Thou shouldst arrest
these four rebellious princes and act freely and justly towards the
Pandavas."

The weak old maharajah was stricken with grief, and he sent Vidura for
his elder son. Then came Queen Gándhári and remonstrated with
Duryodhana; but when she had spoken he answered not, and went away
again.

Shakuni and Karna and Duhsasana waited outside for Duryodhana, and they
plotted to lay hands on Krishna so that the power of the Pandavas might
be weakened. But to Krishna came knowledge of their thoughts, and he
informed the elders who were there.

Once again the maharajah summoned Duryodhana before him, and Krishna
said: "Ah! thou of little understanding, is it thy desire to take me
captive? Know now that I am not alone here, for all the gods and holy
beings are with me."

Having spoken thus, Krishna suddenly revealed himself in divine
splendour. His body was transformed into a tongue of flame; gods and
divine beings appeared about him; fire issued from his mouth and eyes
and ears; sparks broke from his skin, which became as radiant as the
sun. . . .

All the rajahs closed their eyes; they trembled when an earthquake shook
the palace. But Duryodhana remained defiant.

Krishna, having resumed his human form, then bade farewell to the
maharajah, who lamented the doings of Duryodhana. The divine one spake
and said: "O

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dhritarashtra,
thee I forgive freely; but alas! a father is often cursed by the people
because of the wicked doings of his own son."

Ere Krishna left the city he met Karna and spake to him, saying: "Come
with me, and the Pandavas will regard thee as their elder brother, and
thou wilt become the king."

Said Karna: "Although Duryodhana is a rajah, he rules according to my
counsel. . . . I know, without doubt, that a great battle is pending
which will cover the earth with blood. Terrible are the omens. Calamity
awaits the Kauravas. . . . Yet I cannot desert those who have given me
their friendship. Besides, if I went with thee now, men would regard me
as Arjuna's inferior. Arjuna and I must meet in battle, and fate will
decide who is the greater. I know I shall fall in this war, but I must
fight for my friends. . . . O mighty one, may we meet on earth again. If
not, may we meet in heaven."

Then Krishna and Karna embraced one another, and each went his own way.

Vidura spake to Pritha, mother of the Pandavas, and said: "O mother of
living sons, my desire is ever for peace, but although I cry myself
hoarse, Duryodhana will not listen to my words. Dhritarashtra is old,
yet he doth not work for peace; he is intoxicated with pride for his
sons. When Krishna returneth to the Pandavas, war will certainly break
out; the sin of the Kauravas will cause much bloodshed. I cannot sleep,
thinking of approaching disaster."

Pritha sighed and wept. "Fie to wealth!" she said, "that it should cause
kinsmen to slaughter one another. War should be waged between foemen,
not friends. If the Pandavas do not fight, they will suffer poverty; if
they go to war and win, the destruction of kinsmen will

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

not bring triumph. My heart is full of sorrow. And alas! it is Karna who
supports Duryodhana in his folly; he hath again become powerful."

Pritha lamented the folly of her girlhood which caused Karna to be, and
she went forth to look for him. She found her son bathing in sacred
waters, and she spoke, saying: "Thou art mine own son, and thy sire is
Surya. I hid thee at birth, and Radha, who found thee, is not thy
mother. It is not seemly that thou shouldst in ignorance plot with
Duryodhana against thine own brethren. Let the Kauravas this day behold
the friendship of thee and Arjuna. If you two were side by side you
would conquer the world. My eldest son, it is meet that thou shouldst be
with thy brethren now. Be no longer known as one of lowly birth."

A voice spoke from the sun, saying: "What Pritha hath said is truth. O
tiger among men, great good will be accomplished if thou wilt obey her
command."

Karna remained steadfast, for his heart was full of honour. He said unto
Pritha, his mother: "O lady, it is now too late to command my obedience.
Why didst thou abandon me at birth? If I am a Kshatriya, I have been
deprived of my rank. No foeman could have done me a greater injury than
thou hast done. Thou hast never been a mother to me, nor do thy sons
know I am their brother. How can I now desert the Kauravas, who trust in
me in waging this war. I am their boat on which to cross a stormy sea. .
. . I will speak without deceit unto thee. For the sake of Duryodhana I
will combat against thy sons. I cannot forget his kindness; I cannot
forget mine own honour. Thy command cannot now be obeyed by me. Yet thy
solicitation to me will not be fruitless. I have power to slay
Yudhishthira, and Bhima, and Nakula, and Sahadeva,

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

but I promise they shall not fall by my hand. I will fight with Arjuna
alone. If I slay Arjuna, I will achieve great fame; if I am slain by
him, I will be covered with glory."

Said Pritha: "Thou hast pledged the lives of four of thy brethren. Be
that remembered to thee in the perils of battle. Blessed be thou, and
let health be given thee."

Karna said: "So be it," and then they parted, the mother going one way
and the son another.

After this the Pandavas and Kauravas gathered together their mighty
armies and marched to the field of battle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Battle of Eighteen Days](iml23.md)
