<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu05)  [Next](tmu07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

### MAIṬREYA-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### SĀMAVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">A King</span> named Bṛhaḍratḥa, thinking this
body to be impermanent and having acquired indifference (to objects),
retired to the forest, leaving his eldest son to rule over (his)
kingdom. With hands uplifted and eyes fixed on the sun, he performed a
severe Ṭapas (or religious austerity). At the end of a thousand days,
the Lord Śākāyanya Muni, a knower of Āṭmā, who was like fire without
smoke, and who was as a scorching fire with his Ṭejas (spiritual lustre)
approached (him) and addressed the King thus: "Rise, rise and choose a
boon." The King prostrated before him and said: "O Lord, I am not an
Āṭmaviṭ (or knower of Āṭmā). Thou art a Ṭaṭṭwavit, we hear. Please
enlighten me about Saṭṭva (the state of Saṭ or Brahman)." (To which) the
Muni replied thus: "O thou that art born of the race of Ikshwāku: To
begin with, your question is difficult (of explanation): do not question
me. Ask for any other thing you desire." Thereupon the King touched the
feet of Śākāyanya and recited the (following) verse:

"What is the use of these to me or any other? Oceans dry up. Mountains
sink down. The positions of Ḍhruva (the Polar Star) and of trees change.
Earth is drowned. The Suras (angels) run away, leaving their
(respective) places. (While such is the case), I am He in reality.
Therefore of what avail to me is the gratification of desires, since one
who clings to the gratification of desires is found to return again and
again to this Samsāra (mundane existence)? Thou art able to extricate me
(out of this Samsāra). I am drowned like a frog in a dry well. Thou art
my refuge.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

"O Lord! this body was the result of sexual intercourse. It is without
wisdom; it is hell (itself). It came out through the urinary orifice. It
is linked together by bones. It is coated over with flesh. It is bound
by skin. It is replete with fæces, urine, Vāyu (air), bile, phlegm,
marrow, fat, serum and many other impurities. O Lord! to me in such a
foul body (as this), thou art my refuge."

Thereupon Lord Śākāyanya was pleased and addressed the King thus: "O
Mahārāja, Bṛhaḍratḥa, the flag of the Ikshwāku race, thou art an
Āṭmajñānī. Thou art one that has done his duty. Thou art famous by the
name of Maruṭ." At which the King asked: "O Lord! in what way, can you
describe Āṭmā?" To which he replied thus: "Sound, touch, and others
which seem to be Arṭha (wealth) are in fact Anarṭha (evil). The Bhūṭāṭmā
(the lower Self) clinging to these, never remembers the Supreme Seat.
Through Ṭapas, Saṭṭwa (quality) is acquired; through Saṭṭwa, a (pure)
mind is acquired; and through mind, (Parama-) Āṭmā, (the higher Self) is
reached. Through attaining Āṭmā, one gets liberation. Just as fire
without fuel is absorbed into its own womb, so Chiṭṭa (thought) through
the destruction of its modifications is absorbed into its own womb
(source). To a mind that has attained quiescence and truth, and which is
not affected by sense-objects, the events that occur to it through the
bondage of Karma are merely unreal. It is Chiṭṭa alone that is Samsāra.
It should be cleansed with effort. Whatever his Chiṭṭa (thinks), of that
nature he becomes. This is an archaic mystery. With the purifying of
Chiṭṭa, one makes both good and bad Karmas to perish. One whose mind is
thus cleansed attains the indestructible Bliss (through his own Self).
Just as Chiṭṭa becomes united with an object that comes across it, so
why should not one (be released) from bondage, when one is united with
Brahman. One should meditate in the middle of the lotus of the heart,
Parameśwara (the highest Lord) who is the witness to the play of Buḍḍhi,
who is the object of supreme love, who is beyond the reach of mind and
speech, who has no beginning or end, who is Saṭ alone being of the
nature of light only, who is beyond meditation, who can

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

neither be given up nor grasped (by the mind), who is without equal or
superior, who is the permanent, who is of unshaken depth, who is without
light or darkness, who is all-pervading, changeless and vehicleless, and
who is wisdom of the nature of Moksha (salvation). I am He—that
Paramāṭmā who is the eternal, the pure, the liberated, of the nature of
wisdom, the true, the subtle, the all-pervading, the secondless, the
ocean of bliss, and one that is superior to Praṭyagāṭmā (the lower
Self). There is no doubt about it. How will calamity (or bondage)
approach me who am depending upon my own bliss in my heart, who have put
to shame the ghost of desires, who look upon this universe as (but) a
jugglery and who am not associated with anything. The ignorant with
their observance of the castes and orders of life obtain their fruits
according to their Karmas. Men who have given up all duties of castes,
etc., rest content in the bliss of their own Self. The distinctions of
caste and orders of life have divisions among them, have beginning and
end, and are very painful. Therefore having given up all identification
with sons and as well as body, one should dwell in that endless and most
supreme Bliss."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Aḍhyāya</span> II

Then Lord Maiṭreya went to Kailas and having reached it asked Him thus:
"O Lord! please initiate me into the mysteries of the highest Ṭaṭṭwa."
To which Mahāḍeva replied: "The body is said to be a temple. The Jīva in
it is Śiva alone. Having given up all the cast-off offerings of Ajñāna,
one should worship Him with So’ham (I am He). The cognition of
everything as non-different from oneself is Jñāna (wisdom). Abstracting
the mind from sensual objects is Ḍhyāna (meditation). Purifying the mind
of its impurities is Snāna (bathing). The subjugation of the Inḍriyas
(sensual organs) is Śaucha (purification). One should drink the nectar
of Brahman and beg food for maintaining the body. Having one (thought)
alone, he should live in a solitary place without a second. The wise man
should observe thus: then be obtains Absolution.

"This body is subject to birth and death. It is of the nature of the
secretion of the father and mother. It is impure,

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

being the seat of happiness and misery. (Therefore) bathing is
prescribed for touching it. It is bound by the Ḍhāṭus (skin, blood,
etc.), is liable to severe diseases, is a house of sins, is impermanent
and is of changing appearance and size. (Therefore) bathing is
prescribed for touching it. Foul matter is naturally oozing out always
from the nine holes. It (body) contains bad odour and foul excrement.
(Therefore) bathing is prescribed for touching it. It is connected (or
tainted) with the child-birth impurity of the mother and is born with
it. It is also tainted with death impurity. (Therefore) bathing is
prescribed for touching it. (The conception of) "I and mine" is the
odour arising from the besmeared dung and urine. The release from it is
spoken of as the perfect purification. The (external) purification by
means of water and earth is on account of the worldly. The destruction
of the threefold affinities (of Śāsṭras, world and body) generates the
purity for cleansing Chiṭṭa. That is called the (real) purification
which is done by means of the earth and water of Jñāna (wisdom) and
Vairāgya (indifference to objects).

"The conception of Aḍwaiṭa (non-dualism) should be taken in as the
Bhiksha (alms-food); (but) the conception of Ḍwaiṭa (dualism) should not
be taken in. To a Sannyāsī (ascetic), Bhiksha is ordained as dictated by
the Śāsṭra and the Guru. After becoming a Sannyāsī, a learned man should
himself abandon his native place and live at a distance, like a thief
released from prison. When a person gives up Ahaṅkāra (I-am-ness) the
son, wealth the brother, delusion the house, and desire the wife, there
is no doubt that he is an emancipated person. Delusion, the mother is
dead. Wisdom, the son is born. In this manner while two kinds of
pollution have occurred, how shall we (the ascetics) observe the
Sanḍhyās (conjunction periods)? The Chiṭ (consciousness) of the sun is
ever shining in the resplendent Ākāś of the heart. He neither sets nor
rises; while so, how shall we perform the Sanḍhyās? Ekānṭa (solitude) is
that state of one without second as determined by the words of a Guru.
Monasteries or forests are not solitudes. Emancipation is only for those
who do not doubt. To those who doubt, there

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

is no salvation even after many births. Therefore one should attain
faith. (Mere) abandoning of the Karmas or of the Manṭras uttered at the
initiation of a Sannyāsī (ascetic) will not constitute Sannyāsa. The
union of Jīva (-Āṭmā) (the lower Self) and Parama (-Āṭmā) (the higher
Self) at the two Sanḍhis (morning and evening) is termed Sannyāsa.
Whoever has a nausea for all Īshaṇa (desires) and the rest as for
vomited food, and is devoid of all affection for the body, is qualified
for Sannyāsa. At the moment when indifference towards all objects arises
in the mind, a learned person may take up Sannyāsa. Otherwise, he is a
fallen person. Whoever becomes a Sannyāsī on account of wealth, food,
clothes and fame, becomes fallen in both (as a Sannyāsī and as
[householder](errata.htm#4)); (then) he is not worthy of salvation.

"The thought of (contemplation upon) Ṭaṭṭwas is the transcendental one;
that of the Śāsṭras, the middling, and that of Manṭras, the lowest. The
delusion of pilgrimages is the lowest of the lowest. Like one, who,
having seen in water the reflection of fruits in the branches of trees,
tastes and enjoys them, the ignorant without self-cognition are in vain
overjoyed with (as if they reached) Brahman. That ascetic is an
emancipated person who does not abandon the internal alms-taking
(*viz*., the meditation upon the non-dual), generating Vairāgya as well
as faith the wife, and wisdom the son. Those men (termed) great through
wealth, age, and knowledge, are only servants to those that are great
through their wisdom as also to their disciples. Those whose minds are
deluded by My Māyā, however learned they may be, do not attain Me, the
all-full Āṭmā, and roam about like crows, simply for the purpose of
filling up their belly, well burnt up (by hunger, etc.). For one that
longs after salvation, the worship of images made of stone, metals, gem,
or earth, is productive of rebirth and enjoyment. Therefore the ascetic
should perform his own heart-worship alone, and relinquish external
worship in order that he may not be born again. Then like a vessel full
to its brim in an ocean, he is full within and full without. Like a
vessel void in the ether, he is void within and void without. Do not
become (or

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

differentiate between) the Āṭmā that knows or the Āṭmā that is known. Do
become of the form of that which remains, after having given up all
thoughts. Relinquishing with their Vāsanās the seer, the seen and the
visual, worship Āṭmā alone, the resplendent supreme presence. That is
the real supreme State wherein all Saṅkalpas (thoughts) are at rest,
which resembles the state of a stone, and which is neither waking nor
sleeping."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Aḍhyāya</span> III

"I am "I" (the Self). I am also another (the not-Self). I am Brahman. I
am the Source (of all things). I am also the Guru of all worlds. I am of
all the worlds. I am He. I am Myself alone. I am Siḍḍha. I am the Pure.
I am the Supreme. I am. I am always He. I am the Eternal. I am
stainless. I am Vijñāna. I am the Excellent. I am Soma. I am the All. I
am without honour or dishonour. I am without Guṇas (qualities). I am
Śiva (the auspicious). I am neither dual or non-dual. I am without the
dualities (of heat or cold, etc.) I am He. I am neither existence nor
non-existence. I am without language. I am the Shining. I am the Glory
of void and non-void. I am the good and the bad. I am Happiness. I am
without grief. I am Chaiṭanya. I am equal (in all). I am the like and
the non-like. I am the eternal, the pure, and the ever felicitous. I am
without all and without not all. I am Sāṭṭwika. I am always existing. I
am without the number one. I am without the number two. I am without the
difference of Saṭ and Asaṭ. I am without Saṅkalpa. I am without the
difference of manyness. I am the form of immeasurable Bliss. I am one
that exists not. I am the one that is not another. I am without body,
etc. I am with asylum. I am without asylum. I am without support. I am
without bondage or emancipation. I am the pure Brahman. I am He. I am
without Chiṭṭa, etc. I am the supreme and the Supreme of the supreme. I
am ever of the form of deliberation and yet am without deliberation. I
am He. I am of the nature of the Akāra and Ukāra as also of Makāra. I am
the earliest. The contemplator and contemplation I am without. I am One
that cannot be contemplated upon. I

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

am He. I have full form in all. I have the characteristics of
Sachchiḍānanḍa. I am of the form of places of pilgrimages. I am the
higher Self and Śiva. I am neither the thing defined nor non-defined. I
am the non-absorbed Essence. I am not the measurer, the measure or the
measured. I am Śiva. I am not the universe. I am the Seer of all. I am
without the eyes, etc. I am the full grown. I am the Wise. I am the
Quiescent. I am the Destroyer. I am without any sensual organs. I am the
doer of all actions. I am One that is content with all Veḍānṭas (either
books or Āṭmic Wisdom). I am the easily attainable. I have the name of
one that is pleased as well as one that is not. I am the fruits of all
silence. I am always of the form of Chinmāṭra (Absolute Consciousness).
I am always Saṭ (Be-ness) and Chiṭ (Consciousness). I am one that has
not anything in the least. I am not one that has not anything in the
least. I am without the heart-Graṇthi (knot). I am the Being in the
middle of the lotus. I am without the six changes. I am without the six
sheaths and without the six enemies. I am within the within. I am
without place and time. I am of the form of happiness having the
quarters as My garment. I am the emancipated One, without bondage. I am
without the "no". I am of the form of the part-less. I am the partless.
I have Chiṭṭa, though released from the universe. I am without the
universe. I am of the form of all light. I am the Light (Jyoṭis) in
Chinmāṭra (Absolute Consciousness). I am free from the three periods (of
time past, present, and future). I am without desires. I am without
body. I am One that has no body. I am Guṇaless. I am alone. I am without
emancipation. I am the emancipated One. I am ever without emancipation.
I am without truth or untruth. I am always One that is not different
from Saṭ (Be-ness). I have no place to travel. I have no going, etc. I
am always of the same form. I am the Quiescent. I am Purushoṭṭama (the
Lord of Souls). There is no doubt that he who has realised himself thus,
is Myself. Whoever hears (this) once becomes himself Brahman, yea, he
becomes himself Brahman. Thus is the Upanishaḍ."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Kaivalya-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu07)

</div>
