<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu15)  [Next](tmu17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### VAJRASŪCHI <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66)-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### SĀMAVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">I now</span> proceed to declare the
vajrasūchi—the weapon that is the destroyer of ignorance—which condemns
the ignorant and praises the man of divine vision.

There are four castes—the brāhmaṇa, the kshaṭriya, the vaiśya, and the
śūḍra. Even the smṛṭis declare in accordance with the words of the veḍas
that the brāhmaṇa alone is the most important of them.

Then this remains to be examined. What is meant by the brāhmaṇa? Is it a
jīva? Is it a body? Is it a class? Is it jñāna? Is it karma? Or is it a
doer of ḍharma?

To begin with: is jīva the brāhmaṇa? No. Since the jīva is the same in
the many past and future bodies (of all persons), and since the jīva is
the same in all of the many bodies obtained through the force of karma,
therefore jīva is not the brāhmaṇa.

Then is the body the brāhmaṇa? No. Since the body, as it is made up of
the five elements, is the same for all people down to chaṇdālas, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67) etc., since old age and death, ḍharma and
aḍharma are found to be common to them all, since there is no absolute
distinction that the brāhmaṇas are white-coloured, the kshaṭriyas red,
the vaiśyas yellow, and the śūḍras dark, and since in burning the corpse
of his father, etc., the stain of the murder of a brāhmaṇa, etc., will
accrue to the son, etc., therefore the body is not the brāhmaṇa.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

Then is a class the brāhmaṇa? No. Since many great Ṛshis have sprung
from other castes and orders of creation—Ṛshyaśṛṅga was born of deer;
Kauśika, of Kuśa grass; Jāmbuka of a jackal; Vālmīki of valmīka (an
ant-hill); Vyāsa of a fisherman's daughter; Gauṭama, of the posteriors
of a hare; Vasishtha of Ūrvaśi <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68); and
Agasṭya of a water-pot; thus have we heard. Of these, many Ṛshis outside
the caste even have stood first among the teachers of divine Wisdom;
therefore a class is not the brāhmaṇa.

Is jñāna the brāhmaṇa? No. Since there were many kshaṭriyas and others
well versed in the cognition of divine Truth, therefore jñāna is not the
brāhmaṇa.

Then is karma the brāhmaṇa? No. Since the prārabḍha <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69), sañchiṭa <span
id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70), and āgami <span
id="fr_71"></span>[4](#fn_71) karmas are the same for all beings, and
since all people perform their actions as impelled by karma, therefore
karma is not the brāhmaṇa.

Then is a doer of ḍharma (virtuous actions) the brāhmaṇa? No. Since
there are many kshaṭriyas, etc., who are givers of gold, therefore a
doer of virtuous actions is not the brāhmaṇa.

Who indeed then is brāhmaṇa? Whoever he may be, he who has directly
realised his Āṭmā and who is directly cognizant, like the myrobalan in
his palm, of his Āṭma that is without a second, that is devoid of class
and actions, that is free from the faults of the six stains <span
id="fr_72"></span>[5](#fn_72) and the six changes,  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[6](#fn_73) that is of the nature of truth, knowledge,
bliss, and eternity, that is without any change in itself, that is the
substratum of all the kalpas, that exists penetrating all things that
pervades everything within and without as ākāś, that is of nature of
undivided bliss, that cannot be reasoned about and that is known only by
direct cognition. He who by the reason of having obtained his wishes is
devoid of the faults of thirst after worldly objects and passions, who
is the possessor of the qualifications beginning

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

with śama <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74), who is free from emotion,
malice, thirst after worldly objects, desire, delusion, etc., whose mind
is untouched by pride, egoism, etc., who possesses all these qualities
and means—he only is the brāhmaṇa.

Such is the opinion of the veḍas, the smṛṭis, the iṭihāsa and the
purāṇas. Otherwise one cannot obtain the status of a brāhmaṇa. One
should meditate on his Āṭmā as Sachchiḍānanḍa, and the non-dual Brahman.
Yea, one should meditate on his Āṭmā as the Sachchiḍānanḍa Brahman. Such
is the Upanishaḍ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[110:1](tmu16.htm#fr_66) Lit., the
diamond-needle-Upanishaḍ.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[110:2](tmu16.htm#fr_67) The lowest class of
persons among the Hinḍūs.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[111:1](tmu16.htm#fr_68) One of the celestial
nymphs dancing in the court of Inḍra.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[111:2](tmu16.htm#fr_69) The karmic affinities
generated by us in our former lives, the fruit of which is being enjoyed
in our present life.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[111:3](tmu16.htm#fr_70) The karmic affinities
generated by us in our former lives and collected together to be enjoyed
in our future lives.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[111:4](tmu16.htm#fr_71) The affinities
generated by us in our present life to be enjoyed hereafter.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[111:5](tmu16.htm#fr_72) The six stains—hunger,
thirst, grief, confusion, old age, and death.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[111:6](tmu16.htm#fr_73) Birth, existence, etc.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[112:1](tmu16.htm#fr_74) Sama, ḍama, uparaṭi,
ṭiṭīkshā, samāḍhāna, and sraḍḍhā.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. Śārīraka-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu17)

</div>
