<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu13)  [Next](tmu15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

### ṬEJOBINḌU <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### KṚSHṆA-YAJURVEḌA

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> I

<span class="smallcaps">Param-Ḍhyāna</span> (the supreme meditation)
should be upon ṭejo binḍu, which is the Āṭmā of the universe, which is
seated in the heart, which is of the size of an atom, which pertains to
Śiva, which is quiescent and which is gross and subtle, as also above
these qualities. That alone should be the ḍhyāna of the Munis as well as
of men, which is full of pains, which is difficult to meditate on, which
is difficult to perceive, which is the emancipated one, which is
decayless and which is difficult to attain. One whose food is moderate,
whose anger has been controlled, who has given up all love for society,
who has subdued his passions, who has overcome all pairs (heat and cold
etc.), who has given up his egoism, who does not bless anyone nor take
anything from others, and also who goes where they naturally ought not
to go, and naturally would not go where they like to go—such persons
also obtain three <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55) in the face. Hamsa
is said to have three seats. Therefore know it is the greatest of
mysteries, without sleep and without support. It is very subtle, of the
form of Soma, and is the supreme seat of Vishṇu. That seat has three
faces, three guṇas and three ḍhāṭus, and is formless, motionless,
changeless, sizeless, and supportless. That seat is without upāḍhi, and
is above the reach of speech and

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

mind. It is Svabhāva (Self or nature) reachable only by bhāva (being).
The indestructible seat is associateless, without bliss, beyond mind,
difficult to perceive, emancipated and changeless. It should be
meditated upon as the liberated, the eternal, the permanent and the
indestructible. It is Brahman, is aḍhyāṭma (or the deity presiding as
Āṭmā) and is the highest seat of Vishṇu. It is inconceivable, of the
nature of Chiḍāṭmā and above the ākāś, is void and non-void, and beyond
the void, and is abiding in the heart. There is (in It) neither
meditation nor meditator, nor the meditated, nor the non-meditated. It
is not the universe. It is the highest space; it is neither supreme nor
above the supreme. It is inconceivable, unknowable, non-truth, and not
the highest. It is realised by the Munis, but the Ḍevas do not know the
supreme One. Avarice, delusion, fear, pride, passion, anger, sin, heat,
cold, hunger, thirst, thought and fancy—(all these do not exist in It).
(In It) there is no pride of (belonging to) the Brāhmaṇa caste, nor is
there the collection of the knot of salvation. (In It) there is no fear,
no happiness, no pains, neither fame nor disgrace. That which is without
these states is the supreme Brahman.

Yama, <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) (forbearance), niyama
(religious observance), tyāga (renunciation), mouna (silence) according
to time and place, āsana (posture), mūlabanḍha, seeing all bodies as
equal, the position of the eye, prāṇa-samyamana (control of breath),
praṭyāhāra (subjugation of the senses), ḍhāraṇa, āṭma-ḍhyāna and
samāḍhi—these are spoken of as the parts (of yoga) in order. That is
called yama in which one controls all his organs (of sense and actions)
through the vijñāna that all is Brahman; this should be practised often
and often. Niyama, in which there is the supreme bliss enjoyed through
the flowing (or inclination) of the mind towards things of the same
(spiritual) kind, (*viz*., Brahman) and the abandoning of things
differing from one another is practised by the sages as a rule. In tyāga
(renunciation), one abandons the manifestations (or objects) of the
universe through the cognition of Āṭmā that is Saṭ and Chiṭ. This is
practised by the great and is the giver of immediate salvation.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mouna (the
silence), in which, without reaching That, speech returns along with
mind, is fit to be attained by the Yogins and should be ever worshipped
by the ignorant (even). How is it possible to speak of "That", from
which speech returns? How should it be described as the universe as
there is no word to describe it? It is "That" which is (really) called
silence, and which is naturally understood (as such). There is silence
in children, but with words (latent); whereas the knowers of Brahman
have it (silence) but without words. That should be known as "the lonely
seat" in which there is no man in the beginning, middle, or end, and
through which all this (universe) is fully pervaded. The illusion of
Brahmā and all other beings takes place within one twinkling (of His
eye). That should be known as āsana (posture), in which one has with
ease and without fatigue (uninterrupted) meditation of Brahman; that is
described by the word kāla (time), that is endless bliss and that is
secondless. Everything else is the destroyer of happiness. That is
called siḍḍhāsana (siḍḍha-posture) in which the siḍḍhas (psychical
personages) have succeeded in realising the endless One as the support
of the universe containing all the elements, etc. That is called the
mūlabanḍha, which is the Mūla (root) of all worlds, and through which
the root Chiṭṭa is (baṇdha) bound. It should be always practised by the
Rājayogins.

One after having known the equality of the aṅgas (or parts of yoga)
point to one and the same Brahman, should be absorbed in that equal (or
uniform) Brahman; if not, there is not that equality (attained). Then
like a dry tree, there is straightness (or uniformity throughout).
Making one's vision full of spiritual wisdom, one should look upon the
world as full of Brahman. That vision is very noble. It is (generally)
aimed at the tip of the nose; but it should be directed towards that
seat (of Brahman) wherein the cessation of seer, the seen, and sight
will take place, and not towards the tip of the nose. That is called
prāṇāyāma (the control of breath), in which there is the control of the
modifications (of mind) through the cognition of Brahman in all the
states of chiṭṭa, and others. The checking of

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (the conception of
the reality of) the universe, is said to be expiration. The conception
of "I am Brahman" is inspiration. The holding on (long) to this
conception without agitation is cessation of breath. Such is the
practice of the enlightened. The ignorant close their nose. That should
be known as praṭyāhāra, through which one sees Āṭmā (even) in the
objects of sense, and pleases chiṭṭa through manas. It should be
practised often and often. Through seeing Brahman wherever the mind
goes, the ḍhāraṇa of the mind is obtained. Ḍhāraṇā is thought of highly
by the wise. By ḍhāraṇa is meant that state where one indulges in the
good thought, "I am Brahman alone," and is without any support. This
ḍhyāna is the giver of supreme bliss. Being first in a state of
changelessness, and then thoroughly forgetting (even) that state owing
to the cognition of the (true) nature of Brahman—this is called samāḍhi.
This kind of bliss should be practised (or enjoyed) by a wise person
till his cognition itself united in a moment with the state of praṭyag
(Āṭmā). Then this King of Yogins becomes a Siḍḍha, and is without any
aid (outside himself). Then he will attain a state, inexpressible and
unthinkable.

When samāḍhi is practised, the following obstacles arise with great
force—absence of right inquiry, laziness, inclination to enjoyment,
absorption (in material object), ṭamas, distraction, impatience, sweat,
and absent-mindedness. All these obstacles should be overcome by
inquirers into Brahman. Through bhāvavṛṭṭis (worldly thoughts), one gets
into them. Through śūnya-vṛṭṭis (void or empty thoughts), one gets into
them. But through the vṛṭṭis of Brahman, one gets fullness. Therefore
one should develop fullness through this means (of Brahman). He who
abandons this vṛṭṭi of Brahman, which is very purifying and supreme—that
man lives in vain like a beast. But he who understands this vṛṭṭi (of
Brahman), and having understood it makes advances in it, becomes a good
and blessed person, deserving to be worshipped by the three worlds.
Those who are greatly developed through the ripening (of their past
karmas) attain the state of Brahman; others are simply reciters of
words.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Those who are
clever in arguments about Brahman, but are without the action pertaining
to Brahman, and who are greatly attached to the world—those certainly
are born again and again (in this world) through their ajñāna; (the
former) never remain, even for half a moment—without the vṛṭṭi of
Brahman, like Brahma and others, Sanaka, <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) etc., Śuka and others. When a cause is
subject to changes, it (as an effect) must also have its cause. When the
cause ceases to exist in truth, the effect perishes through right
discrimination. Then that substance (or principle) which is beyond the
scope of words, remains pure. After that, vṛṭṭi jñāna arises in their
purified mind; through meditation with transcendental energy, there
arises a firm certitude. After reducing the visible into the invisible
state, one should see everything as Brahman. The wise should ever stay
in bliss with their understanding full of the essence of Chiṭ. Thus ends
the first chapter of Ṭejobinḍu.

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> II

Then the Kumāra <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58) asked Śiva: "Please
explain to me the nature of Chinmāṭra, that is the partless non-dual
essence." The great Śiva replied: "The partless non-dual essence is the
visible. It is the world, it is the existence, it is the Self, it is
manṭra, it is action, it is spiritual wisdom, it is water. It is the
earth, it is ākāś, it is the books, it is the three Veḍas, it is the
Brahman, it is the religious vow, it is Jīva, it is Aja (the unborn), it
is Brahma, it is Vishṇu, it is Ruḍra; it is I, it is Āṭma, it is the
Guru. It is the aim, it is sacrifice, it is the body, it is manas, it is
chiṭṭa, it is happiness, it is viḍyā; it is the undifferentiated, it is
the eternal, it is the supreme, it is everything. O six-faced one,
different from It there is nothing. None, none but It; It is I. It is
gross, it is subtle, it is knowable, it is thou; it is the mysterious;
it is the knower; it is existence, it is mother, it is father, it is
brother, it is husband, it is Sūṭra (Āṭmā), it is Virāt.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is the body, it
is the head, it is the internal, it is the external, it is full, it is
nectar, it is goṭra (clan), it is gṛha (the house), it is the
preservable, it is the moon, it is the stars, it is the sun, it is the
holy seat. It is forgiveness, it is patience, it is the guṇas, it is the
witness. It is a friend, it is a relative, it is an ally, it is the
king, town, kingdom and subjects. It is Om, japa, meditation, the seat,
the one worthy to be taken (in), the heart, the Jyoṭis, Swarga (heaven)
and Self."

"All the partless and non-dual essence should be regarded as Chinmāṭra.
Chinmāṭra alone is the Absolute Consciousness; and this partless
non-dual essence alone is the (real) essence. All having consciousness
alone except those having changes, are Chinmāṭra. All this is Chinmāṭra.
He is Chinmaya; the state of Āṭmā is known as Chinmāṭra and the partless
non-dual essence. The whole world is Chinmāṭra. Your state and my state
are Chinmāṭra. Ākāś, earth, water, vāyu, agni, Brahmā, Vishṇu, Śiva and
all else that exist or do not, are Chinmāṭra. That which is the partless
non-dual essence is Chinmāṭra. All the past, present, and future are
Chinmāṭra. Substance and time are Chinmāṭra. Knowledge and the knowable
are Chinmāṭra. The knower is Chinmāṭra. Everything is Chinmāṭra. Every
speech is Chinmāṭra. Whatever else is Chinmāṭra. Asaṭ and Saṭ are
Chinmāṭra. The beginning and end are Chinmāṭra; that which is in the
beginning and end is Chinmāṭra ever. The Guru and the disciple are
Chinmāṭra. If the seer and the seen are Chinmāṭra, then they are always
Chinmaya. All things wondrous are Chinmāṭra. The (gross) body is
Chinmāṭra, as also the subtle and causal bodies. There is nothing beyond
Chinmāṭra. I and thou are Chinmāṭra. Form and non-form are Chinmāṭra.
Virtue and vice are Chinmāṭra. The body is a symbol of Chinmāṭra.
Saṅkalpa, knowing, manṭra, and others, the gods invoked in manṭras, the
gods presiding over the eight quarters, the phenomenal and the supreme
Brahman are nothing but Chinmāṭra. There is nothing without Chinmāṭra.
Māyā is nothing without Chinmāṭra. Pūjā (worship) is nothing without
Chinmāṭra. Meditation, truth, sheaths and others, the (eight) valus,
silence, non-silence, and indifference to objects

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —are nothing
without Chinmāṭra. Everything is from Chinmāṭra. Whatever is seen and
however seen—it is Chinmāṭra so far. Whatever exists and however
distant, is Chinmāṭra. Whatever elements exist, whatever is perceived,
and whatever is veḍānṭa—all these are Chinmāṭra. Without Chinmāṭra,
there is no motion, no Moksha and no goal aimed at. Everything is
Chinmāṭra. Brahman that is the partless non-dual essence is known to be
nothing but Chinmāṭra. Thou, O Lord, art the partless non-dual essence
(stated) in the books, in me, in Thee, and in the ruler. He who thus
perceives 'I' as of one homogeneity (pervading everywhere) will at once
be emancipated through this spiritual wisdom. He is his own Guru with
this profound spiritual wisdom. Thus ends the second chapter of
Ṭejobinḍu."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> III

The Kumāra addressed his father (again): "Please explain to me the
realisation of Āṭma." To which the great Śiva said: "I am of the nature
of the Parabrahman. I am the supreme bliss. I am solely of the nature of
divine wisdom. I am the sole supreme, the sole quiescence, the sole
Chinmaya, the sole unconditioned, the sole permanent and the sole
Saṭṭva. I am the 'I' that has given up 'I'. I am one that is without
anything. I am full of Chiḍākāś. I am the sole fourth one. I am the sole
one above the fourth (state of ṭurya). I am of the nature of (pure)
consciousness. I am ever of the nature of the bliss-consciousness. I am
of the nature of the non-dual. I am ever of a pure nature, solely of the
nature of divine wisdom, of the nature of happiness, without fancies,
desires or diseases, of the nature of bliss, without changes or
differentiations, and of the nature of the eternal one essence and
Chinmāṭra. My real nature is indescribable, of endless bliss, the bliss
above Saṭ and Chiṭ and the interior of the interior. I am beyond reach
of manas and speech. I am of the nature of Āṭmic bliss, true bliss and
one who plays with (my) Āṭmā. I am Āṭmā and Saḍāśiva. My nature is Āṭmic
spiritual effulgence. I am the essence of the jyoṭis of Āṭmā. I am
without beginning, middle, or end. I am like the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

sky. I am solely Saṭ, Ānanḍa, and Chiṭ which is unconditioned and pure.
I am the Sachchiḍānanḍa that is eternal, enlightened and pure. I am ever
of the nature of the eternal Śesha (serpent-time). I am ever beyond all.
My nature is beyond form. My form is supreme ākāś. My nature is of the
bliss of earth. I am ever without speech. My nature is the all-seat
(foundation of all). I am ever replete with consciousness, without the
attachment of body, without thought, without the modifications of
chiṭṭa, the sole essence of Chiḍāṭma, beyond the visibility of all and
of the form of vision. My nature is ever full. I am ever fully
contented, the all, and Brahman, and the very consciousness; I am 'I'.
My nature is of the earth. I am the great Āṭmā and the supreme of the
supreme; I appear sometimes as different from myself; sometimes as
possessing a body, sometimes as a pupil and sometimes as the basis of
the worlds. I am beyond the three periods of time, am worshipped by the
Veḍas, am determined by the sciences and am fixed in the chiṭṭa. There
is nothing left out by me, neither the earth nor any other objects here.
Know that there is nothing which is out of myself. I am Brahma, a
Siḍḍha, the eternally pure, non-dual one, Brahman, without old age or
death. I shine by myself; I am my own Āṭmā, my own goal, enjoy myself,
play in myself, have my own spiritual effulgence, am my own greatness,
and am used to play in my own Āṭmā, look on my own Āṭmā and am in myself
happily seated. I have my own Āṭmā as the residue, stay in my own
consciousness, and play happily in the kingdom of my own Āṭmā. Sitting
on the real throne of my own Āṭmā, I think of nothing else but my own
Āṭma. I am Chiḍrūpa alone, Brahman alone, Sachchiḍānanḍa, the
second-less, the one replete with bliss and the sole Brahman and ever
without anything, have the bliss of my own Āṭmā, the unconditioned
bliss, and am always Āṭma-Ākāś. I alone am in the heart like Chiḍāḍiṭya
(the consciousness-sun). I am content in my own Āṭmā, have no form, or
no decay, am without the number one, have the nature of an unconditionod
and emancipated one, and I am subtler than ākāś; I am without the
existence of beginning or end, of the nature of the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

all-illuminating, the bliss greater than the great, of the sole nature
of Saṭ, of the nature of pure Moksha, of the nature of truth and bliss,
full of spiritual wisdom and bliss, of the nature of wisdom alone, and
of the nature of Sachchiḍānanḍa. All this is Brahman alone. There is
none other than Brahman and that is 'I'.

"I am Brahman that is Saṭ, and bliss, and the ancient. The word 'thou'
and the word 'that' are not different from me. I am of the nature of
consciousness. I am alone the great Śiva. I am beyond the nature of
existence. I am of the nature of happiness. As there is nothing that can
witness me, I am without the state of witness. Being purely of the
nature of Brahman, I am the eternal Āṭmā. I alone am the Āḍiśesha (the
primeval Śesha). <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) I alone am the
Śesha. I am without name and form, of the nature of bliss, of the nature
of being unperceivable by the senses, and of the nature of all beings; I
have neither bondage nor salvation. I am of the form of eternal bliss. I
am the primeval consciousness alone, the partless and non-dual essence,
beyond reach of speech and mind, of the nature of bliss everywhere, of
the nature of fullness everywhere, of the nature of earthly bliss, of
the nature of contentment everywhere, the supreme nectary essence, and
the one and secondless Saṭ, (*viz*.,) Brahman. There is no doubt of it.
I am of the nature of all-void. I am the one that is given out by the
Veḍas. I am of the nature of the emancipated and emancipation, of
Nirvāṇic bliss, of truth and wisdom, of Saṭ alone and bliss, of the one
beyond the fourth, of one without fancy, and ever of the nature of Aja
(the unborn). I am without passion or faults. I am the pure, the
enlightened, the eternal, the all-pervading and of the nature of the
significance of Om, of the spotless, and of Chiṭ. I am neither existing
nor non-existing. I am not of the nature of anything. I am of the nature
of the actionless. I am without parts. I have no semblance, no manas, no
sense, no buḍḍhi, no change, none of the three bodies, neither the
waking, dreaming, or dreamless sleeping states. I am neither of the
nature of the three pains nor of the three desires. I have neither

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> śravaṇa nor manana
in Chiḍāṭma in order to attain salvation. There is nothing like me or
unlike me. There is nothing within me. I have none of the three bodies.

"The nature of manas is unreal, the nature of buḍḍhi is unreal, the
nature of aham (the 'I') is unreal; but I am the unconditioned, the
permanent and the unborn. The three bodies are unreal, the three periods
of time are unreal, the three guṇas are unreal, but I am of the nature
of the Real and the pure. That which is heard is unreal, all the Veḍas
are unreal, the Śāsṭras are unreal, but I am. the Real and of the nature
of Chiṭ. The Mūrṭis (Brahma, Vishṇu, and Ruḍra having limitation) are
unreal, all the creation is unreal, all the ṭaṭṭvas are unreal, but know
that I am the great Saḍāśiva. The master and the disciple are unreal,
the manṭra of the Guru is unreal, that which is seen is unreal, but know
me to be the Real. Whatever is thought of is unreal, whatever is lawful
is unreal, whatever is beneficial is unreal, but know me to be the Real.
Know the Purusha (ego) to be unreal, know the enjoyments to be unreal,
know things seen and heard are unreal as also the one woven warp-wise
and woof-wise, *viz*., this universe; cause and non-cause are unreal,
things lost or obtained are unreal. Pains and happiness are unreal, all
and non-all are unreal, gain and loss are unreal, victory and defeat are
unreal. All the sound, all the touch, all the forms, all the taste, all
the smell, and all ajñāna are unreal. Everything is always unreal—the
mundane existence is unreal—all the guṇas are unreal. I am of the nature
of Saṭ.

"One should cognize his own Āṭmā alone. One should always practise the
manṭra of his Āṭmā. The manṭra (Ahambrahmāsmi) 'I am Brahman' removes
all the sins of sight, destroys all other manṭras, destroys all the sins
of body and birth, the noose of Yama, the pains of duality, the thought
of difference, the pains of thought, the disease of buḍḍhi, the bondage
of chiṭṭa, all diseases, all griefs and passions instantaneously, the
power of anger, the modifications of chiṭṭa, saṅkalpa, crores of sins,
all actions and the ajñāna of Āṭmā. The manṭra 'I am Brahman' gives
indescribable bliss, gives the state of ajada (the non-inertness or the
undecaying) and

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

kills the demon of non-Āṭmā. The thunderbolt 'I am Brahman' clears all
the hill of not-Āṭmā. The wheel 'I am Brahman' destroys the asuras of
not-Āṭmā. The manṭra 'I am Brahman' will relieve all (persons). The
manṭra 'I am Brahman' gives spiritual wisdom and bliss. There are seven
crores of great manṭras and there are vraṭas (vows) of (or yielding)
hundred crores of births. Having given up all other manṭras, one should
ever practise this manṭra. He obtains at once salvation, and there is
not even a particle of doubt about it. Thus ends the third chapter of
the Ṭejobinḍu-Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> IV

The Kumāra asked the great Lord: "Please explain to me the nature of
Jīvanmukṭi (embodied salvation) and viḍehamu.kti (disembodied
salvation)." To which the great Śiva replied: "I am Chiḍāṭmā. I am
Para-Āṭmā. I am the Nirguṇa, greater than the great. One who will simply
stay in Āṭmā is called a Jivanmukṭa. He who realises: 'I am beyond the
three bodies, I am the pure consciousness and I am Brahman,' is said to
be a Jivanmukṭa. He is said to be a Jivanmukṭa, who realises: 'I am of
the nature of the blissful and of the supreme bliss, and I have neither
body nor any other thing except the certitude "I am Brahman" only'. He
is said to be a Jivanmukṭa who has not at all got the 'I' in myself, but
who stays in Chinmāṭra (absolute consciousness) alone, whose interior is
consciousness alone, who is only of the nature of Chinmāṭra, whose Āṭma
is of the nature of the all-full, who has Āṭmā left over in all, who is
devoted to bliss, who is undifferentiated, who is all-full of the nature
of consciousness, whose Āṭmā is of the nature of pure consciousness, who
has given up all affinities (for objects), who has unconditioned bliss,
whose Āṭmā is tranquil, who has got no other thought (than Itself), and
who is devoid of the thought of the existence of anything. He is said to
be a Jivanmukṭa who realises: I have no chiṭṭa, no buḍḍhi, no ahaṅkāra,
no sense, no body at any time, no prāṇas, no Māyā, no passion and no
anger, I am the great, I have nothing of these objects or

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

of the world, and I have no sin, no characteristics, no eye, no manas,
no ear, no nose, no tongue, no hand, no waking, no dreaming, or causal
state in the least or the fourth state.' He is said to be a Jivanmukṭa,
who realises: 'All this is not mine, I have no time, no space, no
object, no thought, no snāna (bathing), no sanḍhyās (junction-period
ceremonies), no deity, no place, no sacred places, no worship, no
spiritual wisdom, no seat, no relative, no birth, no speech, no wealth,
no virtue, no vice, no duty, no auspiciousness, no Jīva, not even the
three worlds; no salvation, no duality, no Veḍas, no mandatory rules, no
proximity, no distance, no knowledge, no secrecy, no Guru, no disciple,
no diminution, no excess, no Brahma, no Vishṇu, no Ruḍra, no moon, no
earth, no water, no vāyu, no ākāś, no agni, no clan, no lakshya (object
aimed at), no mundane existence, no meditator, no object of meditation,
no manas, no cold, no heat, no thirst, no hunger, no friend, no foe, no
illusion, no victory, no past, present, or future, no quarters, nothing
to be said or heard in the least, nothing to be gone (or attained) to,
nothing to be contemplated, enjoyed or remembered, no enjoyment, no
desire, no yoga, no absorption, no garrulity, no quietude, no bondage,
no love, no joy, no instant joy, no hugeness, no smallness, neither
length nor shortness, neither increase nor decrease, neither aḍhyāropa
(illusory attribution) nor apavāḍa (withdrawal of that conception) no
oneness, no manyness, no blindness, no dullness, no skill, no flesh, no
blood, no lymph, no skin, no marrow, no bone, no skin, none of the seven
ḍhāṭus, no whiteness, no redness, no blueness, no heat, no gain, neither
importance nor non-importance, no delusion, no perseverance, no mystery,
no race, nothing to be abandoned or received, nothing to be laughed at,
no policy, no religious vow, no fault, no bewailments, no happiness,
neither knower nor knowledge nor the knowable, no Self, nothing
belonging to you or to me, neither you nor I, and neither old age nor
youth nor manhood; but I am certainly Brahman. "I am certainly Brahman.
I am Chiṭ, I am Chiṭ "' He is said to be a Jivanmukṭa who cognizes: I am
Brahman alone, I am Chiṭ alone, I am the supreme.' No doubt need be
entertained about this; 'I am Hamsa itself, I remain of my own will, I
can see

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

myself through myself, I reign happy in the kingdom of Āṭmā and enjoy in
myself the bliss of my own Āṭmā.' He is a Jivanmukṭa who is himself, the
foremost and the one undaunted person who is himself the lord and rests
in his own Self.

"He is a Viḍehamukṭa who has become Brahman, whose Āṭma has attained
quiescence, who is of the nature of Brāhmic bliss, who is happy, who is
of a pure nature, and who is a great mouni (observer of silence). He is
a Viḍehamukṭa who remains in Chinmāṭra alone without (even) thinking
thus: 'I am all Āṭmā, the Āṭmā that is equal (or the same) in all, the
pure, without one, the non-dual, the all, the self only, the birth-less
and the deathless—I am myself the undecaying Āṭmā that is the object
aimed at, the sporting, the silent, the blissful, the beloved and the
bondless salvation—I am Brahman alone—I am Chiṭ alone.' He is a
Viḍehamukṭa who having abandoned the thought: 'I alone am the Brahman'
is filled with bliss. He is a Viḍehamukṭa who having given up the
certainty of the existence or non-existence of all objects is pure
Chiḍānanḍa (the consciousness-bliss), who having abandoned (the
thought): 'I am Brahman' (or) 'I am not Brahman' does not mingle his
Āṭmā with anything, anywhere or at any time, who is ever silent with the
silence of Saṭya, who does nothing, who has gone beyond guṇas, whose
Āṭmā has become the All, the great, and the purifier of the elements,
who does not cognize the change of time, matter, place, himself or other
differences, who does not see (the difference of) 'I,' 'thou,' 'this' or
'that,' who being of the nature of time is yet without it, whose Āṭmā is
void, subtle and universal, but yet without (them), whose Āṭmā is divine
and yet without Ḍevas, whose Āṭma is measurable and yet without measure,
whose Āṭmā is without inertness and within every one, whose Jima is
devoid of any saṅkalpa, who thinks always: 'I am Chinmāṭra, I am simply
Paramāṭman, I am only of the nature of spiritual wisdom, I am only of
the nature of Saṭ, I am afraid of nothing in this world,' and who is
without the conception of Ḍevas, Veḍas and sciences, 'All this is
consciousness, etc.,' and regards all as void. He is a Viḍehamukṭa who
has realised himself to be Chaiṭanya alone, who is remaining at ease in
the pleasure-garden

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

of his own Āṭmā, whose Āṭmā is of an illimitable nature, who is without
the conception of the small and the great, and who is the fourth of the
fourth state and the supreme bliss. He is a Viḍehamukṭa whose Āṭmā is
nameless and formless, who is the great spiritual wisdom of the nature
of bliss, and of the nature of the state beyond ṭurya, who is neither
auspicious nor inauspicious, who has yoga as his Āṭmā, whose Āṭmā is
associated with yoga, who is free from bondage or freedom, without guṇa
or non-guṇa, without space, time, etc., without the witnessable and the
witness, without the small or the great, and without the cognition of
the universe or even the cognition of the nature of Brahman, but who
finds his spiritual effulgence in his own nature, who finds bliss in
himself, whose bliss is beyond the scope of words and mind, and whose
thought is beyond the beyond. He is said to be a Viḍehamukṭa who has
gone beyond (or mastered quite) the modifications of chiṭṭa, who
illumines such modifications, and whose Āṭmā is without any
modifications at all. In that case, he is neither embodied nor
disembodied. If such a thought is entertained (even), for a moment, then
he is surrounded (in thought) by all. He is a Viḍehamukṭa whose external
Āṭmā invisible to others is the supreme bliss aiming at the highest
veḍānṭa, who drinks of the juice of the nectar of Brahman, who has the
nectar of Brahman as medicine, who is devoted to the juice of the nectar
of Brahman, who is immersed in that juice, who has the beneficent
worship of the Brāhmic bliss, who is not satiated with the juice of the
nectar of Brahman, who realises Brāhmic bliss, who cognizes the Śiva
bliss in Brāhmic bliss, who has the effulgence of the essence of Brāhmic
bliss, who has become one with it, who lives in the household of Brāhmic
bliss, has mounted the car of Brāhmic bliss, who has an imponderable
Chiṭ being one with it, who is supporting (all), being full of it, who
associates with me having it, who stays in Āṭmā having that bliss and
who thinks: 'All this is of the nature of Āṭmā, there is nothing else
beside Āṭmā, all is Āṭmā, I am Āṭma, the great Āṭmā, the supreme Āṭmā,
and Āṭmā of the form of bliss.' He who thinks: 'My nature is full, I am
the great Āṭmā, I am the all-contented and the permanent Āṭmā. I am

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

the Āṭmā pervading the heart of all, which is not stained by anything,
but which has no Āṭmā; I am the Āṭmā whose nature is changeless, I am
the quiescent Āṭmā; and I am the many Āṭmā.' He who does not think this
is Jīvāṭmā and that is Paramāṭmā, whose Āṭmā is of the nature of the
emancipated and the non-emancipated, but without emancipation or
bondage, whose Āṭmā is of the nature of the dual and the non-dual one,
but without duality and non-duality; whose Āṭmā is of the nature of the
All and the non-All, but without them; whose Āṭmā is of the nature of
the happiness arising from objects obtained and enjoyed, but without it;
and who is devoid of any saṅkalpa—such a man is a Viḍehamukṭa. He whose
Āṭmā is partless, stainless, enlightened, Purusha, without bliss, etc.,
of the nature of nectar, of the nature of the three periods of time, but
without them; whose Āṭmā is entire and non-measurable, being subject to
proof though without proof; whose Āṭmā is the eternal and the witness,
but without eternality and witness; whose Āṭmā is of the nature of the
secondless, who is the self-shining one without a second, whose Āṭmā
cannot be measured by viḍyā and aviḍyā but without them; whose Āṭmā is
without conditionedness or unconditionedness, who is without this or the
higher worlds, whose Āṭmā is without the six things beginning with śama,
who is without the qualifications of the aspirant after salvation, whose
Āṭmā, is without gross, subtle, causal, and the fourth bodies, and
without the anna, prāṇa, manas, and vijñāna sheaths; whose Āṭmā is of
the nature of ānanḍa (bliss) sheath, but without five sheaths; whose
Āṭmā is of the nature of nirvikalpa, is devoid of saṅkalpa, without the
characteristics of the visible or the audible, and of the nature of
void, owing to unceasing samāḍhi, who is without beginning, middle, or
end; whose Āṭmā is devoid of the word Prajñāna, who is without the idea
'I am Brahman,' whose Āṭmā is devoid (of the thought) of 'thou art', who
is without the thought 'this is Āṭmā', whose Āṭmā is devoid of that
which is described by Om, who is above the reach of any speech or the
three states, and is the indestructible and the Chiḍāṭmā, whose Āṭmā is
not the one which can be known by Āṭmā and whose Āṭma has neither

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

light nor darkness. Such a personage is a Viḍehamukṭa. Look only upon
Āṭmā; know It as your own. Enjoy your Āṭmā yourself, and stay in peace.
O six-faced one, be content in your own Āṭma, be wandering in your own
Āṭmā, and be enjoying your own Āṭmā. Then you will attain Viḍehamukṭi."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> V

The Sage named Niḍāgha addressed the venerable Ṛbhu: "O Lord please
explain to me the discrimination of Āṭmā from non-Āṭmā." The Sage
replied thus:

"The furthest limit of all vāk (speech) is Brahman; the furthest limit
to all thoughts is the Guru. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) That
which is of the nature of all causes and effects but yet without them,
that which is without saṅkalpa, of the nature of all bliss and the
auspicious, that which is the great one of the nature of bliss, that
which illuminates all luminaries and that which is full of the bliss of
nāḍa (spiritual sound), without any enjoyment and contemplation and
beyond nāḍas and kalās (parts)—that is Āṭmā, that is the 'I', the
indestructible. Being devoid of all the difference of Āṭmā and non-Āṭmā,
of heterogeneity and homogeneity, and of quiescence and
non-quiescence—that is the one Jyoṭis at the end of nāḍa. Being remote
from the conception of Mahā-vakyārṭha (*i.e.*, the meaning of
Maha-vākyas) as well of 'I am Brahman,' being devoid of or without the
conception of the word and the meaning, and being devoid of the
conception of the destructible and indestructible—that is the one Jyoṭis
at the end of nāḍa. Being without the conception 'I am the partless
non-dual essence' or 'I am the blissful,' and being of the nature of the
one beyond all—that is one Jyoṭis at the end of nāḍa. He who is devoid
of the significance of Āṭmā (*viz*. motion) and devoid of
Sachchiḍānanḍa—he is alone Āṭmā, the eternal. He who is undefinable and
unreachable by the words of the Veḍas, who has neither externals nor
internals, and whose symbol is either the universe or Brahman—he is
undoubtedly Āṭmā. He who has no body, nor

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

is a Jīva made up of the elements and their compounds, who has neither
form nor name, neither the enjoyable nor the enjoyer, neither Saṭ nor
asaṭ, neither preservation nor regeneration, neither guṇa nor
non-guṇa—that is undoubtedly my Āṭmā. He who has neither the described
nor description, neither śravaṇa nor manana, neither Guru nor disciple,
neither the world of the Ḍevas nor the Ḍevas nor Asuras, neither duty
nor non-duty, neither the immaculate nor non-immaculate, neither time
nor non-time, neither certainty nor doubt, neither manṭra nor
non-manṭra, neither science nor non-science, neither the seer nor the
sight which is subtle, nor the nectar of time—that is Āṭmā. Rest assured
that not-Āṭmā is a misnomer. There is no manas as not-Āṭmā. There is no
world as not-Āṭma. Owing to the absence of all saṅkalpas and to the
giving up of all actions, Brahman alone remains, and there is no
not-Āṭmā. Being devoid of the three bodies, the three periods of time,
the three guṇas of Jīva, the three pains and the three worlds, and
following the saying 'All is Brahman,' know that there is nothing to be
known through the absence of chiṭṭa; there is no old age through the
absence of body; no motion through the absence of legs; no action
through the absence of hands; no death through the absence of creatures;
no happiness through the absence of buḍḍhi; no virtue, no purity, no
fear, no repetition of manṭras, no Guru nor disciple. There is no second
in the absence of one. Where there is not the second, there is not the
first. Where there is truth alone, there is no non-truth possible; where
there is non-truth alone, there is no truth possible. If you regard a
thing auspicious as inauspicious, then auspiciousness is desired (as
separate) from inauspiciousness. If you regard fear as non-fear, then
fear will arise out of non-fear. If bondage should become emancipation,
then in the absence of bondage will be no emancipation. If birth should
imply death, then in the absence of birth, there is no death. If 'thou'
should imply 'I,' then in the absence of 'thou' there is no 'I'. If
'this' should be 'that,' 'this' does not exist in the absence of 'that'.
If being should imply non-being, then non-being will imply being. If an
effect implies a cause, then in the absence

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

of effect, there is no cause. If duality implies non-duality, then in
the absence of duality, there is no non-duality. If there should be the
seen, then there is the eye (or sight); in the absence of the seen,
there is no eye. In the absence of the interior, there is no exterior.
If there should be fullness, then non-fullness is possible. Therefore
(all) this exists nowhere. Neither you nor I, nor this nor these exist.
There exists no (object of) comparison in the true one. There is no
simile in the unborn. There is (in it) no mind to think. I am the
supreme Brahman. This world is Brahman only. Thou and I are Brahman
only. I am Chinmāṭra simply, and there is no not-Āṭmā. Rest assured of
it. This universe is not (really at all). This universe is not (really)
at all. It was nowhere produced and stays nowhere. Some say that chiṭṭa
is the universe. Not at all. It exists not. Neither the universe nor
chiṭṭa nor ahaṅkāra nor Jīva exists (really). Neither the creation of
Māyā nor Māyā itself exists (really). Fear does not (really) exist.
Actor, action, hearing, thinking, the two samāḍhis, the measurer, the
measure, ajñāna and aviveka—none of these exists (truly) anywhere.
Therefore the four moving <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61)
considerations and the three kinds of relationship exist not. There is
no Gaṅgā, no Gaya, no Seṭu (bridge), no elements or anything else, no
earth, water, fire, vāyu, and ākas anywhere, no Ḍevas, no guardians of
the four quarters, no Veḍas, no Guru, no distance, no proximity, no
time, no middle, no non-duality, no truth, no untruth, no bondage, no
emancipation, no Saṭ, no asaṭ, no happiness, etc., no class, no motion,
no caste, and no worldly business. All is Brahman only and nothing
else—all is Brahman only and nothing else. There exists then nothing (or
statement) as that 'consciousness alone is'; there is (then) no saying
such as 'Chiṭ is I'. The statement 'I am Brahman' does not exist (then);
nor does exist (then) the statement: 'I am the eternally pure'. Whatever
is uttered by the mouth, whatever is thought by manas, whatever is
determined by buḍḍhi, whatever is cognized by chiṭṭa—all these do not
exist. There is no Yogin or

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

yoga then. All are and are not. Neither day nor night, neither bathing
nor contemplating, neither delusion nor non-delusion—all these do not
exist then. Know that is no not-Āṭmā.

The Veḍas, Sciences, Purāṇas, effect and cause, Īśvara and the world and
the elements and mankind—all these are unreal. There is no doubt of it.
Bondage, salvation, happiness, relatives, meditation, chiṭṭa, the Ḍevas,
the demons, the secondary and the primary, the high and the low—all
these are unreal. There is no doubt of it. Whatever is uttered by the
mouth, whatever is willed by saṅkalpa, whatever is thought by manas—all
these are unreal. Whatever is determined by the buḍḍhi, whatever is
cognized by chiṭṭa, whatever is discussed by the religious books,
whatever is seen by the eye and heard by the ears, and whatever exists
as Saṭ, as also the ear, the eye, and the limbs—all these are unreal.
Whatever is described as such and such, whatever is thought as
so-and-so, all the existing thoughts such as 'thou art I', 'that is
this,' and 'He is I,' and whatever happens in moksha, as also all
saṅkalpas, delusion, illusory attribution, mysteries and all the
diversities of enjoyment and sin—all these do not exist. So is also
not-Āṭmā. Mine and thine, my and thy, for me and for thee, by me and by
thee—all these are unreal. (The statement) that Vishṇu is the preserver,
Brahmā is the creator, Ruḍra is the destroyer—know that these
undoubtedly are false. Bathing, utterings of manṭras, japas (religious
austerities) homa (sacrifice), study of the Veḍas, worship of the Ḍevas,
manṭra, ṭanṭra, association with the good, the unfolding of the faults
of guṇas, the working of the internal organ, the result of aviḍyā, and
the many crores of mundane eggs—all these are unreal. Whatever is spoken
of as true according to the verdict of all teachers, whatever is seen in
this world and whatever exists—all these are unreal. Whatever is uttered
by words, whatever is ascertained, spoken, enjoyed, given or done by
anyone, whatever action is done, good or bad, whatever is done as
truth—know all these to be unreal. Thou alone art the transcendental
Āṭmā and the supreme Guru of the form of ākāś, which is devoid of
fitness (for it) and of the nature of all creatures.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thou art Brahman;
thou art time; and thou art Brahman, that is ever and imponderable. Thou
art everywhere, of all forms, and full of consciousness. Thou art the
truth. Thou art one that has mastered the siḍḍhis, and thou art the
ancient, the emancipated, emancipation, the nectar of bliss, the God,
the quiescent, the diseaseless, Brahman the full, and greater than the
great. Thou art impartial, Saṭ and the ancient knowledge, recognised by
the words 'Truth, etc'. Thou art devoid of all parts. Thou art the
ever-existing—thou appearest as Brahmā, Ruḍra, Inḍra, etc.—thou art
above the illusion of the universe—thou shinest in all elements—thou art
without saṅkalpa in all—thou art known by means of the underlying
meaning of all scriptures; thou art ever content and ever happily seated
(in thyself); thou art without motion; etc. In all things, thou art
without any characteristics; in all things thou art contemplated by
Vishṇu and other Ḍevas at all times; thou hast the nature of Chiṭ, thou
art Chinmāṭrā unchecked, thou stayest in Āṭmā itself, thou art void of
everything and without gums, thou art bliss, the great, the one
secondless, the state of Saṭ and asaṭ, the knower, the known, the seer,
the nature of Sachchiḍānanḍa, the lord of Ḍevas, the all-pervading, the
deathless, the moving, the motionless, the all and the non-all with
quiescence and non-quiescence, Saṭ alone, Saṭ commonly (found in all),
of the form of Niṭya-Siḍḍha (the unconditioned developed one), and yet
devoid of all siḍḍhis. There is not an atom which thou dost not
penetrate; but yet thou art without it. Thou art devoid of existence and
non-existence as also the aim and object aimed at. Thou art changeless,
decayless, beyond all nāḍas, without kāla or kāshta (divisions of time)
and without Brahmā, Vishṇu, and Śiva. Thou lookest into the nature of
each and art above the nature of each. Thou art immersed in the bliss of
Self. Thou art the monarch of the kingdom of Self, and yet without the
conception of Self. Thou art of the nature of fullness and
incompleteness. There is nothing that thou seest which is not in
thyself. Thou dost not stir out of thy nature. Thou attest according to
the nature of each. Thou art nothing but the nature of each. Have no
doubt 'thou art I'.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

"This universe and everything in it, whether the seer or the seen,
resembles the horns of a hare (or are illusory). Earth, water, agni,
vāyu, ākāś, manas, buḍḍhi, ahaṅkāra, ṭejas, the worlds and the sphere of
the universe, destruction, birth, truth, virtue, vice, gain, desires,
passion, anger, greed, the object of meditation, wisdom, guru, disciple,
limitation, the beginning and end, auspiciousness, the past, present,
and future, the aim and the object of aim, mental restraint, inquiry,
contentment, enjoyer, enjoyment, etc., the eight parts of yoga, yama,
etc., the going and coming (of life), the beginning, middle and end,
that which can be taken and rejected, Hari, Śiva, the organs, manas, the
three states, the twenty-four ṭaṭṭvas, the four means, one of the same
class or different classes, Bhūḥ and other worlds, all the castes and
orders of life with the rules laid down for each, manṭras and tanṭras,
science and nescience, all the Veḍas, the inert and the non-inert,
bondage and salvation, spiritual wisdom and non-wisdom, the enlightened
and the non-enlightened, duality and non-duality, the conclusion of all
Veḍānṭas and Śāsṭras, the theory of the existence of all souls and that
of one soul only, whatever is thought by chiṭṭa, whatever is willed by
saṅkalpa, whatever is determined by buḍḍhi, whatever one hears and sees,
whatever the guru instructs, whatever is sensed by all the organs,
whatever is discussed in mīmāmsā, whatever is ascertained by nyāya
(philosophy) and by the great ones who have reached the other side of
the Veḍas, the saying 'Śiva destroys the world, Vishṇu protects it, and
Brahma creates it', whatever is found in the purāṇas, whatever is
ascertained by the Veḍas, and is the signification of all the Veḍas—all
these resemble the horns of a hare. The conception 'I am the body' is
spoken of as the internal organ; the conception 'I am the body' is
spoken of as the great mundane existence; the conception 'I am the body'
constitutes the whole universe. The conception 'I am the body' is spoken
of as the knot of the heart, as non-wisdom, as the state of asaṭ, as
nescience, as the dual, as the true Jīva and as with parts, is certainly
the great sin, and is the disease generated by the fault of thirst after
desires. That

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

which is saṅkalpa, the three pains, passion, anger, bondage, all the
miseries, all the faults and the various forms of time—know these to be
the result of manas. Manas alone is the whole world, the ever-deluding,
the mundane existence, the three worlds, the great pains, the old age
and others, death and the great sin, the saṅkalpa, the Jīva, the chiṭṭa,
the ahaṅkāra, the bondage, the internal organ and earth, water, agni,
vāyū, and ākāś. Sound, touch, form, taste, and odour, the five sheaths,
the waking, the, dreaming, and dreamless sleeping states, the guardians
of the eight quarters, Vasus, Ruḍras, Āḍiṭyas, the seen, the inert, the
pairs and non-wisdom—all these are the products of manas. Rest assured
that there is no reality in all that is saṅkalpa. The whole world, the
guru, disciple, etc., do not exist, yea, do not exist. Thus ends the
fifth chapter of this Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> VI

Ṛbhu continued again: "Know everything as Sachchinmaya (full of Saṭ and
consciousness). It pervades everything. Sachchiḍānanḍa is non-dual,
decayless, alone and other than all. It is 'I'. It alone is ākāś and
'thou'. It is I. There is (in it) no manas, no buḍḍhi, no ahaṅkāra, no
chiṭṭa, or the collection of these—neither 'thou' nor I, nor anything
else nor everything. Brahman alone is. Sentence, words, Veḍas, letters,
beginning, middle, or end, truth, law, pleasure, pain, existence, māyā,
prakṛṭi, body, face, nose, tongue, palate, teeth, lip, forehead,
expiration and inspiration, sweat, bone, blood, urine, distance,
proximity, limb, belly, crown, the movement of hands and feet, Śāsṭras,
command, the knower, the known, and the knowledge, the waking, dreaming
and dreamless sleeping and the fourth state—all these do not belong to
me. Everything is Sachchinmaya interwoven. No attributes pertaining to
body, elements and spirit, no root, no vision, no Ṭaijasa, no Prājña, no
Virāt, no Sūṭrāṭma, no Īśvara, and no going or coming, neither gain nor
loss, neither the acceptable nor the rejectable, nor the censurable,
neither the pure nor the impure, neither the stout nor the lean, no
sorrow, time, space, speech,

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

all, fear, duality, tree, grass or mountain, no meditation, no siḍḍhi of
yoga, no Brāhmaṇa, Kshaṭṭriya or Vaiśya, no bird or beast, or limb, no
greed, delusion, pride, malice, passion, anger or others, no woman,
Śūḍra, castes or others, nothing that is eatable or enjoyable, no
increase or decrease, no belief in the Veḍas, no speech, no worldliness
or unworldliness, no transaction, no folly, no measure or measured, no
enjoyment or enjoyed, no friends, son, etc., father, mother, or sister,
no birth or death, no growth, body or 'I', no emptiness or fullness, no
internal organs or mundane existence, no night, no day, no Brahmā,
Vishṇu, or Śiva, no week, fortnight, month, or year, no unsteadiness, no
Brahmaloka, Vaikuṇtha, Kailāsa and others, no Swarga, Inḍra, Agniloka,
Agni, Yamaloka, Yama, vāyuloka, guardians of the world, three
worlds—Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Svaḥ, Pāṭāla or surface of earth, no science,
nescience, māyā, prakṛṭi, inertness, permanency, transience,
destruction, movement, running, object of meditation, bathing, manṭra or
object, no adorable object, anointment or sipping with water, no flower,
fruit, sandal, light waved before god, praise, prostrations or
circumambulation, no entreaty, conception of separateness even, oblation
of food, offered food, sacrifice, actions, abuse, praise, Gāyaṭrī and
sanḍhi (period of junction, such as twilight, etc.), no mental state,
calamity, evil desire, bad soul, chaṅdāla (low caste person) pulkasa,
unbearableness, unspeakableness, kirāṭa (hunter), kaiṭava (demon),
partiality, partisanship, ornament, chief, or pride, no manyness, no
oneness, durability, triad, tetrad, greatness, smallness, fullness, or
delusion, no kaiṭava, Benares, ṭapas, clan, family, sūṭra, greatness,
poverty, girl, old woman or widow, no pollution, birth, introvision or
illusion, no sacred sentences, identity, or the siḍḍhis, aṇimā, etc.

"Everything being consciousness alone, there is no fault in anything.
Everything being of the nature of Saṭ alone, is Sachchiḍānanḍa only.
Brahman alone is everything and there is nothing else. So 'That' is 'I'.
'That' is 'I'. 'That' alone is 'I'. 'That' alone is 'I'. 'That' alone is
'I'. The eternal Brahman alone is 'I'. I am Brahman alone without being
subject to mundane existence. I am Brahman alone

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

without any manas, any buḍḍhi, organs or body. I am Brahman alone not
perceivable. I am Brahman alone and not Jīva. I am Brahman alone and not
liable to change. I am Brahman alone and not inert. I am Brahman alone
and have no death. I am Brahman alone and have no prāṇas. I am Brahman
alone and greater than the great. This is Brahman. Great is Brahman.
Truth is Brahman. It is all-pervading. Time is Brahman. Kāla is Brahman.
Happiness is Brahman. It is self-shining. One is Brahman. Two is
Brahman. Delusion is Brahman. Kāma and others are Brahman. Badness is
Brahman. Goodness is Brahman. It is of the form of restraint,
quiescence, the all-pervading and the all-powerful. The Loka (world) is
Brahman. Guru is Brahman. Disciple is Brahman. It is Saḍāśiva. (That
which) is before is Brahman. (That which will be) hereafter is Brahman.
Purity is Brahman. Auspiciousness and inauspiciousness are Brahman. Jīva
always is Brahman. I am Sachchiḍānanḍa. All are of the nature of
Brahman. The universe is said to be of the nature of Brahman. Brahman is
itself. There is no doubt of it. There is nothing out of itself. The
letter Om of the form of consciousness is Brahman alone. Everything is
itself. I alone am the whole universe and the highest seat, have crossed
the guṇas and am greater than the great, the supreme Brahman, Guru of
Gurus, the support of all and the bliss of bliss. There is no universe
besides Āṭmā. The universe is of the nature of Āṭmā. There is nowhere
(or no place) without Āṭmā. There is not even grass different from Āṭmā.
There is not husk different from Brahman. The whole universe is of the
nature of Āṭmā. All this is of the nature of Brahman. Asaṭ is not of the
nature of Brahman. There is not a grass different from Brahman. There is
not a seat different from Brahman; there is not a Guru different from
Brahman; there is not a body different from Brahman. There is nothing
different from Brahman like I-ness or you-ness. Whatever is seen in this
world, whatever is spoken of by the people, whatever is enjoyed
everywhere—all these are asaṭ (unreal) only. The differences arising
from the actor, action, qualities, likes, taste and gender—all these
arise from asaṭ and are (but) pleasurable.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The differences
arising from time, objects, actions, success or defeat and whatever
else—all these are simply asaṭ. The internal organ is asaṭ. The organs
are asaṭ. All the prāṇas, the collections of all these, the five
sheaths, the five deities, the six changes, the six enemies, the six
seasons, and the six tastes, are asaṭ. I am Sachchiḍānanḍa. The universe
is rootless. I am Āṭmā alone, Chiṭ and Ānanḍa. The scenes of mundane
existence are not different. I am the Truth of the nature of Ānanḍa and
of the nature of the imponderable Chiṭ. All this is of the nature of
jñāna.

"I am the secondless, having jñāna and bliss. I am of the nature of an
illuminator of all things. I am of the nature of all non-being. I alone
shine always. Therefore how can I with such a nature become asaṭ? That
which is called 'thou' is the great Brahman of the nature of the bliss
of consciousness and of the nature of chiṭ having chiḍākāś and chiṭ
alone as the great bliss. Āṭmā alone is 'I'. Asaṭ is not 'I'. I am
Kūtasṭha, the great guru and Sachchiḍānanḍa alone. I am this born
universe. No time, no universe, no māyā, no prakṛṭi (in me). I alone am
the Hari. Personally, I alone am the Saḍāśiva. I am of the nature of
pure consciousness. I am the enjoyer of pure saṭṭva. I am the only
essence full of chiṭ. Everything is Brahman and Brahman alone.
Everything is Brahman and is chiṭ alone. I am of the nature of the
all-latent and the all-witness. I am the supreme Āṭmā, the supreme
Jyoṭis, the supreme wealth, the supreme goal, the essence of all
veḍānṭas, the subject discussed in all the Śāsṭras the nature of yogic
bliss, the ocean of the chief bliss, the brightness of all wisdom, of
the nature of chief wisdom, the brightness of the fourth state and the
non-fourth but devoid of them, the indestructible chiṭ, truth, Vāsuḍeva,
the birthless, and the deathless Brahmā, Chiḍākāś, the unconditioned,
the stainless, the immaculate, the emancipated, the utterly emancipated,
the soulless, the formless and of the nature of the non-created
universe.

"The universe which is assumed as truth and non-truth does not really
exist. Brahman is of the nature of eternal bliss and

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

is even by itself. It is endless, decayless, quiescent and of one nature
only. If anything is other than myself, then it is as unreal as the
mirage in an oasis. If one should be afraid of the son of a barren
woman, or if a powerful elephant be killed by means of the horns of a
hare, then the world (really is). If one (person) can quench his thirst
by drinking the waters of the mirage, or if one should be killed by the
horns of a man, then the universe really is. The universe exists always
in the true Ganḍharva city (merely unreal). When the blueness of the,
sky really exists in it, then the universe really is. When the silver in
mother-of-pearl can be used in making an ornament, when a man is bitten
by (the conception of) a snake in a rope, when the flaming fire is
quenched by means of a golden arrow, when milky food is obtained in the
(barren) forest of Vindhya (mountains), when cooking can take place by
means of the fuel of (wet) plantain trees, when a female (baby) just
born begins to cook, when curds resume the state of milk, or when the
milk (milked) goes back through the teats of a cow, then will the
universe really be. When the dust of the earth shall be produced in the
ocean, when the maddened elephant is tied by means of the hair of a
tortoise, when (mountain) Meru is shaken by the thread in the stalk of a
lotus, when the ocean is bound by its rows of tides, when the fire
flames downwards, when flame shall become (really) cold, when the lotus
shall grow out of flaming fire, when Inḍranīla (sapphire) arises in the
great mountains, when Meru comes and sits in the lotus-eye, when a
mountain can become the offspring of a black bee, when Meru shall shake,
when a lion is killed by a gnat, when the three worlds can be found in
the space of the hollow of an atom, when the fire which burns a straw
shall last for a long time, when the objects seen in a dream shall come
in the waking state, when the current of a river shall stand still (of
itself), when the delivery of a barren woman shall be fruitful, when the
crow shall walk like a swan, when the mule shall fight with a lion, when
a great ass shall walk like an elephant, when the full moon shall become
a sun, when Rāhu (one of the nodes) shall abandon the sun and the moon,
when a good crop shall arise out of the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

waste (burnt) seeds, when the poor shall enjoy the happiness of the
rich, when the lions shall be conquered by the bravery of dogs, when the
heart of Jñānīs is known by fools, when the ocean is drunk by the dogs
without any remainder, when the pure ākāś shall fall upon men, when
heaven shall fall on the earth, when the flower in the sky shall emit
fragrance, when a forest appearing in pure ākāś shall move, and when
reflection shall arise in a glass simply (without mercury or anything
else in its back), then the world really is. There is no universe in the
womb of Aja (the unborn Brahman)—there is no universe in the womb of
Āṭma. Duality and non-duality, which are but the results of
differentiation, are really not. All this is the result of māyā.
Therefore, there should be Brahma-Bhāvanā. If misery should arise from
the conception of 'I am the body,' then it is certain 'I am Brahman.'
The knot of the heart is the wheel of Brahman, which cuts asunder the
knot of existence. When doubt arises in one, he should have faith in
Brahman. That non-dual Brahman, which is eternal and of the form of
unconditioned bliss, is the guard of Āṭmā against the chief of the form
of not-Āṭmā. Through instances like the above is established the nature
of Brahman. Brahman alone is the all-abode. Abandon the name even of the
universe. Knowing for certain 'I am Brahman,' give up the 'I'.
Everything disappears as the flower from the hands of a sleeping person.
There is neither body nor karma. Everything is Brahman alone. There are
neither objects, nor actions, nor the four states. Everything which has
the three characteristics of vijñāna is Brahman alone. Abandoning all
action, contemplate 'I am Brahman,' 'I am Brahman'. There is no doubt of
this. I am Brahman of the nature of chiṭ. I am of the nature of
Sachchiḍānanḍa.

"This great science of Śaṅkara should never be explained to any ordinary
person, to an atheist or to a faithless, ill-behaved or evil-minded
person. It should be, after due examination, given to the high-souled
ones whose minds are purified with devotion to their gurus. It should be
taught for a year and a half. Leaving off thoroughly and entirely the
practice

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

recommended by the (other) Upanishaḍs, one should study the
Ṭejobinḍu-Upanishaḍ always with delight. By once studying it, he becomes
one with Brahman. Thus ends the sixth chapter. Thus ends the Upanishaḍ."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[78:1](tmu14.htm#fr_54) Ṭejas is spiritual light
and binḍu is seed; hence the seed or source of spiritual light.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[78:2](tmu14.htm#fr_55) This probably refers to
the triangle appearing in the disciples.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[79:1](tmu14.htm#fr_56) All these parts of yoga
are explained here from the standpoint of veḍānṭa.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[82:1](tmu14.htm#fr_57) Sanaka is one of the
four Kumāras in the Purāṇas who refused to create; Suka is the son of
Veḍa-Vyās.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[82:2](tmu14.htm#fr_58) The Kumāra is the son of
Śiva called Kārṭikēya the six-faced, symbolising the six-faced Mars in
one sense.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[86:1](tmu14.htm#fr_59) Sesha, meaning remainder
is the serpent representing time.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[93:1](tmu14.htm#fr_60) Herein is given the hint
as to the difference of functions between an Ishta-ḍevaṭā and a Guru.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[95:1](tmu14.htm#fr_61) The four moving
considerations (of veḍānṭa) are subject (Brahman), object, relationship,
and the qualified person.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. Brahmopanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu15)

</div>
