<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu17)  [Next](tmu19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

### GARBHA-UPANISHAḌ <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76)

### OF

### KṚSHṆA-YAJURVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>. The body is composed of the five
(elements); it exists in the five (objects of sense, etc.); it has six
supports: it is associated with the six guṇas; it has seven ḍhāṭus
(essential ingredients) and three malas (impurities); it has three yonis
(wombs) and is formed of four kinds of food.

Why is the body said to be composed of five? Because there are five
elements in this body (*viz*.), pṛṭhivī, āpas, agni, vāyu, and ākāś. In
this body of five elements, what is the pṛṭhivī element? what āpas? what
agni? what vāyu? and what ākāś? Pṛṭhivī is said to be that which is
hard; āpas is said to be that which is liquid; agni is said to be that
which is hot; vāyu is that, which moves; ākāś is that which is full of
holes (or tubes <span id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77)). Of these, pṛṭhivī
is seen in supporting (objects), āpas in cohesion, ṭejas (or agni) in
making forms visible, vāyu in moving, ākāś chiefly in avakāśa (*viz*.,
giving space). (Then what are the five objects of sense, etc.?) The ear
exists in sound, the skin in touch, the eye in forms, the tongue in
taste, and the nose in odour. (Then) the mouth (exists) in speech, the
hand in lifting, the feet in walking, the anus in excreting, and the
genitals in enjoying. (Then) through buḍḍhi, one knows and determines;
through manas, he thinks and fancies; through chiṭṭa, he recollects;
through ahaṅkāra, he feels the idea of 'I'. Thus these perform their
respective functions.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

Whence the six supports? There are six kinds of rasas (essences or
tastes)—sweet, sour, saltish, bitter, astringent, and pungent. The body
depends upon them while they depend upon the body. There are six changes
of state (*viz*.), the body exists, is born, grows, matures, decays, and
dies. And there are also six chakras (wheels) depending on the ḍhāmāni
(nerves), (*viz*.), mūlāḍhāra, svāḍhishthāna, maṇipūraka, anāhaṭa,
viśuḍḍhi, and ājñā. Also the guṇas are six—kāma (passion) and others and
śama (mental restraint) and others; there being properly—association
(with the former) and devotion (to the latter). Then there are seven
kinds of sounds, (*viz*.), shadja (sa), ṛshabha (ri), gānḍhāra (ga),
maḍhyama (ma), pañchama (pa), ḍaivaṭa (da), and nishāḍa (ni), which are
stated to be seven agreeable and disagreeable ones; and there are seven
kinds of ḍhāṭus having seven colours, (*viz*.), śukla (white), rakṭa
(red), kṛshṇa (dark-blue or indigo), ḍhūmra (blue), pīṭa (yellow),
kapila (orange-red), and pāṇdara (yellowish white). In whomsoever these
substances arise and increase, the rasa (essence) is the cause of the
one following and so on (as stated below). (These) rasas are six in
number; from the rasas (probably chyme) arises blood: from blood, flesh;
from flesh, fat; from fat, bones; from bones, marrow; and from marrow,
śukla (the male seminal fluid). From the union of śukla and śoṇiṭa (the
female vital energy), occurs garbha (conception in the womb). Being
stationed in the heart, it is led. In the heart of persons, (there is)
an internal agni; in the seat of agni, there is bile; in the seat of
bile, there is vāyu; in the seat of vāyu, is hṛḍya (heart or Āṭmā).

Through having connection at the ṛṭu (season) fit for raising issues, it
(the embryo formed in the womb) is like water in the first night; in
seven nights, it is like a bubble; at the end of half a month, it
becomes a ball. At the end of a month, it is hardened; in two months,
the head is formed; in three months, the region about the feet; and in
the fourth month, the region about the stomach and the loins and also
ankle is formed; in the fifth month, the back (or spinal) bone; in the
sixth, the face of the nose, eyes, and ears; in the seventh, it becomes
united with Jīva (Āṭmā); in the eighth month, it becomes full (of all
organs); in the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

ninth, it becomes fatty. Śukla belongs to men and śoṇiṭa to women. Each
(by itself) is neutral (or is powerless). (But in their combination) a
son is born when the father's seed preponderates. A daughter is born
when the mother's seed preponderates. Should both be equal, a eunuch is
born. Since females have more of passion, on account of their deriving
more pleasure (than males from sexual union), a greater number of
females are born. Action corresponds to the mental state (of the actor).
Hence the child (born) takes after (the thought of) the parents. From
parents with minds full of anxieties (at the time of union) are born the
blind, the lame, the hunchback, the dwarf, and the limbless. (From
impregnation) during the eclipses of the sun and the moon, children are
born with defective limbs. Increase or decrease, similarities or
dissimilarities of bodies arise (in children) through the influence of
time, place, action, ḍravya (substance), and enjoyment. From a
well-conducted intercourse (or union), the child being born with the
form of the father possesses, his qualities, just as the image in a
glass reflects truly the original. When śukla bursts into two through
the interaction (or blowing against one another) of the vāyu of both
śukla and śoṇiṭa, then twins (of the same sex) are born. In the same
manner when the reṭas (the seminal fluids), *viz*., (śukla and śoṇiṭa)
of both the parents burst into two, then mixed progeny (male and female)
is the result. Among mankind, five embryos (only can be formed at a
pregnancy in the womb). A womb with one embryo is common. There are some
with two. Those with three are only to be found (as rarely) as one in a
thousand. Where there is a frequent pouring (of seminal fluid into the
womb), a greater number of limbs is produced (in the child). When the
pouring (within the womb) is only once, then the child becomes dried up
(or contracted). By pouring (within) more than once, couples are
(sometimes) born.

Then, (*viz*., in the ninth month), this (in the body) made of the five
elements and able to sense odour, taste, etc., through ṭejas (spiritual
fire), etc., which is also made up of the five elements—this cognizes
the indestructible Omkāra through its deep wisdom and contemplation. It
cognizes as the one letter

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Om). Then there
arise in the body the eight prakṛṭis <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78)
and the sixteen vikāras (changes). Through the food and drink of the
mother transmitted through her nādis, the child obtains prāṇa. In the
ninth month, it is full of all attributes.

It then remembers its previous births, finds out what has been done and
what has not been done, and discriminates between actions, right and
wrong. (Then it thinks thus:) Many thousands of wombs have been seen by
me, many kinds of food have been tasted (by me), and many breasts have
been suckled (by me). All parts of the world have been my place of
birth, as also my burning-ground in the past. In eighty-four lakhs <span
id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79) of wombs, have I been born. I have been
often born and have often died. I have been subject to the cycle of
rebirths very often. I have had birth and death, again birth and death,
and again birth (and so on). There is much suffering whilst living in
the womb. Delusion and sorrow attend every birth. In youth are sorrow,
grief, dependence on others, ignorance, the non-performance of what is
beneficial) laziness, and the performance of what is unfavourable. In
adult age, (the sources of sorrow are) attachment to sensual objects and
the groaning under the three kinds <span id="fr_80"></span>[3](#fn_80)
of pain. In old age anxiety, disease, fear of death, desires, love of
self, passion, anger, and non-independence—all these produce very great
suffering. This birth is the seed of sorrow, and being of the form of
sorrow is unbearable. I have not attained the ḍharma of nivṛṭṭi,
(*viz*., the means of overcoming the cycle of re-birth) nor have I
acquired the means of yoga and jñāna. Alas! I am sunk in the ocean of
sorrow and find no remedy for it. Fie on ajñāna! fie on ajñāna! fie on
the troubles caused by passion and anger; fie on the fetters of samsāra
(the mundane existence)! I shall attain wisdom from a guru. If I get
myself freed from the womb, then I shall practise sāṅkhya yoga which is
the cause of the extinction of all evil and the bestower

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

of the fruit of emancipation. If I get myself freed from the womb, I
shall seek refuge in Maheśvara (the great Lord) who is the cause of the
extinction of all evil and bestower of the (four <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81)) ends of life. If I get myself freed from
the womb, then I shall seek refuge in that Lord of the world who is the
Chiḍāṭmā of all śakṭis and the cause of all causes. If I get myself
freed from the womb, then I shall seek refuge in that supreme Lord
Bhargaḥ (Śiva or light) who is paśupaṭi (the lord of paśus or souls),
Ruḍra, Mahāḍeva (the great Deva) and the Guru of the world. If I get
myself freed from the bondage of the womb, I shall perform great
penances. If I get myself freed from the passage of the womb, I shall
worship Vishṇu in my heart who is the bestower of nectar, who is bliss,
who is Nārāyaṇa, and who never decays. I am now confined in my mother's
womb; and were I freed from its bonds, I shall please the divine
Vāsuḍeva without diverting my mind from Him. I am burnt through actions,
good and bad, committed by me alone before for the sake of others,
whilst those who enjoyed the fruits thereof have disappeared. Through
non-belief (unspirituality), I formerly gave up all fear (of sin) and
committed sins. I now reap their fruits. I shall become a believer
hereafter <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82)."

Thus does the Jīva (Āṭmā) within the (mother's womb) contemplate again
and again the many kinds of miseries (it had undergone), and remembering
always the miseries of the cycle of re-births, becomes disgusted (with
the material enjoyments of the world), often fainting in the inmost
centre (*viz*., heart) of all creatures at (the idea of) his aviḍyā,
desire, and karma. Then this being, who had entered many hundreds of
female wombs of beings (in the previous births), comes to the mouth of
the womb wishing to obtain release. Here being pressed by the yanṭra
(neck of the uterus), it suffers much trouble. Moreover it is much
affected by prasūṭi (delivery) vāyu. As soon as it is born, it comes in
contact with the vaishṇavī vāyu and ceases to remember anything of the
past;

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

it also ceases to see far and to be the cognizer of the real. Coming
into contact with the earth, it becomes fierce-eyed and debased. The
evil of the eye after it is rubbed with (or cleaned by) water vanishes;
and with it, vanishes memory of birth and death, good and bad actions
and their affinities. Then how does he understand vāyu, bile, and
śleshma (phlegm)? When they are in their proper state, they produce
health: with their disturbance, diseases are generated. It should be
known that one becomes capable of knowing through a proper quantity of
bile; through having a little more or a little less of it, he comes to
know more. When the bile is changed (otherwise), he becomes changed and
acts like a mad man. And that bile is agni. Agni influenced by karma is
kindled by vāyu, the source (or seat) of virtue and vice, as fuel is
kindled within (by fire) from without (by the wind).

And of how many kinds is that agni? It has three bodies, three reṭas
(seeds or progeny), three puras (cities), three ḍhāṭus, and three kinds
of agni threefold. Of these three, Vaiśvānara is bodiless. And that agni
becomes (or is subdivided into) Jñānāgni (wisdom-fire), Ḍarśanāgni
(eye-fire), and Koshthāgni (digestive fire). Of these Jñānāgni pertains
to the mind; Darśanāgni pertains to the senses; and Koshthāgni pertains
to ḍahara and daily cooks (or digests) equally whatever is eaten, drunk,
licked, or sucked through prāṇa and apāna. Darśanāgni is (in) the eye
itself and is the cause of vijñāna and enables one to see all objects of
form. It has three seats, the (spiritual) eye itself being the (primary)
seat, and the eyeballs being the accessory seats. Ḍakshiṇāgni is in the
heart, Gārhapaṭya is in the belly, and in the face is Āhavanīya. (In
this sacrifice with the three agnis), the Purusha is himself the
sacrificer; buḍḍhi becomes his wife; sanṭosha (contentment) becomes the
ḍīkshā (vow) taken; the mind and the organs of the senses become the
sacrificial vessels; the karmenḍriyas (organs of action) are the
sacrificial instruments. In this sacrifice of the body, the several
ḍevas who become the ṛṭvijas (sacrificial priests) perform their parts
following the master of the sacrifice, (*viz*., the true individuality),
wherever he goes. In this (sacrifice), the body is the sacrificial
place,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

the skull of the head is the fire-pit, the hairs are the kuśa grass; the
mouth is the anṭarveḍi (raised platform in sacrifice); kāma (or passion)
is the clarified butter; the period of life is the period of sacrifice;
nāḍa (sound) produced in ḍahara (heart) is the sāmaveḍa (recited during
the sacrifice); vaikharī is the yajus (or yajurveḍa hymns); parā,
paśyanṭi, and maḍhyamā <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83) are the ṛks
(or ṛgveḍa hymns); cruel words are the aṭharvas (aṭharvaveḍa hymns) and
khilas (supplementary texts of each veḍa); true words are the
vyāhṛṭis <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84). Life, strength, and bile
are the paśus (sacrificial creatures) and death is avabhṛṭa (the bath
which concludes the sacrifice). In this sacrifice, the (three) fires
blaze up and then according to (the desires of) the
[worldly](errata.htm#8), the ḍevas bless him. All who are living (in
this world) are the sacrificers. There is none living who does not
perform yajña (sacrifice). This body is (created) for yajña, and arises
out of yajña and changes according to yajña. If this yajña is continued
in a direction changed (from the right course, or is abused), then it
leads to an ocean of misery.

In this body, there are sixteen side-teeth, having each a membrane (as
its root) and fifteen openings. It (the body) is measured by ninety-six
digits. There are in it fourteen nādi seats and 108 joints. There are
seventy-two tubes seats with seventy-two nādis between them, of which
three are important, *viz*., idā, piṅgalā, and sushumnā, the fourth is
purīṭaṭi, and jivaṭa the fifth. Above jivaṭa is bile and near bile is
Purīṭaṭi. Above the navel, two digits to the left of it, is seated the
source of bile. The food taken in is divided into three parts—urine,
fæces, and sāra (the essence or chyme). The urine dividing itself into
two, spreads to the left below the navel. The fæces is in the right side
and is of seven kinds. The sāra is of five kinds and spreads itself over
the body. Hence the semen and blood are produced from food and drink. In
this body, vāyu which is moving as prāṇa is the Sūṭrāṭma. Through it,
one inspires and expires and moves (his limbs). Without it, no limb of
the body will be

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

animated. Through vāyu, the current of blood is driven into the midis
from the chakra (plexus) of the heart, and those which can be touched
(on the body) are easily discernible. The juicy essences (of food) which
arise out of digestion enter the womb which is suspended in the stomach
of the mother and coming near the child's head nourishes the child's
prāṇa through the sushumnā (on the head or pineal gland). Sushumnā is
the Brahma-nādi. Prāṇa and others are found there. It (prāṇa) descends
lower and lower as the time of birth approaches and settles in the heart
when the child is born. Through yoga, it should be brought from the
middle of the eyebrows to the end of sushumnā (*viz*., the pineal
gland), when he becomes the cognizer of the Real like the child in the
womb. In the body of this nature, Āṭmā is latent and deathless, and is
the witness and Purusha. It lives in this body, being enveloped (by
māyā). Prāṇī (or the jīva having prāṇa) has abhimāna (identification
with the body) on account of aviḍyā. Ajñāna which surrounds it is the
seed; the antaḥkaraṇa (internal organ) is the sprout and the body is the
tree. In this tree (of body), there are eight crores of hairs, eighty
hundreds of joints, nine hundreds of tendons, eight palams of
heart <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85), twelve palams of tongue, one
prasṭha (or two palams) of bile; one ādhaka of phlegm, one kudupa (or ¼
prasṭha) of śukla and two prasṭhas of marrow. One should consider
everything as evanescent, like the child in the womb (with its prāṇa,
etc.,) stationed in the sushumnā (of the head). Then he becomes freed
and gets no more body. If not, an ignorant man becomes subject to the
cycle of re-births, etc., is exposed like a worm to the drink of urine
and fæces, and undergoes in this body the sufferings of hell. Therefore
knowing all this, one should be averse to worldly objects. Thus ends the
moksha-śāsṭra of Pippalāḍa—thus ends the moksha-śāsṭra of Pippalāḍa.
Thus ends the Upanishaḍ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[116:1](tmu18.htm#fr_76) The Upanishaḍ treating
of embryo, etc.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[116:2](tmu18.htm#fr_77) The Sanskrit word
'sushira' means perforated or tubular.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[119:1](tmu18.htm#fr_78) The eight prakṛṭis are
mūlaprakṛṭi, mahaṭ, ahaṅkāra, and the five elements; the sixteen vikāras
are the five organs of sense, the five organs of action, the five
prāṇas, and antaḥkaraṇa.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[119:2](tmu18.htm#fr_79) The Hinḍūs believe in
so many number of wombs to be born on the earth.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[119:3](tmu18.htm#fr_80) Those that arise from
the body, the elements, and the ḍevas.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[120:1](tmu18.htm#fr_81) They are kāma
(passion), ārtha (acquisition of wealth), ḍharma (performance of duty),
and moksha (salvation).

<span id="fn_82"></span>[120:2](tmu18.htm#fr_82) The reason why it
remembers them seems to be that the jīvāṭmā is in the pineal gland then,
prior to its coming down.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[122:1](tmu18.htm#fr_83) Vaikharī and the three
others are the different stages of nāḍa (sound).

<span id="fn_84"></span>[122:2](tmu18.htm#fr_84) Vyāhṛṭis are parts of
the Gāyaṭrī Manṭra, *viz*., Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Suvaḥ.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[123:1](tmu18.htm#fr_85) Eight palams are 3/5 of
a lb. (avdp.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. Ṭārasāra-Upanishaḍ of Śukla-Yajurveḍa](tmu19)

</div>
