<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu12)  [Next](tmu14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### SUBALA-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### ŚUKLA-YAJURVEḌA

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> I

<span class="smallcaps">Then</span> he (Raikva <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)) asked: "What was at first?" To which (He
the Lord) replied:

"There was neither Saṭ <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37) nor asaṭ nor
Saṭ-asaṭ. From it, ṭamas (darkness) was evolved. From ṭamas came
bhūṭāḍi; <span id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_38)from bhūṭāḍi came ākāś, from
ākāś, vāyu; from vāyu, agni (fire); from agni, āpas (water); and from
āpas, pṛṭhivī (earth). Then it became an egg. After remaining so for one
(divine) year, it split into two and became earth below, <span
id="fr_39"></span>[4](#fn_39) the ākāś above and in the midst, the
infinite Purusha of a divine form of myriads of heads, eyes, feet and
hands. Prior to the bhūṭas (elements), he had evolved Mṛṭyu (time or
death) of three letters <span id="fr_40"></span>[5](#fn_40), three
heads, and three feet, and having a khaṇda-paraśu <span
id="fr_41"></span>[6](#fn_41) (broken

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

axe). To him, Brahma (the Purusha) spoke. He entered Brahma himself and
evolved mentally the seven sons <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) and
these Havirāts (or sons) as well as the seven prajāpaṭis (progenitors).
Brāhmaṇas <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) were born from His mouth,
Kshaṭṭriyas from His hands, Vaiśyas from His thighs, and from the feet
were born the Śuḍras. The moon was born from His manas (mind), the sun
from His eyes, vāyu from (His) ears and prāṇas from (His) heart. Thus
all things were born."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> II

"From apāna came Nishāḍas, Yakshas, Rākshasas, and Ganḍharvas. From
(His) bones, arose the mountains. From His hairs arose the herbs and the
trees. From His forehead, Ruḍra was born through His anger. The breath
of this great Being became the Ṛgveḍa, Yajurveḍa, Sāmaveḍa, Aṭharvaveḍa,
Śīkshā (the science of the proper pronunciation and articulation of
sounds), Kalpa (the science of methodology), Vyākaraṇa (grammar),
Nirukṭa (glossarial explanation of obsolete and other terms in Veḍas),
Chhanḍas (prosody or veḍic metre), Jyoṭisha (astronomy), Nyāya (logic),
Mīmāmsā (including rituals and veḍānṭa), Dharmaśāsṭras, commentaries,
glosses and all beings. This Āṭmā (or the Self of Purusha) is
Hiraṇyajyoṭis (or golden or effulgent Light) into which all the universe
is absorbed. He divided Āṭmā (his Self) into two moieties; out of one
moiety, the woman was created; and out of the other, man. Having become
a Ḍeva, He created the Ḍevas. Having become a Ṛshi, He created the
Ṛshis; also He created Yakshas, Rākshasas, Ganḍharvas, wild and domestic
beasts and others such as cows, bulls, mares and horses, she-asses and
asses and Viśvambhara (the Supporter) and Viśvambharā (the earth).
Becoming Vaiśvānara (fire) at the end (of creation), He burnt up all
objects. Then (in dissolution), pṛṭhivī was absorbed in āpas, āpas in
agni, agni in vāyu, vāyu in ākaś, ākaś in inḍriyas (organs),

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

inḍriyas into ṭanmāṭras (rudimentary properties), ṭanmāṭras into
bhūṭāḍi, bhūṭāḍi into mahaṭ, mahaṭ into avyakṭa, avyakṭa into akshara
(the indestructible), akshara into Lamas (darkness). And Lamas becomes
one with the supreme Lord. And then there is neither Saṭ nor asaṭ, nor
Saṭ-asaṭ. This is the teaching of Nirvāṇa and this is the teaching of
the Veḍas. Yea, This is the teaching of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> III

"At first, there was Asaṭ, unborn, non-existent, unsupported, soundless,
touchless, formless, tasteless, odourless, and decayless. The undaunted
man never grieves, as he knows Āṭmā to be great, all-pervading and
unborn. It (Āṭma) is prāṇaless, mouthless, earless, tongueless,
manas-less, ṭejas-less, eyeless, nameless, goṭraless (or clanless),
headless, handless, feetless, non-unctuous, bloodless, non-measurable,
neither long nor short, neither gross nor atomic, neither great nor
small, endless, indescribable, nonreturnable, non-luminous, not hidden,
having neither inside nor outside, neither eating anything nor being
eaten by others. Some one (out of many) attains to this (Āṭmā) by the
six means of saṭya (truth), ḍāna (charity), ṭapas (religious
austerities), non-injury to any creature, celibacy and complete
indifference to worldy objects; <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) and
there are no other means. Whoever feels happy with the thought 'I know
That', that learned person's prāṇa will never get out of his body at the
moment of death, but will become absorbed in Brahman; and being absorbed
in Brahman, he attains the state of Brahman Itself as he who knows
this."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> IV

"In the middle of the heart is a red fleshy mass in which is the
ḍahara-lotus. Like the lotus, it opens into many (petals). There are ten
openings in the heart. The (different kinds of) prāṇas are located
there. Whenever he (Āṭmā) is united with

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

prāṇa, he sees cities with rivers and other variegated things; when
united with vyāna, he sees Ḍevas and Ṛshis; when united with apāna, he
sees Yakshas, Rākshasas and Ganḍharvas; when united with udāna, he
perceives the celestial world, Ḍevas, Skanḍa (Kārṭikeya or the six-faced
Mars), and Jayanṭa (Inḍra's son); when united with samāna, he sees the
celestial world and the treasures (of Kubera); when united with rambhā
(a nādi hereafter given out), he sees whatever is seen or not seen,
heard or not heard, eaten or not eaten, asaṭ or Saṭ and all else.

"There are ten midis; in each of these are seventy-one. And these become
72,000 branch nādis. When Āṭmā sleeps therein, it produces sound; but
when Āṭmā sleeps in the second kośa (or sheath) then it sees this world
and the higher as also knows all the sounds. This is spoken of as
samprasāḍa (deep sleep rest). Then prāṇa protects the body. The nādis
are full of blood, of the colours green, blue, yellow, red, and white.
Now this ḍahara-lotus has many petals like a lily. Like a hair divided
into 1,000 parts, the nādis called hiṭa are. The divine Āṭmā sleeps in
the ākāś of the heart, in the supreme kośa (or ānanḍamaya sheath);
sleeping there, it has no desires, no dreams, no ḍeva-worlds, no yajñas
or sacrificer, no mother or father, no relative, no kinsman, no thief,
or no Brahman-slayer. Its body is ṭejas (resplendent effulgence) and of
the nature of nectar (or the immortal). It is as if in sport, a
water-lotus. When he returns again to the waking state by the same way
(he quitted or went in before to the heart), he is Samrāt <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45). Thus says he."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> V <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46)

"That which joins one place (or centre) with another is the nādis which
bind them. The eye is aḍhyāṭmā, (pertaining to the body); the visible
objects are āḍhibhūṭa (pertaining to the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

elements) and the sun is aḍhidaivaṭa (spiritual). The nādis form their
bond (or connect them). He who moves in the eye, in the visible, in the
sun, in the midis, in prāṇa, in vijñāna, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) in ānanḍa, in the ākāś of the heart, and
within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which should be worshipped. It
is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The ear is adhyāṭma, the audible aḍhibhūṭa, and ḍik (the quarters) is
aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in the ear, in the
audible, in the quarters, in the nādis, in prāṇa, in vijñāna, in ānanḍa,
in the ākāś of the heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that
which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow,
or end.

"The nose is adhyāṭma, the odoriferous aḍhibhūṭa, and the earth is
aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in the nose, the
odoriferous, the earth, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna, ānanḍa, the ākāś of
the heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which should be
worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The tongue is adhyāṭma: the tastable aḍhibhūṭa, and Varuṇa is
aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in the tongue, the
tastable, Varuṇa, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna, ānanḍa, the ākaś of the
heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which should be
worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The skin is adhyāṭma, the tangiferous aḍhibhūṭa, and the vāyu is
aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in the skin, the
tangiferous, the vāyu, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna, ānanḍa, the ākāś of
the heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which should be
worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"Vāk (speech) is adhyāṭma, that which is acted upon by vāk is aḍhibhūṭa,
and Agni is Aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in vāk, that
which is acted upon by vāk, Agni, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna, the ākāś of
the heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which should be
worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

"The hand is aḍhyāṭma, that which can be handled is aḍhibhūṭa, and Inḍra
is aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in the hand, that
which can be handled by it, Inḍra, the nādis, prāṇa vijñāna, ānanḍa, the
ākāś of the heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which
should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or
end.

"The feet is aḍhyāṭma, that which is walked upon is aḍhibhūṭa, and
Vishṇu (or Upenḍra) is aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in
the feet, that which is walked upon, Vishṇu, the midis, prāṇa, vijñāna,
ānanḍa, the ākāś of the heart, and within all else—That is Āṭma. It is
that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear,
sorrow, or end.

"The anus is aḍhyāṭma, the excreta is aḍhibhūṭa, and Mṛṭyu is
aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves the anus, the excreta,
Mṛṭyu, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna, ānanḍa, the ākāś of the heart, and
within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which should be worshipped. It
is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"The genitals is aḍhyāṭma, the secretion is aḍhibhūṭa, and Prajāpaṭi is
aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in the genitals,
secretion, Prajāpaṭi, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna, ānanḍa, the ākāś of the
heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which should be
worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

 <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48)"Manas is aḍhyāṭma, the thinkable is
aḍhibhūṭa, and the moon is Aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who
moves in the manas, the thinkable, the moon, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna,
ānanḍa, the ākāś of the heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is
that which should be worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear,
sorrow, or end.

"Buḍḍhi is aḍhyāṭma, the certainly knowable is aḍhibhūṭa, and Brahma is
aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves in buḍḍhi, the certainly
knowable, Brahma, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna, ānanḍa, the ākāś of the
heart, and within all else—That

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

is Āṭmā. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age,
death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"Ahaṅkāra is aḍhyāṭma, that which is acted upon by ahaṅkāra is
aḍhibhūṭa, and Ruḍra is aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The nādis bind them. He who moves
in ahaṅkāra, that which is acted upon by ahaṅkāra, Ruḍra, the nādis,
prāṇa, vijñāna, ānanḍa, the ākāś of the heart, and within all else—That
is Āṭmā. It is that which should be worshipped. It is without old age,
death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"Chitty is aḍhyāṭma, that which is acted upon by chiṭṭa (producing
fluctuation of thought) is aḍhibhūṭa, and Ksheṭrajña is aḍhiḍaivaṭa. The
nādis bind them. He who moves in chiṭṭa, that which is acted upon by
chiṭṭa, Ksheṭrajña, the nādis, prāṇa, vijñāna, ānanḍa, the ākāś of the
heart, and within all else—That is Āṭmā. It is that which should be
worshipped. It is without old age, death, fear, sorrow, or end.

"He is the knower of all, the Lord of all, the ruler of all, the one
latent in all, the one worshipped for the happiness of all, but Himself
not worshipping (or seeking) any happiness, the one worshipped by all,
the Veḍas and other books and to which all this is food, but who does
not become the food of another; moreover, the one who, as the eye, is
the ordainer of all, the one who as annamaya is Bhūṭāṭmā; the one who as
prāṇamaya is Inḍriyāṭmā, the one as manomaya is Sankalpāṭmā, the one who
as vijñānamaya is Kālāṭmā, the one who as ānanḍamaya is Layāṭmā, is one
and not dual. How can it be said to be mortal? How can it be said that
there is not immortality in It? It is neither internal prajñā nor
external prajñā nor both, nor Prajñānaghana; it is neither prajñā nor
not-prajñā; it is neither known nor is it to know anything. Thus is the
exposition of Nirvāṇa; and thus is the exposition of the Veḍas; yea,
thus is the exposition of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> VI

"At first there was not anything in the least. These creatures were born
through no root, no support but the Divine Ḍeva, the one Nārāyaṇa. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) The eye and the visible are Nārāyaṇa;

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

the ear and the audible are Nārāyaṇa; the tongue and the 'tastable' are
Nārāyaṇa; the nose and the 'smellable' are Nārāyaṇa; the skin and the
tangible are Nārāyaṇa; manas and that which is acted upon by it are
Nārāyaṇa; buḍḍhi and that which is acted upon by it are Nārāyaṇa;
ahaṅkāra and that which is acted upon by it are Nārāyaṇa; chiṭṭa and
that which is acted upon by it are Nārāyaṇa; vāk and that which is
spoken are Nārāyaṇa; the hand and that which is lifted are Nārāyaṇa; the
leg and that which is walked upon are Nārāyaṇa; the anus and the
excreted are Nārāyaṇa; the genitals and the enjoyment of pleasure are
Nārāyaṇa. The originator and the ordainer as also the agent and the
causer of changes, are the Divine Deva Nārāyaṇa only. Āḍiṭyas, Ruḍras,
Maruṭs, Vasus, Aśvins, the Ṛk, Yajus, and Sāma, Manṭras, Agni, clarified
butter and oblation—all these are Nārāyaṇa. The origin and the
combination are the Divine Deva Nārāyaṇa only. Mother, father, brother,
residence, asylum, friends and dependents are Nārāyaṇa only. The divine
midis known as virājā, suḍarśanā, jiṭā, saumyā, moghā, kumārā, amṛṭā,
saṭyā, sumaḍhyamā, nāsīrā, śiśirā, surā, sūryā, and bhāsvatī (fourteen
nādis in all), that which thunders, sings and rains, *viz*., Varuṇa,
Aryamā (sun), Chanḍramas (moon), Kalā (part), Kavi (Śukra), the creator
Brahma and Prajāpaṭi, Inḍra, Kāla (or time) of days, half-days, Kalpa,
the upper, and the directions—all these are Nārāyaṇa. That which was and
will be is this Purusha only. Like the eye (which sees without any
obstacle) the thing spread in the ākāś, the wise ever see this supreme
seat of Vishṇu. Brāhmaṇas who are ever spiritually awake, praise in
diverse ways and illuminate the supreme abode of Vishṇu. Thus is the
exposition to the attaining of Nirvāṇa; thus is the teaching of the
Veḍas; yea, thus is the teaching of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> VII

"Within the body, is the one eternal Aja (unborn), located in the cave
(of the heart). Earth is His body. Though He moves in the earth, earth
does not know Him. Waters are His

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

body. Though He moves in the waters, waters do not know Him. Ṭejas is
His body. Though He moves in ṭejas, ṭejas does not know Him. Vāyu is His
body. Though He moves in vāyu, vāyu does not know Him. Ākāś is His body.
Though He moves in ākāś, ākāś does not know Him. Manas is His body.
Though He moves in manas, manas does not know Him. Buḍḍhi is His body.
Though He moves in buḍḍhi, buḍḍhi does not know Him. Ahaṅkāra is His
body. Though He moves in ahaṅkāra, ahaṅkāra does not know Him. Chiṭṭa is
His body. Though He moves in chiṭṭa, chiṭṭa does not know Him. Avyakṭa
is His body. Though He moves in avyakṭa, avyakṭa does not know Him.
Akshara is His body. Though He moves in akshara, akshara does not know
Him. Mṛṭyu (death) is His body. Though He moves in Mṛṭyu, Mṛṭyu does not
know Him. Such an one is the Mind within all creatures, the remover of
all sins and the Divine Deva, the one Nārāyaṇa.

"This knowledge was imparted (by Nārāyaṇa) to Apānṭaraṭama who in turn
imparted it to Brahmā. Brahma imparted it to Ghora-Aṅgiras. He imparted
it to Raikva, who in turn imparted it to Rāma. Rāma imparted it to all
creatures. This is the teaching of Nirvāṇa; this is the teaching of the
Veḍas; yea, this is the teaching of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> VIII

"The Āṭmā of all which is immaculate, is located within the cave in the
body. Āṭmā which lives in the midst of the body filled with fat, flesh
and phlegm in a seat very closely shut up with shining many-coloured
walls resembling a Ganḍharva city and with the (subtle) essence going
out of it (to other parts of the body), which seat may be likened to a
plantain flower and is ever agitated like a water-bubble—this Āṭmā is of
an unthinkable form, the Divine Deva, associateless and pure, has ṭejas
as its body, is of all forms, the Lord of all, the unthinkable and the
bodiless, placed within the cave, immortal, shining, and bliss itself.
He is a wise person who cognizes Āṭmā thus, and not one who does not do
so."

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> IX

Once Raikva questioned Him (Lord) thus: "O Lord, in whom does everything
disappear (or merge)?" He replied thus: "That which (or he who)
disappears in the eye becomes the eye only; that which disappears in the
visible becomes the visible only; that which disappears in the sun
becomes sun only; that which disappears in Virāt becomes Virāt only;
that which disappears in prāṇa becomes prāṇa only; that which disappears
in vijñāna becomes vijñāna only; that which disappears in ānanḍa becomes
ānanḍa only; that which disappears in ṭurya becomes ṭurya only—(all
these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless,
and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the ear becomes ear itself;
that which disappears in the audible becomes the audible only; that
which disappears in ḍik (space) becomes ḍik only; that which disappears
in suḍarśanā (discus) becomes suḍarśanā only: that which disappears in
apāna becomes apāna only; that which disappears in vijñāna becomes
vijñāna only; that which disappears in ānanḍa become ānanḍa only; that
which disappears in ṭurya becomes ṭurya only—(all these) attain that
which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the nose becomes nose only;
that which disappears in the odoriferous becomes odoriferous only; that
which disappears in pṛṭhivī becomes pṛṭhivī only; that which disappears
in jiṭam (victory) becomes; victory only; that which disappears in vyāna
becomes vyāna only; that which disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna
only; that which disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which
disappears in ṭurya becomes ṭurya only—(all these) attain that which is
deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the mouth becomes the mouth
only; that which disappears in the tasted becomes the tasted only; that
which disappears in Varuṇa becomes Varuṇa only; that which disappears in
soumya

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (moon or Mercury)
becomes soumya only; that which disappears in udāna becomes udāna only;
that which disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna only; that which
disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in ṭurya
becomes ṭurya only—(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless,
sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the skin becomes the skin
only; that which disappears in touch becomes touch only; that which
disappears in vāyu becomes vāyu only; that which disappears in cloud
becomes cloud only; that which disappears in samāna becomes samāna only;
that which disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna only; that which
disappears in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in ṭurya
becomes ṭurya only—(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless,
sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in vāk becomes vāk only; that
which disappears in speech becomes speech only; that which disappears in
Agni becomes Agni only; that which disappears in kumārā becomes kumārā
only; that which disappears in hostility becomes hostility itself; that
which disappears in vijñāna become vijñāna only; that which disappears
in bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in ṭurya becomes
ṭurya only—(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless,
sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the hand becomes the hand
only; that which disappears in that which is lifted by the hand becomes
that which is lifted by the hand; that which disappears in Inḍra becomes
Inḍra only; that which disappears in the nectar becomes the nectar only;
that which disappears in mukhya becomes mukhya only; that which
disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna only; that which disappears in
[bliss](errata.htm#5) becomes bliss only; that which disappears in ṭurya
becomes ṭurya only—(all these) attain, that which is deathless,
fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the leg becomes the leg
only; that which disappears in that which is walked upon becomes that
which is walked upon; that which disappears

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

in Vishṇu becomes Vishṇu only; that which disappears in saṭya becomes
saṭya only; that which disappears in the suppression of the breath and
voice becomes the suppression of the breath and voice; that which
disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna only; that which disappears in
bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in ṭurya becomes ṭurya
only—(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless,
endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the anus becomes the anus
only; that which disappears in that which is excreted becomes that which
is excreted; that which disappears in Mṛṭyu becomes Mṛṭyu only; that
which disappears in spirituous liquor becomes spirituous liquor only;
that which disappears in hurricane becomes hurricane only; that which
disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna only; that which disappears in
bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in ṭurya becomes ṭurya
only—(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless,
endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in the genitals becomes the
genitals only; that which disappears in that which is enjoyed becomes
that which is enjoyed; that which disappears in that which is Prajāpaṭi
becomes Prajāpaṭi only; that which disappears in nāsīnām becomes nāsīnām
only; that which disappears in kurmira becomes kurmira only; that which
disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna only; that which disappears in
bliss becomes bliss only; that which disappears in ṭurya becomes ṭurya
only—(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless,
endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in manas becomes manas itself;
that which disappears in the thinkable becomes the thinkable itself;
that which disappears in the moon becomes the moon itself; that which
disappears in śiśu becomes śiśu itself; that which disappears in śyena
becomes śyena itself; that which disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna
itself; that which disappears in ānanḍa, becomes ānanḍa itself; that
which disappears in ṭurya becomes ṭurya itself—(all these) attain that
which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless,"

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

Then He continued: "That which disappears in buḍḍhi becomes buḍḍhi
itself; that which disappears in the certainly knowable becomes the
certainly knowable itself; that which disappears in Brahma becomes
Brahmā himself; that which disappears in Kṛshṇa becomes Kṛshṇa himself;
that which disappears in Sūrya becomes Sūrya itself; that which
disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna itself; that which disappears in
ānanḍa becomes ānanḍa itself; that which disappears in ṭurya becomes
ṭurya itself—(all these) attain that which is deathless, fearless,
sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in ahaṅkāra becomes ahaṅkāra
itself; that which disappears in that which is acted upon by ahaṅkāra
becomes that itself; that which disappears in Ruḍra becomes Ruḍra
himself; that which disappears in asura becomes asura itself; that which
disappears in śveṭa becomes śveṭa itself; that which disappears in
vijñāna becomes vijñāna itself; that which disappears in ānanḍa becomes
ānanḍa itself; that which disappears in ṭurya becomes ṭurya itself—(all
these) attain that which is deathless, fearless, sorrow-less, endless,
and seedless."

Then He continued: "That which disappears in chiṭṭa becomes chiṭṭa
itself; that which disappears in that which is acted upon by chiṭṭa
becomes that itself; that which disappears in Ksheṭrajña becomes
Ksheṭrajña itself; that which disappears in bhāsvatī becomes bhāsvatī
itself; that [which](errata.htm#6) disappears in nāga becomes nāga
itself; that which disappears in vijñāna becomes vijñāna itself; that
which disappears in ānanḍa becomes ānanḍa itself; that which disappears
in ṭurya [becomes](errata.htm#7) ṭurya itself—(all these) attain that
which is deathless, fearless, sorrowless, endless, and seedless."

"He who knows this as seedless in this manner becomes himself seedless.
He is neither born, nor dies, nor is deluded, nor split, nor burnt, nor
cut—yea, he does not feel angry, and hence he is said to be Āṭmā,
capable of burning all. Such an Āṭmā is neither attained by a hundred
sayings, nor by (the reading of) many scriptures, nor by mere
intelligence, nor by hearing from others, nor by understanding, nor by
Veḍas, nor

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

by scriptures, nor by severe ṭapas, nor sāṅkhya, nor yoga, nor
observances of the orders of the life, nor by any other means (than the
following). Devoted Brāhmaṇas who repeat the Veḍas according to rules
and who worship Him with praise attain Him. He who is quiescent,
self-controlled, indifferent to worldly objects and resigned, having
centred his mind on Āṭmā sees Āṭmā and becomes one with the Āṭmā of all,
as also he who knows this."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> X

Then Raikva asked Him: "O Lord, where do all things rest? He replied:
"In the worlds of Rasāṭala (or nether worlds)."

"In what are these (Rasāṭala worlds) woven warp and woof?" He replied:
"In the worlds of Bhūḥ."

"In what are these (worlds of Bhūḥ) woven warp and woof?" He replied:
"In the worlds of Bhuvaḥ."

"In what are these (Bhuvaḥ worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the worlds
of Suvaḥ."

"In what are these (Suvaḥ worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the worlds
of Mahaḥ."

In what are these (Mahaḥ worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the
Janaloka."

"In what are these (Jana worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the
Ṭapoloka."

"In what are these (Ṭapolokas) woven warp and woof?" "In the Saṭya
loka."

"In what are these (Saṭya worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the
Prajāpaṭi loka."

"In what are these (Prajāpaṭi worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the
Brahmaloka."

"In what are these (Brahma worlds) woven warp and woof?" "In the
Sarvaloka."

"In what are these (Sarva lokas) woven warp and woof?" "In Āṭmā—which is
Brahman, like beads (in a rosary) warp-wise and woof-wise."

Then he said: "All these rest in Āṭmā, and he who knows this, becomes
Āṭmā itself. Thus is the exposition of Nirvāṇa.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus is the
exposition of the Veḍas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> XI

Again Raikva asked Him: "O Lord! what is the seat of Āṭmā which is
replete with vijñāna? and how does it leave the body and pervade the
universe?" To this He replied: "There is a mass of red flesh in the
middle of the heart. In it, there is a lotus called ḍahara. It buds
forth in many petals like a water-lily. In the middle of it is an ocean
(samuḍra). <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) In its midst is a
koka <span id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51) (bird). In it there are four
nādis. They are ramā, aramā, Ichchhā and punarbhava. Of these, ramā
leads a man of virtue to a happy world. Aramā leads one of sins into the
world of sins. (Passing) through Ichchhā (nādi), one gets whatever he
remembers. Through punarbhava, he splits open the sheaths; after
splitting open the sheaths, he splits open the skull of the head; then
he splits open pṛṭhivī; then āpas; then ṭejas; then vāyu; then ākāś.
Then he splits open manas; then bhūṭāḍi; then mahaṭ; then avyakṭa; then
akshara; then he splits open mṛṭyu and mṛṭyu becomes one with the
supreme God. Beyond this, there is neither Saṭ nor asaṭ, nor Saṭ-asaṭ.
Thus is the exposition of Nirvāṇa; and thus is the exposition of the
Veḍas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> XII <span id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_52)

"Anna (food) came from Nārāyaṇa. It was first cooked in Brahmaloka in
the Mahā-samvarṭaka fire. Again it was cooked in the sun; again it was
cooked in kravyāḍi (lit., the fire that burns raw flesh, etc.); again it
was cooked in jwālakīla (the flaming kīla); then it became pure and not
stale (or fresh). One should eat whatever has fallen to his lot and
without begging; one should never beg any (food)."

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> XIII

"The wise man should conduct himself like a lad, with the nature of a
child, without company, blameless, silent and wise and without
exercising any authority. This description of Kaivalya is stated by
Prajāpaṭi. Having found with certitude the supreme seat, one should
dwell under a tree with torn cloths, unaccompanied, single and engaged
in samāḍhi. He should be longing after the attaining of Āṭmā and having
attained this object, he is desireless, his desires have decayed. He
fears none, though he finds the cause of death in such as elephants,
lions, gadflies, musquitoes, ichneuma, serpents, Yakshas, Rākshasas, and
Ganḍharvas. He will stand like a tree. Though cut down, he will neither
get angry nor tremble. He will stand (or remain) like a lotus. Though
pierced, he will neither get angry nor tremble. He will stand like ākāś;
though struck, he will neither get angry nor tremble. He will stand by
Saṭya (truth), since Āṭmā is Saṭya.

"Pṛṭhivī is the heart (or centre) of all odours; āpas is the heart of
all tastes; ṭejas is the heart of all forms; vāyu is the heart of all
touch; ākāś is the heart of all sounds; avyakṭa is the heart of gīṭās
(or sounds); mṛṭyu is the heart of all Saṭṭvas; and mṛṭyu becomes one
with the Supreme. And beyond Him, there is neither Saṭ nor asaṭ, nor
Saṭ-asaṭ. Thus is the exposition of Nirvāṇa; thus is the exposition of
the Veḍas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> XIV <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)

"Pṛṭhivī is the food, and āpas is the eater; āpas is the food, and
jyoṭis (or fire) is the eater; jyoṭis is the food, and vāyu is the
eater; vāyu is the food, and ākāś is the eater; and akāś is the food and
the inḍriyas (organs) are the eaters; inḍriyas are the food and manas is
the eater; manas is the food, and buḍḍhi is the eater; buḍḍhi is the
food, and avyakṭa is the eater; avyakṭa is the food, and akshara is the
eater; akshara is the food, and

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

mṛṭyu is the eater; and mṛṭyu becomes one with the Supreme. Beyond Him,
there is neither Saṭ nor asaṭ, nor Saṭ-asaṭ. Thus is the exposition of
Nirvāṇa, and thus is the exposition of the Veḍas; yea, thus is the
exposition of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> XV

Again Raikva asked: "O Lord, when this Vijñāna-ghana goes out (of the
body or the universe), what does it burn and how?" To which He replied:
"When it goes away, it burns prāṇa, apāna, vyāna, uḍāna, samāna,
vairambha, mukhya, anṭaryāma, prabhañjana, kumāra, śyena, kṛshṇa, śveṭa,
and nāga. Then it burns pṛṭhivī, āpas, ṭejas, vāyu, and ākāś; then it
burns the waking, the dreaming, the dreamless sleeping and the fourth
states as well as the maharlokas and worlds higher; then it burns the
lokāloka (the highest world forming a limit to the other worlds). Then
it burns ḍharma and aḍharma. Then it burns that which is beyond, is
sunless, limitless, and worldless. Then it burns mahaṭ; it burns
avyakṭa; it burns akshara; it burns mṛṭyu; and mṛṭyu becomes one with
the great Lord. Beyond Him, there is neither Saṭ nor asaṭ, nor Saṭ-asaṭ.
Thus is the exposition of Nirvāṇa, and thus is the exposition of the
Veḍas; yea, thus is the exposition of the Veḍas."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Khaṇda</span> XVI

"This Subāla-Bīja-Brahma-Upanishaḍ should neither be given out nor
taught to one who has not controlled his passions, who has no sons, who
has not gone to a Guru, and having become his disciple has not resided
with him for a year, and whose family and conduct are not known. These
doctrines should be taught to him who has supreme devotion to the Lord
and as much to his Guru. Then these truths shine in his great soul. Thus
is the exposition of Nirvāṇa; thus is the exposition of the Veḍas; yea,
thus is the exposition of the Veḍas."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[61:1](tmu13.htm#fr_36) In the Chhānḍogya
Upanishaḍ, Raikva is said to be the imparter of Samvargaviḍyā.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[61:2](tmu13.htm#fr_37) The absolute
(Parabrahman) is neither Saṭ (Be-ness) nor asaṭ (not-Be-ness) nor a
commingling of both. It is neither spirit nor matter nor a commingling
of both.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[61:3](tmu13.htm#fr_38) Bhūṭāḍi is ṭāmasa
ahaṅkāra according to Vishṇu Purāṇa.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[61:4](tmu13.htm#fr_39) "Above and below" refers
not to the position but only to the state, of matter, gross or subtle.
"In the midst" implies that ākāś and earth are soaked in and with
spirit.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[61:5](tmu13.htm#fr_40) This refers to the first
triune manifestation of Purusha or spirit through time when only there
is activity, Mṛṭyu or Kāla is the first manifestation whereas Yama (or
the God of death) is the secondary one dealing with the death of
creatures lower down.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[61:6](tmu13.htm#fr_41) Khaṇda means divided or
with parts. Parasu literally injuring another. Hence Mṛṭyu with his
khaṇda-parasu divided eternal time into its parts and conditions the
absolute through primordial matter. In the Purāṇas and other books,
Mṛṭyu and Yama are represented as having an axe broken in a conflict.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[62:1](tmu13.htm#fr_42) This refers to the
septenary manifestation from the triune one; also to the sub-septenary
ones.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[62:2](tmu13.htm#fr_43) In other words beings of
Saṭṭva, Rajas and Ṭamas and an admixture of these were born.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[63:1](tmu13.htm#fr_44) The word anāsakena
(non-injury) is repeated in the text which is wrong.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[64:1](tmu13.htm#fr_45) Lit., one producing
sound.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[64:2](tmu13.htm#fr_46) In this chapter are
given out the several correspondences of the ḍevas (or the presiding
spiritual deities) and of the objects to the five organs of sense, the
five organs of action, and the antaḥkaraṇa (or lower mind) composed of
manas, buḍḍhi, ahaṅkāra, and chiṭṭa.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[65:1](tmu13.htm#fr_47) Probably prāṇa, vijñāna,
and ānanḍa refer to the sheaths formed by them.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[66:1](tmu13.htm#fr_48) Although in the original
manas, buḍḍhi, etc., are in the middle, yet they are inserted here after
the karmenḍriyas.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[67:1](tmu13.htm#fr_49) Nārāyaṇa is the
Universal Self. This chapter gives out the pantheistic theory that the
whole universe is nothing but God Nārāyaṇa.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[75:1](tmu13.htm#fr_50) The ocean probably
refers to ākāsic space.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[75:2](tmu13.htm#fr_51) Koka probably refers to
Hamsa.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[75:3](tmu13.htm#fr_52) In this chapter are
related the different fires, the first or primordial anna or
food-substance has to pass through in order to become the gross food.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[76:1](tmu13.htm#fr_53) The causes and effects
are herein given out, the cause of an effect becoming itself the effect
of a higher cause.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. Ṭejobinḍu-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu14)

</div>
