<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu18)  [Next](tmu20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

### ṬĀRASĀRA-UPANISHAḌ <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86)

### OF

### ŚUKLA-YAJURVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>. Bṛhaspaṭi asked Yājñavalkya: "That
which is called Kuruksheṭra is the place of the sacrifice of the Ḍevas
and the spiritual seat of all beings. Therefore where should one go in
order that he may cognize Kuruksheṭra, the place of the sacrifice of the
Ḍevas and the spiritual seat of all beings?" (To which Yājñavalkya
replied:) "Avimukṭa <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87) is Kuruksheṭra,
the place of the sacrifice of the Ḍevas and of the study of Brahman,
because it is there that Ruḍra initiates one into the Ṭāraka <span
id="fr_88"></span>[3](#fn_88) Brahman when prāṇa (life) goes out.
Through this, one becomes immortal and the enjoyer of moksha. Therefore
one should always be in the midst of that place avimukṭa, and should
never leave, O reverend sir, avimukṭa." Thus said Yājñavalkya.

Then Bhāraḍvāja asked Yājñavalkya: "What is ṭāraka? what is that which
causes one to cross (this mundane existence)." To which Yājñavalkya
replied: "Om-Namō-Nārāyaṇāya is the ṭāraka. It should be worshipped as
Chiḍāṭma. Om is a single syllable and of the nature of Āṭmā. N amah is
of two syllables and is of the nature of prakṛṭi (matter). Nārāyarṇāya
is of five syllables and is of the nature of Parabrahman. He who knows
this becomes immortal. Through Om, is Brahma produced; through *Na* is
Vishṇu produced; through *Ma* is Ruḍra produced; through *Nā* is Īśvara
produced; through *Rā* is the Aṇda-Virāt (or Virāt of the universe)
produced; through *Ya* is

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Purusha produced;
through *Nā* is Bhagavān (Lord) produced; and through *Ya* is Paramāṭmā
produced. This Ashtākshara (eight syllables) of Nārāyaṇa is the supreme
and the highest Purusha. Thus is the Ṛgveḍa with the first foot (or
half). That which is Om is the indestructible, the supreme, and Brahman.
That alone should be worshipped. It is this that is of the eight subtle
syllables. And this becomes eight, being of eight forms. A is the first
letter; U is the second; M is the third; Binḍu is the fourth; Nāḍa is
the fifth; Kalā is the sixth; Kalāṭīṭa (that beyond kalā) is the
seventh; and that which is beyond these is the eighth. It is called
Ṭāraka, because it enables one to cross this mundane existence. Know
that Ṭāraka alone is Brahman and it alone should be worshipped." The
(following) verses may be quoted here: "From the letter A came Brahmā
named Jāmbavān (the bear <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89)). From the
letter U came Upenḍra <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90), named Hari.
From the letter M came Śiva, known as Hanumān <span
id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_91). Binḍu is named Īśvara and is Śaṭrughna,
the Lord of the discus itself. Nāḍa should be known as the great Lord
named Bharaṭa and the sound of the conch itself. From Kalā came the
Purusha himself as Lakshmaṇa and the bearer of the earth. Kalāṭīṭa is
known as the goddess Sīṭā Herself. That which is beyond is the Paramāṭmā
named Śrī-Rāma and is the highest Purusha. All this is the explanation
of the letter Om, which is the past, the present, and future, and which
is other than these (*viz*.,) ṭaṭṭva, manṭra, varṇa, (colour), ḍevaṭā
(deity), chhanḍas (metre), ṛk, kāla, śakṭi, and sṛshti (creation). He
who knows this becomes immortal. (Thus is) Yajurveḍa with the second
foot."

Then Bhāraḍvāja asked Yājñavalkya: "Through what manṭra is Paramāṭmā
pleased and shows his own Āṭmā (to persons)? Please tell this."
Yājñavalkya replied:

"(1st Manṭra:) Om. He who is Śrī-Paramāṭmā, Nārāyaṇa, and the Lord
described by (the letter) A and is Jāmbavān (the bear) and Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ,
and Suvaḥ: Salutation to Him."

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

"(2nd Manṭra:) He who is Paramāṭmā, Nārāyaṇa, and the Lord described by
(the letter) U and is Upenḍra (or) Hari and Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, and Suvaḥ:
Salutation to Him.

"(3rd Manṭra:) Om. He who is Śri-Paramāṭmā, Nārāyaṇa, and the Lord
described by (the letter) M and is of the form of Śiva (or), Hanumān and
Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, and Suvaḥ: Salutation to Him.

"(4th Manṭra:) Om. He who is Śri-Paramāṭmā, Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of
Śaṭrughna <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) of the form of Binḍu and
the Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, and Suvaḥ: Salutation to Him.

"(5th Manṭra:) Om. He who is Śri-Paramāṭmā, Nārāyaṇa, and the Lord, and
is Bharaṭa <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_92) of the form of Nāḍa and
the Bhūḥ Bhuvaḥ, and Suvaḥ: Salutation to Him.

"(6th Manṭra:) Om. He who is Śri-Paramāṭmā, Nārāyaṇa, and the Lord, and
is Lakshmaṇa of the form of Kalā and the Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, and Suvaḥ:
Salutation to Him.

"(7th Manṭra:) Om. He who is Śri-Paramāṭmā, Nārāyaṇa, and the Lord, and
is Kalāṭīṭa, the Goddess Sīṭa, of the form of Chiṭ and the Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ,
and Suvaḥ: Salutation to Him.

"(8th Manṭra:) Om. He who is Śri-Paramāṭmā, Nārāyaṇa, and the Lord that
is beyond that (Kalāṭīṭa), is the supreme Purusha, and is the ancient
Purushoṭṭama, the eternal, the immaculate, the enlightened, the
emancipated, the true, the highest bliss, the endless, the secondless,
and the all-full—that Brahman is myself. I am Rāma and the Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ,
and Suvaḥ: Salutation to Him."

He who has mastered this eightfold manṭra is purified by Agni; he is
purified by Vāyu; he is purified by the sun; he is purified by Śiva; he
is known by all the Ḍevas. He attains the fruit of reciting Iṭihāsas,
Purāṇas, Ruḍra (Manṭras), a hundred thousand times. He who repeatedly
remembers (or recites) the Ashtākshara (the eight-syllabled manṭra) of
Nārāyaṇa gains the fruit of the recitation of Gāyaṭrī a hundred thousand
times or of Praṇava (Om) a myriad of times. He purifies (his ancestors)
ten (degrees) above and (his descendants) ten

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (degrees) below.
He attains the state of Nārāyaṇa. He who knows this (attains the state
of Nārāyaṇa).

Like the eye (which sees without any obstacle) the things spread (in the
sky), the wise ever see this supreme seat of Vishṇu. Brāhmaṇas who are
spiritually awake praise in diverse ways and illuminate the supreme
abode of Vishṇu. Thus is the Upanishaḍ. (Thus is) the Sāmaveḍa with the
third foot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[124:1](tmu19.htm#fr_86) This Upanishaḍ treats
of the sāra (essence) for ṭāra (crossing).

<span id="fn_87"></span>[124:2](tmu19.htm#fr_87) It is one of the many
names given to Benares.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[124:3](tmu19.htm#fr_88) Ṭāraka is Om—from *ṭṛ*,
to cross.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[125:1](tmu19.htm#fr_89) As the bear, Brahmā,
incarnated according to the 'Rāmāyaṇa'.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[125:2](tmu19.htm#fr_90) As Upenḍra, Vishṇu
incarnates in the lower ṭala as well in the legs in man.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[125:3](tmu19.htm#fr_91) Hanumān is the
incarnation of vāyu, one of the elements of Śiva.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[126:1](tmu19.htm#fr_93) Bharaṭa is rather the
incarnation of discus or consciousness and Saṭrughna, that of
conch—via., ākāsic sound.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. Nārāyaṇa-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu20)

</div>
