<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu10)  [Next](tmu12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

### PAIṄGALA-UPANISHAḌ <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)

### OF

### ŚUKLA-YAJURVEḌA

##### <span class="smallcaps">Aḍhyāya</span> I

<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>. Paiṅgala, having served under
Yājñavalkya for twelve years, asked him to initiate him into the supreme
mysteries of Kaivalya. To which Yājñavalkya replied thus: "O gentle one,
at first, this (universe) was Saṭ (Be-ness) only. It (Saṭ) is spoken of
as Brahman which is ever free (from the trammels of matter), which is
changeless, which is Truth, Wisdom, and Bliss, and which is full,
permanent, and one only without a second. In It, was like a mirage in
the desert, silver in mother-of-pearl, a person in the pillar, or
colour, etc., in the crystals, mūlaprakṛṭi, having in equal proportions
the guṇas, red, <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20) white, and black,
and being beyond the power of speech. That which is reflected in it is
Sākshi-Chaiṭanya (lit., the witness-consciousness), It (mūlaprakṛṭi)
undergoing again change becomes with the preponderance of Saṭṭva (in
it), Āvaraṇa <span id="fr_21"></span>[3](#fn_21) Śakṭi named avyakṭa.
That which is reflected in it (Avyakṭa) is Īśvara-Chaiṭanya. He (Īśvara)
has Māyā under his control, is omniscient, the original cause of
creation, preservation, and dissolution, and the seed of this universe.
He causes the universe which was latent in Him, to manifest itself
through the bonds of karma of all creatures like a painted canvas
unfurled. Again through the extinction

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

of their karmas, he makes it disappear. In Him alone is latent all the
universe, wrapped up like a painted cloth. Then from the supreme
(Āvaraṇa) Śakṭi, dependent on (or appertaining to Īśvara, arose, through
the preponderance of Rajas, Vikshepa <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)
Śakṭi called Mahaṭ. That which is reflected in it is
Hiraṇyagarbha-Chaiṭanya. Presiding (as He does) over Mahaṭ, He
(Hiraṇyagarbha) has a body, both manifested and unmanifested. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) From Vikshepa Śakṭi, of Hiraṇyagarbha
arose, through the preponderance of Ṭamas, the gross Śakṭi called
ahaṅkāra. That which is reflected in it is Virāt-Chaiṭanya. He (Virāt)
presiding over it (ahaṅkāra) and possessing a manifested body becomes
Vishṇu, the chief Purusha and protector of all gross bodies. From that
Āṭmā arose ākāś; from ākāś arose vāyu, from vāyu agni, from agni apas,
and from apas pṛṭhivī. The five ṭanmāṭras <span
id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24) (rudimentary properties) alone are the
guṇas (of the above five). That generating cause of the universe
(Īśvara) wishing to create and having assumed ṭamo-guṇa, wanted to
convert the elements which were subtle ṭanmāṭras into gross ones. In
order to create the universe, he divided into two parts each of those
divisible elements; and having divided each moiety into four parts, made
a fivefold mixture, each element having moiety of its own original
element and one-fourth of a moiety of each of the other elements, and
thus evolved out of the fivefold classified gross elements, the many
myriads of Brahmāṇdas (Brahma's egg or macrocosm), the fourteen worlds
pertaining to each sphere, and the spherical gross bodies (microcosm)
fit for the (respective) worlds. Having divided the Rajas-essence of the
five elements into four parts, He out of three such parts created (the
five) prāṇas having fivefold function. Again out of the (remaining)
fourth part, He created karmenḍriyas (the organs of action). Having
divided their Saṭṭva-essence into four parts, He out of three such parts
created the antaḥkaraṇa (internal organ) having fivefold

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

function. Out of the (remaining) fourth part of Śaṭṭva-essence, he
created the jñānenḍriyas (organs of sense). Out of the collective
totality of Saṭṭva-essence, He created the ḍevaṭās (deities) ruling over
the organs of sense and actions. Those (ḍevaṭās) He created, He located
in the spheres (pertaining to them). They through His orders, began to
pervade the macrocosm. Through His orders, Virat associated with
ahaṅkāra created all the gross things. Through His orders, Hiraṇyagarbha
protected the subtle things. Without Him, they that were located in
their spheres were unable to move or to do anything. Then He wished to
infuse cheṭana (life) into them. Having pierced the Brahmāṇda (Brahma's
egg or macrocosm) and Brahmaranḍhras (head-fontanelle) in all the
microcosmic heads, He entered within. Though they were (at first) inert,
they were then able to perform karmas like beings of intelligence. The
omniscient Īśvara entered the microcosmic bodies with a particle of Māyā
and being deluded by that Māyā, acquired the state of diva. Identifying
the three bodies with Himself, He acquired the state of the actor and
enjoyer. Associated with the attributes of the states of jāgraṭ, svapna,
sushupṭi, trance, and death and being immersed in sorrow, he is (whirled
about and) deluded like water-lift or potter's wheel, as if subject to
birth and death."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Aḍhyāya</span> II

Paiṅgala again addressed Yājñavalkya thus: "How did Īśvara, who is the
creator, preserver, and destroyer and the Lord of all the worlds,
acquire the state of Jīva?" To which Yājñavalkya replied: "I shall tell
in detail the nature of Jīva and Īśvara, together with a description of
the origin of the gross, subtle, and kāraṇa (causal) bodies. Hear
attentively with one-pointed mind.

"Īśvara having taken a small portion of the quintuplicated mahā-bhūṭas,
(the great elements), made in regular order the gross bodies, both
collective and segregate. The skull, the skin, the intestines, bone,
flesh, and nails are of the essence of pṛṭhivī. Blood, urine, saliva,
sweat and others are of the essence of

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

āpas. Hunger, thirst, heat, delusion, and copulation are of the essence
of agni. Walking, lifting, breathing and others are of the essence of
vāyu. Passion, anger, etc., are of the essence of ākāś. The collection
of these having touch and the rest is this gross body that is brought
about by karma, that is the seat of egoism in youth and other states and
that is the abode of many sins. Then He created prāṇas out of the
collective three parts of Rajas-essence of the fivefold divided
elements. The modifications of prāṇa are prāṇa, apāna, vyāna, udāna, and
samāna; nāga, karma, kṛkara, ḍevaḍaṭṭa and dhanañjaya are the auxiliary
prāṇas. (Of the first five), the heart, anus, navel, throat and the
whole body are respectively the seats. Then He created the karmenḍriyas
out of the fourth part of the Rajas-guṇa. Of 'Olds' and the rest the
mouth, legs, hands, and the organs of secretion and excretion are the
modifications. Talking, walking, lifting, excreting, and enjoying are
their functions. Likewise out of the collective three parts of
Saṭṭva-essence, He created the antaḥkaraṇa (internal organ).
Anṭaḥkaraṇa, <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) manas, buḍḍhi, chiṭṭa,
and ahaṅkāra are the modifications. Saṅkalpa (thought), certitude,
memory, egoism, and anusanḍhāna (inquiry) are their functions. Throat,
face, navel, <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26) heart, and the middle
of the brow are their seats. Out of the (remaining) fourth part of
Saṭṭva-essence, He created the jñānenḍriyas (organs of sense). Ear,
skin, eyes, tongue, and nose are the modifications. Sound, touch, form,
taste, and odour are their functions. Ḍik (the quarters), Vāyu, Arka
(the sun), Varuṇa, Aśvini Ḍevas, Inḍra, Upenḍra, Mṛṭyu (the God of
death), Prajāpaṭi, the Moon, Vishṇu the four-faced Brahma and Śambhu
(Śiva) are the presiding deities of the organs. There are the five kośas
(sheaths), *viz*., annamaya, prāṇamaya, manomaya, vijñānamaya, and
ānanḍamaya. Annamaya sheath is that which is created and developed out
of the essence of food, and is absorbed into the earth which is of the
form of food. It alone is the gross body. The prāṇas with the
karmenḍriyas (organs of action) is the prāṇamaya

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

sheath. Manas with the jñānenḍriyas (organs of sense) is the manomaya
sheath. Buḍḍhi with the jñānenḍriyas is the vijñānamaya sheath. These
three sheaths constitute the liṅgaśarīra (or the subtle body). (That
which tends to) the ajñāna (ignorance) of the Reality (of Āṭmā) is the
ānanḍamaya sheath. This is the kāraṇa body. Moreover the five organs of
sense, the five organs of action, the five prāṇas and others, the five
ākāś and other elements, the four internal organs, aviḍyā, passion,
karma, and Lamas—all these constitute this town (of body).

"Virāt, under the orders of Īśvara having entered this microcosmic body,
and having buḍḍhi as his vehicle, reaches the state of Viśva. Then he
goes by the several names of Viñjānāṭma, Chiḍābhāsa, Viśva, Vyāvahārika,
the one presiding over the waking gross body and the one generated by
karma. Sūṭrāṭmā, under the orders of Īśvara, having entered the
microcosmic subtle body, and having manas as his vehicle, reaches the
Ṭaijasa state. Then he goes by the names of ṭaijasa, prāṭibhāsika and
svapnakalpiṭa (the one bred out of dream). Then under the orders of
Īśvara, he who is coupled with avyakṭa, the vehicle of Māyā having
entered the microcosmic kāraṇa body, reaches the state of prajñā. He
goes then by the names of prajñā, avichchinna, and pāramārṭhika and
sushupṭhi-abhimāni (the presider over sushupṭi). Such sacred sentences,
as Ṭaṭṭvamasi (That art thou) and others, speak of the identity with the
Brahman of the Pāramārṭhika-Jīva enveloped by ajñāna, which is but a
small particle of avyakṭa; but not vyāvahārika and prāṭibhāsika (Jīvas).
It is only that chaiṭanya which is reflected in antaḥkaraṇa that attains
the three states. When it assumes the three states of jāgraṭ, swapna,
and sushupṭi, it is like a water-lift as if grieved, born and dead.
There are five avasṭhās—jāgraṭ, swapna, sushupṭi, mūrchchhā (trance),
and death. Jāgraṭ avasṭhā is that in which there is the perception of
objects, of sound, etc., through the grace of the ḍevaṭā presiding over
each of them. In it, the Jīva, being in the middle of the eyebrows and
pervading the body from head to foot, becomes the agent of actions, such
as doing, hearing and others. He becomes also the enjoyer of the

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

fruits thereof; and such a person doing karma for the fruits thereof
goes to other worlds and enjoys the same there. Like an emperor tired of
worldly acts (in the waking state), he strives to find the path to
retire into his abode within. The svapna avasṭhā is that in which, when
the senses are at rest, there is the manifestation of the knower and the
known, along with the affinities of (things enjoyed in) the waking
state. In this state Viśva alone, its actions in the waking state having
ceased, reaches the state of Ṭaijasa (of ṭejas or effulgence), who moves
in the middle of the nādīs (nerves), illuminates by his lustre the
heterogeneity of this universe which is of the form of affinities, and
himself enjoys according to his wish. The sushupṭi avasṭhā is that in
which the chiṭṭa is sole organ (at play). Just as a bird, tired of
roaming, flies to its nest with its stomach filled, so the Jīva being
tired of the actions of the world in the waking and dreaming states,
enters ajñāna and enjoys bliss. Then trance is attained which resembles
death, and in which one with his collection of organs quails, as it
were, through fear and ajñāna, like one beaten unexpectedly by a hammer,
club or any other weapon. Then death avasṭhā is that which is other than
the avasṭhās of jāgraṭ, svapna, sushupṭi, and trance, which produces
fear in all Jīvas from Brahma down to small insects and which dissolves
the gross body. The Jīva, that is surrounded by aviḍyā and the subtle
elements, takes with it the organs of sense and action, their objects,
and prāṇas along with the kāmic karmas and goes to another world,
assuming another body. Through the ripening of the fruits of previous
karmas, the Jīva has no rest like an insect in a whirlpool. It is only
after many births that the desire of emancipation arises in man through
the ripening of good karma. Then having resorted to a good Guru and
served under him for a long time, one out of many attains moksha, free
from bondage. Bondage is through non-inquiry and moksha through inquiry.
Therefore there should always be inquiry (into Āṭmā). The Reality should
be ascertained through aḍhyāropa (illusory attribution) and apavād
(withdrawal or recession of that idea). Therefore there

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

should be always inquiring into the universe, Jīva and Paramāṭmā. Were
the true nature of Jīva and the universe known, then there remains
Brahman which is non-different from Praṭyagāṭmā."

#### <span class="smallcaps">Aḍhyāya</span> III

Then Paiṅgala asked Yājñavalkya to offer an exposition on the mahāvākyas
(sacred sentences of the Veḍas). To which Yājñavalkya replied: "One
should scrutinise (the sacred sentences), Ṭaṭṭvamasi (That art thou),
Ṭvamṭaḍasi (Thou art That), Ṭwambrahmasi (Thou art Brahman) and
Ahambrahmāsmi (I am Brahman). The word 'Ṭaṭ' denotes the cause of the
universe that is variegated beyond perception, has the characteristics
of omniscience, has Māyā as His vehicle and has the attributes of
Sachchiḍānanḍa. It is He that is the basis of the notion 'I' which has
the differentiated knowledge produced by antaḥkaraṇa; and it is He that
is denoted by the word 'Ṭwam' (Thou). That is the undifferentiated
Brahman which remains as the aim (or meaning) of the words Ṭaṭ and Ṭvam
after freeing itself from Māyā and Aviḍyā which are respectively the
vehicles of Paramāṭmā and Jīvāṭmā. The inquiry into the real
significance of the sentences Ṭaṭṭvamasi and Ahambrahmāsmi forms (what
is called) śravaṇa (hearing—the first stage of inquiry). To inquire in
solitude into the significance of śravaṇa is manana. The concentration
of the mind with one-pointedness upon that which should be sought after
by śravaṇa and manana is niḍiḍhyāsana. Samāḍhi is that state in which
chiṭṭa having given up (the conception of the difference of) the
meditator and the meditation, becomes of the form of the meditated like
a lamp in a place without wind. Then arise the modifications pertaining
to Āṭmā. Such (modifications) cannot be known; but they can only be
inferred through memory (of the samāḍhi state). The myriads of karmas
committed in this beginningless cycle of rebirths are annihilated only
through them. Through proficiency in practice, the current of
nectar <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

always rains down in diverse ways. Therefore those who know Yoga call
this samāḍhi, ḍharma-megha (cloud). Through these (modifications of
Āṭmā), the collection of affinities is absorbed without any remainder
whatever. When the accumulated good and bad karmas are wholly destroyed,
these sentences (Ṭaṭṭvamasi and Ahambrahmāsmi), like the myrobalan in
the palm of the hand, bring him face to face with the ultimate Reality,
though It was before invisible. Then he becomes a Jīvanmukṭa.

"Īśvara wished to produce non-quintuplication (or involution) in the
fivefold differentiated elements. Having drawn into their cause Brahma's
egg and its effects of worlds, and mixed together the subtle organs of
sense and action and the four internal organs and dissolved all things
composed of the elements into their cause, the five elements, He then
caused pṛṭhivī to merge into water, water into agni, agni into vāyu, and
vāyu into ākāś, ākāś into ahaṅkāra, akaṅkāra into mahaṭ, mahaṭ into
avyakṭa, and avyakṭa into Purusha in regular order. Virat, Hiraṇyagarbha
and Īśvara being freed from the vehicle of Māyā, are absorbed into
Paramāṭmā. This gross body composed of the five differentiated elements
and obtained through accumulated karma, is merged into its subtle state
of non-quintuplicated elements, through the extinction of (bad) karma
and increase of good karma, then attains its kāraṇa (causal) state and
(finally) is absorbed into its cause, (*viz*.,) Kūtasṭha-Praṭyagāṭma.
Viśva and Ṭaijasa and Prājña, their upāḍhi (of aviḍyā) having become
extinct, are absorbed in Praṭyagāṭmā. This sphere (of universe) being
burnt up by the fire of jñāna is absorbed along with its cause into
Paramāṭmā. Therefore a Brāhmaṇa should be careful and always meditate
upon the identity of Ṭaṭ and Ṭvam. Then Āṭmā shines, like the sun freed
from the (obscuration of the) clouds. One should meditate upon Āṭmā in
the midst (of the body) like a lamp within a jar.

"Āṭmā, the Kūtasṭha, should be meditated upon as being of the size of a
thumb, as being of the nature of the jyoṭis (light) without smoke, as
being within, illuminating all and as being

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

indestructible. That Muni (sage) who meditates (upon Āṭmā always) until
sleep or death comes upon him passes into the state of (Jīvanmukṭi)
emancipation like the immovable state of the wind. Then there remains
that One (Brahman) without sound, touch, free from destruction, without
taste or odour, which is eternal, which is without beginning or end,
which is beyond, the Ṭaṭṭva of Mahaṭ, and which is permanent and without
stain or disease."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Aḍhyāya</span> IV

Then Paiṅgala addressed Yājñavalkya thus: "To the wise, what is their
karma? And what is their state?" To which Yājñavalkya replied: "A lover
of moksha, having humility <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) and other
possessions (or virtues), enables twenty-one generations to cross (to
Āṭmā). One through his being a Brahmaviṭ <span
id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) alone enables 101 generations to cross.
Know Āṭmā to be the rider and the body as the chariot. Know also buḍḍhi
as the charioteer and manas as the reins. The wise say the organs are
the horses, the objects are the roads (through which the horses travel)
and the hearts are the moving balloons. Mahāṛshis say that Āṭmā, when
associated with the sense organs and manas, is the enjoyer. Therefore it
is the actual Nārāyaṇa alone that is established in the heart. Till his
prārabḍha karma <span id="fr_30"></span>[3](#fn_30) is worn out, he
exists (in his body) as in the (cast-off) slough of a serpent (without
any desire for the body). An emancipated person having such a body roves
about like a moon gladdening all with no settled place of abode. He
gives up his body whether in a sacred place, or in a chaṅdāla's
(out-caste's) house (without any distinction whatever), and attains
salvation. Such a body (when seen by a person) should be offered as a
sacrifice to ḍik (the quarters) or should be buried (underground). It is
only to Purusha (the wise) that sannyāsa (renunciation) is ordained and
not to others. In case of the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

death of an ascetic who is of the form (or has attained the nature) of
Brahman, there is no pollution (to be observed); neither the ceremonies
of fire (as burning the body, homa, etc.); nor the piṇda (balls of
rice), nor ceremonies of water, nor the periodical ceremonies (monthly
and yearly). Just as a food once cooked is not again cooked, so a body
once burnt (by the fire of wisdom) should not be burnt (or exposed to
fire) again. To one whose body was burnt by the fire of wisdom there is
neither śrāḍḍha <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) (required to be
performed), nor (funeral) ceremony. So long as there is the upāḍhi (of
non-wisdom) in one, so long should he serve the Guru. He should conduct
himself towards his Guru's wife and children as he does to his Guru. If
being of a pure mind, of the nature of immaculate Chiṭ and resigned, and
having the discrimination arising from the attainment of wisdom "I am
He," he should concentrate his heart on Paramāṭmā and obtain firm peace
in his body, then he becomes of the nature of Jyoṭis, void of manas and
buḍḍhi. Of what avail is milk to one content with nectar? Of what avail
are the Veḍas to him who has known his Āṭmā thus? For a Yogin content
with the nectar of wisdom, there is nothing more to be done. If he has
to do anything, then he is not a knower of Ṭaṭṭva. Praṭyagāṭmā though
far (or difficult of attainment), is not far; though in the body, he is
devoid of it (since) he is all-pervading. After having purified the
heart and contemplated on the One without disease (*viz*., Brahman), the
cognizing of 'I' as the supreme and the all is the highest bliss. Like
water mixed with water, milk with milk, and ghee with ghee, so Jīvāṭmā
and Paramāṭmā are without difference. When the body is rendered bright
through wisdom and the buḍḍhi becomes of the partless One, then the wise
man burns the bondage of karma through the fire of Brahma-jñāna. Then he
becomes purified, of the nature of the non-dual named Parmeśvara and the
light like the stainless ākāś. Like water mixed with water, so Jīva
(-Āṭmā) becomes upāḍhiless (or freed from the bonds of matter). Āṭma,
is, like ākāś, of an invisible form. (Therefore) the inner Āṭmā is
invisible like vāyu. Though he is within and without, he is the
immovable

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Āṭmā. Through the
torch of wisdom, the internal Āṭmā sees (or knows) .

"A wise man, in whatever place or manner he dies, is absorbed in that
place like the all-pervading ākāś. It should be known that Āṭmā is
absorbed as truly as the ākāś in the pot (when broken). Then he attains
the all-pervading wisdom-light that is without support. Though men
should perform ṭapas standing on one leg for a period of 1,000 years, it
will not, in the least, be equal to one-sixteenth part of ḍhyānayoga.
One desirous of knowing what jñāna (wisdom) and jñeya (the object to be
known) are, will not be able to attain his desired end, even though he
may study the Śāsṭras for 1,000 years. That which is alone should be
known as the indestructible. That which exists (in this world) is only
impermanent. (Therefore) after having given up (the study of) the many
Śāsṭras, one should worship that which is saṭya (truth). The many
karmas, purity (of mind and heart), japa (the muttering of manṭras),
sacrifice and pilgrimages—all these should be observed till Ṭaṭṭva is
known. For Mahatmas (noble souls) to be always in (the conception of) 'I
am Brahman' conduces to their salvation. There are two causes (that
lead) to bondage and emancipation. They are 'mine' and 'not mine'.
Through 'mine' creatures are bound, whereas through 'not mine' they are
released from bondage. When the mind attains the state of Unmani (above
manas, *viz*., when it is destroyed), then there is never the conception
of duality. When the Unmani state occurs, then is the supreme Seat
(attained). (After which) wherever the mind goes, there is the supreme
Seat (to it, *viz*., the mind enjoys salvation wherever it is). That
which is equal in all is Brahman alone. One may attain the power to
strike the ākāś with his fist; he may appease his hunger by eating husks
(of grain), but never shall he attain emancipation who has not the
self-cognition, 'I am Brahman'.

"Whoever recites this Upanishaḍ becomes as immaculate as Agni. He
becomes as pare as Brahma. He becomes as pure as Vāyu. He becomes like
one who has bathed in all the holy waters. He becomes like one who has
studied all the Veḍas. He becomes like one that has undergone all veḍic
observances. He

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

obtains the fruit of the recitation of Iṭihāsas <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32), Purāṇas and Ruḍramanṭras a lakh of times.
He becomes like one that has pronounced Praṇava (Om) ten thousand times.
He purifies his ancestors ten degrees removed and his descendants ten
degrees removed. He becomes purified of all those that sit with him for
dinner. He becomes a great personage. He becomes purified from the sins
of the murder of a Brahman, the drinking of alcohol, theft of gold, and
sexual cohabitation with Guru's wife, and from the sins of associating
with those that commit such sins.

"Like the eye pervading the ākaś (seeing without effort everything
above), a wise man sees (always) the supreme Seat of Vishṇu. The
Brāhmaṇas who have always their spiritual eyes wide open praise and
illuminate in diverse ways the supreme Seat of Vishṇu. Om: This
Upanishaḍ is truth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[43:1](tmu11.htm#fr_19) This Upanishaḍ is so
called after the questioner.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[43:2](tmu11.htm#fr_20) Rajas, Saṭṭva and Ṭamas
colours.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[43:3](tmu11.htm#fr_21) Āvaraṇa Śakṭi literally
means the veiling or contracting power. This is it that produces egoism.
It may be called the centripetal force.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[44:1](tmu11.htm#fr_22) Vikshepa Ṣakṭi (lit.,)
is the expanding power. It may be called the centrifugal force.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[44:2](tmu11.htm#fr_23) The account given here
though differing from that in other books may be justified.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[44:3](tmu11.htm#fr_24) They are sound, touch,
form, taste, and odour.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[46:1](tmu11.htm#fr_25) The fifth aspect of
antaḥkaraṇa is made to be itself, having the function of anusanḍhāna or
inquiry, though others call it otherwise.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[46:2](tmu11.htm#fr_26) Navel is the seat of
chiṭṭa.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[49:1](tmu11.htm#fr_27) It is said that in
samāḍhi astral nectar flows from the head down which the Yogins are said
to drink and which gives them infinite bliss.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[51:1](tmu11.htm#fr_28) Humility and other
virtues twenty in number are described in *Bhagavaḍ-Giṭā*, Chapter XIII.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[51:2](tmu11.htm#fr_29) There are four classes
of Brahma Jñānīs or initiates of whom this is one.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[51:3](tmu11.htm#fr_30) That portion of past
karma which is being enjoyed in this life.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[52:1](tmu11.htm#fr_31) The yearly ceremonies in
honour of the dead.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[54:1](tmu11.htm#fr_32) Iṭihāsas are the
Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhāraṭa.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. Aḍhyāṭma-Upanishaḍ of Śukla-Yajurveḍa](tmu12)

</div>
