<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu28)  [Next](tmu30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

### VARĀHA <span id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_175)-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### KṚSHṆA-YAJURVEḌA

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> I

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> great sage Ṛbhu performed penance for
twelve ḍeva (divine) years. At the end of the time, the Lord appeared
before him in the form of a boar. He said: "Rise, rise and choose your
boon." The sage got up and having prostrated himself before him said: "O
Lord, I will not, in my dream, wish of thee those things that are
desired by the worldly. All the Veḍas, Śāsṭras, Iṭihāsas <span
id="fr_190"></span>[2](#fn_176) and all the hosts of other sciences, as
well as Brahma and all the other Ḍevas, speak of emancipation as
resulting from a knowledge of thy nature. So impart to me that science
of Brahman which treats of thy nature."

Then the boar-shaped Bhagavān (Lord) said: "Some disputants hold that
there are twenty-four ṭaṭṭvas (principles) and some thirty-six, whilst
others maintain that there are ninety-six. I shall relate them in their
order. Listen with an attentive mind. The organs of sense are five,
*viz*.: ear, skin, eye and others. The organs of action are five,
*viz*.: mouth, hand, leg and others. Prāṇas (vital airs) are five; <span
id="fr_191"></span>[3](#fn_177) sound and others (*viz*., rudimentary
principles) are five. <span id="fr_192"></span>[4](#fn_178) Manas,
buḍḍhi, chiṭṭa and ahaṅkāra are four; <span
id="fr_193"></span>[5](#fn_179) thus

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

those that know Brahman know these to be the twenty-four ṭaṭṭvas.
Besides these, the wise hold the quintuplicated elements to be five,
*viz*.: earth, water, fire, vāyu and ākāś; the bodies to be three,
*viz*.: the gross, the subtle and the kāraṇa or causal; the states of
consciousness to be three, *viz*.: the waking, the dreaming and the
dreamless sleeping. The munis know the total collection of ṭaṭṭvas to be
thirty-six (coupled with jīva).

"With these ṭaṭṭvas, there are six changes, *viz*.: existence, birth,
growth, transformation, decay and destruction. Hunger, thirst, grief,
delusion, old age and death are said to be the six infirmities. Skin,
blood, flesh, fat, marrow and bones are said to be the six sheaths.
Passion, anger, avarice, delusion, pride and malice are the six kinds of
foes. Viśva, Ṭaijasa and Prājña <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_180)
are the three aspects of the jīva. Saṭṭva, rajas and ṭamas are the three
guṇas (qualities). Prārabḍha, <span id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_181)
sañchiṭa and āgāmin are the three karmas. Talking, lifting, walking,
excreting and enjoying are the five actions (of the organs of action);
and there are also thought, certainty, egoism, compassion, memory
(functions of manas, etc.,), complacency, sympathy and indifference: ḍik
(the quarters), Vāyu, Sun, Varuṇa, <span id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_182)
Aśvini ḍevas, <span id="fr_197"></span>[4](#fn_183) Agni, Inḍra,
Upenḍra, <span id="fr_198"></span>[5](#fn_184) and Mṛṭyu (death): and
then the moon, the four-faced Brahma, Ruḍra, Ksheṭrajña, <span
id="fr_199"></span>[6](#fn_185) and Īśvara. Thus these are the
ninety-six ṭaṭṭvas. Those that worship, with devotion, me of the form of
boar, who am other than the aggregate of these ṭaṭṭvas and am without
decay are released from ajñāna and its effects and become jīvanmukṭas.
Those that know these ninety-six ṭaṭṭvas will attain salvation in
whatever order of life they may be, whether they have matted hair or are
of shaven head or have (only) their tuft of hair on. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[7](#fn_186) There is no doubt of this. Thus ends the
first chapter."

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> II

The great Ṛbhu (again) addressed the Lord of Lakshmī of the form of boar
thus: "O Lord, please initiate me into the supreme Brahmaviḍyā (or
science)." Then the Lord who removes the miseries of his devotees being
thus questioned, answered thus: "Through (the right observance of) the
duties of one's own caste and orders of life, through religious
austerities and through the pleasing of the guru (by serving him
rightly), arise to persons the four, vairāgya, etc. They are the
discrimination of the eternal from the non-eternal; indifference to the
enjoyments of this and the other worlds; the acquisition of the six
virtues, śama, <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_187) etc., and the
longing after liberation. These should be practised. Having subdued the
sensual organs and having given up the conception of 'mine' in all
objects, you should place your consciousness of 'I' in (or identify
yourself with) me, who am the witness Chaiṭanya (consciousness). To be
born as a human being is difficult—more difficult it is to be born as a
male being—and more so is it to be born as a Brahman. Even then, if the
fool does not cognise through the hearing, <span
id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_188) etc., of veḍānṭa, the true nature of the
Sachchiḍānanḍa (of Brahman) that is all-pervading, and that is beyond
all caste and orders of life, when will he obtain moksha? I alone am
happiness. There is none other. If there is said to be another, then it
is not happiness. There is no such thing as love, except on my account.
The love that is on account of me is not natural to me. As I am the seat
of supreme love, that 'I am not' is not. He who is sought after by all,
saying "I should become such," is myself, the all-pervading. How can
non-light affect Āṭmā, the self-shining which is no other than the light
whence originates the words 'I am not light'. My firm conviction is,
whoever knows for certain that (Āṭmā) which is self-shining and has
itself no basis (to rest upon), is one of vijñāna.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

"The universe, jīva, Īśvara, māyā and others do not really exist, except
my full Āṭmā. I have not their characteristics. Karma which has ḍhāraṇā
and other attributes and is of the form of darkness and ajñāna is not
fit to touch (or affect) me, who am Āṭmā, the self-resplendent. That man
who sees (his) Āṭmā which is all-witness and is beyond all caste and
orders of life as of the nature of Brahman, becomes himself Brahman.
Whoever sees, through the evidence of veḍānṭa, this visible universe as
the Supreme Seat which is of the form of light, attains moksha at once.
When that knowledge which dispels the idea that this body (alone) is
Āṭmā, arises firmly in one's mind as was before the knowledge that this
body (alone) is Āṭmā, then that person, even though he does not desire
moksha, gets it. Therefore how will a person be bound by karma, who
always enjoys the bliss of Brahman which has the characteristics of
Sachchiḍānanḍa, and which is other than ajñāna? Persons with spiritual
eyes see Brahman, that is the witness of the three states that has the
characteristics of be-ness, wisdom and bliss, that is the underlying
meaning of the words 'Thou' (Ṭvam) and 'I' (Aham), and that is untouched
by all the stains. As a blind man does not see the sun that is shining,
so an ignorant person does not see (Brahman). Prajñāna alone is Brahman.
It has truth and prajñāna as its characteristics. By thus cognising
Brahman well, a person becomes immortal. One who knows his own Āṭmā as
Brahman, that is bliss, and without duality and guṇas (qualities), and
that is truth and absolute consciousness is not afraid of anything. That
which is consciousness alone which is all-pervading, which is eternal,
which is all-full, which is of the form of bliss, and which is
indestructible, is the only true Brahman. It is the settled
determination of Brahmajñānīs that there *is* naught else but that. As
the world appears dark to the blind and bright to those having good
eyes, so this world full of manifold miseries to the ignorant is full of
happiness to the wise. In me, of the form of boar, who am infinite and
the Bliss of absolute Consciousness, if there is the conception of
non-dualism, where then is bondage? And who is the one to be
emancipated? The real nature of all

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

embodied objects is ever the absolute Consciousness. Like the pot seen
by the eyes, the body and its aggregates are not (*viz*., do not really
exist). Knowing, as Āṭma, all the locomotive and fixed worlds that
appear as other than Āṭmā, meditate upon them as 'It I am'. Such a
person then enjoys his real nature. There is no other to be enjoyed than
one-Self. If there is anything that is, then Brahman alone has that
attribute. One who is perfect in Brahmajñāna, though he always sees this
established universe, does not see it other than his Āṭmā. By cognising
clearly my form, one is not trammelled by karma. He is an undaunted
person who by his own experience cognises as his own real nature all
(the universe and Brahman) that is without the body and the organs of
sense—that is the all-witness—that is the one noumenal vijñāna, that is
the blissful Āṭmā (as contrasted with jīvāṭmā or the lower self) and
that is the self-resplendent. He is one that should be known as 'I'
(myself). O Ṛbhu, may you become He. After this, there will be never any
experience of the world. Thereafter there will always be the experience
of the wisdom of one's own true nature. One who has thus known fully
Āṭmā has neither emancipation nor bondage. Whoever meditates, even for
one muhūrṭa (48 minutes) through the cognition of one's own real form,
upon Him who is dancing as the all-witness, is released from all
bondage. Prostrations—prostrations to me who am in all the elements, who
am the Chiḍāṭmā (*viz*., Āṭmā of the nature of wisdom) that is eternal
and free and who am the Praṭyagāṭmā. O Ḍevaṭā, you are I. I am you.
Prostrations on account of myself and yourself who are infinite and who
are Chiḍāṭmā, myself being the supreme Īśa (Lord) and yourself being
Śiva (of a beneficent nature). What should I do? Where should I go? What
should I reject? (Nothing, because) the universe is filled by me as with
the waters of the universal deluge. Whoever gives up (fond) love of the
external, love of the internal and love of the body and thus gives up
all associations, is merged in me. There is no doubt about it. That
Paramahamsa (ascetic) who, though living in the world, keeps aloof from
human congregation as from serpent, who regards a beautiful woman as a
(living)

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

corpse and the endless sensual objects as poison, and who has abandoned
all passion and is indifferent towards all objects is no other than
Vāsuḍeva, <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_189) (*viz*.,) myself. This
is saṭya (truth). This is nothing but truth. It is truth alone that is
now said. I am Brahman, the truth. There is naught else but I.

"(The word) 'upavāsa' (lit., dwelling near) signifies the dwelling near
(or union) of jīvāṭmā and Paramāṭmā and not (the religious observance as
accepted by the worldy of) emaciating the body through fasts. To the
ignorant, what is the use of the mere drying up of the body? By beating
about the hole of a snake, can we be said to have killed the big snake
within, A man is said to attain paroksha (indirect) wisdom when he knows
(theoretically) that there is Brahman; but he is said to attain
sākshāṭkāra (direct cognition) when he knows (or realises) that he is
himself Brahman. When a yogin knows his Āṭmā to be the Absolute, then he
becomes a jīvanmukṭa. To mahatmas, to be always in the state 'I am
Brahman' conduces to their salvation. There are two words for bondage
and moksha. They are 'mine' and 'not mine'. Man is bound by 'mine', but
he is released by 'not mine'. He should abandon all the thoughts
relating to externals and so also with reference to internals. O Ṛbhu
having given up all thoughts, you should rest content (in your Āṭmā)
ever.

"The whole of the universe is caused through saṅkalpa alone. It is only
through saṅkalpa that the universe manifests. Having abandoned the
universe, which is of the form of saṅkalpa and having fixed your mind
upon the nirvikalpa (one which is changeless), meditate upon my abode in
your heart. O most intelligent being, pass your time in meditating upon
me, glorifying me in songs, talking about me to one another and thus
devoting yourself entirely to me as the Supreme. Whatever is chiṭ
(consciousness) in the universe is only Chinmāṭra. This universe is
Chinmaya only. You are Chiṭ. I am Chiṭ: contemplate upon the worlds also
as Chiṭ. Make the desires nil. Always be without any stain. How then can
the bright lamp of Āṭmic vijñāna

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

arising through the Veḍas be affected by the karma arising from the
ignorance of the actor and the agent? Having given up not-Āṭmā and being
in the world unaffected by it, delight only in the Chinmāṭra within,
ever intent on the One. As the ākāś of the pot and that of the house are
both located in the all-pervading ākāś, so the jīvas and Īśvara are only
evolved out of me, the Chidākāś (the one ākāś of universal
consciousness). So that which did not exist before the evolution of
Āṭmās (jīvas and Īśvara) and that which is rejected at the end (*viz*.,
universal deluge) is called māyā by Brahmajñānīs through their
discrimination. Should māyā and its effects (the universe) be
annihilated, there is no state of Īśvara, there is no state of jīva.
Therefore like the ākāś without its vehicle, I am the immaculate and
Chiṭ.

"The creation, sentient as well as non-sentient from īkshaṇā (thinking)
to praveśa (entry) (as stated in Chhānḍogya-Upanishaḍ, Prapāthaka VI,
Khaṇdas II and III) of those having the forms of jīvas and Īśvara is due
to the creation (or illusion) of Īśvara; while the samsāra (worldly
existence) from the waking state to salvation is due to the creation of
jīva. So the karmas ordained in the sacrifice (called) Ṭriṇāchaka (so
called after Nachikeṭas of Katha-Upanishaḍ) to yoga are dependent upon
the illusion of Īśvara; while (the systems from) Lokāyaṭa (atheistical
system) to sāṅkhya rest on the illusion of jīva. Therefore aspirants
after salvation should never make their heads enter into the field of
controversy regarding jīva and Īśvara. But with an undisturbed mind, the
ṭaṭṭvas of Brahman should be investigated. Those who do not cognise the
ṭaṭṭva of the secondless Brahman are all deluded persons only. Whence
(then) is salvation to them? Whence then is happiness (to them) in this
universe? What if they have the thoughts of the superiority and
inferiority (of Īśvara and jīva)? Will sovereignty and mendicancy
(experienced by a person) in the dreaming state affect him in his waking
state? When buḍḍhi is absorbed in ajñāna, then it is termed, by the
wise, sleep. Whence then is sleep to me who have not ajñāna and its
effects? When buḍḍhi is in full bloom, then it is said to be the jāgraṭ
(waking state).

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As I have no
changes, etc., there is no waking state to me. The moving about of
buḍḍhi in the subtle nādis constitutes the dreaming state. In me without
the act of moving about, there is no dreaming. Then at the time of
sushupṭi when all things are absorbed, enveloped by ṭamas, he then
enjoys the highest bliss of his own nature in an invisible state. If he
sees everything as Chiṭ without any difference, he alone is an actual
vijñānī. He alone is Śiva. He alone is Hari. He alone is Brahma. This
mundane existence which is an ocean of sorrow, is nothing but a
long-lived dream, or an illusion of the mind or a long-lived reign of
the mind. From rising from sleep till going to bed, the one Brahman
alone should be contemplated upon. By causing to be absorbed this
universe which is but a superimposition, the chiṭṭa partakes of my
nature. Having annihilated all the six powerful enemies, through their
destruction become the non-dual One like the scent-elephant. Whether the
body perishes now or lasts the age of moon and stars, what matters it to
me having Chiṭ alone as my body? What matters it to the ākāś in the pot,
whether it (the pot) is destroyed now or exists for a long time. While
the slough of a serpent lies cast off lifeless in its hole, it (the
serpent) does not evince any affection towards it. Likewise the wise do
not identify themselves with their gross and subtle bodies. If the
delusive knowledge (that the universe is real) with its cause should be
destroyed by the fire of āṭmajñāna, the wise man becomes bodiless,
through the idea 'It (Brahman) is not this; It is not this.' Through the
study of Śāsṭras, the knowledge of reality (of the universe) perishes.
Through direct perception of truth, one's fitness for action (in this
universe) ceases. With the cessation of prārabḍha (the portion of the
past karma which is being enjoyed in this life), the destruction of the
manifestation (of the universe) takes place. Māyā is thus destroyed in a
threefold manner. If within himself no identification (of jīva) with
Brahman takes place, the state (of the separateness) of jīva does not
perish. If the non-dual one is truly discerned, then all affinities (for
objects) cease. With the cessation of prārabḍha (arising from the
cessation of

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

affinities), there is that of the body. Therefore it is certain that
māyā perishes thus entirely.

"If it is said that all the universe is, that Brahman alone is that is
of the nature of Saṭ. If it is said that the universe shines, thon it is
Brahman alone that shines. (The mirage of) all the water in an oasis is
really no other than the oasis itself. Through. inquiry of one's Self,
the three worlds (above, below and middle) are only of the nature of
Chiṭ. In Brahman, which is one and alone, the essence of whose nature is
absolute Consciousness and which is remote from the differences of jīva,
Īśvara and guru, there is no ajñāna. Such being the case, where then is
the occasion for the universe there? I am that Brahman which is all
full. While the full moon of wisdom is robbed of its lustre by the rāhu
(one of the two nodes of the moon) of delusion, all actions <span
id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_190) such as the rites of bathing,
alms-giving and sacrifice performed during the time of eclipse are all
fruitless. As salt dissolved in water becomes one, so if Āṭmā and manas
become identified, it is termed samāḍhi. Without the grace of a good
(perfect) guru, the abandonment of sensual objects is very difficult of
attainment; so also the perception of (divine) truth and the attainment
of one's true state. Then the state of being in one's own self shines of
its own accord in a yogin in whom jñāna-śakṭi <span
id="fr_205"></span>[2](#fn_191) has dawned and who has abandoned all
karmas. The (property of) fluctuation is natural to mercury and mind. If
either mercury is bound (or consolidated) or mind is bound (or
controlled), what then on this earth cannot be accomplished? He who
obtains mūrchchhā <span id="fr_206"></span>[3](#fn_192) cures all.
diseases. The dead are brought to life again. He who has bound (his mind
or mercury) is able to move in the air. Therefore mercury and mind
confer upon one the state of Brahman. The master of inḍriyas (the
organs) is manas (mind). The master of manas is prāṇa. The master of
prāṇa is laya (absorption yoga). Therefore laya-yoga should be
practised. To the yogins, laya (-yoga) is said to be

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

without actions and changes. This laya (absorption) of mind which is
above speech and in which one has to abandon all saṅkalpas and to give
up completely all actions, should be known through one's own
(experience). As an actress, though subject (or dancing in harmony) to
music, cymbals and other musical instruments of time, has her mind
intent upon the protection of the pot on her head, so the yogin, though
intent for the time being upon the hosts of objects, never leaves off
the mind contemplating on Brahman. The person who desires all the wealth
of yoga should, after having given up all thoughts, practise with a
subdued mind concentration on nāḍa (spiritual sound) alone."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> III

"The One Principle cannot at any time become of manifold forms. As I am
the partless, there is none else but myself. Whatever is seen and
whatever is heard is no other than Brahman. I am that Parabrahman, which
is the eternal, the immaculate, the free, the one, the undivided bliss,
the non-dual, the truth, the wisdom, and the endless. I am of the nature
of bliss; I am of undivided wisdom; I am the supreme of the supreme; I
am the resplendent absolute Consciousness. As the clouds do not touch
the ākāś, so the miseries attendant on mundane existence do not affect
me. Know all to be happiness through the annihilation of sorrow and all
to be of the nature of saṭ (be-ness) through the annihilation of asaṭ
(not-be-ness). It is only the nature of Chiṭ (Consciousness) that is
associated with this visible universe. Therefore my form is partless. To
an exalted yogin, there is neither birth nor death, nor going (to other
spheres), nor returning (to earth); there is no stain or purity or
knowledge but (the universe) shines to him as absolute Consciousness.
Practise always silence 'I am (*viz*., that you yourself are)
Parabrahman' which is truth and absolute Consciousness, which is
undivided and non-dual, which is invisible, which is stainless, which is
pure, which is second-less, and which is beneficent. It (Brahman) is not
subject to

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

birth and death, happiness and misery. It is not subject to caste, law,
family and goṭra (clan). Practise silence—I am Chiṭ which is the
vivarṭa-upāḍāna <span id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_193) (*viz*., the
illusory cause) of the universe. Always practise silence—I am (*viz*.,
you are) the Brahman, that is the full, the secondless, the undivided
consciousness which has neither the relationship nor the differences
existing in the universe and which partakes of the essence of the
non-dual and the supreme Saṭ and Chiṭ.

"That which always is and that which preserves the same nature during
the three periods of time, unaffected by anything, is my eternal form of
Saṭ. Even the state of happiness which is eternal without upāḍhis
(vehicles) and which is superior to all the happiness derivable from
sushupṭi is of my bliss only. As by the rays of the sun, thick gloom is
soon destroyed, so darkness, the cause of rebirth is destroyed by Hari
(Vishṇu) *viz*., the sun's lustre. Through the contemplation and worship
of my (Hari's) feet, every person is delivered from his ignorance. The
means of destroying deaths and births is only through the contemplation
of my feet. As a lover of wealth praises a wealthy man, so if with
earnestness a person praises the Cause of the universe, who will not be
delivered from bondage?

"As in presence of the sun the world of its own accord begins to perform
its actions, so in my presence all the worlds are animated to action. As
to the mother-of-pearl, the illusory conception of silver is falsely
attributed, so to me is falsely attributed through māyā this universe
which is composed of mahaṭ, etc. I am not with those differences that
are (observable) in the body of low caste men, the body of cow, etc.,
the fixed ones, the bodies of brāhmaṇas and others. As to a person, even
after being relieved from the misconception of the directions, the (same
misconception of) direction continues (as before),

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

just so is to me the universe though destroyed by vijñāna. Therefore the
universe is not. I am neither the body nor the organs of sense and
action, nor prāṇas, nor manas, nor buḍḍhi, nor ahaṅkāra, nor chiṭṭa, nor
māyā, nor the universe including ākāś and others. Neither am I the
actor, the enjoyer, nor he who causes the enjoyment. I am Brahman that
is Chiṭ, Saṭ and Ānanḍa alone and that is Janārdaṇa (Vishṇu).

"As, through the fluctuation of water, the sun (reflected therein) is
moved, so Āṭmā arises in this mundane existence through its mere
connection with ahaṅkāra. This mundane existence has chiṭṭa as its root.
This (chiṭṭa) should be cleansed by -repeated effort. How is it you have
your confidence in the greatness of chiṭṭa? Alas, where is all the
wealth of the kings! Where are the Brahmās? Where are all the worlds?
All old ones are gone. Many fresh evolutions have occurred. Many crores
of Brahmās have passed away. Many kings have flitted away like particles
of dust. Even to a jñānī, the love of the body may arise through the
asura (demoniacal) nature. If the asura nature should arise in a wise
man, his knowledge of truth becomes fruitless. Should rajas and others
generated in us be burnt by the fire of discriminative (divine) wisdom,
how can they germinate again? Just as a very intelligent person delights
in the shortcomings of another, so if one finds out his own faults (and
corrects them) who will not be relieved from bondage? O Lord of munis,
only he who has not āṭmajñāna and who is not an emancipated person,
longs after siḍḍhis. He attains such siḍḍhis through medicine, <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_194) (or wealth), manṭras, religious works,
time and skill. In the eyes of an āṭmajñānī, these siḍḍhis are of no
importance. One who has become an āṭmajñānī, one who has his sight
solely on āṭmā, and one who is content with Āṭmā (the higher self)
through (his) āṭmā (or the lower self), never follows (the dictates of)
aviḍyā. Whatever exists in this world, he knows to be of the nature of
aviḍyā. How then will an āṭmajñānī who has relinquished aviḍyā be
immersed in (or affected by) it. Though medicine, manṭras, religious
work, time and skill (or mystical

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

expressions) lead to the development of siḍḍhis, yet they cannot in any
way help one to attain the seat of Paramāṭmā. How then can one who is an
āṭmajñānī and who is without his mind be said to long after siḍḍhis,
while all the actions of his desires are controlled?"

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> IV

On another occasion Niḍāgha asked Lord Ṛbhu to enlighten him as to the
characteristics of jīvanmukti. <span id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_195) To
which Ṛbhu replied in the affirmative and said the following:

"In the seven bhūmikās or (stages of development of wisdom) there are
four kinds of jīvanmukṭas. <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_195) Of
these the first stage <span id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_196) is
śubhechchhā (good desire); the second is vichāraṇā (inquiry); the third
is tanumānasī (or pertaining to the thinned mind); the fourth is
saṭṭvāpaṭṭi (the attainment of saṭṭva); the fifth is asamsakṭi
(non-attachment); the sixth is the paḍārṭhabhāvanā (analysis of objects)
and the seventh is the ṭurya (fourth or final stage). The bhūmikā which
is of the form of praṇava (<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>) is formed
of (or is divided into) akāra—A, ukāra—U, makāra—M, and arḍhamāṭrā.
Akāra and others are of four kinds on account of the difference of
sṭhūla (gross), sūkshma (subtle), bīja (seed or causal), and sākshī
(witness). Their avasṭhās are four: waking, dreaming, dreamless sleeping
and ṭurya (fourth). He who is in (or the entity that identifies itself
with) the waking state in the gross amśa (essence or part) of akāra is
named Viśva; in the subtle essence, he is termed Ṭaijasa; in the bīja
essence, he is termed Prājña; and in the sākshī essence, he is termed
Ṭurya.

"He who is in the dreaming state (or the entity which identifies itself
with the dreaming state) in the gross essence of ukāra is Viśva; in the
subtle essence, he is termed Ṭaijasa; in the bīja essence, is termed
Prājña; and in the sākshī essence, he is termed Ṭurya.

"He who is in the sushupṭi state in the gross essence of makāra is
termed Viśva; in the subtle essence, Ṭaijasa; in the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

bīja essence, he is termed Prājña; and in the sākshī essence, he is
termed Ṭurya.

"He who is in ṭurya state in the gross essence of arḍhamāṭrā is termed
Ṭurya-viśva. In the subtle, he is termed Ṭaijasa; in the bīja essence,
he is termed Prājña; and in the sākshī essence, he is termed
Ṭurya-ṭurya.

"The ṭurya essence of akāra is (or embraces) the first, second and third
(bhūmikās or stages of the seven). The ṭurya essence of ukāra embraces
the fourth bhūmikā. The ṭurya essence of makāra embraces the fifth
bhūmikā. The ṭurya essence of arḍhamāṭrā is the sixth stage. Beyond
this, is the seventh stage.

"One who functions in the (first) three bhūmikās is called mumukshu; one
who functions in the fourth bhūmikā is called a brahmaviṭ; one who
functions in the fifth bhūmikā is called a brahmaviḍvara; one who
functions in the sixth bhūmikā is called a brahmaviḍvarīya; and one in
the seventh bhūmikā is called a brahmaviḍvarishtha. With reference to
this, there are ślokas. They are:

"'Śubhechchhā is said to be the first jñānabhūmi (or stage of wisdom);
vichāraṇā, the second; tanumānasī, the third; saṭṭvāpaṭṭi, the fourth;
then come asamsakṭi as the fifth, paḍārṭhabhāvanā as the sixth and ṭurya
as the seventh.'

"The desire that arises in one through sheer vairāgya (after resolving)
'Shall I be ignorant? I will be seen by the Śāsṭras and the wise (or I
will study the books and be with the wise)' is termed by the wise as
Śubhechchhā. The association with the wise and Śāsṭras and the following
of the right path preceding the practice of indifference is termed
vichāraṇā. That stage wherein the hankering after sensual objects is
thinned through the first and second stages is said to be tanumānasī.
That stage wherein having become indifferent to all sensual objects
through the exercise in the (above) three stages, the purified chiṭṭa
rests on Āṭmā which is of the nature of saṭ is called saṭṭvāpaṭṭi. The
light (or manifestation) of saṭṭvaguṇa that is firmly rooted (in one)
without any desire for the fruits of actions through the practice in the
above four stages

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

is termed asamsakṭi. That stage wherein through the practice in the
(above) five stages one, having found delight in Āṭma, has no conception
of the internals or externals (though before him) and engages in actions
only when impelled to do so by others is termed paḍārṭhabhāvanā, the
sixth stage. The stage wherein after exceedingly long practice in the
(above) six stages one is (immovably) fixed in the contemplation of
'Āṭma alone without the difference (of the universe) is the seventh
stage called ṭurya. The three stages beginning with Śubhechchā are said
to be attained with (or amidst) differences and non-differences.
(Because) the universe one sees in the waking state he thinks to be
really existent. When the mind is firmly fixed on the non-dual One and
the conception of duality is put down, then he sees this universe as a
dream through his union with the fourth stage. As the autumnal cloud
being dispersed vanishes, so this universe perishes. O Niḍāgha, be
convinced that such a person has only saṭṭva remaining. Then having
ascended the fifth stage called sushupṭipaḍa (dreamless sleeping seat),
he remains simply in the non-dual state, being freed from all the
various differences. Having always introvision though ever participating
in external actions, those that are engaged in the practice of this
(sixth stage) are seen like one sleeping when fatigued (*viz*., being
freed from all affinities). (Lastly) the seventh stage which is the
ancient and which is called gūdhasupṭi <span
id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_197) is generally attained. Then one remains
in that secondless state without fear and with his consciousness almost
annihilated where there is neither saṭ nor asaṭ, neither self nor
not-self. Like an empty pot in the ākāś, there is void both within and
without; like a filled vessel in the midst of an ocean, he is full both
within and without. Do not become either the knower or the known. May
you become the Reality which remains after all thoughts are given up.
Having discarded (all the distinctions of) the seer, the sight and the
seen with their affinities, meditate solely upon Āṭmā which shines as
the supreme Light.

"He is said to be a jīvanmukṭa (emancipated person) in whom, though
participating in the material concerns of the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

world, the universe is not seen to exist like the invisible ākāś. He is
said to be a jīvanmukṭa, the light of whose mind never sets or rises in
misery or happiness, and who does not seek to change what happens to him
(*viz*., either to diminish his misery or increase his happiness). He is
said to be a jīvanmukṭa who though in his sushupṭi is awake and to whom
the waking state is unknown and whose wisdom is free from the affinities
(of objects).

"He is said to be a jīvanmukṭa whose heart is pure like ākāś, though
acting (as if) in consonance to love, hatred, fear and others. He is
said to be a jīvanmukṭa who has not the conception of his being the
actor and whose buḍḍhi is not attached to material objects, whether he
performs actions or not. He is said to be a jīvanmukṭa, of whom people
are not afraid, who is not afraid of people and who has given up joy,
anger and fear. He is said to be a jīvanmukṭa who, though participating
in all the illusory objects, is cool amidst them and is a full Mind,
(being) as if they belonged to others. O muni, he is called a jīvanmukṭa
who, having eradicated all the desires of his chiṭṭa, is (fully) content
with me who am the Āṭmā of all. He is said to be a jīvanmukṭa who rests
with an unshaken mind in that all pure abode which is Chinmāṭrā and free
from all the modifications of chiṭṭa. He is said to be a jīvanmukṭa in
whose chiṭṭa do not dawn (the distinctions of) the universe, I, he, thou
and others that are visible and unreal. Through the path of the guru and
Śāsṭras, enter soon Saṭ—the Brahman that is immutable, great, full and
without objects—and be firmly seated there. Śiva alone is Guru; Śiva
alone is Veḍas; Śiva alone is Lord; Śiva alone is I; Śiva, alone is all.
There is none other than Śiva. The undaunted Brāhmaṇa having known Him
(Śiva) should attain wisdom. One need not utter many words as they but
injure the organ of speech.

"(The Ṛshi) Śuka <span id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_198) is a mukṭa
(emancipated person). (The Ṛshi) Vāmaḍeva is a mukṭa. There are no
others (who have attained emancipation) than through these (*viz*., the
two

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

paths of these two Ṛshis). 'Those brave men who follow the path of Śuka
in this world become saḍyomukṭas (*viz*., emancipated) immediately after
(the body [wears](errata.htm#16) away); while those who always follow
the path of veḍānṭa in this world are subject again and again to
rebirths and attain krama (gradual) emancipation, through yoga, sāṅkhya
and karmas associated with saṭṭva (guṇa). Thus there are two paths laid
down by the Lord of Ḍevas (*viz*.,) the Śuka and Vāmaḍeva paths. The
Śuka path is called the bird's path: while the Vāmaḍevā path is called
the ant's path. <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_199) Those persons that
have cognised the true nature of their Āṭmā through the mandatory and
prohibitory injunctions (of the Veḍas), the inquiry into (the true
meaning of) mahāvākyas (the sacred sentences of the Veḍas), the samāḍhi
of sāṅkhya yoga or asamprajñāṭa samāḍhi <span
id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_200) and that have thereby purified
themselves, attain the supreme seat through the Śuka path. Having,
through hathayoga <span id="fr_216"></span>[3](#fn_201) practice with
the pain caused by yama, postures, etc., become liable to the ever
recurring obstacles caused by aṇimā and other (siḍḍhis) and having not
obtained good results, one is born again in a great family and practises
yoga through his previous (karmic) affinities. Then through the practice
of yoga during many lives, he attains salvation (*viz*.,) the supreme
seat of Vishṇu through the Vāmaḍeva path. Thus there are two paths that
lead to the attainment of Brahman and that are beneficent. The one
confers instantaneous salvation and the other confers gradual salvation.

"To one that sees (all) as the one (Brahman), where is delusion? Where
is sorrow? Those that are under the eyes of those whose buḍḍhi is solely
occupied with the truth (of Brahman) that is the end of all experience
are released from all heinous sins. All beings inhabiting heaven and
earth that fall under the vision of Brahmaviṭs are at once emancipated
from the sins committed during many crores of births."

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> V

Then Niḍāgha asked Lord Ṛbhu to enlighten him as to the rules (to be
observed) in the practice of Yoga. Accordingly He (the Lord) said thus:

"The body is composed of the five elements. It is filled with five
maṇdalas (spheres). <span id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_202) That which is
hard is Pṛṭhivī (earth), one of them; that which is liquid is Apas; that
which is bright is Ṭejas (fire); motion is the property of Vāyu; that
which pervades everywhere is Ākāś. All these should be known by an
aspirant after Yoga. Through the blowing of Vāyumaṇdala in this body,
(there are caused) 21,600 breaths every day and night. If there is a
diminution in the Pṛṭhivīmaṇdala, there arise folds in the body; if
there is diminution in the essence of Apas, there arises gradually
greyness of hair; if there is diminution in the essence of Ṭejas, there
is loss of hunger and lustre; if there is diminution in the essence of
Vāyu, there is incessant tremor; if there is diminution in the essence
of Ākāś, one dies. The jīviṭa (*viz*., Prāṇa) which possesses these
elements having no place to rest (in the body) owing to the diminution
of the elements, rises up like birds flying up in the air. It is for
this reason that it is called Uḍyāna (lit., flying up). With reference
to this, there is said to be a banḍha (binding, also meaning a posture
called Uddiyāṇabanḍha, by which this flight can be arrested). This
Uddiyāṇabanḍha <span id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_203) is to (or does away
with) death, as a lion to an elephant. Its experience is in the body, as
also the banḍha. Its binding (in the body) is hurtful. If there is
agitation of Agni (fire) within the belly, then there will be caused
much of pain. Therefore this (Uddiyāṇabanḍha) should not be practised by
one who is hungry or who has urgency to make water or void excrement. He
should take

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

many times in small quantities proper and moderate food. He should
practise Manṭrayoga, <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_204) Layayoga and
Hathayoga, through mild, middling and transcendental methods (or
periods) respectively. Laya, Manṭra, and Hathayogas have each (the same)
eight subservients. They are yama, niyama, āsana, prāṇāyāma, praṭyāhāra,
(Parana, ḍhyāna, and samāḍhi. <span id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_205) (Of
these), yama is of ten kinds. They are non-injury, truth, non-coveting,
continence, compassion, straightforwardness, patience, courage, moderate
eating, and purity (bodily and mental). Niyama is of ten kinds. They are
ṭapas (religious austerities), contentment, belief in the existence of
God or Veḍas, charity, worship of Īśvara (or God), listening to the
exposition of religious doctrines, modesty, a (good) intellect, japa
(muttering of prayers), and vraṭa (religious observances). There are
eleven postures beginning with chakra. Chakra, paḍma, karma, mayūra,
kukkuta, vīra, svasṭika, bhaḍra, simha, mukṭa, and gomukha, are the
postures enumerated by the knowers of yoga. Placing the left ankle on
the right thigh and the right ankle on the left thigh, and keeping the
body erect (while sitting) is the posture "Chakra". Prāṇāyāma should be
practised again and again in the following order, *viz*., inspiration,
restraint of breath and expiration. The prāṇāyāma is done through the
nādis (nerves). Hence it is called the nādis themselves.

"The body of every sentient being is ninety-six digits long. In the
middle of the body, two digits above the anus and two digits below the
sexual organ, is the centre of the body (called Mūlāḍhāra or sacral
plexus). Nine digits above the genitals, there is kanḍa of nādis which
revolves oval-shaped, four digits high and four digits broad. It is
surrounded by fat, flesh, bone, and blood. In it, is situate a
nādī-chakra (wheel of nerves) having twelve spokes. Kuṇdalī by which
this body is supported is there. It is covering by its face the
Brahmaranḍhra (*viz*., Brahma's hole) of Sushumnā. (By the side) of
Sushumnā dwell the nādis

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Alambusā and
Kuhūḥ. In the next two (spokes) are Vāruṇā and Yaśasvinī. On the spoke
south of Sushumnā is, in regular course, Piṅgalā. On the next two
spokes, are Pasha and Payasvinī. On the spoke west of Sushumnā is the
nādi called Sarasvaṭī. On the next two spokes are Śāṅkhinī and Gānḍhārī.
To the north of Sushumnā dwells Idā; in the next is Hasṭijihvā; in the
next is Viśvodarā. In these spokes of the wheel, the twelve nādis carry
the twelve vāyus from left to right (to the different parts of the
body). The nādis are like (*i.e.*, woven like the warp and woof of)
cloth. They are said to have different colours. The central portion of
the cloth (here the collection of the nādis) is called the Nābhichakra
(navel plexus). Jvalanṭī, Nāḍarūpiṇī, Pararanḍhrā, and Sushumnā are
called the (basic) supports of nāḍa (spiritual sound). These four nādis
are of ruby colour. The central portion of Brahmaranḍhra is again and
again covered by Kuṇdalī. Thus ten vāyus move in these nādis. A wise man
who has understood the course of nādis and vāyus should, after keeping
his neck and body erect with his mouth closed, contemplate immovably
upon Ṭuryaka (Āṭmā) at the tip of his nose, in the centre of his heart
and in the middle of binḍu, <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_206) and
should see, with a tranquil mind through the (mental) eyes, the nectar
flowing from there. Having closed the anus and drawn up the vāyu and
caused it to rise through (the repetition of) praṇava (Om), he should
complete with Śrī bīja. He should contemplate upon his Āṭmā as Śrī (or
Parāśakṭi) and as being bathed by nectar. This is kālavañchana (lit.,
time illusion). It is said to be the most important of all. Whatever is
thought of by the mind is accomplished by the mind itself. (Then) agni
(fire) will flame in jala (water) and in the flame (of agni) will arise
the branches and blossoms. Then the words uttered and the actions done
regarding the universe, are not in vain. By checking the binḍu in the
path, by making the fire flame up in the water and by causing the water
to dry up, the body is made firm. Having contracted simultaneously the
anus and yoni (the womb) united together, he should draw up Apāna and
unite with it Samāna. He

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

should contemplate upon his Āṭmā as Śiva and then as being bathed by
nectar. In the central part of each spoke, the yogin should commence to
concentrate Bala (will or strength). He should try to go up by the union
of Prāṇa and Apāna. This most important yoga brightens up in the body
the path of siḍḍhis. As a dam across the water serves as an obstacle to
the floods, so it should ever be known by the yogins that the chhāyā of
the body is (to jīva). This banḍha is said of all nādis. Through the
grace of this banḍha, the Ḍevaṭā (goddess) becomes visible. This banḍha
of four feet serves as a check to the three paths. This brightens up the
path through which the siḍḍhas obtained (their siḍḍhis). If with Prāṇa
is made to rise up soon Uḍāna, this banḍha checking all nādis goes up.
This is called Samputayoga or Mūlabanḍha. Through the practising of this
yoga, the three banḍhas are mastered. By practising day and night
intermittingly or at any convenient time, the vāyu will come under his
control. With the control of vāyu, agni (the gastric fire) in the body
will increase daily. With the increase of agni, food, etc., will be
easily digested. Should food be properly digested, there is increase of
rasa (essence of food). With the daily increase of rasa, there is the
increase of ḍhāṭus (spiritual substances). With the increase of ḍhāṭus,
there is the increase of wisdom in the body. Thus all the sins collected
together during many crores of births are burnt up.

"In the centre of the anus and the genitals, there is the triangular
Mūlāḍhāra. It illumines the seat of Śiva of the form of binḍu. There is
located the Parāśakṭi named kuṇdalinī. From that seat, vāyu arises. From
that seat, agni becomes increased. From that seat, binḍu originates and
nāḍa becomes increased. From that seat, Hamsa is born. From that seat,
manas is born. The six chakras beginning with Mūlāḍhāra are said to be
the seat of Śakṭi (Goddess). From the neck to the top of the head is
said to the seat of Śambhu (Śiva). To the nādis, the body is the support
(or vehicle); to Prāṇa, the nādis are the support; to jīva, Prāṇa is the
dwelling place; to Hamsa, jīva is the support; to Śakṭi, Hamsa is the
seat and the locomotive and fixed universe.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

"Being without distraction and of a calm mind, one should practise
prāṇāyāma. Even a person who is well-skilled in the practice of the
three banḍhas should try always to cognise with a true heart that
Principle which should be known and is the cause of all objects and
their attributes. Both expiration and inspiration should (be stopped and
made to) rest in restraint of breath (alone). He should depend solely on
Brahman which is the highest aim of all visibles. (The giving out of)
all external objects is said to be rechaka (expiration). The (taking in
of the) spiritual knowledge of the Śāsṭras is said to be pūraka
(inspiration) and (the keeping to oneself of) such knowledge is said to
be kumbhaka (or restraint of breath). He is an emancipated person who
practises thus such a chiṭṭa. There is no doubt about it. Through
kumbhaka, it (the mind) should be always taken up, and through kumbhaka
alone it should be filled up within. It is only through kumbhaka that
kumbhaka should be firmly mastered. Within it is Paramaśiva. That (vāyu)
which is non-motionless should be shaken again through kaṇtha-muḍrā
(throat-posture). Having checked the course of vāyu, having become
perfect in the practice of expiration and restraint of breath and having
planted evenly on the ground the two hands and the two feet, one should
pierce the four seats through vāyu through the three yogas. He should
shake Mahāmeru with the (aid of) prakotis (forces) <span
id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_207) at the mouth of vāyu. The two putas
(cavities) being drawn, vāyu throbs quickly. The union of moon, sun and
agni should be known on account of nectar. Through the motion of Meru,
the ḍevaṭās who stay in the centre of Meru move. At first in his
Brahma-granṭhi, there is produced soon a hole (or passage). Then having
pierced Brahma-granṭhi, he pierces Vishṇu-granṭhi then he pierces
Ruḍra-granṭhi. Then to the yogin comes veḍha <span
id="fr_223"></span>[2](#fn_208) (piercing) through his liberation from
the impurities of delusion, through the religious ceremonies (performed)
in various births, through the grace of gurus and ḍevaṭās and through
the practice of yoga.

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

"In the maṇdala (sphere or region) of Sushumnā (situated between Idā and
Piṅgalā, vāyu should be made to rise up through the feature known as
Muḍrā-banḍha. The short pronunciation (of Praṇava) frees (one) from
sins: its long pronunciation confers (on one) moksha. So also its
pronunciation in āpyāyana or pluṭa svara (tone). He is a knower of Veḍa,
who through the above-mentioned three ways of pronunciation <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_209) knows the end of Praṇava which is beyond
the power of speech, like the never-ceasing flow of oil or the
long-drawn bell-sound. The short svara goes to binḍu. The long svara
goes to brahmaranḍhra: the pluṭa to ḍvāḍaśānṭa (twelfth centre). The
manṭras should be uttered on account of getting manṭra siḍḍhis. This
Praṇava (OM) will remove all obstacles. It will remove all sins. Of
this, are four bhūmikās (states) predicated, *viz*., ārambha, ghata,
parichaya, and nishpaṭṭi. Ārambha is that state in which one having
abandoned external karmas performed by the three organs (mind, speech
and body), is always engaged in mental karma only. It is said by the
wise that the ghata state is that in which vāyu having forced an opening
on the western side and being full, is firmly fixed there. Parichaya
state is that in which vayu is firmly fixed to ākāś, neither associated
with jīva nor not, while the body is immovable. It is said that
nishpaṭṭi state is that in which there take place creation and
dissolution through Āṭmā or that state in which a yogin having become a
jīvanmukṭa performs yoga without effort.

"Whoever recites this Upanishaḍ becomes immaculate like agni. Like vāyu,
he becomes pure. He becomes freed from the sin of drinking alcohol. He
becomes freed from the sins of the theft of gold. He becomes a
jīvanmukṭa. This is what is said by the Ṛgveḍa. Like the eye pervading
the ākāś (seeing without effort everything above), a wise man sees
(always) the supreme seat of Vishṇu. The brāhmaṇas who have always their
spiritual eyes wide open praise and illuminate in diverse ways the
spiritual seat of Vishṇu.

"<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>, thus is the Upanishaḍ."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_175"></span>[220:1](tmu29.htm#fr_189) This means boar and
refers to the incarnation of Vishṇu as a boar.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[220:2](tmu29.htm#fr_190) Books such as
*Mahābhāraṭa* and *Rāmāyaṇa*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[220:3](tmu29.htm#fr_191) Prāṇa, Apāna, Uḍāna,
Vyāna and Samāna, having their respective places and functions in the
body.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[220:4](tmu29.htm#fr_192) Sound, touch, form,
taste and odour.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[220:5](tmu29.htm#fr_193) Producing
respectively uncertainty, certain knowledge, fluctuation of thought, and
egoism and having certain centres in the body.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[221:1](tmu29.htm#fr_194) In the states of
waking, dreaming and dreamless sleeping.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[221:2](tmu29.htm#fr_195) Being past karmas now
being enjoyed, past karmas being in store to be enjoyed hereafter and
the karmas now produced to be enjoyed hereafter.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[221:3](tmu29.htm#fr_196) Presiding over water
or tongue.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[221:4](tmu29.htm#fr_197) Presiding over odour
or nose.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[221:5](tmu29.htm#fr_198) Presiding over leg or
nether world.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[221:6](tmu29.htm#fr_199) Vide the translation
of Sarvasāra-Upanishaḍ.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[221:7](tmu29.htm#fr_200) This refers to the
several class of persons in different modes of life who wear their hair
in different ways as yogins, ascetics and so on.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[222:1](tmu29.htm#fr_201) Meaning respectively
mental restraint, bodily restraint, the renunciation or practising of
works without reference to their fruits, endurance of heart and soul,
etc., faith and settled peace of mind.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[222:2](tmu29.htm#fr_202) Meaning meditation
and reflection thereon.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[225:1](tmu29.htm#fr_203) *Viz*., Vishṇu, the
Lord of all persons.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[228:1](tmu29.htm#fr_204) During the solar and
lunar eclipses, these rites are done by the Hinḍūs.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[228:2](tmu29.htm#fr_205) Of the six sakṭis,
she is one that gives wisdom.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[228:3](tmu29.htm#fr_206) Either controlling
the breath through prāṇāyāma or the consolidation of mercury through
some means, leading in both cases to siḍḍhis, etc.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[230:1](tmu29.htm#fr_207) Of the two causes of
the universe, Spirit is the nimiṭṭa (instrumental) cause while matter is
the upāḍāna (material) cause. This material cause is again subdivided
into three: *viz*., ārambha (initial), pariṇāma (changed) and vivarṭa
(illusory). The first or material cause may be exemplified by the cotton
or woollen thread being the initial material cause of cloth or dresses
which are woven out of these threads without changing the threads; the
second by milk being the changed cause of curd, since a change takes
place in the milk which becomes curd; the third by a serpent being the
illusory cause of a rope, for here through illusion we mistake the rope
for the serpent.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[231:1](tmu29.htm#fr_208) The mystic Hinḍū
Tamil books teem with works on medicine through which the higher siḍḍhis
can be developed.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[232:1](tmu29.htm#fr_210) Jīvanmukṭi is
emancipation. Jīvanmukṭas are those that have attained emancipation.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[232:2](tmu29.htm#fr_211) This word and others
are explained in full later on in the text.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[234:1](tmu29.htm#fr_212) Lit., secret sleep.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[235:1](tmu29.htm#fr_213) Suka is a Ṛshi, the
son of the present Vyāsa and the narrator of *Bhāgavaṭa Purāṇa*.
Vāmaḍeva is also a Ṛshi.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[236:1](tmu29.htm#fr_214) Bird's path, like
birds which fly at once to the place they intend to go; Ant's path, like
ants which move slowly.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[236:2](tmu29.htm#fr_215) It is that of intense
self-absorption when one loses his consciousness of individuality.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[236:3](tmu29.htm#fr_216) Hathayoga, as stated
in Paṭañjali's Yoga Philosophy.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[237:1](tmu29.htm#fr_217) There are either the
five elements or Mūlāḍhāra (sacral plexus), Svāḍhishthāna (epigastric or
prostatic plexus), Maṇipūraka (solar plexus), Anāhata (cardiac plexus)
and Visuḍḍhi (laryngeal or pharyngeal plexus). These are situated
respectively in the anus, the genital organs, navel, heart and throat.
The last or the sixth plexus is omitted here, as the five plexuses
mentioned above correspond to the five elements. This chapter treating
of yoga is very mystical.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[237:2](tmu29.htm#fr_218) This is one of the
postures treated of in *Siva Samhiṭa* and other books.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[238:1](tmu29.htm#fr_219) There are four kinds
of yoga—the fourth being Rājayoga. Manṭrayoga is that in which
perfection is obtained through the pronunciation of manṭras. Layayoga is
that in which perfection is obtained through laya (absorption).

<span id="fn_205"></span>[238:2](tmu29.htm#fr_220) They mean
respectively forbearance, religious restraint, posture, restraint of
breath, subjugation of the senses, contemplation, meditation, and
intense self-absorption.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[239:1](tmu29.htm#fr_221) Lit., germ.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[241:1](tmu29.htm#fr_222) It is mystic here and
later on.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[241:2](tmu29.htm#fr_223) He has pierced all
the granṭhis and hence becomes a master of veḍha.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[242:1](tmu29.htm#fr_224) There are the three
kinds of pronunciation with 1 māṭrā, 2 māṭrās and 3 māṭrās. They are
respectively hrasva, ḍīrgha and pluṭa which may be translated as short,
long and very long.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. Maṇdalabrāhmaṇa-Upanishaḍ of Śukla-Yajurveḍa](tmu30)

</div>
