<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu25)  [Next](tmu27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

### ḌHYĀNABINḌU-UPANISHAḌ <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_148)

### OF

### SĀMAVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">Even</span> if sin should accumulate to a
mountain extending over many yojanas (distance), it is destroyed by
ḍhyānayoga. At no time has been found a destroyer of sins like this.
Bījākshara (seed-letter) is the supreme binḍu. Nāḍa (spiritual sound) is
above it. When that nāḍa ceases along with letter, than the nāḍa-less is
supreme state. That yogin who considers as the highest that which is
above nāḍa, which is anāhaṭa, <span id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_149) has
all his doubts destroyed. If the point of a hair be divided into
one-hundred thousand parts, this (nāḍa) is one-half of that still
further divided; and when (even) this is absorbed, the yogin attains to
the stainless Brahman. One who is of a firm mind and without the
delusion (of sensual pleasures) and ever resting in Brahman, should see
like the string (in a rosary of beads) all creatures (as existing) in
Āṭmā like odour in flowers, ghee in milk, oil in gingelly seeds and gold
in quartz. Again just as the oil depends for its manifestation upon
gingelly seeds and odour upon flowers, so does the Purusha depend for
its existence upon the body, both external and internal. The tree is
with parts and its shadow is without parts but with and without parts,
Āṭmā exists everywhere.

The one akshara (letter <span class="smallcaps">Om</span>) should be
contemplated upon as Brahman by all who aspire for emancipation.
Pṛṭhivī, agni, ṛgveḍa, bhūḥ and Brahmā—all these (are absorbed) when
Akāra

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (A), the first
amśa (part) of praṇava (<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>) becomes
absorbed. Anṭariksha, yajurveḍa, vāyu, bhuvaḥ and Vishṇu, the
Janārḍana—all these (are absorbed) when Ukāra (U), the second amśa of
praṇava becomes absorbed. Ḍyur, sun, sāmaveḍa, suvaḥ and Maheśvara—all
these (are absorbed) when Makāra (M), the third amśa of praṇava becomes
absorbed. Akāra is of (pīṭa) yellow colour and is said to be of
rajoguṇa; Ukāra is of white colour and of saṭṭvaguṇa; Makāra is of dark
colour and of ṭamoguṇa. He who does not know Omkāra as having eight
aṅgas (parts), four pāḍas (feet), three sṭhānas (seats) and five ḍevaṭās
(presiding deities) is not a Brāhmaṇa. Praṇava is the bow. Āṭmā is the
arrow and Brahman is said to be the aim. One should aim at it with great
care and then he, like the arrow, becomes one with It. When that Highest
is cognised, all karmas return (from him, *viz*., do not affect him).
The Veḍas have Omkāra as their cause. The swaras (sounds) have Omkāra as
their cause. The three worlds with (all) the locomotive and the fixed
(ones in them) have Omkāra as their cause. The short (accent of <span
class="smallcaps">Om</span>) burns all sins, the long one is decayless
and the bestower of prosperity. United with arḍhamāṭrā (half-metre of
<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>), the praṇava becomes the bestower of
salvation. That man is the knower of the Veḍas who knows that the end
(*viz*., arḍhamāṭrā) of praṇava should be worshipped (or recited) as
uninterrupted as the flow of oil and (resounding) as long as the sound
of a bell. One should contemplate upon Omkāra as Īśvara resembling an
unshaken light, as of the size of a thumb and as motionless in the
middle of the pericarp of the lotus of the heart. Taking in vāyu through
the left nostril and filling the stomach with it, one should contemplate
upon Omkāra as being in the middle of the body and as surrounded by
circling flames. Brahma is said to be inspiration; Vishṇu is said to be
cessation (of breath), and Ruḍra is said to be expiration. These are the
ḍevaṭās of prāṇāyāma. Having made Āṭmā as the (lower) araṇi (sacrificial
wood) and praṇava as the upper araṇi, one should see the God in secret
through the practice of churning which is ḍhyāna. One should practise
restraint of breath as much as it lies in his power along with (the
uttering of)

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Omkāra sound,
until it ceases completely. Those who look upon <span
class="smallcaps">Om</span> as of the form of Hamsa staying in all,
shining like crores of suns, being alone, staying in gamāgama (ever
going and coming) and being devoid of motion—at last such persons are
freed from sin. That manas which is the author of the actions (*viz*.),
creation, preservation and destruction of the three worlds, is (then)
absorbed (in the supreme One). That is the highest state of Vishṇu.

The lotus of the heart has eight petals and thirty-two filaments. The
sun is in its midst: the moon is in the middle of the sun. Agni is in
the middle of the moon: the prabhā (spiritual light) is in the middle of
agni. Pītha (seat or centre) is in the midst of prabhā, being set in
diverse gems. One should meditate upon the stainless Lord Vāsuḍeva as
being (seated) upon the centre of Pītha, as having Śrīvaṭsa <span
id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_150) (black mark) and Kausṭubha (garland of
gems) on his chest and as adorned with gems and pearls resembling pure
crystal in lustre and as resembling crores of moons in brightness. He
should meditate upon Mahā-Vishṇu as above or in the following manner.
(That is) he should meditate with inspiration (of breath) upon
Mahā-Vishṇu as resembling the aṭasī flower and as staying in the seat of
navel with four hands; then with restraint of breath, he should meditate
in the heart upon Brahma, the Grandfather as being on the lotus with the
gaura (pale-red) colour of gems and having four faces: then through
expiration, he should meditate upon the three-eyed Śiva between the two
eyebrows shining like the pure crystal, being stainless, destroying all
sins, being in that which is like the lotus facing down with its flower
(or face) below and the stalk above or like the flower of a plantain
tree, being of the form of all Veḍas, containing one hundred petals and
one hundred leaves and having the pericarp full-expanded. There he
should meditate upon the sun, the moon and the agni, one above another.
Passing above through the lotus which has the brightness of the sun,
moon and agni, and taking its Hrīm bīja (letter), one leads his Āṭmā
firmly. He is the knower of Veḍas

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

who knows the three seats, the three māṭrās, the three Brahmās, the
three aksharas (letters) and the three māṭrās associated with the
arḍhamāṭrā. He who knows that which is above binḍu, nāḍa and kalā as
uninterrupted as the flow of oil and (resounding) as long as the sound
of a bell—that man is a knower of the Veḍas. Just as a man would draw up
(with his mouth) the water through the (pores of the) lotus-stalk, so
the yogin treading the path of yoga should draw up the breath. Having
made the lotus-sheath of the form of arḍhamāṭrā, one should draw up the
breath through the stalk (of the nādis Sushumnā, Idā and Piṅgalā) and
absorb it in the middle of the eyebrows. He should know that the middle
of the eyebrows in the forehead which is also the root of the nose is
the seat of nectar. That is the great place of Brahman.

Postures, restraint of breath, subjugation of the senses ḍhāraṇā, ḍhyāna
and samāḍhi are the six parts of yoga. There are as many postures as
there are living creatures; and Maheśvara (the great Lord) knows their
distinguishing features. Siḍḍha, bhaḍra, simha and paḍma are the four
(chief) postures. Mūlāḍhāra is the first chakra. Svāḍhishthāna is the
second. Between these two is said to be the seat of yoni (perineum),
having the form of Kāma (God of love). In the Ādhāra of the anus, there
is the lotus of four petals. In its midst is said to be the yoni called
Kāma and worshipped by the siḍḍhas. In the midst of the yoni is the
Liṅga facing the west and split at its head like the gem. He who knows
this, is a knower of the Veḍas. A four-sided figure is situated above
agni and below the genital organ, of the form of molten gold and shining
like streaks of lightning. Prāṇa is with its sva (own) sound, having
Svāḍhishthāna as its aḍhishthāna (seat), (or since sva or prāṇa arises
from it). The chakra Svāḍhishthāna is spoken of as the genital organ
itself. The chakra in the sphere of the navel is called Maṇipūraka,
since the body is pierced through by vāyu like maṇis (gems) by string.
The jīva (ego) urged to actions by its past virtuous and sinful karmas
whirls about in this great chakra of twelve <span
id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_151) spokes, so long as it

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

does not grasp the truth. Above the genital organ and below the navel is
kanḍa of the shape of a bird's egg. There arise (from it) nādis
seventy-two thousand in number. Of these seventy-two are generally
known. Of these, the chief ones are ten and carry the prāṇas. Idā,
Piṅgalā, Sushumnā, Gānḍhārī, Hasṭijihvā, Pasha, Yaśasvinī, Alambusā,
Kuhūḥ and Śāṅkhinī are said to be the ten. This chakra of the midis
should ever be known by the yogins. The three nādis Ida, Piṅgalā and
Sushumnā are said to carry prāṇa always and have as their ḍevaṭās, moon,
sun and agni. Idā is on the left side and Piṅgalā on the right side,
while the Sushumnā is in the middle. These three are known to be the
paths of prāṇa. Prāṇa, Apāna, Samāna, Uḍāna, and Vyāna; Naga, Karma,
Kṛkara, Ḍevaḍaṭṭa and Ḍhanañjaya; of these, the first five are called
prāṇas, etc., and last five Naga, etc. are called vāyus (or sub-prāṇas).
All these are situated (or run along) the one thousand nādis, (being) in
the form of (or producing) life. Jīva which is under the influence of
prāṇa and apāna goes up and down. Jīva on account of its ever moving by
the left and right paths is not visible. Just as a ball struck down (on
the earth) with the bat of the hand springs up, so jīva ever tossed by
prāṇa and apāna is never at rest. He is knower of yoga who knows that
prāṇa always draws itself from apāna and apāna draws itself from prāṇa,
like a bird (drawing itself from and yet not freeing itself) from the
string (to which it is tied).

The jīva comes out with the letter *Ha* and gets in again with the
letter *Sa*. Thus jīva always utters the manṭra 'Ham-sa,' 'Hamsa'. The
jīva always utters the manṭra twenty-one thousand and six hundred times
in one day and night. This is called Ajapā Gāyaṭrī and is ever the
bestower of nirvāṇa to the yogins. Through its very thought, man is
freed from sins. Neither in the past nor in the future is there a
science equal to this, a japa equal to this or a meritorious action
equal to this. Parameśvarī (*viz*., kunḍalinī śakṭi) sleeps shutting
with her mouth that door which leads to the decayless Brahma-hole. Being
aroused by the contact of agni with manas and prāṇa, she takes the form
of a needle and pierces up through Sushumnā. The

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

yogin should open with great effort this door which is shut. Then he
will pierce the door to salvation by means of kunḍalinī. Folding firmly
the fingers of the hands, assuming firmly the Paḍma posture, placing the
chin firmly on the breast and fixing the mind in ḍhyāṇa, one should
frequently raise up the apāna, fill up with air and then leave the
prāṇa. Then the wise man gets matchless wisdom through (this) śakṭi.
That yogin who assuming Paḍma posture worships (*i.e.*, controls) vāyu
at the door of the nādis and then performs restraint of breath is
released without doubt. Rubbing off the limbs the sweat arising from
fatigue, abandoning all acid, bitter and saltish (food), taking delight
in the drinking of milk and rasa, practising celibacy, being moderate in
eating and ever bent on yoga, the yogin becomes a siḍḍha in little more
than a year. No inquiry need be made concerning the result. Kuṇdalinī
śakṭi, when it is up in the throat, makes the yogi get siḍḍhi. The union
of prāṇa and apāna has the extinction of urine and fæces.

One becomes young even when old through performing mūlabanḍha always.
Pressing the yoni by means of the heels and contracting the anus and
drawing up the apāna—this is called mūlabanḍha. Uddiyāṇa banḍha is so
called because it is (like) a great bird that flies up always without
rest. One should bring the western part of the stomach above the navel.
This Uddiyāṇa banḍha is a lion to the elephant of death, since it binds
the water (or nectar) of the ākāś which arises in the head and flows
down. The Jālanḍhara banḍha is the destroyer of all the pains of the
throat. When this Jālanḍhara banḍha which is destroyer of the pains of
the throat is performed, then nectar does not fall on agni nor does the
vāyu move. When the tongue enters backwards into the hole of the skull,
then there is the muḍrā of vision latent in the eyebrow called khecharī.
He who knows the muḍrā, khecharī has not disease, death, sleep, hunger,
thirst, or swoon. He who practises this muḍrā is not affected by illness
or karma; nor is he bound by the limitations of time. Since chiṭṭa moves
in the kha (ākāś) and since the tongue has entered (in the muḍrā) kha
(*viz*., the hole in the mouth), therefore the muḍrā is called khecharī
and worshipped by

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

the siḍḍhas. He whose hole (or passage) above the uvula is closed (with
the tongue backwards) by means of khecharīmuḍrā never loses his
virility, even when embraced by a lovely woman. Where is the fear of
death, so long as the binḍu (virility) stays in the body. Binḍu does not
go out of the body, so long as the khecharīmuḍrā is practised. (Even)
when binḍu comes down to the sphere of the perineum, it goes up, being
prevented and forced up by violent effort through yonimuḍrā. This binḍu
is twofold, white and red. The white one is called śukla and the red one
is said to contain much rajas. The rajas which stays in yoni is like the
colour of a coral. The binḍu stays in the seat of the genital organs.
The union of these two is very rare. Binḍu is Śiva and rajas is śakṭi.
Binḍu is the moon and rajas is the sun. Through the union of these two
is attained the highest body; when rajas is roused up by agitating the
śakṭi through vāyu which unites with the sun, thence is produced the
divine form. Śukla being united with the moon and rajas with the sun, he
is a knower of yoga who knows the proper mixture of these two. The
cleansing of the accumulated refuse, the unification of the sun and the
moon and the complete drying of the rasas (essences), this is called
mahāmuḍrā. Placing the chin on the breast, pressing the anus by means of
the left heel, and seizing (the toe of) the extended right leg by the
two hands, one should fill his belly (with air) and should slowly
exhale. This is called mahāmuḍrā, the destroyer of the sins of men.

Now I shall give a description of Āṭmā. In the seat of the heart is a
lotus of eight petals. In its centre is jīvāṭmā of the form of jyoṭis
and atomic in size, moving in a circular line. In it is located
everything. It knows everything. It does everything. It does all these
actions attributing everything to its own power, (thinking) I do, I
enjoy, I am happy, I am miserable, I am blind, I am lame, I am deaf, I
am mute, I am lean, I am stout, etc. When it rests on the eastern petal
which is of śveṭa (white) colour, then it has a mind (or is inclined) to
ḍharma with bhakṭi (devotion). When it rests on the southeastern petal,
which is of rakṭa (blood colour), then it is inclined

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

to sleep and laziness. When it rests on the southern petal, which is of
kṛshṇa (black) colour, then it is inclined to hate and anger. When it
rests on the south-western petal which is of nīla (blue) colour, then it
gets desire for sinful or harmful actions. When it rests on the western
petal which is of crystal colour, then it is inclined to flirt and
amuse. When it rests on the north-western petal which is of ruby colour,
then it has a mind to walk, rove and have vairāgya (or be indifferent).
When it rests on, the northern petal which is pita (yellow) colour, then
it is inclined to be happy and to be loving. When it rests on the
north-eastern petal which is of vaidūrya (lapis lazuli) colour, then it
is inclined to amassing money, charity and passion. When it stays in the
interspace between any two petals, then it gets the wrath arising from
diseases generated through (the disturbance of the equilibrium of) vāyu,
bile and phlegm (in the body). When it stays in the middle, then it
knows everything, sings, dances, speaks and is blissful. When the eye is
pained (after a day's work), then in order to remove (its) pain, it
makes first a circular line and sinks in the middle. The first line is
of the colour of banḍhūka flower (Bassia). Then is the state of sleep.
In the middle of the state of sleep is the state of dream. In the middle
of the state of dream, it experiences the ideas of perception, Veḍas,
inference, possibility, (sacred) words, etc. Then there arises much
fatigue. In order to remove this fatigue, it circles the second line and
sinks in the middle. The second is of the colour of (the insect)
Inḍragopa (of red or white colour). Then comes the state of dreamless
sleep.

During the dreamless sleep, it has only the thought connected with
Parameśvara (the highest Lord) alone. This state is of the nature of
eternal wisdom. Afterwards it attains the nature of the highest Lord
(Parameśvara). Then it makes a round of the third circle and sinks in
the middle. The third circle is of the colour of paḍmarāga (ruby). Then
comes the state of ṭurya (the fourth). In ṭurya, there is only the
connection of Paramāṭmā. It attains the nature of eternal wisdom. Then
one should gradually attain the quiescence of buḍḍhi with

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

self-control. Placing the manas in Āṭmā, one should think of nothing
else. Then causing the union of prāṇa and apāna, he concentrates his aim
upon the whole universe being of the nature of Āṭma. Then comes the
state of turyāṭīṭa (*viz*., that state beyond the fourth). Then
everything appears as bliss. He is beyond the pairs (of happiness and
pains, etc.). He stays here as long as he should wear his body. Then he
attains the nature of Paramāṭmā and attains emancipation through this
means. This alone is the means of knowing Āṭmā.

When vāyu (breath) which enters the great hole associated with a hall
where four roads meet gets into the half of the well-placed
triangle, <span id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_152) then is Achyuṭa (the
indestructible) seen. Above the aforesaid triangle, one should meditate
on the five bīja (seed) letters of (the elements) pṛṭhivī, etc., as also
on the five prāṇas, the colour of the bījas and their position. The
letter य <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_153) is the bīja of prāṇa and
resembles the blue cloud. The letter र is the bīja of agni, is of apāna
and resembles the sun. The letter ल is the bīja of pṛṭhivī, is of vyāna
and resembles banḍhūka flower. The letter व is the bīja of jīva (or
vayu), is of udāna and is of the colour of the conch. The letter ह is
the bīja of ākāś, is of samāna, and is of the colour of crystal. Prāṇa
stays in the heart, navel, nose, ear, foot, finger, and other places,
travels through the seventy-two thousand nādis, stays in the
twenty-eight crores of hair-pores and is yet the same everywhere. It is
that which is called jīva. One should perform the three, expiration,
etc., with a firm will and great control: and drawing in everything
(with the breath) in slow degrees, he should bind prāṇa and apāna in the
cave of the lotus of the heart and utter praṇava, having contracted his
throat and the genital organ. From the Mūlāḍhāra (to the head) is the
Sushumnā resembling the shining thread of the lotus. The nāḍa is located
in the Vīṇāḍaṇda, (spinal column); that sound from its middle resembles
(that of) the conch, etc. When it goes to the hole of the ākāś, it
resembles that of the peacock. In the middle of the cave of the

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

skull between the four doors shines Āṭmā, like the sun in the sky.
Between the two bows in the Brahma-hole, one should see Purusha with
śakṭi as his own Āṭmā. Then his manas is absorbed there. That man
attains kaivalya who understands the gems, moonlight, nāḍa, binḍu, and
the seat of Maheśvara (the great Lord).

Thus is the Upanishaḍ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[202:1](tmu26.htm#fr_162) The Upanishaḍ of the
seed of meditation.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[202:2](tmu26.htm#fr_163) Of the heart.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[204:1](tmu26.htm#fr_164) The black mark on the
breast standing for mūlaprakṛṭi and the garland for the five elements.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[205:1](tmu26.htm#fr_165) In other places, it
is ten.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[210:1](tmu26.htm#fr_166) Probably it refers to
the triangle of the initiates.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[210:2](tmu26.htm#fr_167) There seems to be
some mistake in the original.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. Hamsa-Upanishaḍ of Śukla-Yajurveḍa](tmu27)

</div>
