[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40004)  [Next](cc40006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>THE ARGUMENT

<span id="vi-p2"></span>ON THE

<span id="vi-p3"></span>SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.

<span id="vi-p4"></span>So far as we can judge from the connection of
this Epistle, it appears that the *first* Epistle was not without some
good effect among the Corinthians,  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) but at the same time was not
productive of so much benefit as it ought to have been; and farther,
that some wicked persons, despising Paul’s authority, persisted in their
obstinacy. For the fact of his being so much occupied, at one time in
declaring his fidelity, and at another in maintaining the dignity of his
office, is itself a token that they had not as yet been thoroughly
confirmed. He himself, too, complains in express terms, that there were
some that made sport of his former Epistle, instead of deriving benefit
from it. Understanding, then, the condition of the Church among them to
be such, and being detained by other matters, so as to be prevented from
coming to them so soon as he had at that time contemplated, he wrote
this Epistle from Macedonia. We are now in possession of the purpose
which he had in view in writing this Epistle — that he might perfect
what he had already begun, in order that he might, when he came, find
every thing in proper order.

<span id="vi-p6"></span>He begins, as he is wont, with thanksgiving,
rendering thanks to God, that he had been marvellously rescued from the
most imminent dangers, and at the same time he calls them to notice,
that all his afflictions and distresses tended to their benefit and
welfare, that he may the better secure their favor by this farther
pledge of union,  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) while the,
wicked perversely took occasion from this to lessen his influence.
Farther, when wishing to apologize for delaying to come to them, he
declares that he had not changed his purpose from lightness or
unsteadiness, and that he had not, for the purpose of deceiving,
professed anything that he had not really had in view;  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) for there was the same consistency to
be seen by them in all his sayings, that they had had experience of in
his doctrine. Here, too, he briefly notices, how stable and sure was the
truth of his preaching, as being founded on Christ, by whom all the
promises of God are fixed and ratified — which is a high recommendation
of the gospel.

<span id="vi-p9"></span>After this he declares, that the reason why he
had not come was this, that he could not appear among them cheerful and
agreeable. In this statement, he reproves those, who, from his change of
purpose, took occasion to calumniate him. He accordingly throws the
blame upon the Corinthians, as being not yet well prepared for receiving
him. He shows, at the same time, with what fatherly forbearance he was
actuated, inasmuch as he kept himself back from visiting their city for
this reason — that he might not be under the necessity of exercising
severity upon them.

<span id="vi-p10"></span>Farther, lest any one should object, that he
had in the mean time not at all refrained from handling the Corinthians
severely in his writings, he apologizes for the vehemence that he made
use of in his first Epistle, by saying that it was owing to others —
they having shut him up to the necessity of this against his will. That
this keenness had proceeded from a friendly disposition he
satisfactorily shows, by ordering that the incestuous person himself, on
whose account he had been much exasperated, should be received back into
favor, having since that time given some evidence of repentance.
Farther, he brings forward this additional evidence of his affection
towards them, that he *had no rest in his mind* (<span
id="vi-p10.1"></span>[2Co 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013)<span
id="vi-p10.1"></span>) until he had learned through means of Titus the
state of their affairs, for an anxiety of this kind originates in
affection.

<span id="vi-p11"></span>Having had occasion, however, to make mention
here of his journey to Macedonia, he begins to speak of the glory of his
ministry. As, however, those darling Apostles, who endeavored to detract
from him, had obtained an easy victory over him by trumpeting their own
praises, that he may have nothing in common with them, and that he may
at the same time beat down their foolish boasting, he declares that he
derives commendation from the work itself,  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) and does not borrow it from men. In
the same passage, he extols in magnificent terms the efficacy of his
preaching, and sets off to advantage the dignity of his Apostleship by
comparing the gospel with the law, declaring, however, first of all,
that he claimed nothing as his own, but acknowledged everything,
whatever it might be, to have come forth from God.

<span id="vi-p13"></span>After this he relates again, with what fidelity
and integrity he had discharged the office intrusted to him, and in this
he reproves those who malignantly reproached him. Nay more, rising still
higher in holy confidence, he declares, that all are blinded by the
devil, who do not perceive the lustre of his gospel. Perceiving,
however, that the meanness of his person (as being contemptible)  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) detracted much from the respect due to
his Apostleship, embracing this favorable opportunity, he does not
merely remove this occasion of offense, but turns it into an opposite
direction, by saying, that the excellence of God’s grace shines forth so
much the more brightly, from the circumstance that so valuable a

<span id="vi-p15"></span>treasure was presented in earthen vessels.  
(<span id="vi-p15.2"></span>[2Co
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="vi-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi-p16"></span>Thus he turns to his own commendation those
things which the malevolent were wont to cast up to him by way of
reproach, because on his being weighed down with so many distresses, he
always, nevertheless, after the manner of the palm tree,  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) rises superior to them. He treats of
this subject up to the middle of the *fourth* chapter, (<span
id="vi-p17.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#000)<span id="vi-p17.1"></span>). As,
however, the true glory of Christians lies beyond this world, he teaches
that we must, by contempt of this present life and mortification of the
*outward man,* set ourselves with the whole bent of our mind to
meditation on a blessed immortality.

<span id="vi-p18"></span>Farther, near the beginning of the *fifth*
chapter, (<span id="vi-p18.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#000)<span id="vi-p18.1"></span>), he
glories in this — that being actuated by such a disposition, he has
nothing else as the object of his desire, than to have his services
approved unto the Lord, and he entertains a hope, that he will have the
Corinthians as witnesses of his sincerity. As, however, there was a
danger of his being suspected of vanity, or arrogance, he again repeats,
that he is constrained to this by the unreasonableness of wicked
persons, and that it was not for his own sake, as though he were eager
to retain their good opinion, but for the benefit of the Corinthians, to
whom it was of advantage to have this opinion and persuasion; and he
declares that he is concerned for nothing but their welfare. With the
view of confirming this, he subjoins a universal statement, showing what
ought to be the object aimed at by the servants of Christ — that, losing
sight of themselves, they should live to the honor of their Lord; and at
length he concludes, that everything except newness of life ought to be
reckoned of no importance, so that he alone, who has denied himself, is
to be held in esteem. From this he passes on to unfold the sum of the
Gospel message, that by the magnitude and excellence of it he may stir
up both ministers and people to a pious solicitude. This he does in the
beginning of the *sixth* chapter, (<span id="vi-p18.2"></span>[2
Corinthians 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#000)<span
id="vi-p18.2"></span>).

<span id="vi-p19"></span>Here again, after having noticed how faithfully
he discharged his office, he gently reproves the Corinthians, as being
hinderances to themselves in the way of their reaping advantage. To this
expostulation he immediately subjoins an exhortation, to *flee from
idolatry* — from which it appears, that the Corinthians had not yet been
brought so far as he wished. Hence it is not without good reason that he
complains, that they had themselves to blame, inasmuch as they had not
had their ears open to doctrine so plain. But lest he should, by
pressing too severely their tender minds, dishearten or alienate them,
he again assures them of his kind disposition towards them, and resuming
his apology for severity, which he had left off in a manner abruptly, he
brings it to a conclusion, though in a different way. For assuming
greater confidence, he acknowledges that he is not dissatisfied with
himself for having grieved them, inasmuch as he had done it for their
good;  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) while at the same time,
by congratulating them on the happy issue, he shows them how cordially
he desires their best interests. These things he treats of to the end of
the *seventh* chapter, (<span id="vi-p20.2"></span>[2 Corinthians
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#000)<span id="vi-p20.2"></span>).

<span id="vi-p21"></span>From the beginning of the *eighth* chapter,
(<span id="vi-p21.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#000)<span id="vi-p21.1"></span>), to the
end of the *ninth*, (<span id="vi-p21.2"></span>[2 Corinthians
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#000)<span id="vi-p21.2"></span>), he
stirs them up to cheerfulness in giving alms, of which he had made
mention in the last chapter of the first Epistle. He commends them, it
is true, for having begun well, but lest the ardour of their zeal should
cool in process of time, as often happens, he encourages them by a
variety of arguments to go on perseveringly in the course on which they
had entered.

<span id="vi-p22"></span>In the *tenth* chapter, (<span
id="vi-p22.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#000)<span id="vi-p22.1"></span>), he
begins to defend himself, and his office as an Apostle, from the
calumnies with which the wicked assailed him. And in the first place, he
shows that he is admirably equipped with the armor that is requisite for
maintaining Christ’s warfare.  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205)
Farther, he declares, that the authority which he had exercised in the
former Epistle was grounded on the assurance of a good conscience, and
he shows them that he had no less power in his actions, when present,
than authority in his words when absent. Lastly, by instituting a
comparison between himself and them, he shows how vain their boasting
is.  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206)

<span id="vi-p25"></span>In the *eleventh* chapter, (<span
id="vi-p25.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#000)<span id="vi-p25.1"></span>), he
calls upon the Corinthians to renounce those depraved inclinations, by
which they had been corrupted, showing them that nothing is more
dangerous than to allow themselves to be drawn aside from the simplicity
of the Gospel. The fact of his having begun to be somewhat disesteemed
among them, while others had been more favorably received by them, had
arisen, as he shows, not from any fault on his part, but from their
being haughty or nice to please; inasmuch as those others had brought
them nothing better or more excellent, while he was contemptible in
their view because he did not set himself off to advantage by elegance
of speech,  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) or because he had,
by voluntary subjection, by way of humouring their weakness, given up
his just claim. This irony  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208)
contains in it an indirect reproach for their ingratitude, for where was
the reasonableness of esteeming him the less, because he had
accommodated himself to them? He declares, however, that the reason why
he had refrained from taking the wages to which he was entitled, was not
that he had less affection to the Corinthians,  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) but in order that no advantage might
be gained over him in any respect by the false apostles, who, he saw,
laid snares for him by this stratagem.

<span id="vi-p29"></span>Having reproved the unreasonable and malignant
judgment of the Corinthians, he magnifies himself in a strain of pious
glorying, letting them know in what magnificent terms he could boast,
were he so inclined, premising however, that it is for their sakes that
he acts the fool  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) in heralding
his own praises. At length, checking himself, as it were, in the middle
of the course, he says that his chief ground of glorying is that
abasement which was despised by the proud, for he had been admonished by
the Lord, not to glory in anything but in his infirmities.

<span id="vi-p31"></span>Towards the close of the *twelfth* chapter,
(<span id="vi-p31.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#000)<span id="vi-p31.1"></span>), he
again expostulates with them for shutting him up to the necessity of
thus playing the fool, while they give themselves up to ambitious men,
 <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) by whom they are estranged from
Christ. Farther, he inveighs keenly against those who wantonly raged
against him, adding to their previous crimes this impudence of
opposition.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212)

<span id="vi-p34"></span>In the *thirteenth* chapter, (<span
id="vi-p34.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#000)<span id="vi-p34.1"></span>), by
forewarning such persons, that he will treat them with peculiar
severity, he exhorts all in general to recognise his apostleship, as it
will be for their advantage to do so; while it is a dangerous thing for
them to despise one, whom they had found by experience to be a trusty
and faithful ambassador from the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc40005.htm#fr_198) <span
id="vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p5"></span> “<span id="vi-p5.1"></span>N’auoit point este
du tout inutile et sans fruit;” — “Was not altogether useless and
without fruit.”

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc40005.htm#fr_199) <span
id="vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p7"></span> “<span id="vi-p7.1"></span>Afin que cela luy
serue d’vn gage et nouueau lien pour entrer en leur bonne grace;” —
“That this may serve as a pledge and new tie to establish them in their
good graces.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc40005.htm#fr_200) <span
id="vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p8"></span> “<span id="vi-p8.1"></span>Qu’il n’a point
pretendu de les tromper, leur donnant à entendre d’vn, et pensant
d’autre;” — “That he had not intended to deceive them, by giving them to
understand one thing while he was thinking of another.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc40005.htm#fr_201) <span
id="vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p12"></span> “<span id="vi-p12.1"></span>De l’auancement de
l’oeuure;” — “From the advancement of the work.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc40005.htm#fr_202) <span
id="vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p14"></span> “<span id="vi-p14.1"></span>Comme de faict il
estoit contemptible au monde;” — “As in fact he was contemptible in the
view of the world.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc40005.htm#fr_203) <span
id="vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p17"></span> The palm is one of the most beautiful trees in
the vegetable kingdom; it is upright, lofty, verdant, and embowering. It
grows by the brook or well of living water; and, *resisting every
attempt to press or bend it downwards*, shoots directly towards heaven.
For this reason, perhaps, it was regarded by the ancients as peculiarly
sacred, and, therefore, most frequently used in adorning their temples.
The chosen symbol of constancy, fruitfulness, patience, and victory;
*the more it is oppressed the more it flourishes, the higher it grows,
and the stronger and broader the top expands*. — Paxton’s Illustrations,
(Edin. 1842,) volume 2. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc40005.htm#fr_204) <span
id="vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p20"></span> “<span id="vi-p20.1"></span>Pour ce que ce
qu’il en auoit fait, estoit tourné à leur grand proufit;” — “Because,
what he had done had turned out to their great advantage.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc40005.htm#fr_205) <span
id="vi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p23"></span> “<span id="vi-p23.1"></span>Pour bataillier
sous l’enseigne de Iesu Christ;” — “For fighting under the banners of
Jesus Christ.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc40005.htm#fr_206) <span
id="vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p24"></span> “<span id="vi-p24.1"></span>Finalement,
faisant comparaison de sa personne auec telles gens, il monstre que
c’est folie à eux de s’esleuer et vanter ainsi, sans auoir dequoy;” —
“Lastly, by drawing a comparison between himself and such persons, he
shows that it is folly in them to exalt themselves and vaunt, as they
did, without having any ground for doing so.”

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc40005.htm#fr_207) <span
id="vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p26"></span> “<span id="vi-p26.1"></span>Par vne eloquence
de paroles ornees et magnifiques;” — “By an eloquence of elegant and
magnificent words.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc40005.htm#fr_208) <span
id="vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p27"></span> “<span id="vi-p27.1"></span>Qui est vne façon
de parler par ironie (c’est à dire par maniere de moequerie);” — “Which
is an instance of irony, that is to say, by way of mockery.”

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc40005.htm#fr_209) <span
id="vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p28"></span> “<span id="vi-p28.1"></span>Qu’enuers les
autres Eglises;” — “Than to the other Churches.”

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc40005.htm#fr_210) <span
id="vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p30"></span> “<span id="vi-p30.1"></span>Que pour l’amour
d’eux il est contraint de faire du sot;” — “That it is from love to
them, that he is constrained to act the fool.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc40005.htm#fr_211) <span
id="vi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p32"></span> “<span id="vi-p32.1"></span>Ils se laissoyent
manier et gouuerner à un tas d’ambitieux;” — “They allowed themselves to
be directed and governed by a band of ambitious men.”

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc40005.htm#fr_212) <span
id="vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p33"></span> “<span id="vi-p33.1"></span>Ne se contentans
point de leurs fautes passees, sinon qu’ils poursuyuissent de luy
resister impudemment;” — “Not contented with their previous faults,
without persisting in impudently opposing him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc40006)
