[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40007)  [Next](cc40009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1**. Do we begin again to commend ourselves?
or need we, as some *others*, epistles of commendation to you, or
*letters* of commendation from you?

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1**. Incipimus rursum nos ipsos commendare?
numquid, sicuti quidam, commendaticiis epistolis opus habemus ad vos?
aut commendaticiis a vobis?

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span>**2**. Ye are our epistle written in our
hearts, known and read of all men:

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**2**. Epistola nostra vos estis, scripta in
cordibus nostris, quae cognoscitur et legitur ab omnibus hominibus.

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**3** *Forasmuch as ye are* manifestly
declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with
ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but
in fleshly tables of the heart.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>**3**. Dum palam fit, vos esse Epistolam
Christi, subministratam a nobis, scriptam non atramento, sed Spiritu Dei
vivi: non in tabulis lapideis, sed in tabulis cordis carneis.  <span
id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357)

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span><span id="ix.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>**1.** *Do we begin* It appears that this
objection also was brought forward against him — that he was excessively
fond of publishing his own exploits, and brought against him, too, by
those who were grieved to find that the fame, which they were eagerly
desirous to obtain, was effectually obstructed in consequence of his
superior excellence. They had already, in my opinion, found fault with
the former Epistle, on this ground, that he indulged immoderately in
commendations of himself. To *commend* here means to boast foolishly and
beyond measure, or at least to recount one’s own praises in a spirit of
ambition. Paul’s calumniators had a plausible pretext — that it is a
disgusting  <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) and odious thing in
itself for one to be the trumpeter of his own praises. Paul, however,
had an excuse on the ground of *necessity,* inasmuch as he gloried, only
because he was shut up to it. His design also raised him above all
calumny, as he had nothing in view but that the honor of his apostleship
might remain unimpaired for the edification of the Church; for had not
Christ’s honor been infringed upon, he would readily have allowed to
pass unnoticed what tended to detract from his own reputation. Besides,
he saw that it was very much against the Corinthians, that his authority
was lessened among them. In the first place, therefore, he brings
forward their calumny, letting them know that he is not altogether
ignorant as to the kind of talk, that was current among them.

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>*Have we need?* The answer is suited (to use
a common expression) to the person rather than to the thing, though we
shall find him afterwards saying as much as was required in reference to
the thing itself. At present, however, he reproves their malignity,
inasmuch as they were displeased, if he at any time reluctantly, nay
even when they themselves constrained him, made mention of the grace
that God had bestowed upon him, while they were themselves begging in
all quarters for epistles, that were stuffed entirely with flattering
commendations. He says that he has no need of commendation in words,
while he is abundantly commended by his deeds. On the other hand, he
convicts them of a greedy desire for glory, inasmuch as they endeavored
to acquire favor through the suffrages of men.  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) In this manner, he gracefully and
appropriately repels their calumny. We must not, however, infer from
this, that it is absolutely and in itself wrong to receive
recommendations,  <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) provided you
make use of them for a good purpose. For Paul himself recommends many;
and this he would not have done had it been unlawful. Two things,
however, are required here — *first*, that it be not a recommendation
that is elicited by flattery, but an altogether unbiassed testimony;
 <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) and *secondly*, that it be not
given for the purpose of procuring advancement for the individual, but
simply that it may be the means of promoting the advancement of Christ’s
kingdom. For this reason, I have observed, that Paul has an eye to those
who had assailed him with calumnies.

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span><span id="ix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span>**2.** *Ye are our Epistle.* There is no
little ingenuity in his making his own glory hinge upon the welfare of
the Corinthians. “So long as you shall remain Christians, I shall have
recommendation enough. For your faith speaks my praise, as being *the
seal of my apostleship.*” (<span id="ix.i-p18.1"></span>[1Co
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)<span id="ix.i-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span>When he says — *written in our hearts*, this
may be understood in reference to Silvanus and Timotheus, and in that
case the meaning will be: “We are not contented with this praise, that
we derive from the thing itself. The recommendations, that others have,
fly about before the eyes of men, but this, that *we* have, has its seat
in men’s consciences.” It may also be viewed as referring in part to the
Corinthians, in this sense: “Those that obtain recommendations by dint
of entreaty, have not in the conscience what they carry about written
upon paper, and those that recommend others often do so rather by way of
favor than from judgment. We, on the other hand, have the testimony of
our apostleship, on this side and on that, engraven on men’s hearts.”

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span>*Which is known and read* It might also be
read — “Which is known and *acknowledged,”* owing to the ambiguity of
the word <span id="ix.i-p20.1"></span>ἀναγινωσκεσαι,  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) and I do not know but that the latter
might be more suitable. I was unwilling, however, to depart from the
common rendering, when not constrained to do so. Only let the reader
have this brought before his view, that he may consider which of the two
renderings is the preferable one. If we render it *acknowledged,* there
will be an implied contrast between an epistle that is sure and of
unquestionable authority, and such as are counterfeit.  <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) And, unquestionably, what immediately
follows, is rather on the side of the latter rendering, for he brings
forward the *Epistle of Christ,* in contrast with those that are forged
and pretended.

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span><span id="ix.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p24"></span>**3.** *Ye are the Epistle of Christ*
Pursuing the metaphor, he says that the Epistle of which he speaks was
written by Christ, inasmuch as the faith of the Corinthians was his
work. He says that it was *ministered* by him, as if meaning by this,
that he had been in the place of ink and pen. In fine, he makes Christ
the author and himself the instrument, that calumniators may understand,
that it is with Christ that they have to do, if they continue to speak
against him  <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) with malignity.
What follows is intended to increase the authority of that *Epistle.*
The second clause,  <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) however, has
already a reference to the comparison that is afterwards drawn between
the law and the gospel. For he takes occasion from this shortly
afterwards, as we shall see, to enter upon a comparison of this nature.
The antitheses here employed — *ink* and *Spirit, stones* and *heart* —
give no small degree of weight to his statements, by way of
amplification. For in drawing a contrast between *ink* and the *Spirit
of God*, and between *stones* and *heart,* he expresses more than if he
had simply made mention of the *Spirit* and the *heart,* without drawing
any comparison.

<span id="ix.i-p27"></span>*Not on tables of stone* He alludes to the
promise that is recorded in <span id="ix.i-p27.1"></span>[Jer
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span id="ix.i-p27.1"></span>,
and <span id="ix.i-p27.2"></span>[Eze
37:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#026)<span id="ix.i-p27.2"></span>,
concerning the grace of the New Testament.

<span id="ix.i-p28"></span>I will make, says he, a new covenant with
them, not such as I had made with their fathers; but I will write my
laws upon their hearts, and engrave them on their inward parts. Farther,
I will take away the stony heart from the midst of thee, and will give
thee a heart of flesh, that thou mayest walk in my precepts.  
(<span id="ix.i-p28.2"></span>[Ezek.
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#027)<span id="ix.i-p28.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p29"></span>Paul says, that this blessing was
accomplished through means of his preaching. Hence it abundantly
appears, that he is a faithful minister of the New Covenant — which is a
legitimate testimony in favor of his apostleship. The epithet *fleshly*
is not taken here in a bad sense, but means soft and flexible,  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) as it is contrasted with *stony*, that
is, hard and stubborn, as is the heart of man by nature, until it has
been subdued by the Spirit of God.  <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367)

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
3:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#004)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**4**. And such trust have we through Christ
to God-ward:

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**4**. Fiduciam autem eiusmodi per Christum
habemus erga Deum:

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span>**5**. Not that we are sufficient of
ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves; but our sufficiency *is*
of God;

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>**5**. Non quod idonei simus ex nobis ad
cogitandum quicquam, tanquam ex nobis: sed facultas nostra ex Deo est.

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>**6**. Who also hath made us able ministers
of the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the
letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>**6**. Qui nos fecit idoneos ministros Novi
testamenti,  <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) non literae, sed
Spiritus: nam litera quidem occidit: Spiritus autem vivificat.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>**7**. But if the ministration of death,
written *and* engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of
Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of
his countenance; *which* glory was to be done away:

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>**7**. Quodsi ministerium mortis in literis
insculptum in lapidibus fuit in gloria, ita ut non possent intueri filii
Israel in faciem Mosis propter gloriam vultus eius, quae aboletur:

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>**8**. How shall not the ministration of the
Spirit be rather glorious?

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>**8**. Quomodo non magis ministerium
Spiritus erit in gloria?

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>**9**. For if the ministration of
condemnation *be* glory, much more doth the ministration of
righteousness exceed in glory.

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span>**9**. Si enim ministerium damnationis,
gloria: quomodo non magis abundet (*vel, excellat*) ministerium
iustitiae in gloria?

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>**10.** For even that which was made
glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that
excelleth.

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>**10.** Etenim quod glorificatum fuit, in
hac parte, non fuit glorificatum propter antecellentem gloriam.

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>**11.** For if that which is done away *was*
glorious, much more that which remaineth *is* glorious.

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span>**11.** Si enim quod aboletur, per gloriam:
multo magis quod manet, erit in gloria.

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span><span id="ix.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span>**4.** *And such confidence* As it was a
magnificent commendation, that Paul had pronounced to the honor of
himself and his Apostleship, lest he should seem to speak of himself
more confidently than was befitting, he transfers the entire glory to
God, from whom he acknowledges that he has received everything that he
has. “By this boasting,” says he, “I extol God rather than myself, *by
whose grace I am what I am.”* (<span id="ix.ii-p21.1"></span>[1Co
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii-p21.1"></span>.)
He adds, as he is accustomed to do *by Christ,* because he is, as it
were, the channel, through which all God’s benefits flow forth to us.

<span id="ix.ii-p22"></span><span id="ix.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p23"></span>**5.** *Not that we are competent.*  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) When he thus disclaims all merit, it
is not as if he abased himself in merely pretended modesty, but instead
of this, he speaks what he truly thinks. Now we see, that he leaves man
nothing. For the smallest part, in a manner, of a good work is
*thought*. In other words,  <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) it
has neither the *first* part of the praise, nor the *second*; and yet he
does not allow us even *this*. As it is less to *think* than to *will*,
how foolish a part do those act, who arrogate to themselves a right
*will*, when Paul does not leave them so much as the power of *thinking*
aught!  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) Papists have been misled
by the term *sufficiency*, that is made use of by the Old Interpreter.
 <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) For they think to get off by
acknowledging that man is not qualified to form good purposes, while in
the mean time they ascribe to him a right apprehension of the mind,
which, with some assistance from God, may effect something of itself.
Paul, on the other hand, declares that man is in want, not merely of
*sufficiency of himself*, (<span id="ix.ii-p27.1"></span>αὐτάρκειαν,)
but also of *competency* (<span id="ix.ii-p27.2"></span>ἱκανότητα,)
 <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) which would be equivalent to
<span id="ix.ii-p28.2"></span>*idoneitas* (fitness), if such a term were
in use among the Latins. He could not, therefore, more effectually strip
man bare of every thing good.  <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374)

<span id="ix.ii-p32"></span><span id="ix.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p33"></span>**6.** *Who hath made us competent.*  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) He had acknowledged himself to be
altogether useless. Now he declares, that, by the grace of God, he has
been qualified  <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) for an office,
for which he was previously unqualified. From this we infer its
magnitude and difficulty, as it can be undertaken by no one, that has
not been previously prepared and fashioned for it by God. It is the
Apostle’s intention, also, to extol the dignity of the gospel. There is,
at the same time, no doubt, that he indirectly exposes the poverty of
those, who boasted in lofty terms of their endowments, while they were
not furnished with so much as a single drop of heavenly grace.

<span id="ix.ii-p36"></span>*Not of the letter but of the spirit* He now
follows out the comparison between the law and the gospel, which he had
previously touched upon. It is uncertain, however, whether he was led
into this discussion, from seeing that there were at Corinth certain
perverse  <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) devotees of the law,
or whether he took occasion from something else to enter upon it. For my
part, as I see no evidence that the false apostles had there confounded
the law and the gospel, I am rather of opinion, that, as he had to do
with lifeless declaimers, who endeavored to obtain applause through mere
prating,  <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) and as he saw, that
the ears of the Corinthians were captivated with such glitter, he was
desirous to show them what was the chief excellence of the gospel, and
what was the chief praise of its ministers. Now this he makes to consist
in the efficacy of the Spirit. A comparison between the law and the
gospel was fitted in no ordinary degree to show this. This appears to me
to be the reason why he came to enter upon it.

<span id="ix.ii-p39"></span>There is, however, no doubt, that by the
term *letter,* he means the Old Testament, as by the term *spirit* he
means the gospel; for, after having called himself a *minister of the
New Testament,* he immediately adds, by way of exposition, that he is a
*minister of the spirit,* and contrasts the *letter* with the *spirit.*
We must now enquire into the reason of this designation. The exposition
contrived by Origen has got into general circulation — that by the
*letter* we ought to understand the grammatical and genuine meaning of
Scripture, or the *literal* sense, (as they call it,) and that by the
*spirit* is meant the allegorical meaning, which is commonly reckoned to
be the *spiritual* meaning. Accordingly, during several centuries,
nothing was more commonly said, or more generally received, than this —
that Paul here furnishes us with a key for expounding Scripture by
allegories, while nothing is farther from his intention. For by the term
*letter* he means outward preaching, of such a kind as does not reach
the heart; and, on the other hand, by *spirit* he means living doctrine,
of such a nature as *worketh effectually* (<span
id="ix.ii-p39.2"></span>[1Th 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013)<span
id="ix.ii-p39.2"></span>) on the minds of men,  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) through the grace of the Spirit. By
the term *letter,* therefore, is meant *literal* preaching — that is,
*dead* and *ineffectual,* perceived only by the ear. By the term
*spirit,* on the other hand, is meant *spiritual* doctrine, that is,
what is not merely uttered with the mouth, but effectually makes its way
to the souls of men with a lively feeling. For Paul had an eye to the
passage in Jeremiah, that I quoted a little ago, (<span
id="ix.ii-p40.2"></span>[Jer
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span id="ix.ii-p40.2"></span>,)
where the Lord says, that his law had been proclaimed merely with the
mouth, and that it had, therefore, been of short duration, because the
people did not embrace it in their heart, and he promises the Spirit of
regeneration under the reign of Christ, to write his gospel, that is,
the new covenant, upon their hearts. Paul now makes it his boast, that
the accomplishment of that prophecy is to be seen in his preaching, that
the Corinthians may perceive, how worthless is the loquacity of those
vain boasters, who make incessant noise  <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) while devoid of the efficacy of the
Spirit.

<span id="ix.ii-p42"></span>It is asked, however, whether God, under the
Old Testament, merely sounded forth in the way of an external voice, and
did not also speak inwardly to the hearts of the pious by his Spirit. I
answer in the *first* place, that Paul here takes into view what
belonged peculiarly to the law; for although God then wrought by his
Spirit, yet that did not take its rise from the ministry of Moses, but
from the grace of Christ, as it is said in <span
id="ix.ii-p42.1"></span>[Joh 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span
id="ix.ii-p42.1"></span> —

<span id="ix.ii-p43"></span>The law was given by Moses;  
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

<span id="ix.ii-p44"></span>True, indeed, the grace of God did not,
during all that time, lie dormant, but it is enough that it was not a
benefit that belonged to the law.  <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) For Moses had discharged his office,
when he had delivered to the people the doctrine of life, adding
threatenings and promises. For this reason he gives to the law the name
of the *letter,* because it is in itself a dead preaching; but the
gospel he calls *spirit,* because the ministry of the gospel is
*living,* nay, *lifegiving.*

<span id="ix.ii-p46"></span>I answer secondly, that these things are not
affirmed absolutely in reference either to the law or to the gospel, but
in respect of the contrast between the one and the other; for even the
gospel is not always spirit. When, however, we come to compare the two,
it is truly and properly affirmed, that the nature of the law is to
teach men literally, in such a way that it does not reach farther than
the ear; and that, on the other hand, the nature of the gospel is to
teach spiritually, because it is the instrument of Christ’s grace. This
depends on the appointment of God, who has seen it meet to manifest the
efficacy of his Spirit more clearly in the gospel than in the law, for
it is his work exclusively to teach effectually the minds of men.

<span id="ix.ii-p47"></span>When Paul, however, calls himself a
*Minister of the Spirit*, he does not mean by this, that the grace of
the Holy Spirit and his influence, were tied to his preaching, so that
he could, whenever he pleased, breathe forth the Spirit along with the
utterance of the voice. He simply means, that Christ blessed his
ministry, and thus accomplished what was predicted respecting the
gospel. It is one thing for Christ to connect his influence with a man’s
doctrine.  <span id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) and quite another for
the man’s doctrine  <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) to have such
efficacy of itself. We are, then, Ministers of the Spirit, not as if we
held him inclosed within us, or as it were captive — not as if we could
at our pleasure confer his grace upon all, or upon whom we pleased — but
because Christ, through our instrumentality, illuminates the minds of
men, renews their hearts, and, in short, regenerates them wholly.  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) It is in consequence of there being
such a connection and bond of union between Christ’s grace and man’s
effort, that in many cases that is ascribed to the minister which
belongs exclusively to the Lord. For in that case it is not the mere
individual that is looked to, but the entire dispensation of the gospel,
which consists, on the one hand, in the secret influence of Christ, and,
on the other, in man’s outward efforts.

<span id="ix.ii-p51"></span>*For the letter killeth*. This passage was
mistakingly perverted, first by Origen, and afterwards by others, to a
spurious signification. From this arose a very pernicious error — that
of imagining that the perusal of Scripture would be not merely useless,
but even injurious,  <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) unless it
were drawn out into allegories. This error was the source of many evils.
For there was not merely a liberty allowed of adulterating the genuine
meaning of Scripture,  <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) but the
more of audacity any one had in this manner of acting, so much the more
eminent an interpreter of Scripture was he accounted. Thus many of the
ancients recklessly played with the sacred word of God,  <span
id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) as if it had been a ball to be tossed
to and fro. In consequence of this, too, heretics had it more in their
power to trouble the Church; for as it had become general practice to
make any passage whatever  <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) mean
anything that one might choose, there was no frenzy so absurd or
monstrous, as not to admit of being brought forward under some pretext
of allegory. Even good men themselves were carried headlong, so as to
contrive very many mistaken opinions, led astray through a fondness for
allegory.

<span id="ix.ii-p56"></span>The meaning of this passage, however, is as
follows — that, if the word of God is simply uttered with the mouth, it
is an occasion of death, and that it is lifegiving, only when it is
received with the heart. The terms *letter* and *spirit*, therefore, do
not refer to the exposition of the word, but to its influence and fruit.
Why it is that the doctrine merely strikes upon the ear, without
reaching the heart, we shall see presently.

<span id="ix.ii-p57"></span><span id="ix.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p58"></span>**7** *But if the ministry of death.* He now
sets forth the dignity of the gospel by this argument — that God
conferred distinguished honor upon the law, which, nevertheless, is
nothing in comparison with the gospel. The law was rendered illustrious
by many miracles. Paul, however, touches here upon one of them merely —
that the face of Moses shone with such splendor as dazzled the eyes of
all. That splendour was a token of the glory of the law. He now draws an
argument from the less to the greater — that it is befitting, that the
glory of the gospel should shine forth with greater lustre, inasmuch as
it is greatly superior to the law.

<span id="ix.ii-p59"></span>In the first place, he calls the law the
*ministry of death*. Secondly, he says, that the doctrine of it was
*written in letters, and with ink*. Thirdly, that it was *engraven on
stones.* Fourthly, that it was not of perpetual duration; but, instead
of this, its condition was *temporary and fading*. And, fifthly, he
calls it the *ministry of condemnation*. To render the antitheses
complete, it would have been necessary for him to employ as many
corresponding clauses in reference to the gospel; but, he has merely
spoken of it as being the ministry of the Spirit, and of
*righteousness*, and as enduring for ever. If you examine the words, the
correspondence is not complete, but so far as the matter itself is
concerned, what is expressed is sufficient.  <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) For he had said that the *Spirit
giveth life*, and farther, that men’s *hearts* served instead of
*stones*, and *disposition*, in the place of *ink*

<span id="ix.ii-p70"></span>Let us now briefly examine those attributes
of the law and the gospel. Let us, however, bear in mind, that he is not
speaking of the whole of the doctrine that is contained in the law and
the Prophets; and farther, that he is not treating of what happened to
the fathers under the Old Testament, but merely notices what belongs
peculiarly to the ministry of Moses. The law was *engraven on stones*,
and hence it was a literal doctrine. This defect of the law required to
be corrected by the gospel, because it could not but be brittle, so long
as it was merely engraven on tables of stone. The gospel, therefore, is
a holy and inviolable covenant, because it was contracted by the Spirit
of God, acting as security. From this, too, it follows, that the law was
the *ministry of condemnation* and of *death*; for when men are
instructed as to their duty, and hear it declared, that all who do not
render satisfaction to the justice of God are cursed, (<span
id="ix.ii-p70.1"></span>[De 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span
id="ix.ii-p70.1"></span>,) they are convicted, as under sentence of sin
and death. From the law, therefore, they derive nothing but a
condemnation of this nature, because God there demands what is due to
him, and at the same time confers no power to perform it. The gospel, on
the other hand, by which men are regenerated, and are reconciled to God,
through the free remission of their sins, is the ministry of
righteousness, and, consequently, of life also.

<span id="ix.ii-p71"></span>Here, however, a question arises: As the
gospel is the odor of death unto death to some, (<span
id="ix.ii-p71.1"></span>[2Co 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span
id="ix.ii-p71.1"></span>,) and as Christ is a rock of offense, and a
stone of stumbling set for the ruin of many,  <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) (<span id="ix.ii-p72.2"></span>[Lu
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034)<span id="ix.ii-p72.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.ii-p72.3"></span>[1Pe
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008)<span id="ix.ii-p72.3"></span>,)
why does he represent, as belonging exclusively to the law, what is
common to both? Should you reply, that it happens accidentally that the
gospel is the source of death, and, accordingly, it the occasion of it
rather than the cause, inasmuch as it is in its own nature salutary to
all, the difficulty will still remain unsolved; for the same answer
might be returned with truth in reference to the law. For we hear what
Moses called the people to bear witness to — that he had set before them
life and death. (<span id="ix.ii-p72.4"></span>[De
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015)<span id="ix.ii-p72.4"></span>.)
We hear what Paul himself says in <span id="ix.ii-p72.5"></span>[Ro
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii-p72.5"></span> —
that the law has turned out to our ruin, not through any fault attaching
to it, but in consequence of our wickedness. Hence, as the entailing of
condemnation upon men is a thing that happens alike to the law and the
gospel, the difficulty still remains.

<span id="ix.ii-p73"></span>My answer is this — that there is,
notwithstanding of this, a great difference between them; for although
the gospel is an occasion of condemnation to many, it is nevertheless,
on good grounds, reckoned the doctrine of life, because it is the
instrument of regeneration, and offers to us a free reconciliation with
God. The law, on the other hand, as it simply prescribes the rule of a
good life, does not renew men’s hearts to the obedience of
righteousness, and denounces everlasting death upon transgressors, can
do nothing but condemn.  <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) Or if
you prefer it in another way, the office of the law is to show us the
disease, in such a way as to show us, at the same time, no hope of cure:
the office of the gospel is, to bring a remedy to those that were past
hope. For as the law leaves man to himself, it condemns him, of
necessity, to death; while the gospel, bringing him to Christ, opens the
gate of life. Thus, in one word, we find that it is an accidental
property of the law, that is perpetual and inseparable, that it killeth;
for as the Apostle says elsewhere, (<span id="ix.ii-p74.2"></span>[Ga
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii-p74.2"></span>,)

<span id="ix.ii-p75"></span>All that remain under the law are subject to
the curse.

<span id="ix.ii-p76"></span>It does, not, on the other hand, invariably
happen to the gospel, that it *kills,* for in it is

<span id="ix.ii-p77"></span>revealed the righteousness of God from faith
to faith, and therefore it is the power of God unto salvation to every
one that believeth. (<span id="ix.ii-p77.1"></span>[Rom.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016), Rom. 17:0<span
id="ix.ii-p77.1"></span>.)  <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392)

<span id="ix.ii-p79"></span>It remains, that we consider the last of the
properties that are ascribed. The Apostle says, that the law was but for
a time, and required to be abolished, but that the gospel, on the other
hand, remains for ever. There are various reasons why the ministry of
Moses is pronounced transient, for it was necessary that the shadows
should vanish at the coming of Christ, and that statement —

<span id="ix.ii-p80"></span>The law and the Prophets were until John —  
(<span id="ix.ii-p80.2"></span>[Mt
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)<span id="ix.ii-p80.2"></span>)

<span id="ix.ii-p81"></span>— applies to more than the mere shadows. For
it intimates, that Christ has put an end to the ministry of Moses, which
was peculiar to him, and is distinguished from the gospel. Finally, the
Lord declares by Jeremiah, that the weakness of the Old Testament arose
from this — that it was not engraven on men’s hearts. (<span
id="ix.ii-p81.1"></span>[Jer. 31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span id="ix.ii-p81.1"></span>.)
For my part, I understand that abolition of the law, of which mention is
here made, as referring to the whole of the Old Testament, in so far as
it is opposed to the gospel, so that it corresponds with the statement —
*The law and the Prophets were until John.* For the context requires
this. For Paul is not reasoning here as to mere ceremonies, but shows
how much more powerfully the Spirit of God exercises his power in the
gospel, than of old under the law.

<span id="ix.ii-p82"></span>*So that they could not look.* He seems to
have had it in view to reprove, indirectly, the arrogance of those, who
despised the gospel as a thing that was excessively mean,  <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) so that they could scarcely deign to
give it a direct look. “So great,” says he, “was the splendor of the
law, that the Jews could not endure it. What, then, must we think of the
gospel, the dignity of which is as much superior to that of the law, as
Christ is more excellent than Moses?”

<span id="ix.ii-p84"></span><span id="ix.ii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p85"></span>**10.** *What was rendered glorious.* This
is not a correction of what goes before, but rather a confirmation; for
he means that the glory of the law is extinguished when the gospel comes
forth. As the moon and stars, though in themselves they are not merely
luminous, but diffuse their light over the whole earth, do,
nevertheless, disappear before the brightness of the sun; so, however
glorious the law was in itself, it has, nevertheless, no glory in
comparison with the excellence of the gospel. Hence it follows, that we
cannot sufficiently prize, or hold in sufficient esteem the glory of
Christ, which shines forth in the gospel, like the splendor of the sun
when beaming forth; and that the gospel is foolishly handled, nay more,
is shamefully profaned, where the power and majesty of the Spirit do not
come forth to view, so as to draw up men’s minds and hearts heavenward.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
3:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**12.** Seeing then that we have such hope,
we use great plainness of speech:

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>**12.** Habentes igitur hanc spem, multa
fiducia (*vel, libertate*) utimur.

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span>**13.** And not as Moses, *which* put a vail
over his face, that the children of Israel could not stedfastly look to
the end of that which is abolished:

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span>**13.** Et non quemadmodum Moses (<span
id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>[Ex
34:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#033)<span
id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>) ponebat velamen ante faciem suam, ut non
intuerentur filii Israel in finem eius quod aboletur.  <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394)

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>**14.** But their minds were blinded: for
until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading of
the old testament; which *vail* is done away in Christ.

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span>**14.** Sed excœcati sunt  <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) sensus eorum: nam usque in hune diem
velamen illud in lectione Veteris Testamenti  <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) manet: nec tollitur, eo quod aboletur
per Christum.  <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397)

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span>**15.** But even unto this day, when Moses
is read, the vail is upon their heart.

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span>**15.** Sed usque in hodiernum diem, quum
legitur Moses, velamen eorum cordibus impositum est.

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span>**16.** Nevertheless when it shall turn to
the Lord, the vail shall be taken away.

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span>**16.** At ubi conversus fuerit ad Dominum,
auferetur velamen.

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span>**17.** Now the Lord is that Spirit: and
where the Spirit of the Lord *is*, there *is* liberty.

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span>**17.** Dominus Spiritus est: ubi autem
Spiritus Domini, illic libertas.

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span>**18.** But we all, with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, *even* as by the Spirit of the Lord.

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span>**18.** Nos autem omnes retecta facie
gloriam Domini in speculo conspicientes, in eandem imaginem
transformamur a gloria in gloriam, tanquam a Domini Spiritu.

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span> 

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span><span id="ix.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p22"></span>**12.** *Having therefore this hope.* Here
he advances still farther, for he does not treat merely of the nature of
the law, or of that enduring quality of which we have spoken, but also
of its abuse. True, indeed, this also belonged to its nature, that,
being covered with a veil, it was not so manifest to the eye, and that
by its brightness it inspired terror, and accordingly Paul says
elsewhere, what amounts to the same thing — that the people of Israel
had *received* from it the *spirit of bondage unto fear.* (<span
id="ix.iii-p22.1"></span>[Ro 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="ix.iii-p22.1"></span>.) Here, however, he speaks rather of an abuse
that was foreign and adventitious.  <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) There was at that time in all quarters
a grievous stumbling-block arising from the wantonness of the Jews,
inasmuch as they obstinately rejected Christ.  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) In consequence of this, weak
consciences were shaken, being in doubt, whether they should embrace
Christ, inasmuch as he was not acknowledged by the chosen people.  <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) This kind of scruple the Apostle
removes, by instructing them, that their blindness had been prefigured
even from the beginning, inasmuch as they could not behold the face of
Moses, except through the medium of a *veil.* As, therefore, he had
stated previously, that the law was rendered glorious by the lustre of
Moses’ countenance, so now he teaches, that the *veil* was an emblem of
the blindness that was to come upon the people of Israel, for the person
of Moses represents the law. The Jews, therefore, acknowledged by this,
that they had not eyes to behold the law, except when veiled.

<span id="ix.iii-p26"></span>This *veil,* he adds, is not taken away,
except by Christ. From this he concludes, that none are susceptible of a
right apprehension, but those who direct their minds to Christ.  <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) In the *first* place, he draws this
distinction between the law and the Gospel — that the brightness of the
former rather dazzled men’s eyes, than enlightened them, while in the
latter, Christ’s glorious face is clearly beheld. He now triumphantly
exults, on the ground that the majesty of the Gospel is not terrific,
but amiable  <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) — is not hid, but
is manifested familiarly to all. The term <span
id="ix.iii-p28.2"></span>παῤῥησία *confidence,* he employs here, either
as meaning an elevated magnanimity of spirit, with which all ministers
of the Gospel ought to be endowed, or as denoting an open and full
manifestation of Christ; and this second view is the more probable, for
he contrasts this *confidence* with the obscurity of the law.  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403)

<span id="ix.iii-p30"></span><span id="ix.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p31"></span>**13.** *Not as Moses* Paul is not
reasoning as to the intention of Moses. For as it was his office, to
publish the law to his people, so, there can be no doubt that he was
desirous, that its true meaning should be apprehended by all, and that
he did not intentionally involve his doctrine in obscurity, but that the
fault was on the part of the people. As, therefore, he could not renew
the minds of the hearers, he was contented with faithfully discharging
the duty assigned to him. Nay more, the Lord having commanded him to put
a *veil* between his face and the eyes of the beholders, he obeyed.
Nothing, therefore, is said here to the dishonor of Moses, for he was
not required to do more than the commission, that was assigned to him,
called for. In addition to this, that bluntness, or that weak and obtuse
vision, of which Paul is now speaking, is confined to unbelievers
exclusively, because the law though wrapt up in figures,  <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) did nevertheless *impart wisdom to
babes,* <span id="ix.iii-p32.2"></span>[Ps
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii-p32.2"></span>
 <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405)

<span id="ix.iii-p34"></span><span id="ix.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p35"></span>**14.** *Their understandings were
blinded.* He lays the whole blame upon them, inasmuch as it was owing to
their *blindness,* that they did not make any proficiency in the
doctrine of the law. He afterwards adds, *That veil remaineth even until
this day.* By this he means, that that dulness of vision was not for a
single hour merely, but prefigured what the condition of the nation
would be in time to come. “That *veil* with which Moses covered his
face, when publishing the law, was the emblem of a stupidity, that would
come upon that people, and would continue upon them for a long period.
Thus at this day, when the law is preached to them, in

<span id="ix.iii-p36"></span>hearing they hear not, and in seeing they
see not.  
(<span id="ix.iii-p36.2"></span>[Mt
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii-p36.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.iii-p37"></span>There is no reason, however, why we should
be troubled,

<span id="ix.iii-p38"></span>as though some new thing had happened.
(<span id="ix.iii-p38.1"></span>[1Pe
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii-p38.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.iii-p39"></span>God has shown long ago under the type of
the *veil,* that it would be so. Lest, however, any blame should attach
to the law, he again repeats it, that *their hearts were covered with a
veil*

<span id="ix.iii-p40"></span>*And it is not removed, because it is done
away through Christ*. He assigns a reason, why they are so long in
blindness in the midst of light. For the law is in itself bright, but it
is only when Christ. appears to us in it, that we enjoy its splendor.
The Jews turn away their eyes as much as they can from Christ. It is not
therefore to be wondered, if they see nothing, refusing as they do to
behold the sun. This blindness on the part of the chosen people,
especially as it is so long continued, admonishes us not to be lifted up
with pride, relying on the benefits that God has conferred upon us. This
point is treated of in <span id="ix.iii-p40.1"></span>[Ro
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span id="ix.iii-p40.1"></span>.
Let, however, the reason of this blindness deter us from contempt of
Christ, which God so grievously punishes. In the mean time, let us
learn, that without Christ, the Sun of righteousness, (<span
id="ix.iii-p40.2"></span>[Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span
id="ix.iii-p40.2"></span>,) there is no light even in the law, or in the
whole word of God.

<span id="ix.iii-p41"></span><span id="ix.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p42"></span>**16.** *But when he shall have turned to
the Lord.* This passage has hitherto been badly rendered, for both Greek
and Latin writers have thought that the word Israel was to be
understood, whereas Paul is speaking of Moses. He had said, that a *veil
is upon the hearts* of the Jews, *when Moses is read*. He immediately
adds, *As soon as he will have turned to the Lord, the veil will be
taken away*. Who does not see, that this is said of Moses, that is, of
the law? For as Christ is the end  <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) of it, (<span
id="ix.iii-p43.2"></span>[Ro 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="ix.iii-p43.2"></span>,) to which it ought to be referred, it was
turned away in another direction, when the Jews shut out Christ from it.
Hence, as in the law  <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) they
wander into by-paths, so the law, too, becomes to them involved like a
labyrinth, until it is brought to refer to its end, that is, Christ. If,
accordingly, the Jews seek Christ in the law, the truth of God will be
distinctly seen by them,  <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) but so
long as they think to be wise without Christ, they will wander in
darkness, and will never arrive at a right understanding of the law. Now
what is said of the law applies to all Scripture — that where it is not
taken as referring to Christ as its one aim, it is mistakingly twisted
and perverted.  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409)

<span id="ix.iii-p47"></span><span id="ix.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p48"></span>**17.** *The Lord is the Spirit.* This
passage, also, has been misinterpreted, as if Paul had meant to say,
that Christ is of a spiritual essence, for they connect it with that
statement in <span id="ix.iii-p48.1"></span>[Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="ix.iii-p48.1"></span>,
*God is a Spirit*. The statement before us, however, has nothing to do
with Christ’s essence, but simply points out his office, for it is
connected with what goes before, where we found it stated, that the
doctrine of the law is literal, and not merely dead, but even an
occasion of death. He now, on the other hand, calls *Christ its spirit*,
 <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) meaning by this, that it will
be living and life-giving, only if it is breathed into by Christ. Let
the soul be connected with the body, and then there is a living man,
endowed with intelligence and perception, fit for all vital functions.
 <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) Let the soul be removed from
the body, and there will remain nothing but a useless carcase, totally
devoid of feeling.

<span id="ix.iii-p51"></span>The passage is deserving of particular
notice,  <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) as teaching us, in what
way we are to reconcile those encomiums which David pronounces upon the
law — (<span id="ix.iii-p52.2"></span>[Ps.
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#008)<span id="ix.iii-p52.2"></span>) —
“the law of the Lord converteth souls, enlighteneth the eyes, imparteth
wisdom to babes,” and passages of a like nature, with those statements
of Paul, which at first view are at variance with them — that it is the
ministry of sin and death — the letter that does nothing but kill.
(<span id="ix.iii-p52.3"></span>[2 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii-p52.3"></span>.)
For when it is animated by Christ,  <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) those things that David makes mention
of are justly applicable to it. If Christ is taken away, it is
altogether such as Paul describes. Hence Christ is the life of the law.
 <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414)

<span id="ix.iii-p55"></span>*Where the Spirit of the Lord.* He now
describes the manner, in which Christ gives life to the law — by giving
us his Spirit. The term Spirit here has a different signification from
what it had in the preceding verse. There, it denoted the soul, and was
ascribed metaphorically to Christ. Here, on the other hand, it means the
Holy Spirit, that Christ himself confers upon his people. Christ,
however, by regenerating us, gives life to the law, and shows himself to
be the fountain of life, as all vital functions proceed from man’s soul.
Christ, then, is to all (so to speak) the universal soul, not in respect
of essence, but in respect of grace. Or, if you prefer it, Christ is
*the Spirit*, because he quickens us by the life-giving influence of his
Spirit.  <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415)

<span id="ix.iii-p57"></span>He makes mention, also, of the blessing
that we obtain from that source. “*There*,” says he, “*is liberty*.” By
the term *liberty* I do not understand merely emancipation from the
servitude of sin, and of the flesh, but also that confidence, which we
acquire from His bearing witness as to our adoption. For it is in
accordance with that statement —

<span id="ix.iii-p58"></span>We have not again received the spirit of
bondage, to fear, etc. (<span id="ix.iii-p58.1"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="ix.iii-p58.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.iii-p59"></span>In that passage, the Apostle makes mention
of two things — *bondage,* and *fear*. The opposites of these are
*liberty* and *confidence.* Thus I acknowledge, that the inference drawn
from this passage by Augustine is correct — that we are by nature the
slaves of sin, and are made free by the grace of regeneration. For,
where there is nothing but the bare letter of the law, *there* will be
only the dominion of sin, but the term *Liberty,* as I have said, I take
in a more extensive sense. The grace of the Spirit might, also, be
restricted more particularly to ministers, so as to make this statement
correspond with the commencement of the chapter, for ministers require
to have another grace of the Spirit, and another liberty from what
others have. The former signification, however, pleases me better,
though at the same time I have no objection, that this should be applied
to every one according to the measure of his gift. It is enough, if we
observe, that Paul here points out the efficacy of the Spirit, which we
experience for our salvation — as many of us, as have been regenerated
by his grace.

<span id="ix.iii-p60"></span><span id="ix.iii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p61"></span>**18.** *But we all, with unveiled face*. I
know not how it had come into the mind of Erasmus, to apply to ministers
exclusively, what is evidently common to all believers. The word <span
id="ix.iii-p61.1"></span>κατοπτριζεσθαι, it is true, has a double
signification among the Greeks, for it sometimes means to hold out a
mirror to be looked into, and at other times to look into a mirror when
presented.  <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) The old interpreter,
however, has correctly judged, that the *second* of these is the more
suitable to the passage before us. I have accordingly followed his
rendering.  <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) Nor is it without
good reason, that Paul has added a term of universality — “*We all*,”
says he; for he takes in the whole body of the Church. It is a
conclusion that suits well with the doctrine stated previously — that we
have in the gospel a clear revelation from God. As to this, we shall see
something farther in the *fourth* chapter.

<span id="ix.iii-p64"></span>He points out, however, at the same time,
both the strength of the revelation, and our daily progress.  <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) For he has employed such a similitude
to denote *three* things: *first,* That we have no occasion to fear
obscurity, when we approach the gospel, for God *there* clearly
discovers to us His face;  <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419)
*secondly,* That it is not befitting, that it should be a dead
contemplation, but that we should be transformed by means of it into the
image of God; and, *thirdly,* that the one and the other are not
accomplished in us in one moment, but we must be constantly making
progress both in the knowledge of God, and in conformity to His image,
for this is the meaning of the expression — *from glory to glory*

<span id="ix.iii-p67"></span>When he adds, — *as by the Spirit of the
Lord,* he again reminds of what he had said — that the whole excellence
of the gospel depends on this, that it is made life-giving to us by the
grace of the Holy Spirit. For the particle of comparison — *as,* is not
employed to convey the idea of something not strictly applicable, but to
point out the manner. Observe, that the design of the gospel is this —
that the image of God, which had been effaced by sin, may be stamped
anew upon us, and that the advancement of this restoration may be
continually going forward in us during our whole life, because God makes
his glory shine forth in us by little and little.

<span id="ix.iii-p68"></span>There is one question that may be proposed
here. “Paul says, that we behold God’s face with an unveiled face,
 <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) while in the former Epistle we
find it stated, that we do not, for the present, know God otherwise than
through a mirror, and in an obscure manner.” In these statements there
is an appearance of contrariety. They are, however, by no means at
variance. The knowledge that we have of God for the present is obscure
and slender, in comparison with the glorious view that we shall have on
occasion of Christ’s last coming. At the same time, He presents Himself
to us at present, so as to be seen by us, and openly beheld, in so far
as is for our advantage, and in so far as our capacity admits of.  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) Hence Paul makes mention of progress
being made, inasmuch as there will *then* only be perfection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc40008.htm#fr_357) <span
id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>Tables de cœur
de chair; *ou*, tables charnelles du coeur; *ou*, tables du cœur *qui
sont* de chair;” — “Tables of heart of flesh; *or*, fleshly tables of
the heart; *or*, tables of the heart *which are* of flesh.”

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc40008.htm#fr_358) <span
id="ix.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p12.1"></span>Mal sonnante
aux aureilles;” — “Sounding offensively to the ears.”

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc40008.htm#fr_359) <span
id="ix.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p14.1"></span>Par la faueur
et recommandation des hommes;” — “By the favor and recommendation of
men.”

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc40008.htm#fr_360) <span
id="ix.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p15.1"></span>Letres
recommandatoires;” — “Recommendatory letters.”

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc40008.htm#fr_361) <span
id="ix.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p16.1"></span>Enucleatum
testimonium;” — “<span id="ix.i-p16.2"></span>Vn vray tesmoignage rendu
d’vn iugement entier auec prudence et en verite;” — “A true testimony,
given with solid judgment, with prudence, and with truth.” Cicero makes
use of a similar expression, which Calvin very probably had in his eye —
“<span id="ix.i-p16.3"></span>Enucleata suffragia;” — “Votes given
judiciously, and with an unbiassed judgment.” — (Cic. Planc. 4.) — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc40008.htm#fr_362) <span
id="ix.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span> Calvin has had occasion to notice the double
signification of this word when commenting on <span
id="ix.i-p21.2"></span>[2 Corinthians
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#013)<span id="ix.i-p21.2"></span>. An
instance of the ambiguity of the word occurs in <span
id="ix.i-p21.3"></span>[Mt 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)<span
id="ix.i-p21.3"></span>, where the words <span id="ix.i-p21.4"></span>ὁ
ἀναγινώσκων νοείτω are understood by *Kypke* as the words, not of the
evangelist, but of Christ, and as meaning — “He who *recognises* this,
(that is, the completion of Daniel’s prophecy by the ‘abomination of
desolation standing where it ought not,’) let him take notice and
reflect, while most other interpreters consider the words in question as
an admonition of the evangelist to the reader — “Let him that readeth
*understand* or *take notice*.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc40008.htm#fr_363) <span
id="ix.i-p21.5"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p22.1"></span>Celles qui
sont attitrees et faites à plaisir;” — “Such as are procured by unfair
means, and are made to suit convenience.”

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc40008.htm#fr_364) <span
id="ix.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p25"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p25.1"></span>De son
apostre;” — “Against his apostle.”

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc40008.htm#fr_365) <span
id="ix.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p26.1"></span>Le dernier
membre de la sentence;” — “The last clause of the sentence.”

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc40008.htm#fr_366) <span
id="ix.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p30"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p30.1"></span>Vn cœur docile
et ployable, ou aisé à ranger;” — “A heart that is teachable and
flexible, or easy to manage.”

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc40008.htm#fr_367) <span
id="ix.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p31"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p31.1"></span>Jusques à ce
qu’il soit donté et amolli par le sainct Esprit;” — “Until it has been
tamed and softened by the Holy Spirit.”

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc40008.htm#fr_368) <span
id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p8.1"></span>Du nouueau
Testament, o*u, de la nouuelle alliance*;” — “Of the New Testament,
*or*, *of the new covenant*.”

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc40008.htm#fr_369) <span
id="ix.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p24.1"></span>Non point
que soyons suffisans;” — “Not that we are sufficient.”

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc40008.htm#fr_370) <span
id="ix.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p25.1"></span>Pour le
moins;” — “At least.”

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc40008.htm#fr_371) <span
id="ix.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p26"></span> See *Institutes*, volume 1. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc40008.htm#fr_372) <span
id="ix.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p27"></span> Wiclif (1380) following, as he is wont, the
*Vulgate*, renders the verse as follows: “Not that we ben sufficiente to
thenke ony thing of us as of us: but oure sufficience is of God.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc40008.htm#fr_373) <span
id="ix.ii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p28.1"></span>La
disposition, preparation, et inclination;” — “Disposition, preparation,
and inclination.”

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc40008.htm#fr_374) <span
id="ix.ii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p29"></span> Charnock, in his “Discourse on the
Efficient of Regeneration,” makes an interesting allusion to Calvin’s
exposition of this verse. “Thinking,” says he, “is the lowest step in
the ladder of preparation; ‘tis the first act of the creature in any
rational production; yet this the Apostle doth remove from man, as in
every part of it his own act, (<span id="ix.ii-p29.1"></span>[2Co
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii-p29.1"></span>)

<span id="ix.ii-p30"></span>Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to
think any thing as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God.

<span id="ix.ii-p31"></span>The word signifies — reasoning: no rational
act can be done without reasoning; this is not purely our own. We have
no sufficiency of ourselves, *as of ourselves*, originally and radically
of ourselves, as if we were the author of that sufficiency, either
naturally or meritoriously. And Calvin observes, that the word is not
<span id="ix.ii-p31.1"></span>αὐτάρκεια, but <span
id="ix.ii-p31.2"></span>ἱκανότη” — not a *self ability*, but an
*aptitude* or *fitness* to any gracious thought. How can we oblige him
by any act, since, in every part of it, it is from him, not from
ourselves? For as *thinking* is the first requisite, so it is
perpetually requisite to the progress of any rational act, so that every
thought in any act, and the whole progress, wherein there must be a
whole flood of thoughts, is from the sufficiency of God.” — *Charnock’s
Works*, volume 2, p. 149. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc40008.htm#fr_375) <span
id="ix.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p34"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p34.1"></span>Lequel aussi
nous a rendus suffisans ministres;” — “Who also hath made us sufficient
ministers.”

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc40008.htm#fr_376) <span
id="ix.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p35"></span> It is justly observed by *Barnes*, that the
rendering in our authorized version — “Who hath made us *able*
ministers” — “does not *quite* meet the force of the original,” as it
“would seem to imply that Paul regarded himself and his fellow —
laborers as men of talents, and of signal ability; and that he was
inclined to boast of it,” while instead of this “he did not esteem
himself *sufficient* for this work in his own strength, (<span
id="ix.ii-p35.1"></span>[2Co 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span
id="ix.ii-p35.1"></span>; <span id="ix.ii-p35.2"></span>[2Co
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii-p35.2"></span>);
and he here says, that God had made him *sufficient*: not able,
talented, learned, but *sufficient*, (<span
id="ix.ii-p35.3"></span>ἱκάνωσεν ἡμᾶς); he has supplied our deficiency;
he has rendered us competent or fit; — if a word may be coined after the
manner of the Greek here, ‘he has *sufficienced* us for this work.’” The
unhappy rendering referred to had originated (as is shown by *Granville*
*Penn*) in the circumstance, that the Vulgate having rendered the
expression — <span id="ix.ii-p35.4"></span>*qui idoneos nos fecit
ministros*, Wiclif translated it as follows: *which made us also able
mynystris*, and that, while Erasmus suggested that it should be rendered
— <span id="ix.ii-p35.5"></span>*qui idoneos nos fecit ut essemus
ministri, quasi dicas, idoneavit* — who *fitted* or *qualified* us to be
ministers — and while, besides, in the first translation from the
original Greek, in 1526, Tyndale rendered — made us able to minister,
Wiclif’s original version from the Latin was *recalled*, and is now the
reading of our authorized version. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc40008.htm#fr_377) <span
id="ix.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p37.1"></span>Mauuais et
inconsiderez;” — “Wicked and reckless.”

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc40008.htm#fr_378) <span
id="ix.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p38"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p38.1"></span>Il auoit
affaire auec des gens qui sans zele preschoyent l’Euangile, comme qui
prononceroit vne harangue pour son plaisir, et n’ayans que le babil,
pourchassoyent par cela la faueur des hommes;” — “He had to do with
persons, who without zeal preached the gospel, like one that makes a
harangue according to his own liking, and while they had nothing but
mere talk, endeavored by this means to procure the applause of men.”

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc40008.htm#fr_379) <span
id="ix.ii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p40.1"></span>Es cœurs des
auditeurs;” — “In the hearts of the hearers.”

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc40008.htm#fr_380) <span
id="ix.ii-p40.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p41"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p41.1"></span>Crient et
gazouillent;” — “Cry and chirp.”

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc40008.htm#fr_381) <span
id="ix.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p45"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p45.1"></span>Il suffit,
que ce n’estoit point par le moyen de la loy: car elle n’auoit point
cela de propre;” — “It is enough that it was not by means of the law;
for it did not belong peculiarly to it.”

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc40008.htm#fr_382) <span
id="ix.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p48"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p48.1"></span>Au ministere
de l’homme qui enseigne;” — “To the ministry of the man that teaches.”

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc40008.htm#fr_383) <span
id="ix.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p49"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p49.1"></span>La doctrine
de l’homme, c’est à dire, son ministere;” — “The doctrine of the man,
that is to say, his ministry.”

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc40008.htm#fr_384) <span
id="ix.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p50"></span> The reader will find the same subject
largely treated of by Calvin, when commenting on <span
id="ix.ii-p50.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="ix.ii-p50.1"></span>. See
Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, pp. 128-9. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc40008.htm#fr_385) <span
id="ix.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p52"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p52.1"></span>Dangereuse;”
— “Dangerous.”

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc40008.htm#fr_386) <span
id="ix.ii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p53"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p53.1"></span>De corrompre
et desguiser le vray et naturel sens de l’Escriture:” — “Of corrupting
and disguising the true and natural meaning of Scripture.”

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc40008.htm#fr_387) <span
id="ix.ii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p54"></span> “Can you seriously think the Scriptures,”
says Revelation Andrew Fuller, in his Thoughts on Preaching, “to be a
book of riddles and conundrums, and that a Christian minister is
properly employed in giving scope to his fancy in order to discover
their solution? \[...\] All Scripture is profitable in some way, some
for doctrine, some for reproof, some for correction, and some for
instruction in righteousness, but all is not to be turned into allegory.
If we must *play*, let it be with things of less consequence than the
word of the eternal God.” — *Fuller’s Works*, volume 4, p. 694. The
attentive reader cannot fail to observe, how very frequently our author
exposes, in the strongest terms, the exercise of mere fancy in the
interpretation of the Holy Scriptures. See Calvin on the Corinthians,
vol. 1, p. 294. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc40008.htm#fr_388) <span
id="ix.ii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p55"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p55.1"></span>Vn propos et
vn mot;” — “A passage and a word.”

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc40008.htm#fr_389) <span
id="ix.ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p60"></span> *Piscator* brings out the comparison here
drawn by the Apostle between the law and the gospel, as presenting
*eight* points of contrast, as follows: —

<span id="ix.ii-p61"></span>1. <span id="ix.ii-p61.1"></span>Novi
Testamenti. (New Testament.)  
1. <span id="ix.ii-p61.3"></span>Veteris Testamenti. (Old Testament.)

<span id="ix.ii-p62"></span>2. <span id="ix.ii-p62.1"></span>Spiritus.
(Spirit.)  
2. <span id="ix.ii-p62.3"></span>Literae. (Letter.)

<span id="ix.ii-p63"></span>3. <span id="ix.ii-p63.1"></span>Vitae.
(Life.)  
3. <span id="ix.ii-p63.3"></span>Mortis. (Death.)

<span id="ix.ii-p64"></span>4. <span id="ix.ii-p64.1"></span>Inscriptum
cordibus. (Written on men’s hearts.)  
4. <span id="ix.ii-p64.3"></span>Inscriptum lapidibus. (Written on
stones.)

<span id="ix.ii-p65"></span>5. <span id="ix.ii-p65.1"></span>Semper
durans. (Everlasting.)  
5. <span id="ix.ii-p65.3"></span>Abolendum. (To be done away.)

<span id="ix.ii-p66"></span>6. <span id="ix.ii-p66.1"></span>Justitiae.
(Righteousness.)  
6. <span id="ix.ii-p66.3"></span>Damnationis. (Condemnation.)

<span id="ix.ii-p67"></span>7. <span id="ix.ii-p67.1"></span>Excellenter
gloriosum. (Eminently glorious.)  
7. <span id="ix.ii-p67.3"></span>Illius Respectu <span
id="ix.ii-p67.4"></span>ἄδοξον. (Comparatively devoid of glory.)

<span id="ix.ii-p68"></span>8. <span id="ix.ii-p68.1"></span>Perspicuum.
(Clear.)  
8. <span id="ix.ii-p68.3"></span>Obscurum. (Obscure.)

<span id="ix.ii-p69"></span>*Piscatoris Scholia in Epist. 2, ad
Corinth*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc40008.htm#fr_390) <span
id="ix.ii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p72"></span> The occasion of the ruin of unbelievers is
explained by Calvin at considerable length in the Harmony, vol. 1, pp.
148, 149. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc40008.htm#fr_391) <span
id="ix.ii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p74"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p74.1"></span>Elle ne nous
pent apporter autre chose que condemnation;” — “It can bring us nothing
but condemnation.”

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc40008.htm#fr_392) <span
id="ix.ii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p78"></span> *Turretine*, in his Institutes of
Controversial Theology, (volume 2,) gives a much similar view of the
matter, of which Calvin here treats. “<span
id="ix.ii-p78.1"></span>Quando lex vocatur litera occidens, et
ministerium mortis et condemnationis, (<span id="ix.ii-p78.2"></span>[2
Cor. 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009)<span id="ix.ii-p78.2"></span>,)
<span id="ix.ii-p78.3"></span>intelligenda est non per se et naturâ suâ,
sed per accidens, ob corruptionem hominis, non absolute et simpliciter,
sed secundum, quid quando spectatur ut fœdus operum, opposite ad fœdus
gratiae;” — “When the law is called a *killing letter*, and the
*ministry of death* *and condemnation*, (<span
id="ix.ii-p78.4"></span>[2 Cor. 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009)<span id="ix.ii-p78.4"></span>,) it
must be understood to be so, not in itself and in its own nature, but
accidentally, in consequence of man’s corruption — not absolutely and
expressly, but relatively, when viewed as a covenant of works, as
contrasted with the covenant of grace.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc40008.htm#fr_393) <span
id="ix.ii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p83"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p83.1"></span>Trop abiecte
et contemptible:” — “Excessively mean and contemptible.”

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc40008.htm#fr_394) <span
id="ix.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p6.1"></span>Ne
regardassent à la fin de ce qui deuoit prendre fin;” <span
id="ix.iii-p6.2"></span>ou, “<span id="ix.iii-p6.3"></span>ne veissent
de bout de ce,” *etc*.; <span id="ix.iii-p6.4"></span>ou, “<span
id="ix.iii-p6.5"></span>ne veissent iusqu’au fons de ce qui,” *etc*.; —
“Could not look to the end of what required to be abolished;” or, “could
not see to the close of what,” *etc*.; or, “could not see to the bottom
of what,” *etc*.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc40008.htm#fr_395) <span
id="ix.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>Aueuglez ou
endurcis;” — “Blinded or hardened.”

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc40008.htm#fr_396) <span
id="ix.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span> The Apostle says, (<span
id="ix.iii-p10.1"></span>[2Co
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014)<span id="ix.iii-p10.1"></span>,)
speaking of his countrymen — ‘Until this day remaineth the veil untaken
away in the reading of the Old Testament.’ (<span
id="ix.iii-p10.2"></span>ἐπὶ τὣ῎῝8217; ἀναγνώσει τὢς παλαιᾶς διαθήκη”.)
The word in this application is always rendered in our language
*Testament*. We have in this followed the Vulgate, as most modern
translators also have done. In the Geneva French, the word is rendered
both ways in the title, that the one may serve in explaining the other.
‘<span id="ix.iii-p10.3"></span>Le Nouveau Testament, c’est à dire, La
Nouvelle Alliance;’ — (‘The New Testament, that is to say, The New
Covenant,’) in which they copied Beza, who says — ‘<span
id="ix.iii-p10.4"></span>Testamentum Novum, sive Fœdus Novum;’ — (‘The
New Testament, or the New Covenant.’) That the second rendering of the
word is the better version, is unquestionable; but the title
appropriated by custom to a particular book is on the same footing with
a proper name, which is hardly considered as a subject for criticism.
Thus we call Caesar’s Diary Caesar’s Commentaries, from their Latin
name, though very different in meaning from the English word.” —
*Campbell on the Gospels*, Dissertation 5, p. 3 section 3. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc40008.htm#fr_397) <span
id="ix.iii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>Pource
qu’elle est abolie, ou, *laquelle est*;” — “Because it is abolished, or,
*which is*.”

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc40008.htm#fr_398) <span
id="ix.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p23.1"></span>D’vn abus
accidental, et qui estoit venu d’ailleurs;” — “Of an abuse that was
accidental, and that had come from another quarter.”

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc40008.htm#fr_399) <span
id="ix.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p24.1"></span>De ce
qu’ils reiettoyent Iesus Christ d’vne malice endurcie;” — “Inasmuch as
they rejected Christ with a hardened malice.”

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc40008.htm#fr_400) <span
id="ix.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p25.1"></span>Veu que le
peuple esleu ne le recognoissoit point pour Sauueur;” — “Inasmuch as the
chosen people did not acknowledge him as a Savior.”

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc40008.htm#fr_401) <span
id="ix.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p27.1"></span>Ceux qui
appliquent leur entendement à cognoistre Christ;” — “Those who apply
their understandings to the knowledge of Christ.”

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc40008.htm#fr_402) <span
id="ix.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p28.1"></span>Aimable,
et attrayante;” — “Amiable, and attractive.”

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc40008.htm#fr_403) <span
id="ix.iii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p29"></span> “We speak not only with all *confidence*,
but with all imaginable *plainness*; keeping back nothing; disguising
nothing; concealing nothing; and here we differ greatly from Jewish
doctors, and from the Gentile philosophers, who affect *obscurity*, and
endeavor, by figures, metaphors, and allegories, to hide everything from
the vulgar. But we wish that all may hear; and we speak so that all may
*understand*.” — Dr. Adam Clarke. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc40008.htm#fr_404) <span
id="ix.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p32"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p32.1"></span>Figures et
ombres;” — “Figures and shadows.”

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc40008.htm#fr_405) <span
id="ix.iii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p33"></span> “The clause rendered in our authorized
version — making wise the simple, is rendered by Calvin, instructing the
babe in wisdom. In Tyndale’s Bible the reading is, ‘And giveth wisdom
even unto babes.’ Babes is the word used in most of the versions.” —
Calvin on the Psalms, vol. 1, p. 317, n. 2. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc40008.htm#fr_406) <span
id="ix.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p43"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p43.1"></span>La fin et
l’accomplissement d’icelle;” — “The end and accomplishment of it.”

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc40008.htm#fr_407) <span
id="ix.iii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p44"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p44.1"></span>En lisant
la Loy;” — “In reading the Law.”

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc40008.htm#fr_408) <span
id="ix.iii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p45"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p45.1"></span>Ils y
trouuerout clairement la pure verité de Dieu;” — “They will clearly
discover in it the pure truth of God.”

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc40008.htm#fr_409) <span
id="ix.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p46"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p46.1"></span>C’est la
destourner hops de son droit sens et du tout la peruertir;” — “This is
to turn it away from its right meaning, and altogether to pervert it.”

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc40008.htm#fr_410) <span
id="ix.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p49"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p49.1"></span>L’esprit
de la Loy;” — “The spirit of the law.”

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc40008.htm#fr_411) <span
id="ix.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p50"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p50.1"></span>Tous
mouuemens et operations de la vie;” — “All the movements and operations
of life.”

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](cc40008.htm#fr_412) <span
id="ix.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p52"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p52.1"></span>Voici vn
beau passage, et bien digne d’estre noté;” — “Here is a beautiful
passage, and well deserving to be carefully noticed.”

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](cc40008.htm#fr_413) <span
id="ix.iii-p52.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p53"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p53.1"></span>Quand
l’ame luy est inspiree par Christ;” — “When a soul is breathed into by
Christ.”

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](cc40008.htm#fr_414) <span
id="ix.iii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p54"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p54.1"></span>La vie et
l’esprit de la Loy;” — “The life and spirit of the Law.”

<span id="fn_415"></span>[416](cc40008.htm#fr_415) <span
id="ix.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p56"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p56.1"></span>Par
l’efficace et viue vertu de son Sainct Esprit;” — “By the efficacy and
living influence of his Holy Spirit.”

<span id="fn_416"></span>[417](cc40008.htm#fr_416) <span
id="ix.iii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p62"></span> “It is made use of in the former sense by
Plutarch, (2. 894. D.) It is more frequently employed in the latter
signification. Thus *Plato* says, <span id="ix.iii-p62.1"></span>Τοις
μεθυουσι συνεβουλευε κατοπτριζεσθαι — “He advised drunken persons to
look at themselves in a mirror.” So also Diogenes Laert. (in Socrate)
<span id="ix.iii-p62.2"></span>Ηξιου δε τους νεους συνεχως
κατοπτριζεσθαι. He thought that young men should frequently look at
themselves in a mirror. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_417"></span>[418](cc40008.htm#fr_417) <span
id="ix.iii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p63"></span> Wiclif (1380) following, as he is wont to
do, the Vulgate, renders as follows: “And alle we that with open face
seen the glorie of the Lord.” Calvin’s rendering, it will be observed,
is — “<span id="ix.iii-p63.1"></span>In speculo conspicientes;” —
“beholding in a mirror.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc40008.htm#fr_418) <span
id="ix.iii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p65"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p65.1"></span>Le proufit
ou auancement que nous sentons en cela tous les iours;” — “The profit or
advancement, which we experience in it every day.”

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc40008.htm#fr_419) <span
id="ix.iii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p66"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p66.1"></span>Car là
Dieu se descouure à nous face à face;” — “For God there discovers
Himself to us face to face.”

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc40008.htm#fr_420) <span
id="ix.iii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p69"></span> *Granville Penn* renders the verse as
follows: “And we all, looking, as in a glass, at the glory of the Lord
with his face unveiled,” and adds the following note: “St. Paul
contrasts the condition of the Jews, when they could not fix their eyes
on the glory of the unveiled face of Moses, with the privilege of
Christians, who are empowered to look, as in a mirror, on the open and
unveiled face of Christ; and in that gazing, to be transformed into the
same glorious image: The ‘unveiled face,’ therefore, is that of our
Lord, not that of the beholder.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc40008.htm#fr_421) <span
id="ix.iii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p70"></span> “Tis not a change only into the image of
God with slight colors, an image drawn as with charcoal; but a glorious
image even in the rough draught, which grows up into greater beauty by
the addition of brighter colors: *Changed* (saith the Apostle, <span
id="ix.iii-p70.1"></span>[2Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span id="ix.iii-p70.1"></span>)
*into the same image from glory to glory*: glory in the first lineaments
as well as glory in the last lines.” — *Charnock’s* Works, volume 2, p.
209. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc40009)
