[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40015)  [Next](cc40017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
11:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Would to God ye could bear with me a
little in *my* folly: and indeed bear with me.

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Utinam tolerassetis me paulisper in
insipientia mea: imo etiam sufferte me.  <span
id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791)

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** For I am jealous over you with godly
jealousy: for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present
*you as* a chaste virgin to Christ.

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span>**2.** Nam zelotypus sum erga vos Dei zelo:
adiunxi enim vos uni viro, ad exhibendam virginem castam Christo.

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>**3.** But I fear, lest by any means, as the
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Sed metuo, ne qua fiat, ut
quemadmodum serpens Evam decepit versutia sua: ita corrumpantur sensus
vestri a simplicitate, quae est in Christo.

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>**4.** For if he that cometh preacheth
another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or *if* ye receive another
spirit, which ye have not received, or another gospel, which ye have not
accepted, ye might well bear with *him*

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>**4.** Nam si is qui venit, (*vel, si quis
veniens*,) alium Iesum praedicat, quem non praedicavimus; aut si alium
Spiritum accipitis, quem non accepitis: aut Evangelium aliud, quod non
accepistis, recte sustinuissetis.

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span>**5.** For I suppose I was not a whit
behind the very chiefest apostles.

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span>**5.** Arbitror enim me nihilo inferiorem
fuisse eximiis Apostolis.

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span>**6.** But though *I be* rude in speech,
yet not in knowledge; but we have been throughly made manifest among you
in all things.

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>**6.** Caeterum licet imperitus sim
sermone, non tamen scientia: verum ubique manifesti fuimus in omnibus
erga vos.

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span><span id="xvii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p17"></span>**1.** *Would that ye did bear with me.* As
he saw that the ears of the Corinthians were still in part pre-engaged,
 <span id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) he has recourse to another
contrivance, for he turns to express a wish, as persons do when they do
not venture openly to entreat.  <span id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793)
Immediately afterwards, however, as if gathering confidence, he
nevertheless entreats the Corinthians to bear with his *folly*. He gives
the name of *folly* to that splendid proclamation of his praises, which
afterwards follows. Not as if he were a fool in glorying; for he was
constrained to it by necessity, and besides, he restrained himself in
such a manner, that no one could justly regard him as going beyond
bounds; but as it is an unseemly thing to herald one’s own praises, and
a thing that is foreign to the inclinations of a modest man, he speaks
by way of concession.

<span id="xvii.i-p20"></span>What I have rendered in the imperative —
*bear with me,* Chrysostom interprets as an affirmation, and certainly
the Greek word is ambiguous, and either sense suits sufficiently well.
As, however, the reasons that the Apostle subjoins are designed to
induce the Corinthians to *bear with him,* and as we will find him
afterwards expostulating with them again on the ground of their not
conceding anything to him, I have followed the Old Interpreter.  <span
id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) By saying, *Would that,* etc., he had
seemed to be distrustful; *now,* as if correcting that hesitation, he
openly and freely commands.

<span id="xvii.i-p22"></span><span id="xvii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p23"></span>**2.** *For I am jealous* Mark why it is
that he acts the fool, for *jealousy* hurries a man as it were headlong.
“Do not demand that I should show the equable temper  <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) of a man that is at ease, and not
excited by any emotion, for that vehemence of vehemence of jealousy,
with which I am inflamed towards you, does not suffer me to be at ease.”
As, however, there are two kinds of jealousy — the one springs from self
love, and of a wicked and perverse nature, while the other is cherished
by us on God’s account,  <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) he
intimates of what sort his zeal is. For many are zealous — for
themselves, not for God. *That* on the other hand, is the only pious and
right zeal, that has an eye to God, that he may not be defrauded of the
honors that of right belong to him.

<span id="xvii.i-p26"></span>*For I have united you to one man.* That
his zeal was of such a nature, he proves from the design of his
preaching, for its tendency was to join them to Christ in marriage, and
retain them in connection with him.  <span
id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) Here, however, he gives us in his own
person a lively picture of a good minister; for One alone is the
Bridegroom of the Church — the Son of God. All ministers are the
*friends of the Bridegroom,* as the Baptist declares respecting himself.
(<span id="xvii.i-p27.2"></span>[Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="xvii.i-p27.2"></span>.)
Hence all ought to be concerned, that the fidelity of this sacred
marriage remain unimpaired and inviolable. This they cannot do, unless
they are actuated by the dispositions of the Bridegroom, so that every
one of them may be as much concerned for the purity of the Church, as a
husband is for the chastity of his wife. Away then with coldness and
indolence in this matter, for one that is cold  <span
id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) will never be qualified for this
office. Let them, however, in the mean time, take care, not to pursue
their own interest rather than that of Christ, that they may not intrude
themselves into his place, lest while they give themselves out as his
*paranymphs,*  <span id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799) they turn out to
be in reality adulterers, by alluring the bride to love themselves.

<span id="xvii.i-p30"></span>*To present you as a chaste virgin.* We are
married to Christ, on no other condition than that we bring virginity as
our dowry, and preserve it entire, so as to be free from all corruption.
Hence it is the duty of ministers of the gospel to purify our souls,
that they may be *chaste virgins to Christ;* otherwise they accomplish
nothing. Now we may understand it as meaning, that they individually
present themselves as *chaste virgins to Christ,* or that the minister
presents the whole of the people, and brings them forward into Christ’s
presence. I approve rather of the second interpretation. Hence I have
given a different rendering from Erasmus.  <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800)

<span id="xvii.i-p32"></span><span id="xvii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p33"></span>**3.** *But I fear* He begins to explain,
what is the nature of that *virginity* of which he has made mention —
our cleaving to Christ alone, sincerely, with our whole heart. God,
indeed, everywhere requires from us, that we be joined with him in body
and in spirit, and he warns us that he is a *jealous God,* (<span
id="xvii.i-p33.1"></span>[Ex 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span
id="xvii.i-p33.1"></span>,) to avenge with the utmost severity the wrong
done to him, in the event of any one’s drawing back from him. This
connection, however, is accomplished in Christ, as Paul teaches in
Ephesians, (<span id="xvii.i-p33.2"></span>[Eph.
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="xvii.i-p33.2"></span>.)
He points out, however, at present the means of it — when we remain in
the pure simplicity of the gospel, for, as in contracting marriages
among men, there are written contracts  <span
id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) drawn out, so the spiritual connection
between us and the Son of God is confirmed by the gospel, as a kind of
written contract.  <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802) Let us
maintain the fidelity, love, and obedience, that have been there
promised by us; he will be faithful to us on his part.

<span id="xvii.i-p36"></span>Now Paul says that he is concerned, that
the minds of the Corinthians may not be *corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ* Paul, it is true, says in Greek <span
id="xvii.i-p36.1"></span>εἰς Χριστόν*,* which Erasmus renders *towards
Christ,*  <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) but the Old
Interpreter has come nearer, in my opinion, to Paul’s intention,  <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) because by the *simplicity that is in
Christ* is meant, that which keeps us in the unadulterated and pure
doctrine of the gospel, and admits of no foreign admixtures  <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) By this he intimates that men’s minds
are *adulterated,*  <span id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) whenever
they turn aside, even in the least degree, to the one side or to the
other, from the pure doctrine of Christ. Nor is it without good reason,
for who would not condemn a matron as guilty of unchastity, so soon as
she lends an ear to a seducer? So in like manner we, when we admit
wicked and false teachers, who are Satan’s vile agents, show but too
clearly, that we do not maintain conjugal fidelity towards Christ. We
must also take notice of the term *simplicity,* for Paul’s fear was not,
lest the Corinthians should all at once openly draw back altogether from
Christ, but lest, by turning aside, by little and little, from the
simplicity which they had learned, so as to go after profane and foreign
contrivances, they should at length become adulterated.

<span id="xvii.i-p41"></span>He brings forward a comparison *as the
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty* For if false teachers have a
show of wisdom, if they have any power of eloquence for persuading, if
they plausibly insinuate themselves into the minds of their hearers, and
instill their poison by fawning artifices, it was in a similar way that
Satan also *beguiled Eve,* as he did not openly declare himself to be an
enemy, but crept in privily under a specious pretext.

<span id="xvii.i-p42"></span><span id="xvii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p43"></span>**4.** *For if he that cometh.* He now
reproves the Corinthians for the excessive readiness, which they showed
to receive the false apostles. For while they were towards Paul himself
excessively morose and irritable,  <span
id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) so that on any, even the least
occasion, they were offended if he gave them even the slightest reproof,
there was, on the other hand, nothing that they did not bear with, on
the part of the false Apostles. They willingly endured their pride,
haughtiness, and unreasonableness. An absurd reverence of this nature he
condemns, because in the mean time they showed no discrimination or
judgment. “How is it that they take  <span
id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) so much liberty with you, and you
submit patiently to their control? Had they brought you another Christ,
or another gospel, or another Spirit, different from what you received
through my hands, I would assuredly approve of your regard for them, for
they would be deserving of such honor. But as they have conferred upon
you nothing, that I had not given you previously, what sort of gratitude
do you show in all but adoring those, to whom you are indebted for
nothing, while you despise me, through whom God has bestowed upon you so
many and so distinguished benefits?” Such is the reverence that is shown
even at this day by Papists towards their pretended Bishops. For while
they are oppressed by their excessively harsh tyranny,  <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) they submit to it without difficulty;
but, at the same time, do not hesitate to treat Christ himself with
contempt.  <span id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810)

<span id="xvii.i-p48"></span>The expressions — *another Christ,* and
*another gospel,* are made use of here in a different sense from what
they bear in <span id="xvii.i-p48.1"></span>[Ga
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="xvii.i-p48.1"></span>.
For *another* is used there in opposition to what is true and genuine,
and hence it means *false* and *counterfeit.* Here, on the other hand,
he means to say — “If the gospel had come to you through their ministry,
and not through mine.”

<span id="xvii.i-p49"></span><span id="xvii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p50"></span>**5.** *For I reckon that I am.* He now
convicts them of ingratitude, by removing the only thing that could
serve as an excuse for them, for he shows that he is on a level, even
with the chief of the Apostles. The Corinthians, therefore, were
ungrateful  <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) in not esteeming him
more highly, after having found him, by experience, to be such; while,
on the other hand, the authority that was justly due to him, they
transferred to persons of no value. For the sake of modesty, however, he
says that he *reckons* so, while the thing was known and manifest to
all. His meaning, however, is, that God had honored his Apostleship with
no less distinguished marks of favor, than that of John or Peter. Now
the man that despises the gifts of God, which he himself recognizes,
cannot clear himself from the charge of being spiteful and ungrateful.
Hence, wherever you see the gifts of God, you must there reverence God
himself:  <span id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) I mean, that every one
is worthy of honor, in so far as he is distinguished by graces received
from God, and especially if any advantage has redounded to thee from
them.

<span id="xvii.i-p53"></span><span id="xvii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p54"></span>**6.** *But though I am rude* There was one
thing  <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) in which he might appear,
at first view, to be inferior — that he was devoid of eloquence. This
judgment,  <span id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) therefore, he
anticipates and corrects, while he *acknowledges* himself, indeed, to be
*rude* and unpolished *in speech,* while at the same time he maintains
that he has *knowledge* By *speech* here he means, elegance of
expression; and by *knowledge* he means, the very substance of doctrine.
For as man has both a soul and a body, so also in doctrine, there is the
thing itself that is taught, and the ornament of expression with which
it is clothed. Paul, therefore, maintains that he understands, what
should be taught, and what is necessary to be known, though he is not an
eloquent orator, so as to know how to set off his doctrine by a polished
and eloquent manner of expression.

<span id="xvii.i-p57"></span>It is asked, however, whether elegance of
*speech*  <span id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) is not also necessary
for Apostles; for how will they otherwise be prepared for teaching?
*Knowledge* might perhaps suffice for others, but how could a teacher be
dumb? I answer, that, while Paul acknowledges himself to be *rude in
speech,* it is not as though he were a mere infant, but as meaning, that
he was not distinguished by such splendid eloquence as others, to whom
he yields the palm as to this, retaining for himself what was the
principal thing — the reality itself,  <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) while he leaves them talkativeness
without gravity. If, however, any one should inquire, why it is that the
Lord, *who made men’s tongues,* (<span id="xvii.i-p59.2"></span>[Ex
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p59.2"></span>,)
did not also endow so eminent an apostle with eloquence, that nothing
might be wanting to him, I answer, that he was furnished with a
*sufficiency* for supplying the want of eloquence. For we see and feel,
what majesty there is in his writings, what elevation appears in them,
what a weight of meaning is couched under them, what power is discovered
in them. In fine, they are thunderbolts, not mere words. Does not the
efficacy of the Spirit appear more clearly in a naked rusticity of
words, (so to speak,) than under the disguise of elegance and ornament?
Of this matter, however, we have treated more largely in the former
Epistle.  <span id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817) In short, he admits,
as far as words are concerned, what his adversaries allege by way of
objection, while he denies in reality what they hold forth. Let us also
learn, from his example, to prefer deeds to words, and, to use a
barbarous but common proverb — “<span id="xvii.i-p60.2"></span>Teneant
alii quid *nominis,* nos autem quid *rei*;” — “Let others know something
of the *name,* but let us know something of the *reality.*”  <span
id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) If eloquence is superadded, let it be
regarded by us as something over and above; and farther, let it not be
made use of for disguising doctrine, or adulterating it, but for
unfolding it in its genuine simplicity.

<span id="xvii.i-p62"></span>*But everywhere.* As there was something
magnificent in placing himself on a level with the chief Apostles, that
this may not be ascribed to arrogance, he makes the Corinthians judges,
provided they judge from what they have themselves experienced; for they
had known sufficiently well, from many proofs, that he did not boast
needlessly, or without good reason. He means, therefore, that he needs
not make use of words, inasmuch as reality and experience afford clear
evidence of every thing that he was about to say  <span
id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819)

<span id="xvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 11:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#007)<span
id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Have I committed an offence in
abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because I have preached to you
the gospel of God freely?

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Num illud peccavi, quod me ipsum
humiliaverim,  <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820) ut vos
exaltaremini: quod gratuito Evangelium Dei praedicaverim vobis?

<span id="xvii.ii-p5"></span>**8.** I robbed other churches, taking
wages *of them*, to do you service.

<span id="xvii.ii-p6"></span>**8.** Caeteras Ecclesias depraedatus sum
accepto ab illis stipendio, quo vobis inservirem.

<span id="xvii.ii-p7"></span>**9.** And when I was present with you, and
wanted, I was chargeable to no man: for that which was lacking to me the
brethren which came from Macedonia supplied: and in all *things* I have
kept myself from being burdensome unto you, and *so* will I keep
*myself*

<span id="xvii.ii-p8"></span>**9.** Et quum apud vos essem et egerem,
non onerosus fui cuiquam;  <span id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) nam
quod mihi deerat, suppleverunt fratres, qui venerant ex Macedonia; et in
omnibus sic me servavi, ne cui essem onerosus, atque ita servabo.

<span id="xvii.ii-p10"></span>**10.** As the truth of Christ is in me,
no man shall stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia.

<span id="xvii.ii-p11"></span>**10.** Est veritas Christi in me, quod
haec gloriatio non interrumpetur contra me in regionibus Achaiae.

<span id="xvii.ii-p12"></span>**11.** Wherefore? because I love you not?
God knoweth.

<span id="xvii.ii-p13"></span>**11.** Quapropter? An quod non diligam
vos? Deus novit.

<span id="xvii.ii-p14"></span>**12.** But what I do, that I will do,
that I may cut off occasion from them which desire occasion; that
wherein they glory, they may be found even as we.

<span id="xvii.ii-p15"></span>**12.** Verum quod facio, idem et faciam:
ut amputem occasionem iis qui cupiunt occasionem, ut in quo gloriantur,
reperiantur, quemadmodum et nos.

<span id="xvii.ii-p16"></span> 

<span id="xvii.ii-p17"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p18"></span>**7.** *Have I committed an offense?* His
humility was cast up to him by way of reproach, while it was an
excellence that was deserving of no ordinary commendation. *Humility*
here means — voluntary abasement; for in conducting himself modestly, as
if he had nothing in him that was particularly excellent, so that many
looked upon him as one of the common people, he had done that for the
advantage of the Corinthians. For the man was inflamed with so great a
desire,  <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822) and so great an anxiety
for their salvation, that he made a regard to himself a secondary
consideration. Hence he says, that he had of his own accord made a
surrender of his own greatness, that they might become great through his
abasement. For his design was, that he might promote their salvation. He
now indirectly charges them with ingratitude, in imputing to him as a
fault so pious a disposition — not indeed for the purpose of reproaching
him, but with the view of restoring them so much the better to a sound
mind. And certainly, he wounded them more severely by speaking
*ironically,* than if he had spoken in a simple way, and without a
figure. He might have said, “What is this? Am I despised by you, because
I have lowered myself for your advantage?” The questioning, however,
which he makes use of, was more forcible for putting them to shame.

<span id="xvii.ii-p20"></span>*Because I preached freely* This is a part
of his abasement. For he had given up his own right, as though his
condition had been inferior to that of others; but such was the
unreasonableness of some of them, that they esteemed him the less on
that account, as if he had been undeserving of remuneration. The reason,
why he had given his services to the Corinthians gratuitously, is
immediately subjoined — for he did not act in this manner everywhere,
but, as we have seen in the former Epistle,  <span
id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823) there was a danger of his furnishing
the false Apostles with a handle against him.

<span id="xvii.ii-p22"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p23"></span>**8.** *I robbed other churches* He has
intentionally, in my opinion, made use of an offensive term, that he
might the more forcibly express the unreasonableness of the matter — in
respect of his being despised by the Corinthians. “I have,” says he,
“procured pay for myself from the *spoils* of others, that I might serve
you. While I have thus spared you, how unreasonable it is to make me so
poor a return!” It is, however, a metaphor, that is taken from what is
customary among soldiers; for as conquerors take *spoils* from the
nations that they have conquered, so every thing that Paul took from the
Churches that he had gained to Christ was, in a manner, the *spoils* of
his victories, though, at the same time, he never would have taken it
from persons against their will, but what they contributed gratuitously
was, in a manner, due by right of spiritual warfare.  <span
id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824)

<span id="xvii.ii-p25"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p26"></span> Observe, however, that he says that he
*had been in want,* for he would never have been a burden to them, had
he not been constrained by necessity. He, nevertheless, in the mean
time, *labored with his hands,* as we have seen before, (<span
id="xvii.ii-p26.1"></span>[1Co
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012)<span id="xvii.ii-p26.1"></span>,)
but, as the *labor of his hands* was not sufficient for sustaining life,
something additional was contributed by the Macedonians. Accordingly he
does not say, that his living had been furnished to him by the
Macedonians,  <span id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825) but merely that
they had supplied what was wanting. We have spoken elsewhere of the
Apostle’s holy prudence and diligence in providing against dangers. Here
we must take notice of the pious zeal of the Macedonians, who did not
hesitate to contribute of their substance for his pay, that the gospel
might be proclaimed to others, and those, too, that were wealthier than
themselves. Ah! how few *Macedonians* are there in the present day, and
on the other hand how many *Corinthians* you may find everywhere!

<span id="xvii.ii-p28"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p29"></span>**10.** *The truth of Christ is in me.*
Lest any one should suspect, that Paul’s words were designed to induce
the Corinthians to be more liberal to him in future, and endeavor to
make amends for their error in the past, he affirms with an oath, that
he would take nothing from them, or from others in Achaia, though it
were offered to him. For this manner of expression — *the truth of
Christ is in me,* is in the form of oath. Let me not be thought to have
the *truth of Christ* in me if I do not retain this glorying among the
inhabitants of Achaia. Now Corinth was in Achaia.  <span
id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826)

<span id="xvii.ii-p31"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p32"></span>**11.** *Is it because I love you not?*
Those that we love, we treat with greater familiarity. Lest the
Corinthians, therefore, should take it amiss, that he refused their
liberality, while he allowed himself to be assisted by the Macedonians,
and even declared with an oath that he would do so still, he anticipates
that suspicion also. And by the figure termed *anthypophora,*  <span
id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) he asks, as it were in their name,
whether this is a token of a malevolent mind? He does not return a
direct answer to the question, but the indirect answer that he returns
has much more weight, inasmuch as he calls God to be a witness of his
good disposition towards them. You see here, that in the course of three
verses  <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) there are two oaths, but
they are lawful and holy, because they have a good design in view, and a
legitimate reason is involved. Hence to condemn indiscriminately all
oaths is to act the part of fanatics, who make no distinction between
white and black.  <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829)

<span id="xvii.ii-p36"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p37"></span>**12.** *But what I do.* He again explains
the reason of his intention.  <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830)
The false Apostles, with the view of alluring to themselves ignorant
persons, took no pay. Their serving gratuitously was a show of uncommon
zeal.  <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) If Paul had availed
himself of his right, he would have given them occasion to raise their
crest, as if they had been greatly superior to him. Paul, accordingly,
that he might give them no occasion of doing injury, did himself, also,
preach the Gospel, free of charge, and this is what he adds — that he is
desirous to *cut off occasion from those that desire occasion* For the
false Apostles were desirous to insinuate themselves by this artifice,
and to detract, in proportion to this, from Paul’s credit, if they were
superior to him in any respect. He says, that he will not give them this
advantage. “They will be found,” says he, “on a level with us in that
glorying which they would wish to have for themselves exclusively.”
This, however, is a useful admonition in connection with cutting off
occasion from the wicked, as often as they desire one. For this is the
only way to overcome them — not in the way of furnishing them with arms
through our imprudence.  <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832)

<span id="xvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 11:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#013)<span
id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p2"></span>**13.** For such *are* false apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ.

<span id="xvii.iii-p3"></span>**13.** Saiquidem istiusmodi
pseudoapostoli; operarii dolosi sunt, qui transformant se in Apostolos
Christi.

<span id="xvii.iii-p4"></span>**14.** And no marvel; for Satan himself
is transformed into an angel of light.

<span id="xvii.iii-p5"></span>**14.** Neque id mirum; quondoquidem ipse
Satanas transfiguratur in Angelum lucis.

<span id="xvii.iii-p6"></span>**15.** Therefore *it is* no great thing
if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness;
whose end shall be according to their works.

<span id="xvii.iii-p7"></span>**15.** Non magnum igitur, si et ministri
illius transformant se, perinde acsi essent ministri iustitiae: quorum
finis erit secundum opera ipsorum.

<span id="xvii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xvii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p10"></span>**13.** *For such are false Apostles*
While he has already taken away from them what they chiefly desired,
yet, not contented with having put himself on a level with them with
respect to that in which they were desirous to excel, he leaves them
nothing for which they deserve any commendation. It was apparently a
laudable thing to despise money, but he says, that they make use of a
pretense for the purpose of deceiving, exactly as if a harlot were to
borrow the apparel of a decent matron. For it was necessary to pull off
the mask, which obscured the glory of God.

<span id="xvii.iii-p11"></span>They are *deceitful workers,* says he,
that is — they do not discover their wickedness at first view, but
artfully insinuate themselves under some fair pretext.  <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) Hence they require to be carefully and
thoroughly sifted, lest we should receive persons as servants of Christ,
as soon as any appearance of excellence is discovered. Nor does Paul in
malice and envy put an unfavorable construction upon what might be
looked upon as an excellence, but, constrained by their dishonesty, he
unfolds to view the evil that lay hid, because there was a dangerous
profanation of virtue in pretending to burn with greater zeal than all
the servants of Christ.

<span id="xvii.iii-p13"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p14"></span>**14.** *And no marvel* It is an argument
from the greater to the less. “If Satan, who is the basest of all
beings, nay, the head and chief of all wicked persons, transforms
himself, what will his ministers do?*”* We have experience of both every
day, for when Satan tempts us to evil, he does not profess to be what he
really is. For he would lose his object, if we were made aware of his
being a mortal enemy, and opposer of our salvation. Hence he always
makes use of some cloak for the purpose of insnaring us, and does not
immediately *show his horns,* (as the common expression is,) but rather
makes it his endeavor to appear as an *angel* Even when he tempts us to
gross crimes, he makes use, nevertheless, of some pretext that he may
draw us, when we are off our guard, into his nets. What then, if he
attacks us under the appearance of good, nay, under the very title of
God? His life-guards imitate, as I have said, the same artifice. These
are golden preambles — “Vicar of Christ” — “Successor of Peter” —
“Servant of God’s servants,” but let the masks be pulled off, and who
and what will the Pope be discovered to be? Scarcely will Satan himself,
his master, surpass so accomplished a scholar in any kind of
abomination. It is a well known saying as to Babylon, that she gives
poison to drink in a golden cup. (<span id="xvii.iii-p14.1"></span>[Jer
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007)<span
id="xvii.iii-p14.1"></span>.) Hence we must be on our guard against
masks.

<span id="xvii.iii-p15"></span>Should any one now ask, “Shall we then
regard all with suspicion?” I answer, that the Apostle did not by any
means intend this; for there are marks of discrimination, which it were
the part of stupidity, not of prudence, to overlook. He was simply
desirous to arouse our attention, that we may not straightway judge of
the lion from the skin  <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) For if
we are not hasty in forming a judgment, the Lord will order it so that
the ears of the animal will be discovered ere long. Farther, he was
desirous in like manner to admonish us, in forming an estimate of
Christ’s servants, not to regard masks, but to seek after what is of
more importance. *Ministers of righteousness* is a Hebraism for
*faithful and upright persons.*  <span id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835)

<span id="xvii.iii-p18"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p19"></span>**15.** *Whose end shall be.* He adds
this for the consolation of the pious. For it is the statement of a
courageous man, who despises the foolish judgments of men, and patiently
waits for the day of the Lord. In the mean time, he shows a singular
boldness of conscience, which does not dread the judgment of God.

<span id="xvii.iii-p20"></span> <span id="xvii.iv"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 11:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016)<span
id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p2"></span>**16.** I say again, Let no man think me a
fool; if otherwise, yet as a fool receive me, that I may boast myself a
little.

<span id="xvii.iv-p3"></span>**16.** Iterum dico, ne quis me putet
insipientem esse: alioqui iam etiam ut insipientem accipite me, ut
paululum quiddam et ego glorier.

<span id="xvii.iv-p4"></span>**17.** That which I speak, I speak *it*
not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this confidence of
boasting.

<span id="xvii.iv-p5"></span>**17.** Quod dico, non dico secundum
Dominum, sed velut per insipientiam: in hac audacia gloriationis.

<span id="xvii.iv-p6"></span>**18.** Seeing that many glory after the
flesh, I will glory also.

<span id="xvii.iv-p7"></span>**18.** Quandoquidem multi gloriantur
secundum carnem, et ego gloriabor.

<span id="xvii.iv-p8"></span>**19.** For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing
ye *yourselves* are wise.

<span id="xvii.iv-p9"></span>**19.** Libenter enim suffertis
insipientes: quum sitis ipsi sapientes.

<span id="xvii.iv-p10"></span>**20.** For ye suffer, if a man bring you
into bondage, if a man devour *you*, if a man take *of you*, if a man
exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face.

<span id="xvii.iv-p11"></span>**20.** Suffertis enim, si quis vos in
servitutem adigit, si quis exedit, si quis accipit, si quis attollit
sese, si quis vos in faciem caedit.

<span id="xvii.iv-p12"></span>**21.** I speak as concerning reproach, as
though we had been weak. Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak
foolishly,) I am bold also.

<span id="xvii.iv-p13"></span>**21.** Iuxta contumeliam loquor, perinde
quasi nos infirmi fuerimus: imo in quocunque audet aliquis, per
insipientiam loquor, ego quoque audeo.

<span id="xvii.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="xvii.iv-p15"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p16"></span>**16.** *I say again* The Apostle has a
twofold design. He has it partly in view to expose the disgusting vanity
of the false Apostles, inasmuch as they were such extravagant trumpeters
of their own praises; and farther, to expostulate with the Corinthians,
because they shut him up to the necessity of glorying, contrary to the
inclinations of his own mind. “*I say again,”* says he. For he had
abundantly shown previously, that there was no reason, why he should be
despised. He had also shown at the same time, that he was very unlike
others, and therefore ought not to have his grounds of glorying
estimated according to the rule of their measure. Thus he again shows,
for what purpose he had hitherto gloried — that he might clear his
apostleship from contempt; for if the Corinthians had done their duty,
he would not have said one word as to this matter.

<span id="xvii.iv-p17"></span>*Otherwise now as a fool* “If I am
reckoned by you a *fool,* allow me at least to make use of my right and
liberty — that is, to speak foolishly after the manner of fools.” Thus
he reproves the false Apostles, who, while they were exceedingly silly
in this respect, were not merely borne with by the Corinthians, but were
received with great applause. He afterwards explains what kind of folly
it is — the publishing of his own praises. While they did so without end
and without measure, he intimates that it was a thing to which he was
unaccustomed; for he says, *for a little while* For I take this clause
as referring to time, so that the meaning is, that Paul did not wish to
continue it long, but assumed, as it were, for the moment, the person of
another, and immediately thereafter laid it aside, as we are accustomed
to pass over lightly those things that are foreign to our object, while
fools occupy themselves constantly (<span id="xvii.iv-p17.1"></span>ἐν
παρέργοις)  <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) *in matters of
inferior moment.*

<span id="xvii.iv-p19"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p20"></span>**17.** *What I speak, I speak not after
the Lord* His disposition, it is true, had an eye to God, but the
outward appearance  <span id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) might seem
unsuitable to a servant of the Lord. At the same time, the things that
Paul confesses respecting himself, he, on the other hand, condemns in
the false Apostles.  <span id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) For it was
not his intention to praise himself, but simply to contrast himself with
them, with the view of humbling them.  <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) Hence he transfers to his own person
what belonged to them, that he may thus open the eyes of the
Corinthians. What I have rendered *boldness,* is in the Greek <span
id="xvii.iv-p23.2"></span>ὑπόστασις*,* as to the meaning of which term
we have spoken in the ninth chapter. (<span
id="xvii.iv-p23.4"></span>[2Co
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#004)<span id="xvii.iv-p23.4"></span>.)
*Subject-matter*  <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) or
*substance,* unquestionably, would not be at all suitable here.  <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841)

<span id="xvii.iv-p26"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p27"></span>**18.** *Since many glory.* The meaning
*is* — Should any one say to me, by way of objection, that what I do is
faulty, what then as to others? Are not they my leaders? Am I alone, or
am I the first, in *glorying according to the flesh?* Why should that be
reckoned praiseworthy in *them,* that is imputed to me as a fault?” So
far then is Paul from ambition in recounting his own praises, that he is
contented to be blamed on that account, provided he exposes the vanity
of the false apostles.

<span id="xvii.iv-p28"></span>*To glory after the flesh,* is to boast
one’s self, rather in what has a tendency towards show, than in a good
conscience. For the term *flesh,* here, has a reference to the world —
when we seek after praise from outward masks, which have a showy
appearance before the world, and are regarded as excellent. In place of
this term he had a little before made use of the expression — *in
appearance.* (<span id="xvii.iv-p28.1"></span>[2Co
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007)<span id="xvii.iv-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.iv-p29"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p30"></span>**19.** *For ye bear with fools
willingly.* He calls them *wise* — in my opinion, *ironically.* He was
despised by them, which could not have been, had they not been puffed up
with the greatest arrogance  <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) He
says, therefore — “Since you are so wise, act the part of wise men in
bearing with me, whom you treat with contempt, as you would a *fool.”*
Hence I infer, that this discourse is not addressed to all
indiscriminately, but some particular persons are reproved, who
conducted themselves in an unkind manner.  <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843)

<span id="xvii.iv-p33"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p34"></span>**20.** *For ye bear with it, if any one.*
There are *three* ways in which this may be understood. He may be
understood as reproving the Corinthians in *irony,* because they could
not endure any thing, as is usually the case with effeminate persons; or
he charges them with indolence, because they had given themselves up to
the false Apostles in a disgraceful bondage; or he repeats, as it were,
in the person of another, what was spitefully affirmed respecting
himself,  <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) as if he claimed for
himself a tyrannical authority over them. The *second* meaning is
approved by Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Augustine, and hence it is commonly
received; and, indeed, it corresponds best with the context, although
the *third* is not less in accordance with my views. For we see, how he
was calumniated from time to time by the malevolent, as if he domineered
tyrannically, while he was very far from doing so. As, however, the
other meaning is more generally received, I have no objection, that it
should be held as the true one.

<span id="xvii.iv-p36"></span>Now this statement will correspond with
the preceding one in this way: “You bear with every thing from others,
if they oppress you, if they demand what belongs to you, if they treat
you disdainfully. Why then will you not bear with me, as they are in no
respect superior to me?” For as to his saying that he is not *weak,* he
means that he had been endowed by God with such excellent graces, that
he ought not to be looked upon as of the common order. For the word
*weak* has a more extensive signification, as we shall see again ere
long.

<span id="xvii.iv-p37"></span>It has been the invariable custom, and
will be so to the end, to resist contumaciously  <span
id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) the servants of God, to get enraged on
the least occasion,  <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) to grumble
and murmur incessantly, to complain of even a moderate strictness,
 <span id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) to hold all discipline in
abhorrence; while, on the other hand, they put themselves under servile
subjection to false apostles, impostors, or mere worthless pretenders,
give them liberty to do any thing whatever, and patiently submit to and
endure, whatever burden they may choose to impose upon them. Thus, at
the present day, you will scarcely find one in thirty, who will put his
neck willingly under Christ’s yoke, while all have endured with patience
a tyranny so severe as that of the Pope. Those very persons are all at
once in an uproar,  <span id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) in
opposition to the fatherly and truly salutary reproofs of their pastors,
who, on the other hand, had formerly swallowed down quietly every kind
of insult, even the most atrocious, from the monks.  <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) Are not those worthy of Antichrist’s
torturing rack, rather than of Christ’s mild sway, who have ears so
tender and backward to listen to the truth? But thus it has been from
the beginning.

<span id="xvii.iv-p43"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p44"></span>**21.** *Nay, in whatsoever.* Paul had
asked, why the Corinthians showed more respect to others than to him,
while he had not been by any means weak, that is, contemptible. He now
confirms this, because, if a comparison had been entered upon, he would
not have been inferior to any one in any department of honor.

<span id="xvii.v"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p1"></span><span id="xvii.v-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
11:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#022)<span id="xvii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p2"></span>**22.** Are they Hebrews? so *am* I. Are
they Israelites? so *am* I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so *am* I.

<span id="xvii.v-p3"></span>**22.** Hebraei sunt? Ego quoque. Israelitae
sunt? Ego quoque: semen Abrahae sunt? Ego quoque.

<span id="xvii.v-p4"></span>**23.** Are they ministers of Christ? (I
speak as a fool,) I *am* more; in labours more abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft.

<span id="xvii.v-p5"></span>**23.** Ministri Christi sunt? Desipiens
loquor, plus ego; in laboribus abundantius, in plagis supra modum, in
carceribus copiosius, in mortibus saepe.

<span id="xvii.v-p6"></span>**24.** Of the Jews five times received I
forty *stripes* save one.

<span id="xvii.v-p7"></span>**24.** A Iudaeis quinquies quadraginta
plagas accepi una minus.

<span id="xvii.v-p8"></span>**25.** Thrice was I beaten with rods, once
was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been
in the deep;

<span id="xvii.v-p9"></span>**25.** Ter virgis caesus sum, semel
lapidatus sum, ter naufragium feci, noctes et dies egi in profundo.

<span id="xvii.v-p10"></span>**26.** *In* journeyings often, *in* perils
of waters, *in* perils of robbers, *in* perils by *mine own* countrymen,
*in* perils by the heathen, *in* perils in the city, *in* perils in the
wilderness, *in* perils in the sea, *in* perils among false brethren;

<span id="xvii.v-p11"></span>**26.** In itineribus saepe, periculis
fluminum, periculis latronum, periculis ex genere, periculis ex
Gentibus, periculis in urbe, periculis in deserto, periculis in mari,
periculis in falsis fratribus:

<span id="xvii.v-p12"></span>**27.** In weariness and painfulness, in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness.

<span id="xvii.v-p13"></span>**27.** In labore et molestia, in vigiliis
saepe, in fame et siti, in ieiuniis saepe, in frigore et nuditate:

<span id="xvii.v-p14"></span>**28.** Besides those things that are
without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches.

<span id="xvii.v-p15"></span>**28.** Praeter ea quae extrinsecus
accidunt, quotidiana mea moles,  <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850)
sollicitudo omnium Ecclesiarum.

<span id="xvii.v-p17"></span>**29.** Who is weak, and I am not weak? who
is offended, and I burn not?

<span id="xvii.v-p18"></span>**29.** Quis infirmatur, et ego non
infirmor? Quis offenditur, et ego non uror?

<span id="xvii.v-p19"></span> 

<span id="xvii.v-p20"></span><span id="xvii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p21"></span>**22.** He now, by enumerating particular
instances, lets them see more distinctly, that he would not by any means
be found inferior, if matters came to a contest. And in the first place,
he makes mention of the glory of his *descent,* of which his rivals
chiefly vaunted. “If,” says he, “they boast of illustrious *descent,* I
shall be on a level with them, for I also am an *Israelite,* of the
*seed of Abraham.”* This is a silly and empty boast, and yet Paul makes
use of *three* terms to express it; nay more, he specifies, as it were,
*three* different marks of excellence. By this repetition, in my
opinion, he indirectly reproves their folly, inasmuch as they placed the
sum-total  <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) of their excellence
in a thing that was so trivial,  <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852)
and this boasting was incessantly in their mouth, so as to be absolutely
disgusting, as vain men are accustomed to pour forth empty bravadoes as
to a mere nothing.

<span id="xvii.v-p24"></span>As to the term *Hebrews,* it appears from
<span id="xvii.v-p24.2"></span>[Ge
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#015)<span id="xvii.v-p24.2"></span>,
that it denotes descent, and is derived from *Heber;* and farther, it is
probable, that Abraham himself is so called in <span
id="xvii.v-p24.3"></span>[Ge
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)<span id="xvii.v-p24.3"></span>,
in no other sense than this — that he was descended from that ancestor.
 <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) Not altogether without some
appearance of truth is the conjecture of those, who explain the term to
mean *those dwelling beyond the river.*  <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) We do not read, it is true, that any
one was called so before Abraham, who had *passed over the river,* when
he quitted his native country, and afterwards the appellation came to be
a customary one among his posterity, as appears from the history of
Joseph. The termination, however, shows that it is expressive of
descent, and the passage, that I have quoted, abundantly confirms it.
 <span id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855)

<span id="xvii.v-p28"></span><span id="xvii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p29"></span>**23.** *Are they ministers of Christ?* Now
when he is treating of matters truly praiseworthy, he is no longer
satisfied with being on an equality with them, but exalts himself above
them. For their carnal glories he has previously been scattering like
smoke by a breath of wind,  <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856) by
placing in opposition to them those which he had of a similar kind; but
as they had nothing of solid worth, he on good grounds separates himself
from their society, when he has occasion to glory in good earnest. For
to be a *servant of Christ* is a thing that is much more honorable and
illustrious, than to be the first-born among all the first-born of
Abraham’s posterity. Again, however, with the view of providing against
calumnies, he premises that he *speaks as a fool* “Imagine this,” says
he, “to be foolish boasting: it is, nevertheless, true.”

<span id="xvii.v-p31"></span>*In labors.* By these things he proves that
he is a more eminent servant of Christ, and *then* truly we have a proof
that may be relied upon, when *deeds* instead of *words* are brought
forward. He uses the term *labors* here in the plural number, and
afterwards *labor* What difference there is between the former and the
latter I do not see, unless perhaps it be, that he speaks here in a more
general way, including those things that he afterwards enumerates in
detail. In the same way we may also understand the term *deaths* to mean
any kind of *perils* that in a manner threatened present death,
instances of which he afterwards specifies. “I have given proof of
myself in *deaths often,* in *labors* oftener still.” He had made use of
the term *deaths* in the same sense in the first chapter. (<span
id="xvii.v-p31.1"></span>[2Co
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010)<span id="xvii.v-p31.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.v-p32"></span><span id="xvii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p33"></span>**24.** *From the Jews.* It is certain that
the Jews had at that time been deprived of jurisdiction, but as this was
a kind of moderate punishment (as they termed it) it is probable that it
was allowed them. Now the law of God was to this effect, that those who
did not deserve capital punishment should be beaten in the presence of a
judge, (<span id="xvii.v-p33.1"></span>[Deut.
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#003)<span id="xvii.v-p33.1"></span>,)
provided not more than *forty stripes* were inflicted, lest the body
should be disfigured or mutilated by cruelty. Now it is probable, that
in process of time it became customary to stop at the thirty-ninth lash,
 <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857) lest perhaps they should on any
occasion, from undue warmth, exceed the number prescribed by God. Many
such precautions,  <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) prescribed by
the Rabbins,  <span id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) are to be found
among the Jews, which make some restriction upon the permission that the
Lord had given. Hence, perhaps, in process of time, (as things generally
deteriorate,) they came to think, that all criminals should be beaten
with stripes to that number, though the Lord did not prescribe, how far
severity should go, but where it was to stop; unless perhaps you prefer
to receive what is stated by others, that they exercised greater cruelty
upon Paul. This is not at all improbable, for if they had been
accustomed ordinarily to practice this severity upon all, he might have
said that he was beaten according to custom. Hence the statement of the
number is expressive of extreme severity.

<span id="xvii.v-p37"></span><span id="xvii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p38"></span>**25.** *Thrice was I beaten with rods*
Hence it appears, that the Apostle suffered many things, of which no
mention is made by Luke; for he makes mention of only *one* stoning,
 <span id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860) one scourging, and *one*
shipwreck. We have not, however, a complete narrative, nor is there
mention made in it of every particular that occurred, but only of the
principal things.

<span id="xvii.v-p40"></span><span id="xvii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p41"></span>By *perils from the nation* he means those
that befell him from his own nation, in consequence of the hatred, that
was kindled against him among all the Jews. On the other hand, he had
the Gentiles as his adversaries; and in the *third* place snares were
laid for him *by false brethren.* Thus it happened, that

<span id="xvii.v-p42"></span>for Christ’s name’s sake he was hated by
all.  
(<span id="xvii.v-p42.2"></span>[Mt
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span id="xvii.v-p42.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.v-p43"></span><span id="xvii.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p44"></span>By fastings I understand those that are
voluntary, as he has spoken previously of *hunger* and *want.* Such were
the tokens by which he showed himself, and on good grounds, to be an
eminent servant of Christ. For how may we better distinguish Christ’s
servants than by proofs so numerous, so various, and so important? On
the other hand, while those effeminate boasters  <span
id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861) had done nothing for Christ, and had
suffered nothing for him, they, nevertheless, impudently vaunted.

<span id="xvii.v-p46"></span>It is asked, however, whether any one can
be a servant of Christ, that has not been tried with so many evils,
perils, and vexations? I answer, that all these things are not
indispensably requisite on the part of all;  <span
id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862) but where these things are seen, there
is, undoubtedly, a greater and more illustrious testimony afforded. That
man, therefore, who will be signalized by so many marks of distinction,
will not despise those that are less illustrious, and less thoroughly
tried, nor will he on that account be elated with pride; but still,
whenever there is occasion for it, he will be prepared, after Paul’s
example, to exult with a holy triumph, in opposition to pretenders
 <span id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863) and worthless persons, provided
he has an eye to Christ, not to himself — for nothing but pride or
ambition could corrupt and tarnish all these praises. For the main thing
is — that we serve Christ with a pure *conscience.* All other things
are, as it were, additional.

<span id="xvii.v-p49"></span><span id="xvii.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p50"></span>**28.** *Besides those things that are
without* “*Besides those things,*” says he, “which come upon me from all
sides, and are as it were extraordinary, what estimate must be formed of
that ordinary burden that constantly presses upon me — the care that I
have of all the Churches.” *The care of all the Churches* he
appropriately calls his *ordinary burden.* For I have taken the liberty
of rendering <span id="xvii.v-p50.1"></span>ἐπισύστασιν in this way, as
it sometimes means — whatever *presses upon* us.  <span
id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864)

<span id="xvii.v-p52"></span>Whoever is concerned in good earnest as to
the Church of God, stirs up himself and bears a heavy burden, which
*presses upon* his shoulders. What a picture we have here of a complete
minister, embracing in his anxieties and aims not one Church merely, or
ten, or thirty, but all of them together, so that he instructs some,
confirms others, exhorts others, gives counsel to some, and applies a
remedy to the diseases of others! Now from Paul’s words we may infer,
that no one can have a heartfelt concern for the Churches, without being
harassed with many difficulties; for the government of the Church is no
pleasant occupation, in which we may exercise ourselves agreeably and
with delight of heart,  <span id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865) but a
hard and severe warfare, as has been previously mentioned, (<span
id="xvii.v-p53.2"></span>[2Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004)<span id="xvii.v-p53.2"></span>,)
— Satan from time to time giving us as much trouble as he can, and
leaving no stone unturned to annoy us.

<span id="xvii.v-p54"></span><span id="xvii.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p55"></span>**29.** *Who is weak.* How many there are
that allow all offenses to pass by unheeded — who either despise the
infirmities of brethren, or trample them under foot! This, however,
arises from their having no concern for the Church. For concern,
undoubtedly, produces <span id="xvii.v-p55.1"></span>συμπάθειαν
(*sympathy,*)  <span id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866) which leads the
Minister of Christ to participate in the feelings of all,  <span
id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867) and put himself in the place of all,
that he may suit himself to all.

<span id="xvii.vi"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xvii.vi-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 11:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#030)<span
id="xvii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p2"></span>**30.** If I must needs glory, I will glory
of the things which concern mine infirmities.

<span id="xvii.vi-p3"></span>**30.** Si gloriari oportet, in iis quae
infirmitatis meae sunt gloriabor.

<span id="xvii.vi-p4"></span>**31.** The God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not.

<span id="xvii.vi-p5"></span>**31.** Deus et Pater Domini nostri Iesu
Christi novit, qui est benedictus in saecula, quod non mentiar.

<span id="xvii.vi-p6"></span>**32.** In Damascus the governor under
Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison,
desirous to apprehend me;

<span id="xvii.vi-p7"></span>**32.** Damasci Aretas, regius gentis
praefectus, custodiebat urbem Damascenorum, volens me apprehendere.
(<span id="xvii.vi-p7.1"></span>[Acts
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#024), [Acts
25:0](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#000)<span id="xvii.vi-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.vi-p8"></span>**33.** And through a window in a basket
was I let down by the wall, and escaped his hands.

<span id="xvii.vi-p9"></span>**33.** Et per fenestram demissus fui in
sporta per muros, atque effugi manus eius.

<span id="xvii.vi-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvii.vi-p11"></span><span id="xvii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p12"></span>**30.** *If he must glory.* Here we have
the conclusion, drawn from all that has gone before — that Paul is more
inclined to boast of those things that are connected with his
*infirmity,* that is, those things which might, in the view of the
world, bring him contempt, rather than glory, as, for example, hunger,
thirst, imprisonments, stonings, stripes, and the like — those things,
in truth, that we are usually as much ashamed of, as of things that
incur great dishonor.  <span id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868)

<span id="xvii.vi-p14"></span><span id="xvii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p15"></span>**31.** *The God and Father* As he was
about to relate a singular feat,  <span
id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) which, at the same time, was not well
known, he confirms it by making use of an oath. Observe, however, what
is the form of a pious oath,  <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) —
when, for the purpose of declaring the truth, we reverently call God as
our witness. Now this persecution was, as it were, Paul’s first
apprenticeship,  <span id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) as appears from
Luke, (<span id="xvii.vi-p18.3"></span>[Ac
9:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)<span
id="xvii.vi-p18.3"></span>); but if, while yet a raw recruit, he was
exercised in such beginnings, what shall we think of him, when a veteran
soldier? As, however, flight gives no evidence of a valiant spirit, it
may be asked, why it is that he makes mention of his flight? I answer,
that the gates of the royal city having been closed, clearly showed with
what rage the wicked were inflamed against him; and it was on no light
grounds that they had been led to entertain such a feeling,  <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) for if Paul had not fought for Christ
with a new and unusual activity, the wicked would never have been thrown
into such a commotion. His singular perseverance, however, shone forth
chiefly in this — that, after escaping from so severe a persecution, he
did not cease to stir up the whole world against him, by prosecuting
fearlessly the Lord’s work.

<span id="xvii.vi-p20"></span>It may be, however, that he proceeds to
mock those ambitious men, who, while they had never had experience of
any thing but applauses, favors, honorable salutations, and agreeable
lodgings, wished to be held in the highest esteem. For, in opposition to
this, he relates, that he was shut in, so that he could with difficulty
save his life by a miserable and ignominious flight.

<span id="xvii.vi-p21"></span>Some, however, ask, whether it was lawful
for Paul to leap over the walls, inasmuch as it was a capital crime to
do so? I answer, in the first place, that it is not certain, whether
that punishment was sanctioned by law in the East; and farther, that
even if it was so, Paul, nevertheless, was guilty of no crime, because
he did not do this as an enemy, or for sport, but from necessity. For
the law would not punish a man, that would throw himself down from the
walls to save his life from the flames; and what difference is there
between a fire, and a fierce attack from robbers? We must always, in
connection with laws, have an eye to reason and equity.  <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) This consideration will exempt Paul
entirely from blame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_791"></span>[792](cc40016.htm#fr_791) <span
id="xvii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p4.1"></span>Mesme aussi
supportez moy, *ou,* et certes vous me supportez;” — “Even so bear with
me, *or,* and certainly you do bear with me.”

<span id="fn_792"></span>[793](cc40016.htm#fr_792) <span
id="xvii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p18.1"></span>Des propos
des faux apostres;” — “By the speeches of the false apostles.”

<span id="fn_793"></span>[794](cc40016.htm#fr_793) <span
id="xvii.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p19.1"></span>Ceux
ausquels ilsont affaire;” — “Those with whom they have to do.”

<span id="fn_794"></span>[795](cc40016.htm#fr_794) <span
id="xvii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p21"></span> The rendering of the Vulgate is as
follows: “<span id="xvii.i-p21.1"></span>Sed supportate me.” (“But bare
with me.”) Wiclif (1380) reads: “But also supporte ye me.” Tyndale
(1534) also renders in the imperative, as follows: “Yee, and I pray you
forbeare me.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_795"></span>[796](cc40016.htm#fr_795) <span
id="xvii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p24"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p24.1"></span>Vne
equalite et moderation;” — “An evenness and moderation.”

<span id="fn_796"></span>[797](cc40016.htm#fr_796) <span
id="xvii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p25.1"></span>De
laquelle nous sommes esmeus pour l’amour de nostre Dieu;” — “By which we
are influenced out of love to our God.”

<span id="fn_797"></span>[798](cc40016.htm#fr_797) <span
id="xvii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p27"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p27.1"></span>Et les
faire perseuerer en saincte conionction auec luy;” — “And to lead them
to persevere in holy connection with him.”

<span id="fn_798"></span>[799](cc40016.htm#fr_798) <span
id="xvii.i-p27.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p28"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p28.1"></span>Quiconque
est froid et lasche;” — “Whoever is cold and indolent.”

<span id="fn_799"></span>[800](cc40016.htm#fr_799) <span
id="xvii.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p29"></span> “Paranymphos;” — “Friends of the
bridegroom.” The reader will find the office and duties of *paranymph*
detailed at considerable length by *Dr. Adam Clarke,* when commenting on
<span id="xvii.i-p29.1"></span>[Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="xvii.i-p29.1"></span> —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_800"></span>[801](cc40016.htm#fr_800) <span
id="xvii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p31"></span> The rendering of Erasmus, as stated by
Beza, (who, like Calvin, disapproves of it,) is “<span
id="xvii.i-p31.1"></span>ut exhiberctis;” — “that *ye* may present.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_801"></span>[802](cc40016.htm#fr_801) <span
id="xvii.i-p33.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p34"></span> <span id="xvii.i-p34.1"></span>*Tabuloe* —
*Juvenal* makes use of this term in the same sense: “<span
id="xvii.i-p34.2"></span>Signatae *tabuloe;*” — “The *marriage contract*
is signed.” — (Juv. 2 119.) See also Juv. 9:75. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_802"></span>[803](cc40016.htm#fr_802) <span
id="xvii.i-p34.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p35"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p35.1"></span>Est
conferme et establi par l’Euangile, comme par vn instrument
authentique;” — “Is confirmed and established by the gospel, as by an
authentic instrument.”

<span id="fn_803"></span>[804](cc40016.htm#fr_803) <span
id="xvii.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p37"></span> Beza, while, like Calvin, he views the
expression <span id="xvii.i-p37.1"></span>εἰς τὸν Χριστόν, as meaning
“in Christ,” makes mention of the rendering of Erasmus, adding a note of
explanation, “<span id="xvii.i-p37.2"></span>Quoe *erat erga Christum,*
nempe quia pure ac simpliciter illi obtemperabatis;” — “Which was
*towards Christ;* that is, inasmuch as you obeyed him in purity and
simplicity.” Cranmer (1539) renders as follows: “Euen so youre wyttes
shuld be corrupte from the singlenes that ye had toward Christ. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_804"></span>[805](cc40016.htm#fr_804) <span
id="xvii.i-p37.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p38"></span> The rendering of the Vulgate is the same
as that adopted by Calvin, “<span id="xvii.i-p38.1"></span>A
simplicitate quae est in Christo;” — “From the simplicity which is in
Christ.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_805"></span>[806](cc40016.htm#fr_805) <span
id="xvii.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p39"></span> “<span
id="xvii.i-p39.1"></span>Corruptions et desguisemens venans d’ailleurs:”
— “Corruptions and disguises springing from some other sources.”

<span id="fn_806"></span>[807](cc40016.htm#fr_806) <span
id="xvii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p40"></span> “<span
id="xvii.i-p40.1"></span>S’abbastardissent, corrompent, et debauchent;”
— “Are adulterated, corrupted, and debauched.”

<span id="fn_807"></span>[808](cc40016.htm#fr_807) <span
id="xvii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p44"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p44.1"></span>Trop
chagrins, difficiles, mal-aises a contenter, et faciles a estre
irritez;” — “Excessively fretful, hard to please, not easily satisfied,
and very readily provoked.”

<span id="fn_808"></span>[809](cc40016.htm#fr_808) <span
id="xvii.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p45"></span> “<span
id="xvii.i-p45.1"></span>Entreprenent et vsurpent;” — “Assume and
usurp.”

<span id="fn_809"></span>[810](cc40016.htm#fr_809) <span
id="xvii.i-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p46"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p46.1"></span>Leur dure
et insupportable tyrannie;” — “Their harsh and intolerable tyranny.”

<span id="fn_810"></span>[811](cc40016.htm#fr_810) <span
id="xvii.i-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p47"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p47.1"></span>Mais de
Christ, il ne leur en chaut, et ne font point de conscience de l’auoir
en mespris;” — “But as for Christ, they do not care for him, and they
make no scruple to hold him in contempt.”

<span id="fn_811"></span>[812](cc40016.htm#fr_811) <span
id="xvii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p51"></span> “<span
id="xvii.i-p51.1"></span>Monstroyent bien en cela leur ingratitude;” —
“Showed clearly in this their ingratitude.”

<span id="fn_812"></span>[813](cc40016.htm#fr_812) <span
id="xvii.i-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p52"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p52.1"></span>En quelque
lieu que nous apperceuerons les dons de Dieu, il faut que la il soit
honore de nous, et que nous luy portions reuerence;” — “Wherever we
recognise the gifts of God, he must there be honored by us, and we must
give him reverence.”

<span id="fn_813"></span>[814](cc40016.htm#fr_813) <span
id="xvii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p55"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p55.1"></span>Il n’y
auoit que ceci seul;” — “There was only this one thing.”

<span id="fn_814"></span>[815](cc40016.htm#fr_814) <span
id="xvii.i-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p56"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p56.1"></span>Ce fol
iugement;” — “This foolish judgment.”

<span id="fn_815"></span>[816](cc40016.htm#fr_815) <span
id="xvii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p58"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p58.1"></span>La faculte
de bien parler et auec grace;” — “The power of speaking well and
gracefully.”

<span id="fn_816"></span>[817](cc40016.htm#fr_816) <span
id="xvii.i-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p59"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p59.1"></span>La
substance de la chose;” — “The substance of the thing.”

<span id="fn_817"></span>[818](cc40016.htm#fr_817) <span
id="xvii.i-p59.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p60"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, pp.
75-77.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[819](cc40016.htm#fr_818) <span
id="xvii.i-p60.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p61"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p61.1"></span>Et afin
que i’vse d’vn prouerbe des Latins barbare, commun toutesfois — ‘Que les
autres scachent les mots, mais que nous ayons bonne cognoissance de la
chose;’” — “And to use a proverb of the Latins, barbarous, indeed, but
common — ‘Let others know the words, but let us have a good acquaintance
with the reality.’” Tymme, in his translation of Calvin on the
Corinthians, (1573,) renders this proverb as follows: “Let other haue
the shell, so we may haue the kernell.” — Ed.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[820](cc40016.htm#fr_819) <span
id="xvii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p63"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p63.1"></span>Monstrent
audoigttout ce qu’il en pourroit dire;” — “Show with the finger every
thing that he might be prepared to say as to it.”

<span id="fn_820"></span>[821](cc40016.htm#fr_820) <span
id="xvii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p4.1"></span>En ce que
ie me suis humilie moy mesme, ou, abbaisse;” — “Because I have humbled
or abased myself.”

<span id="fn_821"></span>[822](cc40016.htm#fr_821) <span
id="xvii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p9.1"></span>Je n’ay
foulle personne, ou, ne suis point deuenu lasche en besongne au dommage
de quelqu’vn;” — “I was not burdensome to any one, or, I did not become
remiss in labor to the hurt of any one.”

<span id="fn_822"></span>[823](cc40016.htm#fr_822) <span
id="xvii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p19.1"></span>Car ce
sainct Apostre estoit tellement embrasse du desir.” — “For this holy
Apostle was to such a degree inflamed with desire.”

<span id="fn_823"></span>[824](cc40016.htm#fr_823) <span
id="xvii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p21"></span> “See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
p. 288.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[825](cc40016.htm#fr_824) <span
id="xvii.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p24"></span> “The word <span
id="xvii.ii-p24.1"></span>ἐσύλησα, rendered in our authorized version
*robbed,* is derived from <span id="xvii.ii-p24.2"></span>σύλη,
*spoils,* and comes originally from the Hebrew verb <span
id="xvii.ii-p24.3"></span>שלל (*shalal*)*,* which is frequently employed
to denote *spoiling,* or *making booty.* (See <span
id="xvii.ii-p24.4"></span>[Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006)<span id="xvii.ii-p24.4"></span>;
<span id="xvii.ii-p24.5"></span>[Eze
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#019)<span
id="xvii.ii-p24.5"></span>.) — “The word <span
id="xvii.ii-p24.6"></span>ἐσύλησα,” says *Barnes,* “means properly, ‘I
spoiled, plundered, robbed,’ but the idea of Paul here is, that he, *as
it were,* robbed them, because he did not render an equivalent for what
they gave him. They supported him, when he was labouring for another
people. A conqueror who plunders a country gives *no equivalent* for
what he takes. In this sense only could Paul say, that he had plundered
the Church at Philippi. His general principle was, that ’the labourer
was worthy of his hire;’ and that a man was to receive his support from
the people for whom he labored, (See <span
id="xvii.ii-p24.7"></span>[1Co
9:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007)<span
id="xvii.ii-p24.7"></span>,) but this rule he had not observed in this
case.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_825"></span>[826](cc40016.htm#fr_825) <span
id="xvii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p27.1"></span>Il ne
dit pas que les Macedoniens luy eussent donne tout ce qui luy estoit
necessaire;” — “He does not say that the Macedonians had given him every
thing that was necessary.”

<span id="fn_826"></span>[827](cc40016.htm#fr_826) <span
id="xvii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p30"></span> “See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
p. 37.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[828](cc40016.htm#fr_827) <span
id="xvii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p33"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p33.1"></span>Pour
repoudre & l’objection;” — “With the view of replying to the objection.”
— See Calvin on the Corinthians, volume 1.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[829](cc40016.htm#fr_828) <span
id="xvii.ii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p34"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p34.1"></span>Ces
trois lignes;” — “These three lines.”

<span id="fn_829"></span>[830](cc40016.htm#fr_829) <span
id="xvii.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p35"></span> “An oath is to be used, when other means
are deficient; and more particularly, we are then only to swear, when
the honor of God is concerned, or Religion and Christianity is falsely
accused; and these are public grounds. To which we may add the good of
the Commonwealth: or we are to swear upon a particular occasion to clear
ourselves from false accusations and crimes charged upon us, if
otherwise our innocency cannot appear; or in the behalf of others, when
they shall suffer either in name, life, or estate, and we are required
thereunto by the Magistrate, that so justice may proceed.” — *Burgesse*
on <span id="xvii.ii-p35.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#000)<span id="xvii.ii-p35.1"></span>. —
See Calvin’s *Harmony,* volume 1. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_830"></span>[831](cc40016.htm#fr_830) <span
id="xvii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p38"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p38.1"></span>C’estoit
vne fausse monstre de quelque zele excellent, de seruir sans rien
prendre;” — “It was a false show of eminent zeal, to serve without
taking any thing.”

<span id="fn_831"></span>[832](cc40016.htm#fr_831) <span
id="xvii.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p39"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p39.1"></span>De la
resolution qu’il a prinse en cest endroit;” — “Of the resolution that he
had taken as to this matter.”

<span id="fn_832"></span>[833](cc40016.htm#fr_832) <span
id="xvii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p40.1"></span>Par
nostre imprudence et inconsideration;” — “By our imprudence and
inconsideration.”

<span id="fn_833"></span>[834](cc40016.htm#fr_833) <span
id="xvii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p12"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iii-p12.1"></span>S’insinuent finement sans qu’on y prene
garde;” — “They artfully insinuate themselves, unless one be on his
guard against them.”

<span id="fn_834"></span>[835](cc40016.htm#fr_834) <span
id="xvii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p16.1"></span>Comme
porte le prouerbe des Latins;” — “As the proverb in use among the Latins
runs.”

<span id="fn_835"></span>[836](cc40016.htm#fr_835) <span
id="xvii.iii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p17"></span> *Beza* takes the same view of this
expression: “<span id="xvii.iii-p17.1"></span>Nec enim illi dicuntur
sese transfigurare in Satanam, sed in ministros propos et integros,
quibus opponuntur <span id="xvii.iii-p17.2"></span>δόλιοι*.* <span
id="xvii.iii-p17.3"></span>Hoc enim declarat epitheton *justitiae* ex
Hebraeorum idiotismo;” — “For they are not said to transform themselves
into Satan, but into ministers, who are honest and upright, as
contrasted with those who are (<span id="xvii.iii-p17.4"></span>δόλιοι)
*deceitful.* For this is the import of the epithet, *of righteousness,*
according to the Hebrew idiom.” Another instance of the same Hebrew
idiom is noticed by Calvin in p. 196. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_836"></span>[837](cc40016.htm#fr_836) <span
id="xvii.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p18"></span> The term <span
id="xvii.iv-p18.1"></span>παρέργον denotes — a matter of mere secondary
importance. Thus Thucydides (6:58) says, <span
id="xvii.iv-p18.2"></span>ὁς οὐκ ἐκ παρέργου τὸν πόλεμον ἐποιεῖτο — who
did not make the war a secondary consideration. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_837"></span>[838](cc40016.htm#fr_837) <span
id="xvii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p21.1"></span>La facon
exterieure en laquelle il procede;” — “The outward manner in which he
goes to work.”

<span id="fn_838"></span>[839](cc40016.htm#fr_838) <span
id="xvii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p22.1"></span>C’est
plustos afin de lea condemner es faux-Apostres;” — “It is rather with
the view of condemning them in the false Apostles.”

<span id="fn_839"></span>[840](cc40016.htm#fr_839) <span
id="xvii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p23.1"></span>Afin de
leur abbaisser le coquet:” — “With the view of bringing down their
talk.”

<span id="fn_840"></span>[841](cc40016.htm#fr_840) <span
id="xvii.iv-p23.5"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p24"></span> Calvin refers here to the rendering of
Erasmus, and of the Vulgate. The term employed by Erasmus is <span
id="xvii.iv-p24.1"></span>*argumenturm* (*subject-matter.*) In
accordance with this, Cranmer’s version (1539) reads, “in this *matter*
of boastinge.” The Vulgate makes use of the term <span
id="xvii.iv-p24.2"></span>*substantia,* (*substance.*) Wiclif (1380)
reads, “in this substance of glorie” The Rheims version (1582), “in this
substance of glorying.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[842](cc40016.htm#fr_841) <span
id="xvii.iv-p24.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p25.1"></span>Certes
il ne conueniendroit pas bien yci de traduire *matiere* ou *substance,*
combien que le mot signifie quelque fois cela;” — “Certainly it would
not be suitable here to render it *subject-matter* or *substance,*
though the word sometimes bears that meaning.”

<span id="fn_842"></span>[843](cc40016.htm#fr_842) <span
id="xvii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p31.1"></span>D’vne
merueilleuse arrogance;” — “With an amazing arrogance.”

<span id="fn_843"></span>[844](cc40016.htm#fr_843) <span
id="xvii.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p32"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p32.1"></span>Enuers
luy;” — “Towards him.”

<span id="fn_844"></span>[845](cc40016.htm#fr_844) <span
id="xvii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p35"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p35.1"></span>Ce que
malicieusement on disoit de luy pour le rendre odieux;” — “What they
said of him maliciously, with the view of making him odious.”

<span id="fn_845"></span>[846](cc40016.htm#fr_845) <span
id="xvii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p38"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p38.1"></span>*De*
resister et contredire opiniastrement;” — “To resist and contradict
obstinately.”

<span id="fn_846"></span>[847](cc40016.htm#fr_846) <span
id="xvii.iv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p39"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p39.1"></span>Se
corroucer aigrement contr’ eux a la moindre occasion;” — “To be fiercely
enraged against them on the least occasion.”

<span id="fn_847"></span>[848](cc40016.htm#fr_847) <span
id="xvii.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p40"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p40.1"></span>Se
plaindre de leur seuerite, en disant qu’elle est excessiue;” — “To
complain of their strictness, by saying that it is excessive.”

<span id="fn_848"></span>[849](cc40016.htm#fr_848) <span
id="xvii.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p41"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p41.1"></span>Ils
tempestent et grincent les dents;” — “They storm and gnash their teeth.”

<span id="fn_849"></span>[850](cc40016.htm#fr_849) <span
id="xvii.iv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p42"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p42.1"></span>Toutes
sortes d injures et outrages horribles que les moines leur faisoyent;” —
“All sorts of horrible injuries and insults that the monks could inflict
upon them.”

<span id="fn_850"></span>[851](cc40016.htm#fr_850) <span
id="xvii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p16"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p16.1"></span>La
pesanteur ordinaire des affaires que i’ay; *ou*, il y a ce qui m’assiege
de tour en tour;” — “The ordinary burden of affairs which I have; *or,*
there is that which besieges me from day to day.”

<span id="fn_851"></span>[852](cc40016.htm#fr_851) <span
id="xvii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p22"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p22.1"></span>Proram et
puppim;” — “The prow and stern.”

<span id="fn_852"></span>[853](cc40016.htm#fr_852) <span
id="xvii.v-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p23"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p23.1"></span>Vne chose
si vaine, et de si petite consequence;” — “A thing so empty, and of so
small importance.”

<span id="fn_853"></span>[854](cc40016.htm#fr_853) <span
id="xvii.v-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p25"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p25.1"></span>Qu’il
estoit descendu d’Heber de pere en fils;” — “That he was descended from
Heber, from father to son.”

<span id="fn_854"></span>[855](cc40016.htm#fr_854) <span
id="xvii.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p26"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p26.1"></span>Vray est
que la coniecture de ceux qui disent qu’ils sont ainsi appelez comme
*habitants outre la riuiere,* n’est pas du tout sans eouleur;” — “It is
true, that the conjecture of those who say that they are so called, as
*dwelling beyond the river,* is not without some appearance of truth.”

<span id="fn_855"></span>[856](cc40016.htm#fr_855) <span
id="xvii.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p27"></span> “The word Hebrew signified properly *one
who was from beyond,* (<span id="xvii.v-p27.1"></span>עכרי from <span
id="xvii.v-p27.2"></span>עכר to *pass,* to *pass over,*) hence applied
to Abraham, because he had come from a foreign land; and the word
denoted properly a *foreigner* — *a* man from the land or country
*beyond* (<span id="xvii.v-p27.3"></span>עכר) the Euphrates. The name
Israelite denoted properly one descended from Israel or Jacob, and the
difference between them was, that the name Israelite, being a patronymic
derived from one of the founders of their nation, was in use among
themselves; the name *Hebrew* was applied by the Canaanite to them, as
having come from *beyond* the river, and was the current name among
foreign tribes and nations.” — *Barnes.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_856"></span>[857](cc40016.htm#fr_856) <span
id="xvii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p30"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p30.1"></span>Car quant
a leurs gloires charnelles, qui n’estoyent que choses vaines, iusques
yci il les a fait esuanoir comme en soufflant dessus.” — “For as to
theft carnal glories, which were but vain things, he has hitherto made
them vanish by, as it were, blowing upon them.”

<span id="fn_857"></span>[858](cc40016.htm#fr_857) <span
id="xvii.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p34"></span> The custom of excepting *one* stripe from
the *forty* is made mention of by Josephus: <span
id="xvii.v-p34.1"></span>πληγὰς μίας λειπούσης τεσσαράκοντα, “forty
stripes save one.” (Joseph. Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 8. sect. 21.) It is
noticed by *Wolfius,* that the Jews in modern times make use of the same
number of stripes — thirty-nine — in punishing offenders, there being
evidence of this from what is stated by Uriel Acosta, who, in his Life,
subjoined by Limborch to his Conversation with a learned Jew, declares
that he had in punishment of his departure from the Jews, received
stripes up to that number. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_858"></span>[859](cc40016.htm#fr_858) <span
id="xvii.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p35"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p35.1"></span>Plusieurs
semblables pouruoyances et remedes inuentez par los Rabbins:” — “Many
similar provisions and remedies, invented by the Rabbins.”

<span id="fn_859"></span>[860](cc40016.htm#fr_859) <span
id="xvii.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p36"></span> “The *Mishna* gives this as a rule, (MISH.
Maccoth. fol. 22:10,) ‘How often shall he, the culprit, be smitten? Ans.
<span id="xvii.v-p36.1"></span>אלכעין חסר אחד, forty stripes, wanting
one, *i.e.,* with the number which is nighest to forty.’ They also
thought it right to stop under forty, lest the person who counted should
make a mistake, and the criminal get more *than forty* stripes, which
would be injustice, as the law required only *forty.*” — *Dr. A.
Clarke.* “As the whip was formed of three cords, and every stroke was
allowed to count for three stripes, the number of strokes never exceeded
thirteen, which made thirty-nine stripes.” — *Bloomfield.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_860"></span>[861](cc40016.htm#fr_860) <span
id="xvii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p39"></span> “*Once* was I stoned.” Paley remarks in
his “Horae Paulinae,” that this clause, “when confronted with the
history,” (contained in the Acts of the Apostles,) “furnishes the
nearest approach to a contradiction, without a contradiction being
actually incurred, of any that he remembers to have met with.” While the
narrative contained in the Acts of the Apostles gives an account of only
one instance in which Paul was actually stoned, (<span
id="xvii.v-p39.1"></span>[Ac
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019)<span id="xvii.v-p39.1"></span>,)
there was, previously to that, “an assault” made upon Paul and Barnabas
at Iconium, “both of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews, with their
rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them, but they were ware
of it, and fled unto Lystra and Derbe.” (<span
id="xvii.v-p39.2"></span>[Acts 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006)<span id="xvii.v-p39.2"></span>.)
“Now had the ‘assault,’” says Paley, “been completed; had the history
related that a stone was thrown, as it relates that preparations were
made both by Jews and Gentiles to stone Paul and his companions; or even
had the account of this transaction stopped, without going on to inform
us that Paul and his companions were *aware of their danger and fled, a*
contradiction between the history and the Apostle would have ensued.
Truth is necessarily consistent; but it is scarcely possible that
independent accounts, not having truth to guide them, should thus
advance to the very brink of contradiction without falling into *it.*” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_861"></span>[862](cc40016.htm#fr_861) <span
id="xvii.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p45"></span> “Thrasones.” — See Calvin on the
Corinthians, vol. 1, p. 98, n. 1.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[863](cc40016.htm#fr_862) <span
id="xvii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p47"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p47.1"></span>Il n’est
pas necessairement requis que tous vniversellement endurent toutes
telles fascheries;” — “It is not indispensably requisite that all
universally endure all such vexations.”

<span id="fn_863"></span>[864](cc40016.htm#fr_863) <span
id="xvii.v-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p48"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p48.1"></span>Des
mercenaires;”. — “Hirelings.”

<span id="fn_864"></span>[865](cc40016.htm#fr_864) <span
id="xvii.v-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p51"></span> The word (<span
id="xvii.v-p51.1"></span>ἐπισύστασις) is *translated* or rather
*paraphrased* by Beza as follows: “<span id="xvii.v-p51.2"></span>Agmen
illud in me consurgens;” — “That troop which rises up together against
me.” He adds by way of explanation: “<span
id="xvii.v-p51.3"></span>Certum est enim <span
id="xvii.v-p51.4"></span>ἐπισύστασιν <span id="xvii.v-p51.5"></span>dici
multitudinem quae adversus aliquem coierit, idque non semel, sed
repetitis vicibus. Quia igitur multiplices erant curae, quarum tanquam
agmine magis ac magis veluti obruebatur, Apostolus usus est translatitie
hoc vocabulo, admodum significanter;” — “For it is certain that <span
id="xvii.v-p51.6"></span>ἐπισύστασιν denotes a multitude that has come
together against any one, and that not once merely, but in repeated
instances. As, therefore, there were manifold cares, by which rushing
upon him like a troop, more and more, he was in a manner overwhelmed,
the Apostle, by way of metaphor, made use of this term very
significantly.” *Raphelius* considers the term to be synonymous with an
expression made use of by Cicero: “<span
id="xvii.v-p51.7"></span>concursus occupationum;” — “a crowding together
of engagements.” — (Cic. Fam. 7:33.) — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_865"></span>[866](cc40016.htm#fr_865) <span
id="xvii.v-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p53"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p53.1"></span>Car le
gouernement de l’Eglise n’est pas vne occupation ioyeuse pour nous
exercer tout doucement, et par manicrc de passe-temps et exercice
gracieux pour recreer nos esprits;” — “For the government of the Church
is not a pleasant occupation for exercising ourselves quite agreeably,
and by way of pass-time, and an agreeable exercise for refreshing our
minds.”

<span id="fn_866"></span>[867](cc40016.htm#fr_866) <span
id="xvii.v-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p56"></span> See Calvin’s *Harmony,* vol. 2, p. 232.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[868](cc40016.htm#fr_867) <span
id="xvii.v-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p57"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p57.1"></span>Prend en
soy les afflictions de tous;” — “Take upon himself the afflictions of
all.”

<span id="fn_868"></span>[869](cc40016.htm#fr_868) <span
id="xvii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="xvii.vi-p13.1"></span>De
toutes lesquelles nous n’avons point de honte coustumierement, que si
nous estions vileinement diffamez;” — “Of all which we feel ordinarily
as much ashamed, as if we had been shockingly defamed.”

<span id="fn_869"></span>[870](cc40016.htm#fr_869) <span
id="xvii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p16"></span> “<span id="xvii.vi-p16.1"></span>Vn acte
singulier de vray champion de guerre;” — “A singular feat of a true
champion of war.”

<span id="fn_870"></span>[871](cc40016.htm#fr_870) <span
id="xvii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="xvii.vi-p17.1"></span>De
iurement sainete et lieitc;” — “Of a holy and lawful oath.”

<span id="fn_871"></span>[872](cc40016.htm#fr_871) <span
id="xvii.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p18"></span> Calvin, when commenting on the passage
referred to, (<span id="xvii.vi-p18.1"></span>[Ac
9:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)<span
id="xvii.vi-p18.1"></span>,) makes use of a similar expression: “<span
id="xvii.vi-p18.2"></span>Hoc tiroeinio ad erueem ferendam mature
assuefaetus fuit;” — “By this apprenticeship he was early inured to the
endurance of the cross.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_872"></span>[873](cc40016.htm#fr_872) <span
id="xvii.vi-p18.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="xvii.vi-p19.1"></span>Et
qu’ils n’auoyent point conceu telle fureur pour vne chose leger et de
petite consequence;” — “And that they had not conceived such a rage for
a slight matter, and one of small consequence.”

<span id="fn_873"></span>[874](cc40016.htm#fr_873) <span
id="xvii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p22"></span> Calvin seems to have here in his eye a
passage expressly alluded to by him, when commenting on <span
id="xvii.vi-p22.1"></span>[Ac
9:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)<span
id="xvii.vi-p22.1"></span>, from the writings of Cicero, to the
following effect: “<span id="xvii.vi-p22.2"></span>Etiamsi peregrinum
lex arceat a muri accessu, minime tamen peccat, qui murum conscendit
servandae urbis causa, quia leges semper ad aequitatem flectendae sunt;”
— “Although the law forbids a foreigner to approach the wall, no offense
is committed by the man, who scales the wall with a view to the defense
of the city; for the laws must always be made to bend towards equity.” —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc40017)
