[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40011)  [Next](cc40013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Having therefore these promises,
dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Has igitur promissiones quum
habeamus, dilecti, mundemus nos ab omni inquinamento carnis et spiritus,
sanctificationem perficientes in timore Dei.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span><span id="xiii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *These promises, therefore.* God, it
is true, anticipates us in his promises by his pure favor; but when he
has, of his own accord, conferred upon us his favor, he immediately
afterwards requires from us gratitude in return. Thus what he said to
Abraham, *I* *am thy God,* (<span id="xiii.i-p6.1"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="xiii.i-p6.1"></span>,)
was an offer of his undeserved goodness, yet he at the same time added
what he required from him — *Walk before me, and be thou perfect* As,
however, this second clause is not always expressed, Paul instructs us
that in all the promises this condition is implied,  <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) that they must be incitements to us to
promote the glory of God. For from what does he deduce an argument to
stimulate us? It is from this, that God confers upon us such a
distinguished honor. Such, then, is the nature of the promises, that
they call us to sanctification, as if God had interposed by an implied
agreement. We know, too, what the Scripture teaches in various passages
in reference to the design of redemption, and the same thing must be
viewed as applying to every token of his favor.

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>*From all filthiness of flesh and spirit.*
Having already shown, that we are called to purity,  <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) he now adds, that it ought to be seen
in the body, as well as in the soul; for that the term *flesh* is taken
here to mean the *body,* and the term *spirit* to mean the *soul,* is
manifest from this, that if the term *spirit* meant the grace of
regeneration, Paul’s statement in reference to the pollution of the
spirit would be absurd. He would have us, therefore, pure from
defilements, not merely *inward,* such as have God alone as their
witness; but also *outward,* such as fall under the observation of men.
“Let us not merely have chaste consciences in the sight of God. We must
also consecrate to him our whole body and all its members, that no
impurity may be seen in any part of us.”  <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625)

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>Now if we consider what is the point that
he handles, we shall readily perceive, that those act with excessive
impudence,  <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) who excuse outward
idolatry on I know not what pretexts.  <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) For as inward impiety, and
superstition, of whatever kind, is a defilement of the spirit, what will
they understand by defilement of the flesh, but an outward profession of
impiety, whether it be pretended, or uttered from the heart? They boast
of a pure conscience; that, indeed, is on false grounds, but granting
them what they falsely boast of, they have only the half of what Paul
requires from believers. Hence they have no ground to think, that they
have given satisfaction to God by that half; for let a person show any
appearance of idolatry at all, or any indication of it, or take part in
wicked or superstitious rites, even though he were — what he cannot be —
perfectly upright in his own mind, he would, nevertheless, not be exempt
from the guilt of polluting his body.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>*Perfecting holiness.* As the verb <span
id="xiii.i-p14.1"></span>ἐπιτελεῖν in Greek sometimes means, *to
perfect*, and sometimes *to perform sacred rites*,  <span
id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) it is elegantly made use of here by
Paul in the former signification, which is the more frequent one — in
such a way, however, as to allude to sanctification, of which he is now
treating. For while it denotes perfection, it seems to have been
intentionally transferred to sacred offices, because there ought to be
nothing defective in the service of God, but everything complete. Hence,
in order that you may sanctify yourself to God aright, you must dedicate
both body and soul entirely to him.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>*In the fear of God.* For if the *fear of
God* influences us, we will not be so much disposed to indulge
ourselves, nor will there be a bursting forth of that audacity of
wantonness, which showed itself among the Corinthians. For how does it
happen, that many delight themselves so much in outward idolatry, and
haughtily defend so gross a vice, unless it be, that they think that
they mock God with impunity? If the fear of God had dominion over them,
they would immediately, on the first moment, leave off all cavils,
without requiring to be constrained to it by any disputations.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 7:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002)<span
id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Receive us; we have wronged no man,
we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man.

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Capaces estote nostri: nemini
fecimus iniuriam, neminem corrupimus, neminem fraudavimus.

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>**3.** I speak not *this* to condemn *you*:
for I have said before, that ye are in our hearts to die and live with
*you*

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>**3.** Non \[hoc\] ad condemnationem vestri
dico: siquidem iam ante dixi vobis, quod in coribus nostris sitis ad
commoriendum et convivendum.

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>**4.** Great *is* my boldness of speech
toward you, great *is* my glorying of you: I am filled with comfort, I
am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>**4.** Multa mihi fiducia erga vos, multa
mihi gloriatio de vobis: impletus sum consolatione supra modum, exundo
gaudio in omni tribulatione nostra.

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>**5.** For, when we were come into
Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side;
without *were* fightings, within *were* fears.

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>**5.** Etenim quum venissemus in
Macedoniam, nullam relaxationem habuit caro nostra, sed in omnibus
fuimus afflicti: foris pugnae, intus timores.

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>**6.** Nevertheless God, that comforteth
those that are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus;

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>**6.** Sed qui consolatur humiles,
consolatus est nos Deus in adventu Titi.

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>**7.** And not by his coming only, but by
the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you, when he told us your
earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent mind toward me; so that I
rejoiced the more.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span>**7.** Neque solum in adventu eius, sed in
consolatione quam acceperat de vobis, annuntians nobis vestrum
desiderium, vestras lacrimas, vestrum stadium pro me: ita ut magis
gauderem.

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span>**2.** *Make room for us.* Again he
returns from a statement of doctrine to treat of what more especially
concerns himself, but simply with this intention — that he may not lose
his pains in admonishing the Corinthians. Nay more, he closes the
preceding admonition with the same statement, which he had made use of
by way of preface. For what is meant by the expressions *Receive us,* or
*Make room for us?* It is equivalent to, *Be ye enlarged,* (<span
id="xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>[2Co
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#013)<span id="xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>;)
that is, “Do not allow corrupt affections, or unfavorable apprehensions,
to prevent this doctrine from making its way into your minds, and
obtaining a place within you. For as I lay myself out for your salvation
with a fatherly zeal, it were unseemly that you should turn a deaf ear
 <span id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) upon me.”  <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630)

<span id="xiii.ii-p19"></span>*We have done injury to no man.* He
*declares* that there is no reason why they should have their minds
alienated,  <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) inasmuch as he had
not given them occasion of offense in any thing. Now he mentions *three*
kinds of offenses, as to which he declares himself to be guiltless. The
*first* is, manifest hurt or injury. The *second* is, the corruption
that springs from false doctrine. The *third* is, defrauding or cheating
in worldly goods. These are *three* things by which, for the most part,
pastors  <span id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) are wont to alienate
the minds of the people from them — when they conduct themselves in an
overbearing manner, and, making their authority their pretext, break
forth into tyrannical cruelty or *unreasonableness,* — *or* when they
draw aside from the right path those to whom they ought to have been
guides, and infect them with the corruption of false doctrine, — or when
they manifest an insatiable covetousness, by eagerly desiring what
belongs to another. Should any one wish to have it in shorter
compass-the *first* is, fierceness and an abuse of power by excessive
*insolence*  <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) the *second,*
unfaithfulness in teaching. the *third,* avarice.

<span id="xiii.ii-p23"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p24"></span>**3.** *I say not this to condemn you.* As
the foregoing apology was a sort of expostulation, and we can scarcely
avoid reproaching when we expostulate, he softens on this account what
he had said. “I clear myself,” says he, *“*in such a way as to be
desirous to avoid, what would tend to your dishonor.” The Corinthians,
it is true, were unkind, and they deserved that, on Paul’s being
acquitted from blame, *they* should be substituted in his place as the
guilty party; nay more, that they should be held guilty in two respects
— in respect of ingratitude, and on the ground of their having
calumniated the innocent. Such, however, is the Apostle’s moderation,
that he refrains from recrimination, contenting himself with standing
simply on the defensive.

<span id="xiii.ii-p25"></span>*For I have before said.* Those that love
do not assail;  <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) nay more, if any
fault has been committed, they either cover it over by taking no notice
of it, or soften it by kindness. For a disposition to reproach is a sign
of hatred. Hence Paul, with the view of showing that he has no
inclination to distress the Corinthians, declares his affection towards
them. At the same time, he undoubtedly in a manner *condemns* them,
while he says that he does not do so. As, however, there is a great
difference between gall and vinegar, so there is also between that
condemnation, by which we harass a man in a spirit of hatred, with the
view of blasting him with infamy, and, on the other hand, that, by which
we endeavor to bring back an offender into the right way, that, along
with safety, he may in addition to this regain his honors unimpaired.

<span id="xiii.ii-p27"></span>*Ye are in our hearts* — that is, “I carry
you about with me inclosed in my heart.” *To die and live with you* —
that is, “So that no change can loosen our attachment, for I am prepared
not merely to *live with you,* but also to be associated with you in
death, if necessary, and to endure anything rather than renounce your
friendship.” Mark well, in what manner all pastors.  <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) ought to be affected.

<span id="xiii.ii-p29"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p30"></span>**4.** *Great is my boldness.* Now, as if
he had obtained the enlargement of heart that he had desired on the part
of the Corinthians, he leaves off complaining, and pours out his heart
with cheerfulness. “What need is there that I should expend so much
labor upon a matter already accomplished? For I think I have already
what I asked. For the things that Titus has reported to me respecting
you are not merely sufficient for quieting my mind, but afford me also
ground of glorying confidently on your account  <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) Nay more, they have effectually
dispelled the grief, which many great and heavy afflictions had
occasioned me.” He goes on step by step, by way of climax; for
*glorying* is more than being of an easy and quiet mind; and *being
freed from grief occasioned by many afflictions,* is greater than either
of those. Chrysostom explains this *boldness* somewhat differently, in
this manner — “If I deal with you the more freely, it is on this
account, that, relying on the assurance of your good will towards me, I
think I may take so much liberty with you.” I have stated, however, what
appeared to me to be the more probable meaning — that the report given
by Titus had removed the unfavorable impression, which had previously
racked his mind.  <span id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637)

<span id="xiii.ii-p33"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p34"></span>**5.** *For when we had come into
Macedonia* The heaviness of his grief tends to show, how efficacious the
consolation was. “I was pressed on every side,” says he, “by afflictions
both internal and external. All this, however, has not prevented the joy
that you have afforded me from prevailing over it, and even
overflowing.”  <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) When he says that
he *had no rest in his flesh,* it is as if he had said — “As a man, I
had no relief.”  <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639) For he excepts
spiritual consolations, by which he was in the mean time sustained. He
was afflicted, therefore, not merely in body, but also in mind, so that,
as a man, he experienced nothing but great bitterness of afflictions.

<span id="xiii.ii-p37"></span>*Without were fightings* By *fightings* he
means outward assaults, with which his enemies molested him: *fears* he
means the anxieties, that he endured on account of the internal maladies
of the Church, for it was not so much by personal as by public evils,
that he was disquieted. What he means, then, to say is this — that there
were not merely avowed enemies that were hostile to him, but that he
endured, nevertheless, much distress in consequence of domestic evils.
For he saw how great was the infirmity of many, nay of almost all, and
in the mean time what, and how diversified, were the machinations, by
which Satan attempted to throw every thing into confusion — how few were
wise, how few were sincere, how few were steadfast, and how many, on the
other hand, were either mere pretenders, and worthless, or ambitious, or
turbulent. Amidst these difficulties, the servants of God must of
necessity feel alarmed, and be racked with anxieties; and so much the
more on this account — that they are constrained to bear many things
silently, that they may consult the peace of the Churches. Hence he
expressed himself with propriety when he said — *Without were fightings;
within were fears.* For faithful pastors openly set themselves in
opposition to those enemies that avowedly attack Christ’s kingdom, but
they are inwardly tormented, and endure secret tortures, when they see
the Church afflicted with internal evils, for the exterminating of which
they dare not openly sound the trumpet.  <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) But although he had almost incessant
conflicts, it is probable that he was at that time more severely pressed
than usual. The servants of Christ, undoubtedly, have scarcely at any
time exemption from *fears,* and Paul was seldom free from outward
*fightings;* but as he was at that time more violently oppressed, he
makes use of the plural number — *fightings and fears*, meaning that he
required to fight in many ways, and against various enemies, and that he
had at the same time many kinds of fear.

<span id="xiii.ii-p39"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p40"></span>**6.** *Who comforteth the lowly.* This is
mentioned as a reason; for he means that consolation had been offered to
him, because he was borne down with evils, and almost overwhelmed,
inasmuch as God is wont to *comfort the lowly,* that is, those that are
cast down. Hence a most profitable doctrine may be inferred — that the
more we have been afflicted, so much the greater consolation has been
prepared for us by God. Hence, in the epithet here applied to God, there
is a choice promise contained, as though he had said, that it is
peculiarly the part of God to comfort those that are miserable and are
abased to the dust.

<span id="xiii.ii-p41"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p42"></span>**7.** *And not by his coming only.* Lest
the Corinthians should object in these terms — “What is it to us if
Titus has cheered you by his coming? No doubt, as you loved him, you
would feel delighted to see him;” he declares, that the occasion of his
joy was, that Titus had, on returning from them, communicated the most
joyful intelligence. Accordingly he declares, that it was not so much
the presence of one individual, as the prosperous condition of the
Corinthians, that had cheered him.

<span id="xiii.ii-p43"></span>*Your desire* Mark, what joyful tidings
were communicated to Paul respecting the Corinthians. Their *desire*
originated in the circumstance, that they held Paul’s doctrine in high
estimation. Their *tears* were a token of respect; because, being
affected with his reproof, they mourned over their sins. Their *zeal*
was an evidence of good will. From these *three* things he inferred that
they were penitent. This afforded him full satisfaction, because he had
no other intention or anxiety, than the consulting of their welfare.

<span id="xiii.ii-p44"></span>*So that I rejoiced the more* — that is,
“So that all my griefs and distresses gave way to joy.” Hence we see,
not merely with what fervor of mind he desired the public good of the
Church, but also how mild and gentle a disposition he possessed, as
being one that could suddenly bury in oblivion offenses of so serious a
nature. At the same time, this may rather be taken in another way, so as
to be viewed in connection with what follows, and I am not sure but that
this meaning would correspond better with Paul’s intention. As, however,
it is a matter of no great moment, I pass over it slightly.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 7:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008)<span
id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**8.** For though I made you sorry with a
letter, I do not repent, though I did repent: for I perceive that the
same epistle hath made you sorry, though *it were* but for a season.

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span>**8.** Quoniam et si contristavi vos in
epistola, non me poenitet: etiamsi poenituerit. Video enim, quod
epistola illa, et si ad tempus, vos contristavit.

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span>**9.** Now I rejoice, not that ye were
made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry
after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing.

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span>**9.** Nunc gaudeo: non quod sitis
contristati, sed quod sitis contristati in poenitentiam, contristati
enim estis secundum Deum, ita ut nulla in re damno affecti sitis ex
nobis.

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>**10.** For godly sorrow worketh
repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the
world worketh death.

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>**10.** Nam quae secundum Deum est
tristitia, poenitentiam ad salutem non poenitendam efficit: mundi autem
tristitia mortem efficit.

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>**11.** For behold, this selfsame thing,
that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you,
yea, *what* clearing of yourselves, yea, *what* indignation, yea, *what*
fear, yea, *what* vehement desire, yea, *what* zeal, yea, *what*
revenge!

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>**11.** Ecce enim hoc ipsum, quod secundum
Deum, contristati estis quantum produxit in vobis stadium! Imo
defensionem, imo indignationem, imo timorem, imo desiderium, imo zelum,
imo vindictam!

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span>**8.** *For though I grieved you.* He now
begins to apologize to the Corinthians for having handle them somewhat
roughly in the former Epistle. Now we must observe, in what a variety of
ways he deals with them, so that it might appear as though he sustained
different characters. The reason is that his discourse was directed to
the whole of the Church. There were some there, that entertained an
unfavorable view of him — there were others that held him, as he
deserved, in the highest esteem — some were doubtful: others were
confident — some were docile: others were obstinate.  <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) In consequence of this diversity, he
required to direct his discourse now in one way, then in another, in
order to suit himself to all. Now he lessens, or rather he takes away
altogether any occasion of offense, on account of the severity that he
had employed, on the ground of its having turned out to the promotion of
their welfare. “Your welfare,” says he, “is so much an object of desire
to me, that I am delighted to see that I have done you good.” This
softening-down is admissible only when the teacher  <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) has done good so far as was needed, by
means of his reproofs; for if he had found, that the minds of the
Corinthians still remained obstinate, and had he perceived an advantage
arising from the discipline that he had attempted, he would,
undoubtedly, have abated nothing from his former severity. It is to be
observed, however, that he rejoices to have been an occasion of grief to
those whom he loved; for he was more desirous to profit, than to please
them.

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>But what does he mean when he adds —
*though I did repent?* For if we admit, that Paul had felt dissatisfied
with what he had written, there would follow an inconsistency of no
slight character — that the former Epistle had been written under a rash
impulse, rather than under the guidance of the Spirit. I answer, that
the word *repent* is used here in a loose sense for being *grieved.* For
while he made the Corinthians sad, he himself also participated in the
grief, and in a manner inflicted grief at the same time upon himself.
“Though I gave you pain against my inclination, and it grieved me to be
under the necessity of being harsh to you, I am grieved no longer on
that account, when I see that it has been of advantage to you.” Let us
take an instance from the case of a father; for a father feels grief in
connection with his severity, when at any time he chastises his son, but
approves of it, notwithstanding, because he sees that it is conducive to
his son’s advantage. In like manner Paul could feel no pleasure in
irritating the minds of the Corinthians; but, being conscious of the
motive that influenced his conduct, he preferred duty to inclination.

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span>*For I see.* The transition is abrupt;
but that does not at all impair the distinctness of the sense. In the
*first* place, he says, that he had fully ascertained by the effect,
that the former Epistle, though for a time unwelcome, had nevertheless
at length been of advantage, and *secondly,* that he rejoiced on account
of that *advantage.*

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span>**9.** *Not because you have been made
sorry*. He means, that he feels no pleasure whatever in their sorrow —
nay more, had he his choice, he would endeavor to promote equally their
welfare and their joy, by the same means; but that as he could not do
otherwise, their welfare was of so much importance in his view, that he
rejoiced that they had been made sorry unto repentance. For there are
instances of physicians, who are, indeed, in other respects good and
faithful, but are at the same time harsh, and do not spare their
patients. Paul declares, that he is not of such a disposition as to
employ harsh cures, when not constrained by necessity. As, however, it
had turned out well, that he had made trial of that kind of cure, he
congratulates himself on his success. He makes use of a similar form of
expression in <span id="xiii.iii-p18.1"></span>[2Co
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="xiii.iii-p18.1"></span>,

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span>We in this tabernacle groan, being
burdened, because we are desirous not to be unclothed, but clothed upon.

<span id="xiii.iii-p20"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p21"></span>**10.** *Sorrow according to God*  <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) In the *first* place, in order to
understand what is meant by this *clause according to God,* we must
observe the contrast, for the *sorrow that is according to God* he
contrasts with the *sorrow of the world* Let us now take, also, the
contrast between two kinds of joy. The *joy of the world* is, when men
foolishly, and without the fear of the Lord, exult in vanity, that is,
in the world, and, intoxicated with a transient felicity, look no higher
than the earth. The *joy that is according to God* is, when men place
all their happiness in God, and take satisfaction in His grace, and show
this by contempt of the world, using earthly prosperity as if they used
it not, and joyful in the midst of adversity. Accordingly, the *sorrow
of the world* is, when men despond in *consequence* of earthly
afflictions, and are overwhelmed with grief; while *sorrow according to
God* is that which has an eye to God, while they reckon it the one
misery — to have lost the favor of God; when, impressed with fear of His
judgment, they mourn over their sins. This sorrow Paul makes the cause
and origin of repentance. This is carefully to be observed, for unless
the sinner be dissatisfied with himself, detest his manner of life, and
be thoroughly grieved from an apprehension of sin, he will never betake
himself to the Lord.  <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) On the
other hand, it is impossible for a man to experience a sorrow of this
kind, without its giving birth to a new heart. Hence repentance takes
its rise in grief, for the reason that I have mentioned — because no one
can return to the right way, but the man who hates sin; but where hatred
of sin is, *there* is self-dissatisfaction and grief.

<span id="xiii.iii-p24"></span>There is, however, a beautiful allusion
here to the term *repentance,* when he says — *not to be repented of;*
for however unpleasant the thing is at first taste, it renders itself
desirable by its usefulness. The epithet, it is true, might apply to the
term *salvation,* equally as to that of *repentance;* but it appears to
me to suit better with the term *repentance* “We are taught by the
result itself, that grief ought not to be painful to us, or distressing.
In like manner, although repentance contains in it some degree of
bitterness, if, is spoken of as *not to be repented of* on account of
the precious and pleasant fruit which it produces.”

<span id="xiii.iii-p25"></span>*To salvation* Paul seems to make
repentance the ground of salvation. Were it so, it would follow, that we
are justified by works. I answer, that we must observe what Paul here
treats of, for he is not inquiring as to the ground of salvation, but
simply commending repentance from the fruit which it produces, he says
that it is like a way by which we arrive at salvation. Nor is it without
good reason; for Christ *calls us* by way of free favor, but it is *to
repentance.* (<span id="xiii.iii-p25.1"></span>[Mt
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013)<span
id="xiii.iii-p25.1"></span>.) God by way of free favor pardons our sins,
but only when we renounce them. Nay more, God accomplishes in us at one
and the same time two things: being renewed by repentance, we are
delivered from the *bondage* of our sins; and, being justified by faith,
we are delivered also from the *curse* of our sins. They are, therefore,
inseparable fruits of grace, and, in consequence of their invariable
connection, repentance may with fitness and propriety be represented as
an introduction to salvation, but in this way of speaking of it, it is
represented as an *effect* rather than as a *cause.* These are not
refinements for the purpose of evasion, but a true and simple solution,
for, while Scripture teaches us that we never obtain forgiveness of sins
without repentance, it represents at the same time, in a variety of
passages, the mercy of God alone as the ground of our obtaining it.

<span id="xiii.iii-p26"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p27"></span>**11.** *What earnest desire it produced
in you* I shall not enter into any dispute as to whether the things that
Paul enumerates are effects of repentance, or belong to it, or are
preparatory to it, as all this is unnecessary for understanding Paul’s
design, for he simply proves the repentance of the Corinthians from its
signs, or accompaniments. At the same time he makes *sorrow according to
God* to be the source of all these things, inasmuch as they spring from
it — which is assuredly the case; for when we have begun to feel
self-dissatisfaction, we are afterwards stirred up to seek after the
other things.

<span id="xiii.iii-p28"></span>What is meant by *earnest desire,* we may
understand from what is opposed to it; for so long as there is no
apprehension of sin, we lie drowsy and inactive. Hence drowsiness or
carelessness, or unconcern,  <span id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645)
stands opposed to that *earnest desire,* that he makes mention of.
Accordingly, *earnest desire* means simply an eager and active assiduity
in the correcting of what is amiss, and in the amendment of life.

<span id="xiii.iii-p30"></span>*Yea, what clearing of yourselves*
Erasmus having rendered it *satisfaction,* ignorant persons, misled by
the ambiguity of the term, have applied it to popish *satisfactions,*
whereas Paul employs the term <span
id="xiii.iii-p30.1"></span>ἀπολογίαν*,* (*defense.*) It is on this
account that I have preferred to retain the word <span
id="xiii.iii-p30.2"></span>*defensionem,* which the Old Interpreter had
made use of.  <span id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646) It is, however, to
be observed, that it is a kind of *defense* that consists rather in
supplication for pardon, than in extenuation of sin. As a son, who is
desirous to clear himself to his father, does not enter upon a regular
pleading of his cause, but by acknowledging his fault excuses himself,
rather in the spirit of a suppliant, than in a tone of confidence,
hypocrites, also, excuse themselves — nay more, they haughtily defend
themselves, but it is rather in the way of disputing with God, than of
returning to favor with him; and should any one prefer the word <span
id="xiii.iii-p31.1"></span>*excusationem,* (*excuse,*) I do not object
to it; because the meaning will amount to the same thing, that the
Corinthians were prompted to clear themselves, whereas previously they
cared not what Paul thought of them.

<span id="xiii.iii-p32"></span>*Yea, what indignation*  <span
id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647) This disposition, also, is attendant
on sacred sorrow — that the sinner is indignant against his vices, and
even against himself, as also all that are actuated by a right zeal
 <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648) are indignant, as often as they
see that God is offended. This disposition, however, is more intense
than sorrow. For the *first* step is, that evil be displeasing to us.
The *second* is, that, being inflamed with anger, we press hard upon
ourselves, so that our consciences may be touched to the quick. It may,
however, be taken here to mean the *indignation,* with which the
Corinthians had been inflamed against the sins of one or a few, whom
they had previously spared. Thus they repented of their concurrence or
connivance.

<span id="xiii.iii-p35"></span>*Fear* is what arises from an
apprehension of divine judgment, while the offender thinks — “Mark it
well, an account must be rendered by thee, and what wilt thou advance in
the presence of so great a judge?” For, alarmed by such a consideration,
he begins to tremble.

<span id="xiii.iii-p36"></span>As, however, the wicked themselves are
sometimes touched with an alarm of this nature, he adds *desire* This
disposition we know to be more of a voluntary nature than *fear,* for we
are often afraid against our will, but we never desire but from
inclination. Hence, as they had dreaded punishment on receiving Paul’s
admonition, so they eagerly aimed at amendment.

<span id="xiii.iii-p37"></span>But what are we to understand by *zeal?*
There can be no doubt that he intended a climax. Hence it means more
than *desire* Now we may understand by it, that they stirred up each
other in a spirit of mutual rivalry. It is simpler, however, to
understand it as meaning, that every one, with great fervor of zeal,
aimed to give evidence of his repentance. Thus zeal is intensity of
desire.

<span id="xiii.iii-p38"></span>*Yea, what revenge* What we have said as
to *indignation,* must be applied also to *revenge;* for the wickedness
which they had countenanced by their connivance and indulgence, they had
afterwards shown themselves rigorous in avenging. They had for some time
tolerated incest; but, on being admonished by Paul, they had not merely
ceased to countenance him, but had been strict reprovers in chastening
him, — this was the *revenge* that was meant. As, however, we ought to
punish sins wherever they are,  <span id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649)
and not only so, but should begin more especially with ourselves, there
is something farther meant in what the Apostle says here, for he speaks
of the signs of repentance. There is, among others, this more
particularly — that, by punishing sins, we anticipate, in a manner, the
judgment of God, as he teaches elsewhere, If we would judge ourselves,
we would not be judged by the Lord. (<span
id="xiii.iii-p39.2"></span>[1Co
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)<span
id="xiii.iii-p39.2"></span>.) We are not, however, to infer from this,
that mankind, by taking vengeance upon themselves, compensate to God for
the punishment due to him,  <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) so
that they redeem themselves from his hand. The case stands thus — that,
as it is the design of God by chastising us, to arouse us from our
carelessness, that, being reminded of his displeasure, we may be on our
guard for the future, when the sinner himself is beforehand in
inflicting punishment of his own accord, the effect is, that he no
longer stands in need of such an admonition from God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p41"></span>But it is asked, whether the Corinthians
had an eye to Paul, or to God, in this *revenge,* as well as in the
*zeal,* and *desire,* and the rest.  <span
id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651) I answer, that all these things are,
under all *circumstances,* attendant upon repentance, but there is a
difference in the case of an individual sinning *secretly* before God,
or openly before the world. If a person’s sin is secret, it is enough if
he has this disposition in the sight of God; on the other hand, where
the sin is open, there is required besides an open manifestation of
repentance. Thus the Corinthians, who had sinned openly and to the great
offense of the good, required to give evidence of their repentance by
these tokens.

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 7:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span
id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>**11.** In all things ye have approved
yourselves to be clear in this matter.

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span>**11.** Modis omnibus comprobastis vos
puros esse in negotio.

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span>**12.** Wherefore, though I wrote unto you,
*I did it* not for his cause that had done the wrong, nor for his cause
that suffered wrong, but that our care for you in the sight of God might
appear unto you.

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span>**12.** Itaque si scripsi vobis, non eius
causa qui laeserat, neque eius causa qui laesus fuerat, scripsi: sed ut
palam fieret stadium vestrum pro nobis apud vos, (*vel, stadium nostrum
in nobis erga vos*,) in conspectu Dei.

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span>**13.** Therefore we were comforted in your
comfort: yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus,
because his spirit was refreshed by you all.

<span id="xiii.iv-p7"></span>**13.** Idcirco consolatione vestri: quin
uberius etiam gavisi sumus ob gaudium Titi, quod refocillatus sit eius
spiritus ab omnibus vobis.

<span id="xiii.iv-p8"></span>**14.** For if I have boasted any thing to
him of you, I am not ashamed; but as we spake all things to you in
truth, even so our boasting, which *I made* before Titus, is found a
truth.

<span id="xiii.iv-p9"></span>**14.** Quodsi quid apud illum de vobis
gloriatus sum, non fuerim pudefactus: sed ut omnia in veritate loquuti
sumus vobis, ita et gloriatio nostra apud Titum veritas facta est.

<span id="xiii.iv-p10"></span>**15.** And his inward affection is more
abundant toward you, whilst he remembereth the obedience of you all, how
with fear and trembling ye received him.

<span id="xiii.iv-p11"></span>**15.** Et viscera eius maiorem in modum
erga vos affecta sunt: dum memoria repetit vestram omnium obedientiam,
quemadmodum cum timore et tremore exceperitis eam.

<span id="xiii.iv-p12"></span>**16.** I rejoice therefore that I have
confidence in you in all *things*

<span id="xiii.iv-p13"></span>**16.** Gaudeo, quod vobis in omnibus
confidam.

<span id="xiii.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iv-p15"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p16"></span> **11.** *Ye have approved yourselves to
be clear*. The Old Interpreter reads, “Ye have shown yourselves.”
Erasmus renders it, “Ye have commended yourselves.” I have preferred a
third rendering, which appeared to me to suit better — that the
Corinthians showed by clear evidences, that they were in no degree
participants in the crime, with which they had appeared, from their
connivance, to have had some connection. What those evidences were, we
have already seen. At the same time, Paul does not altogether clear
them, but palliates their offense. For the undue forbearance, which they
had exercised, was not altogether free from blame. He acquits them,
however, from the charge of concurrence.  <span
id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652) We must farther observe, that he does
not acquit all of them without exception, but merely the body of the
Church. For it may readily be believed, that some were concerned in it,
and countenanced it; but, while all of them together were involved in
disgrace, it afterwards appeared that only a few were in fault.

<span id="xiii.iv-p18"></span>**12.** *Wherefore if I wrote*. He acts as
persons are wont to do, that are desirous of a reconciliation. He wishes
all past things to be buried, he does not any more reproach them, he
does not reprove them for any thing, he does not expostulate as to any
thing; in fine, he forgets every thing, inasmuch as he was satisfied
with their simply repenting. And, certainly, this is the right way — not
to press offenders farther, when they have been brought to repentance.
For if we still

<span id="xiii.iv-p19"></span>call their sins to remembrance, (<span
id="xiii.iv-p19.1"></span>[1Ki
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#018)<span
id="xiii.iv-p19.1"></span>,)

<span id="xiii.iv-p20"></span>it is certain that we are actuated by
malevolence, rather than by pious affection, or a desire for their
welfare. These things, however, are said by Paul by way of concession,
for, unquestionably, he had followed up the offense that he had taken,
and had felt desirous that the author of this offense should be
chastised, but now he puts his foot upon what had been in some degree
offensive. “I am now desirous, that whatever I have written may be
looked upon as having been written with no other view, than that you
might perceive your affection towards me. As to all other things, let us
now leave them as they are.” Others explain it in this way, — that he
had not regard to one individual in particular, but consulted the common
advantage of all. The former interpretation, however, is the more
natural one.

<span id="xiii.iv-p21"></span>*Your concern for us.* As this reading
occurs very generally in the Greek versions, I have not ventured to go
so far as to erase it, though at the same time in one ancient manuscript
the reading is <span id="xiii.iv-p21.1"></span>ἡμων, (*of us,*)  <span
id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653) and it appears from Chrysostom s
Commentaries, that the Latin rendering  <span
id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654) was more commonly received in his
times even among the Greeks — *that our concern for you might become
manifest to you,* that is, that it might be manifest to the Corinthians,
how much concerned Paul was in regard to them. The other rendering,
however, in which the greater part of the Greek manuscripts concur, is,
notwithstanding, a probable one. For Paul congratulates the Corinthians
on their having learned at length, through means of this test, how they
stood affected towards him. “You were not yourselves aware of the
attachment that you felt towards me, until you had trial of it in this
matter.” Others explain it as referring to the particular disposition of
an individual, in this way: “That it might be manifest among you, how
much respect each of you entertained for me, and that, through the
occurrence of this opportunity, each of you might discover what had
previously been concealed in his heart.” As this is not of great moment,
my readers are at liberty, so far as I am concerned, to make choice of
either; but, as he adds at the same time, *in the sight of God,* I
rather think that he meant this — that each of them, having made a
thorough search, as if he had come into the presence of God,  <span
id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655) had come to know himself better than
before.

<span id="xiii.iv-p25"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p26"></span>**13.** *We received consolation.* Paul
was wholly intent upon persuading the Corinthians, that nothing was more
eagerly desired by him than their advantage. Hence he says, that he had
shared with them in their consolation. Now their consolation had been
this — that, acknowledging their fault, they did not merely take the
reproof in good part, but had received it joyfully. For the bitterness
of a reproof is easily sweetened, so soon as we begin to taste the
profitableness of it to us.

<span id="xiii.iv-p27"></span>What he adds — that he *rejoiced more
abundantly on account of the consolation of Titus,* is by way of
congratulation. Titus had been overjoyed in finding them more obedient
and compliant than could have been expected — nay more, in his finding a
sudden change for the better. Hence we may infer, that Paul’s gentleness
was anything but flattery, inasmuch as he rejoiced in their joy, so as
to be, at the same time, chiefly taken up with their repentance.

<span id="xiii.iv-p28"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p29"></span>**14.** *But if I have boasted any thing
to him.* He shows indirectly, how friendly a disposition he had always
exercised towards the Corinthians, and with what sincerity and kindness
he had judged of them; for at the very time that they seemed to be
unworthy of commendation, he still promised much that was honorable on
their behalf. Here truly we have a signal evidence of a rightly
constituted and candid mind, — reproving to their face those that you
love, and yet hoping well, and giving others good hopes respecting them.
Such sincerity ought to have induced them not to take amiss any thing
that proceeded from him. In the mean time, he takes this opportunity of
setting before them again, in passing, his fidelity in all other
matters. “You have hitherto had opportunity of knowing my candor, so
that I have shown myself to be truthful, and not by any means fickle. I
rejoice, therefore, that I have now also been found truthful, when
boasting of you before others.”

<span id="xiii.iv-p30"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p31"></span>**15.** *His bowels more abundantly.* As
the *bowels* are the seat of the affections, the term is on that account
employed to denote compassion, love, and every pious affection.  <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) He wished, however, to express
emphatically the idea, that while Titus had loved the Corinthians
previously, he had been, at that time, more vehemently stirred up to
love them; and that, from the innermost affections of his heart. Now, by
these words he insinuates Titus into the affections of the Corinthians,
as it is of advantage that the servants of Christ should be loved, that
they may have it in their power to do the more good. He at the same time
encourages them to go on well, that they may render themselves beloved
by all the good.

<span id="xiii.iv-p33"></span>*With fear and trembling.* By these two
words he sometimes expresses simply *respect,* (<span
id="xiii.iv-p33.1"></span>[Eph
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005)<span id="xiii.iv-p33.1"></span>,)
and this perhaps would not suit ill with this passage, though I should
have no objection to view the *trembling* as mentioned particularly to
mean, that, being conscious of having acted amiss, they were afraid to
face him. It is true that even those, that are resolute in their
iniquities, tremble at the sight of the judge, but voluntary trembling,
that proceeds from ingenuous shame, is a sign of repentance. Whichever
exposition you may choose, this passage teaches, what is a right
reception for the ministers of Christ. Assuredly, it is not sumptuous
banquets, it is not splendid apparel, it is not courteous and honorable
salutations, it is not the plaudits of the multitude, that gratify the
upright and faithful pastor. He experiences, on the other hand, an
overflowing of delight, when the doctrine of salvation is received with
reverence from his mouth, when he retains the authority that belongs to
him for the edification of the Church, when the people give themselves
up to his direction, to be regulated by his ministry under Christ’s
banners. An example of this we see here in Titus. He at length, in the
close, confirms again, what he had previously stated — that he had never
been offended to such a degree, as altogether to distrust the
Corinthians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_623"></span>[624](cc40012.htm#fr_623) <span
id="xiii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p7.1"></span>Ceste
condition est tacitement attachee a toutes les promesses;” — “This
condition is tacitly appended to all the promises.”

<span id="fn_624"></span>[625](cc40012.htm#fr_624) <span
id="xiii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p9.1"></span>Appelez
àpurete et sainctete;” — “Called to purity and holiness.”

<span id="fn_625"></span>[626](cc40012.htm#fr_625) <span
id="xiii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>Afin qu’il
n’apparoisse en nul endroit de nous ancune macule ou souillure;” — “That
there may not appear in any part of us any spot or filth.”

<span id="fn_626"></span>[627](cc40012.htm#fr_626) <span
id="xiii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p12.1"></span>*Combien*
sont impudens et deshontez;” — “How impudent they are and unabashed.”

<span id="fn_627"></span>[628](cc40012.htm#fr_627) <span
id="xiii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span> Calvin manifestly refers here, as in a
variety of other instances, to the temporizing conduct of the
*Nicodemites.* See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, pp. 286, 384. —
Ed.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[629](cc40012.htm#fr_628) <span
id="xiii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span> It is employed by Herodotus in the sense
of *perfecting* or *completing, (see Herod. 1:51,)* while in various
instances it is made use of by him to mean — discharging a religious
service — in connection with <span id="xiii.i-p15.1"></span>θρησκείας,
*(ceremonies,)* <span id="xiii.i-p15.2"></span>εὐχωλας*, (vows,)* and
<span id="xiii.i-p15.3"></span>θυσίας, *(sacrifices.)* See Herod. 2:37,
63, 4:26. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_629"></span>[630](cc40012.htm#fr_629) <span
id="xiii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p17.1"></span>Indignum
esset me surdis fabulam canere;” — “It were unseemly that I should be
like one that tells a story to the deaf.” A similar expression is made
use of by Horace, (<span id="xiii.ii-p17.2"></span>[Eph.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#000), [Eph.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#000), Eph. 200:0<span
id="xiii.ii-p17.2"></span>,) — “<span
id="xiii.ii-p17.3"></span>Scriptores autem narrare putaret asello
fabellam surdo;” — “But he would think that the writers were telling a
story to a deaf ass.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_630"></span>[631](cc40012.htm#fr_630) <span
id="xiii.ii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p18.1"></span>Que ie
perdisse mon temps en vous admonestant;” — “That I should lose my time
in admonishing you.”

<span id="fn_631"></span>[632](cc40012.htm#fr_631) <span
id="xiii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>De luy
ou de sa doctrine;” — “From him or from his doctrine.”

<span id="fn_632"></span>[633](cc40012.htm#fr_632) <span
id="xiii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p21"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p21.1"></span>Les
ministres et pasteurs;” — “Ministers and pastors.”

<span id="fn_633"></span>[634](cc40012.htm#fr_633) <span
id="xiii.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p22"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p22.1"></span>Quand on
est arrogant, et on abuse de la puissance en se desbordant et vsurpant
plus qu’il ne faut;” — “When one is presumptuous, and abuses his power
by going beyond bounds and assuming more than he ought.”

<span id="fn_634"></span>[635](cc40012.htm#fr_634) <span
id="xiii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p26.1"></span>Ceux qui
aiment vn autre, ne prenent point plaisir ale poursuyure et picquer;” —
“Those who love another take no pleasure in pursuing and stinging him.”

<span id="fn_635"></span>[636](cc40012.htm#fr_635) <span
id="xiii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p28.1"></span>Pasteurs
et ministres;” — “Pastors and ministers.”

<span id="fn_636"></span>[637](cc40012.htm#fr_636) <span
id="xiii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p31"></span> “Timothy is despatched” (by Paul) “to
Corinth, and after him Titus is sent. In the mean time, ‘a door is
opened of the Lord’ to the Apostles to preach Christ’s gospel at Troas;
but, strange to relate! he who panted so earnestly for such
opportunities, had neither heart nor tongue to improve the present. The
expected messenger from Corinth had not arrived — he had ‘no rest in his
spirit,’ and abandoning the rich harvest which invited his labors, he
wandered into Macedonia. Nor yet did he find ease: ‘For when we were
come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on
every side — without were fightings; within were fears.’ At last Titus
arrives with tidings from Corinth. The Apostle’s letter had been well
received; it had produced the intended effects; a spirit of repentance
had fallen upon the Church; they had applied themselves vigorously to
the correction of abuses; the love which they bore to their spiritual
father had revived with additional strength. ‘Now! thanks be unto God,
who always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the
savour of his knowledge by us in every place!’ ‘Great is my boldness of
speech towards you, great is my glorying of you; I am filled with
comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.’ (<span
id="xiii.ii-p31.1"></span>[2Co
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014)<span id="xiii.ii-p31.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.ii-p31.2"></span>[2Co
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004)<span id="xiii.ii-p31.2"></span>.)
What a sudden change! what a wonderful transformation! Formerly we saw
him like a soldier, wounded, weak, disabled, dispirited, fallen to the
ground; now he is lifted up, victorious, and borne on the triumphant
*car.*” — *M’Crie’s Sermons, p. 39.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_637"></span>[638](cc40012.htm#fr_637) <span
id="xiii.ii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p32"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p32.1"></span>La
mauuaise opinion ou le souspecon qu’il auoit d’eux, et dont il estoit
tourmente en son coeur;” — “The bad opinion or suspicion that he had of
them, and with which he had been tormented in his heart.”

<span id="fn_638"></span>[639](cc40012.htm#fr_638) <span
id="xiii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p35"></span> Calvin here has manifestly in his eye the
singularly emphatic word made use of by Paul in the preceding verse —
<span id="xiii.ii-p35.1"></span>ὑπερπερισσεύομαι, *I am exceeding
joyful.* “The word here used occurs nowhere else in the New Testament
except in <span id="xiii.ii-p35.2"></span>[Ro
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="xiii.ii-p35.2"></span>.
It is not found in the classic writers, and is a word which Paul
evidently compounded, (from <span id="xiii.ii-p35.3"></span>ὑπὲρ and
<span id="xiii.ii-p35.4"></span>περισσεύω,) and means to *superabound
over,* to *superabound greatly*, or *exceedingly.* It is a word which
would be used only when the heart was full, and when it would be
difficult to find words to express its conceptions. Paul’s heart was
full of joy, and he pours forth his feelings in the most fervid and
glowing language — ‘I have joy which cannot be expressed.’” — *Barnes.*
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_639"></span>[640](cc40012.htm#fr_639) <span
id="xiii.ii-p35.5"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p36"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p36.1"></span>Je n’ay
point eu de relasche ou soulagement;” — “I had no relief or
alleviation.”

<span id="fn_640"></span>[641](cc40012.htm#fr_640) <span
id="xiii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p38"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p38.1"></span>Pour les
quelles chasser et y remedier, ils n’osent pas sonner la trompette tout
haut, comme on dit:” — “For putting down which evils, and remedying
them, they dare not sound the trumpet aloud, as they say.”

<span id="fn_641"></span>[642](cc40012.htm#fr_641) <span
id="xiii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span> “<span
id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>Obstinez et endurcis;” — ”Obstinate and
obdurate.”

<span id="fn_642"></span>[643](cc40012.htm#fr_642) <span
id="xiii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p14.1"></span>Le
Docteur et Ministre;” — “The Teacher and Minister.”

<span id="fn_643"></span>[644](cc40012.htm#fr_643) <span
id="xiii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p22"></span> “<span
id="xiii.iii-p22.1"></span>Tristitia secundum Deum;” — “<span
id="xiii.iii-p22.2"></span>La tristesse qui est selon Dieu;” — “The
sorrow which is according to God.” “<span
id="xiii.iii-p22.3"></span>Κατὰ Θεὸν, *in such a way as God requires* —
*with reference to his will and glory, i.e.,* as Rosenm. explains,
‘arising from causes out of which he would have it arise, and producing
effects such as he would approve.’” — *Bloomfield.* —*.Ed.*

<span id="fn_644"></span>[645](cc40012.htm#fr_644) <span
id="xiii.iii-p22.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p23.1"></span>*Ne*
pensons pas que iamais il se convertisse au Seigneur;” — “Let us not
think that ever he will turn to the Lord.”

<span id="fn_645"></span>[646](cc40012.htm#fr_645) <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p29"></span> “<span
id="xiii.iii-p29.1"></span>Nonchalance, ou paresse, ou asseurance qui
procede de stupidite;” — “Carelessness or indolence, or confidence
arising from stupidity.”

<span id="fn_646"></span>[647](cc40012.htm#fr_646) <span
id="xiii.iii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p31"></span> Wiclif, (1380,) following the Vulgate,
reads, *defendynge.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_647"></span>[648](cc40012.htm#fr_647) <span
id="xiii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p33.1"></span>*Voire
marrissement.* Il y a proprement au Grec, Indignation ou courroux;” —
“*Yea what concern.* It is properly in the Greek, Indignation or wrath.”

<span id="fn_648"></span>[649](cc40012.htm#fr_648) <span
id="xiii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p34.1"></span>Qui
ont vn bon et sainct zele;” — “Who have a good and holy zeal.”

<span id="fn_649"></span>[650](cc40012.htm#fr_649) <span
id="xiii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p39"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p39.1"></span>En
quelque personne qu’ils soyent trouuez;” — “In any person in whom they
are found.”

<span id="fn_650"></span>[651](cc40012.htm#fr_650) <span
id="xiii.iii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p40"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p40.1"></span>La
peine qu’il leur pourroit iustement imposer;” — “The punishment which he
could justly have inflicted upon them.”

<span id="fn_651"></span>[652](cc40012.htm#fr_651) <span
id="xiii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p42"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p42.1"></span>Et
autres affections yci nominees;” — “And other dispositions here
mentioned.”

<span id="fn_652"></span>[653](cc40012.htm#fr_652) <span
id="xiii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.iv-p17.1"></span>Il les
absout quant a ce qu’on lent pouuoit obiecter qu’ils auoyent consenti a
ce mesfait;” — “He acquits them in so far as it might be alleged that
they had concurred in that crime.”

<span id="fn_653"></span>[654](cc40012.htm#fr_653) <span
id="xiii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p22"></span> “Some (as *Newcome* and *Wakefield)*
would read, from several MSS., and Versions, Fathers, and early
editions, including that of *R. Stephens* <span
id="xiii.iv-p22.1"></span>τὴν σπονδὴν ὑπερ ἡμῶν, *(your care for us)*
But though produces a *sense,* yet it is one far-fetched and jejune,
which does not arise naturally from the subject, and is not so agreeable
to the context. The *external* authority for the reading in question is
but slender; the Ed. Princ., and the great bulk of the MSS., having
<span id="xiii.iv-p22.2"></span>ἡμῶν ὑπερ ὑμῶν, — *our* (care) for
*you.*” — *Bloomfield.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_654"></span>[655](cc40012.htm#fr_654) <span
id="xiii.iv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p23"></span> The rendering of the Vulgate is as
follows: “<span id="xiii.iv-p23.1"></span>Solicitudinem nostrum quam
habemus pro vobis;” — “Our anxiety which we have for you.” Wiclif,
(1380,) following, as usual, the Vulgate, renders it thus: “Our
busynesse which we haw for you bifor God.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_655"></span>[656](cc40012.htm#fr_655) <span
id="xiii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.iv-p24.1"></span>Ne plus
ne moins que s’il eust este deuant Dieu;” — “Neither more nor less than
if he had been in the presence of God.”

<span id="fn_656"></span>[657](cc40012.htm#fr_656) <span
id="xiii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p32"></span> “The word <span
id="xiii.iv-p32.1"></span>σπλάγχνα,” as is observed by *Barnes* in his
Notes on <span id="xiii.iv-p32.2"></span>[2Co
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#012)<span id="xiii.iv-p32.2"></span>,
“commonly means in the Bible the tender affections. The Greek word
properly denotes the *upper* viscera — the heart, the lungs, the liver.
It is applied by Greek writers to denote those parts of victims which
were eaten during or after the sacrifice. Hence it is applied to the
*heart,* as the seat of the emotions and passions; and *especially* the
tender affections — compassion, pity, love, etc. Our word *bowels* is
applied usually to the *lower* viscera, and by no means expresses the
idea of the word which is used in *Greek.*” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc40013)
