[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40010)  [Next](cc40012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** We then, *as* workers together *with
him*, beseech *you* also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Nos vero adiuvantes (*vel,
collaborantes*)  <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) etiam
obsecramus, ne frustra gratiam Dei receperitis.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** (For he saith, I have heard thee in a
time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succoured thee:
behold, now *is* the accepted time; behold, now *is* the day of
salvation.)

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**2.** Dicit enim (<span
id="xii.i-p6.1"></span>[Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span
id="xii.i-p6.1"></span>) Tempore accepto exaudivi te, et in die salutis
auxiliatus sum tibi: ecce, nunc tempus acceptum: ecce, nunc dies
salutis.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Giving no offence in any thing, that
the ministry be not blamed:

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Nullum dantes  <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) ulla in re offensionem, ut ne
vituperetur ministerium:

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**4.** But in all *things* approving
ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses,

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**4.** Sed in omnibus commendantes nos
 <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) tanquam Dei mœrore, in
patientia multa, in afflictionibus, in necessitatibus, in angustiis,

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**5.** In stripes, in imprisonments, in
tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings;

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**5.** In plagis, in carceribus, in
seditionibus, in laboribus, in vigiliis, in ieiuniis;

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**6.** By pureness, by knowledge, by
longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned,

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**6.** In sinceritate, in scientia, in
tolerantia, in mansuetudine, in Spiritu Sancto, in caritate non ficta,

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**7.** By the word of truth, by the power of
God, by the armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**7.** In sermone veritatis, in potentia
Dei, per arma iustitiæ dextra et sinistra:

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>**8.** By honour and dishonour, by evil
report and good report: as deceivers, and *yet* true;

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**8.** Per gloriam et ignominiam, per
infamiam, et bonam famam: tanquam impostores, tamen veraces:

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>**9.** As unknown, and *yet* well known; as
dying, and, behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed;

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**9.** Tanquam ignoti, tamen celebres:
tanquam morientes, et ecce, vivimus; tanquam castigati, tamen morte non
affecti:

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>**10.** As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing;
as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and *yet* possessing
all things.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**10.** Tanquam moerore affecti, semper
tamen gaudentes: tanquam inopes, multos tamen ditantes: tanquam nihil
habentes, et omnia possidentes.

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span><span id="xii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>**1.** *Assisting.* He has repeated the
instructions of embassy with which the ministers of the gospel have been
furnished by God. After they have faithfully communicated these
instructions, they must also use their endeavor, that they may be
carried into effect,  <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) in order
that their labor may not be in vain. They must, I say, add continual
exhortation’s,  <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) that their
embassy may be efficacious. This is what he means by <span
id="xii.i-p29.2"></span>συνεργοῦντες, (*fellow-workers,*) that is,
devoted to the advancement of the work; for it is not enough to *teach,*
if you do not also *urge*. In this way, the particle <span
id="xii.i-p29.3"></span>σύν would have a relation to God, or to the
embassy, which he assigns to his servants. For the doctrine of the
gospel is helped by exhortations, so as not to be without effect, and
ministers connect their endeavors with God’s commission;  <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) as it is the part of an ambassador to
enforce by arguments, what he brings forward in the name of his prince.

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>The particle <span
id="xii.i-p31.1"></span>σύν may also be taken as referring to the
endeavors of ministers in common; for if they do the Lord’s work in good
earnest, they must mutually lend a helping hand to each other, so as to
give assistance to each other. I rather prefer, however, the former
exposition. Chrysostom interprets it as referring to the hearers, with
whom ministers are *fellow-workers,* when they rouse them up from
slothfulness and indolence.

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span>Ministers are here taught, that it is not
enough simply to advance doctrine. They must also labor that it may be
received by the hearers, and that not once merely, but continually. For
as they are messengers between God and men, the *first* duty devolving
upon them is, to make offer *of the grace of God,*  <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) and the *second* is, to strive with
all their might, that it may not be offered in vain.

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span><span id="xii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>**2.** *For he saith, In an acceptable
time.* He quotes a prediction of Isaiah, exceedingly appropriate to the
exhortation of which he speaks. It is without doubt of the kingdom of
Christ that he there speaks,  <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) as
is manifest from the context. The Father, then, appointing his Son a
leader, for the purpose of gathering together a Church, addresses him in
these words:

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>“I have heard thee in an acceptable time.”
(<span id="xii.i-p37.1"></span>[Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span>We know, however, what a degree of
correspondence  <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) there is between
the Head and the members. For Christ was heard in our name, as the
salvation of all of us is entrusted into his hand, and nothing else has
he taken under his charge. Hence we are all admonished in the person of
Christ — not to slight the opportunity that is afforded for obtaining
salvation. While the rendering of the Greek interpreter is, <span
id="xii.i-p39.2"></span>εὐπρόσδεκτον, (*acceptable,*)  <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) the word made use of by the Prophet
is, <span id="xii.i-p40.3"></span>רצון, (*ratson,*) that is,
benevolence, or free favour.  <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578)

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span>The quotation must be applied to the subject
in hand in this way: “As God specifies a particular time for the
exhibition of his grace, it follows that all times are not suitable for
that. As a particular *day of salvation* is named, it follows that a
free offer of salvation is not made every day.” Now this altogether
depends on the providence of God, for the *acceptable time* is no other
than what is called in <span id="xii.i-p42.1"></span>[Ga
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p42.1"></span>,
*the fullness of the time*  <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) The
order of arrangement also must be observed. First, he makes mention of a
*time of benevolence,* and then afterwards of a *day of salvation* By
this it is intimated, that salvation flows to us from the mercy of God
exclusively, as from a fountainhead. Hence we must not seek the cause in
ourselves, as if we by means of our own works moved God to assign to us
his favor, for whence comes the *day of salvation?* It is because it is
the *acceptable time,* that is, the time which God has in his free favor
appointed. In the mean time, we must keep in view what Paul designs to
teach — that there is need of prompt expedition, that we may not allow
the opportunity to pass unimproved, inasmuch as it displeases God, that
the grace that he offers to us should be received by us with coolness
and indifference.

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span>*Behold now is the time* The Prophet had
spoken of the time, when Christ was to be manifested in the flesh for
the redemption of men. Paul transfers the prophecy to the time when
Christ is revealed by the continued preaching of the gospel, and it is
with good reason that he does so, for as *salvation* was once sent to
the whole world, when Christ appeared, so now it is sent to us every
day, when we are made partakers of the gospel. Here we have a beautiful
passage, and affording no ordinary consolation, because, while the
gospel is preached to us, we know assuredly that the way is opened up
for us into the kingdom of God, and that there is a signal of divine
benevolence raised aloft, to invite us to receive *salvation,* for the
opportunity of obtaining it must be judged of by the call. Unless,
however, we embrace the opportunity, we must fear the threatening that
Paul brings forward — that, in a short time, the door will be shut
against all that have not entered in, while opportunity was afforded.
For this retribution always follows contempt of the word.

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span><span id="xii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span>**3.** *Giving no offense* We have already
on several occasions remarked, that Paul sometimes commends the ministry
of the gospel generally, and at other times his own integrity.  <span
id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) In the present instance, then, he
speaks of himself, and sets before us in his own person a living picture
of a good and faithful apostle, that the Corinthians may be led to see
how unfair they were in their judgment, in preferring before him empty
blusterers.  <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) For as they
assigned the praise to mere pretences,  <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) they held in the highest esteem
persons that were effeminate and devoid of zeal, while, on the other
hand, as to the best ministers, they cherished no views but such as were
mean and abject. Nor is there any reason to doubt, that those very
things that Paul makes mention of to his own commendation, had been
brought forward by them in part as a ground of contempt; and they were
so much the more deserving of reproof, inasmuch as they converted into
matter of reproach, what was ground of just praise.

<span id="xii.i-p50"></span>Paul, therefore, treats here of *three*
things: In the *first* place, he shows what are the excellences, on the
ground of which preachers of the gospel ought to be esteemed;
*secondly,* he shows that he is himself endowed with those excellences;
*thirdly,* he admonishes the Corinthians not to acknowledge as Christ’s
servants those who conduct themselves otherwise than he prescribes here
by his example. His design is, that he may procure authority for himself
and those that were like him, with a view to the glory of God and the
good of the Church, or may restore it where it has fallen into decay;
and *secondly,* that he may call back the Corinthians from an
unreasonable attachment to the false apostles, which was a hinderance in
the way of their making so much proficiency in the gospel as was
necessary. Ministers give occasion of stumbling, when by their own
misconduct they hinder the progress of the gospel on the part of their
hearers. *That* Paul says he does not do; for he declares that he
carefully takes heed not to stain his apostleship by any spot of
disgrace.

<span id="xii.i-p51"></span>For this is the artifice of Satan — to seek
some misconduct on the part of ministers, that may tend to the dishonor
of the gospel. For when he has been successful in bringing the ministry
into contempt, all hope of profit is at an end. Hence the man who would
usefully serve Christ, must strive with his whole might to maintain the
credit of his ministry. The method is — to take care that he be
deserving of honor, for nothing is more ridiculous than striving to
maintain your reputation before others, while you call forth upon
yourself reproach by a wicked and base life. That man, therefore, will
alone be honorable, who will allow himself in nothing that is unworthy
of a minister of Christ.

<span id="xii.i-p52"></span><span id="xii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p53"></span>**4.** *In much patience.* The whole of the
enumeration that follows is intended to show, that all the tests by
which the Lord is accustomed to try his servants were to be found in
Paul, and that there was no kind of test to which he had not been
subjected, in order that the faithfulness of his ministry might be more
fully established.  <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) Among other
things that he enumerates, there are some that are under all
circumstances required for all the servants of Christ. Of this nature
are *labors, sincerity, knowledge, watchings, gentleness, love, the word
of truth, the Spirit, the power of God, the armor of righteousness.*
There are other things that are not necessary in all cases; for in order
that any one may be a servant of Christ, it is not absolutely necessary,
that he be put to the test by means of *stripes* and *imprisonments*
Hence these things will in some cases be wanting in the experience of
the best. It becomes all, however, to be of such a disposition as to
present themselves to be tried, as Paul was, with *stripes* and
*imprisonments,* if the Lord shall see meet.

<span id="xii.i-p55"></span>*Patience* is the regulation of the mind in
adversity, which is an excellence that ought invariably to distinguish a
good minister.  <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) *Afflictions*
include more than *necessities;* for by the term *necessity* here I
understand *poverty.* Now this is common to many ministers, there being
few of them that are not in poor circumstances; but at the same time not
to all. For why should a moderate amount of riches prevent a man from
being reckoned a servant of Christ, who, in other respects, is pious, is
of upright mind and honorable deportment, and is distinguished by other
excellences. As the man that is poor is not on that account to be
straightway accounted a good minister, so the man that is rich is not on
that account to be rejected. Nay more, Paul in another passage glories
not less in his *knowing how to abound,* than in *knowing how to be in
want.* (<span id="xii.i-p56.4"></span>[Php
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)<span id="xii.i-p56.4"></span>.)
Hence we must observe the distinction that I have mentioned, between
*occasional* and *invariable* grounds of commendation.  <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585)

<span id="xii.i-p58"></span><span id="xii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p59"></span>**5.** *In tumults* In proportion to the
calmness and gentleness of Paul’s disposition was there the greater
excellence displayed in his standing undaunted in the face of *tumults;*
and he takes praise to himself on this account — that while he regarded
tumults with abhorrence, he nevertheless encountered them with bravery.
 <span id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) Nor does the praise simply
consist in his being unmoved by *tumults,* (this being commonly found
among all riotous persons,  <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) )
but in his being thrown into no alarm by tumults that had been stirred
up through the fault of others. And, unquestionably, two things are
required on the part of ministers of the Gospel — that they should
endeavor to the utmost of their power to maintain peace, and yet on the
other hand go forward, undaunted, through the midst of commotions, so as
not to turn aside from the right course, though heaven and earth should
be mingled.  <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) Chrysostom,
however, prefers to understand <span
id="xii.i-p62.1"></span>ἀκαταστασίαις to mean — frequent expulsions,
 <span id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) inasmuch as there afforded him
a place of rest.  <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) *In fastings*
He does not mean — hunger arising from destitution, but a voluntary
exercise of abstinence.

<span id="xii.i-p65"></span><span id="xii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p66"></span>*Knowledge* may be taken in two senses —
either as meaning doctrine itself, or skill in acting properly and
*knowingly.* The latter appears to me the more likely, as he immediately
adds — *the word of truth* The *Spirit* is taken by *metonymy,* to
denote spiritual graces. Frivolous, however, is the cavil of Chrysostom,
who infers from this, that the other excellences are peculiar to the
Apostle, because he makes mention of the *Spirit* separately, as if
*kindness, knowledge, pureness, armor of righteousness,* were from any
other source, than from the Holy Spirit. He makes mention, however, of
the Spirit separately, as a general term in the midst of particular
instances.  <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) The *power of God*
showed itself in many things — in magnanimity, in efficacy in the
maintaining of the truth, in the propagation of the Gospel, in victory
over enemies, and the like.

<span id="xii.i-p68"></span><span id="xii.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p69"></span>**7.** *By the armor of righteousness* By
*righteousness* you must understand — rectitude of conscience, and
holiness of life. He employs the metaphor of *armor,* because all that
serve God require to fight, inasmuch as the devil is always on the
alert, to molest them. Now they must be completely armed, because, if he
does not succeed in one onset, he thereupon makes a new attempt, and
attacks them at one time from before, at another from behind — now on
this side, and then on that.  <span id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592)

<span id="xii.i-p71"></span><span id="xii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p72"></span>**8.** *By honor and dishonor* This is no
slight test for subjecting a man to trial, for to a man of a noble
spirit nothing is more unpleasant, than to incur disgrace. Hence we may
observe in all histories, that there have been few men of heroism that
have not fallen back, on being irritated by insults.  <span
id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) Hence it is indicative of a mind well
established in virtue, not to be moved away from one’s course by any
disgrace that may be incurred — a rare virtue, but one without which you
cannot show that you are a servant of God. We must, it is true, have a
regard to good character, but it must be only in so far as the
edification of our brethren requires it, and in such a way as not to be
dependent on reports  <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) — nay
more, so as to maintain in the same even course in *honor* and in
*dishonor.* For God allows us to be tried even by the slander of wicked
men, with the view of trying us,  <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) whether we act uprightly from
disinterested motives;  <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) for if
one is drawn aside from duty by the ingratitude of men, that man shows
that he had not his eye directed to God alone. As then we see that Paul
was exposed to infamy and insults, and yet did not on that account stop
short, but held forward with undaunted courage, and broke through every
impediment so as to reach the goal,  <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) let us not give way, if the same thing
should befall us.

<span id="xii.i-p78"></span>*As deceivers* Here he relates, not simply
in what estimation he was held by the wicked and those that were
*without,* (<span id="xii.i-p78.1"></span>[1Co
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span id="xii.i-p78.1"></span>,)
but also what views were entertained of him by those that were *within.*
Now let every one consider with himself, how unseemly was the
ingratitude of the Corinthians, and how great was his magnanimity in
struggling forward, in spite of such formidable obstacles. By indirect
representations, however, he sharply reproves their perverse judgment,
when he says that he *lives* and is *joyful,* while they despised him as
one that was dead and overwhelmed with grief. He reproaches them, also,
with ingratitude, when he says, that he *made many rich,* while he was
contemned on account of his poverty. For they were of the number of
those whom he enriched by his wealth: nay more, all of them to a man
were under obligations to him on many accounts. Thus he said previously,
by way of irony, that he was *unknown,* while at the same time the fruit
of his labor was everywhere known and celebrated. But how cruel to
despise the poverty of the man who supplies you  <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) from his abundance! He means
*spiritual* riches, which ought to be much more esteemed than *earthly.*

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
6:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**11.** *O ye* Corinthians, our mouth is
open unto you, our heart is enlarged.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**11.** Os nostrum apertum est ad vos, O
Corinthii, cor nostrum dilatatum est.

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span>**12.** Ye are not straitened in us, but ye
are straitened in your own bowels.

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**12.** Non estis angusti in nobis, sed
angusti estis in visceribus vestris.  <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599)

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>**13.** Now, for a recompence in the same,
(I speak as unto *my* children,) be ye also enlarged.  <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600)

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>**13.** Eandem vero remunerationem, nem, ut
a filiis, exigo: dilatamini et vos.

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span>**14.** Be ye not unequally yoked together
with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness?

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>**14.** Ne ducatis iugum cum infidelibus:
quæ enim participatio iustitæ cum iniquitate: quæ communicatio luci cum
tenebris?

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>**15.** And what concord hath Christ with
Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>**15.** Quis consensus Christo cum Belial:
aut quo portio fideli cum infideli?

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span>**16.** And what agreement hath the temple
of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in *them*; and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people.

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>**16.** Quautem conventio templo Dei cum
idolis? vos enim estis templum Dei viventis: quemadmodum dicit Deus
(<span id="xii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Le
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012)<span id="xii.ii-p15.1"></span>,)
Habitabo in ipsis, et in medio eorum ambulabo: et ero Deus illorum, et
erunt mihi populus.

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span>**17.** Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean *thing*;
and I will receive you,

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span>**17.** Quamobrem exite de medio eorum et
separamini, dicit Dominus (<span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)<span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>,)
et immundum ne tetigeritis:

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span>**18.** And will be a Father unto you, and
ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span>**18.** Et ego suscipiam vos, et ero vobis
in patrem, et eritis mihi in filios et filias, dicit Dominus omnipotens,
(<span id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>[Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)<span id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span><span id="xii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span>**11** *Our mouth is opened.* As the
*opening of the mouth* is a sign of boldness,  <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) if you are inclined to connect this
with what goes before, the meaning will be this, — “I have ample ground
of glorying, and an upright conscience *opens my mouth.* Your
entertaining unfavorable views of us, is not owing to any fault on our
part, but arises from your being unfair judges. For you ought to have
entertained more favorable views of my ministry, which God has rendered
honorable to you in so many ways.” I explain it, however, otherwise; for
he says that the reason why his *mouth was opened* was, that his *heart
was enlarged* Now what is meant by *enlargement of heart?* Undoubtedly
it means the cheerfulness that springs from benevolence.  <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) It is quite a common figure, to speak
of a *narrow and contracted heart* as denoting either *grief,* or
*disgust,* while, on the other hand, *an enlarged heart* is employed to
denote dispositions of an opposite kind. Hence Paul here says nothing
but what we every day experience, for when we have to do with friends,
our *heart is enlarged,* all our feelings are laid open, there is
nothing there that is hid, nothing shut, — nay more, the whole mind
leaps and exults to unfold itself openly to view.  <span
id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) Hence it is, that the tongue, also, is
free and unfettered, does not faulter, does not with difficulty draw up
from the bottom of the throat broken syllables, as usually happens when
the mind is influenced by a less joyful affection.

<span id="xii.ii-p26"></span><span id="xii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p27"></span>**12.** *Ye are not straitened in us* That
is, “It is owing to your own fault that you are not able to share in
this feeling of cheerfulness, which I entertain towards you. My *mouth
is opened,* so that I deal familiarly with you, my very heart would
willingly pour itself forth,  <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604)
but you shut up your bowels.” He means to say, that it is owing to their
corrupt judgment, that the things that he utters are not relished by
them.

<span id="xii.ii-p29"></span><span id="xii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p30"></span>**13.** *Now the same requital* He softens
his reproof by addressing them kindly as his sons, and also by this
exhortation, by which he intimates that he still entertains good hopes
of them. By the *same requital* he means — mutual duty, for there is a
mutual return of duty between a father and his sons. For as it is the
duty of parents to nourish their children, to instruct them, to direct
them by their counsel, and to defend them, so it is the dictate of
equity, that children should *requite their parents.* (<span
id="xii.ii-p30.1"></span>[1Ti 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004)<span
id="xii.ii-p30.1"></span>.) In fine, he means what the Greeks call <span
id="xii.ii-p30.2"></span>ἀντιπελαργίαν — *affection exercised in
return.*  <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) “I cherish,” says he,
“towards you paternal affection: show yourselves then to be my sons by
affection and respect in return.” At the same time there is a particular
circumstance that must be noticed, That the Corinthians, having found so
indulgent a father, may also show gentleness in their turn, and may
requite his kind condescension by their docility, he exhorts them with
this view to be *enlarged in their own bowels.* The Old Interpreter, not
having caught Paul’s meaning, has added the participle *having,* and has
thus expressed his own view rather than Paul’s. In our exposition, on
the other hand, (which is Chrysostom’s, also,) there is nothing forced.
 <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606)

<span id="xii.ii-p33"></span><span id="xii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p34"></span>**14.** *Be not yoked* As if regaining his
authority, he now reproves them more freely, because they associated
with unbelievers, as partakers with them in outward idolatry. For he has
exhorted them to show themselves docile to him as to a father: he now,
in accordance with the rights that belong to him,  <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) reproves the fault into which they had
fallen. Now we mentioned in the former epistle  <span
id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) what this fault was; for, as they
imagined that there was nothing that was unlawful for them in outward
things, they defiled themselves with wicked superstitions without any
reserve. For in frequenting the banquets of unbelievers, they
participated along with them in profane and impure rites, and while they
sinned grievously, they nevertheless thought themselves innocent. On
this account Paul inveighs here against outward idolatry, and exhorts
Christians to stand aloof from it, and have no connection with it. He
begins, however, with a general statement, with the view of coming down
from that to a particular instance, for to be *yoked with unbelievers*
means nothing less than to

<span id="xii.ii-p37"></span>have fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness,  
(<span id="xii.ii-p37.2"></span>[Eph
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)<span id="xii.ii-p37.2"></span>,)

<span id="xii.ii-p38"></span>and to hold out the hand to them  <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) in token of agreement.

<span id="xii.ii-p40"></span>Many are of opinion that he speaks of
marriage, but the context clearly shows that they are mistaken. The word
that Paul makes use of means — to be connected together in drawing the
same yoke. It is a metaphor taken from oxen or horses, which require to
walk at the same pace, and to act together in the same work, when
fastened under one yoke.  <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) When,
therefore, he prohibits us from having partnership with unbelievers in
drawing the same yoke, he means simply this, that we should have no
fellowship with them in their pollutions. For *one* sun shines upon us,
we eat of the same bread, we breathe the same air, and we cannot
altogether refrain from intercourse with them; but Paul speaks of the
yoke of impiety, that is, of participation in works, in which Christians
cannot lawfully have fellowship. On this principle marriage will also be
prohibited, inasmuch as it is a snare, by which both men and women are
entangled into an agreement with impiety; but what I mean is simply
this, that Paul’s doctrine is of too general a nature to be restricted
to marriage exclusively, for he is discoursing here as to the shunning
of idolatry, on which account, also, we are prohibited from contracting
marriages with the wicked.

<span id="xii.ii-p42"></span>*For what fellowship* He confirms his
exhortation on the ground of its being an absurd, and, as it were,
monstrous connecting together of things in themselves much at variance;
for these things can no more coalesce than fire and water. In short it
comes to this, that unless they would have everything thrown into
confusion, they must refrain from the pollutions of the wicked. Hence,
too, we infer, that even those that do not in their hearts approve of
superstitions are, nevertheless, polluted by dissimulation if they do
not openly and ingenuously stand aloof from them.

<span id="xii.ii-p43"></span><span id="xii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p44"></span>**15.** *What concord has Christ with
Belial?* As to the etymology of the word *Belial,* even the Hebrews
themselves are not agreed  <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) The
meaning, however, is not doubtful.  <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) For Moses takes a word or thought of
*Belial*  <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) to mean a wicked and
base thought,  <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) and in various
instances  <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) those who are wicked
and abandoned to iniquity, are called *men,* or *sons of Belial.* (<span
id="xii.ii-p49.2"></span>[De
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013)<span id="xii.ii-p49.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.ii-p49.3"></span>[Jud
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#022)<span id="xii.ii-p49.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.ii-p49.4"></span>[1Sa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#012)<span id="xii.ii-p49.4"></span>.)
Hence it is, that Paul has employed the word here to mean the devil, the
head of all wicked persons. For from what holds good as to the two
heads, he comes down without delay to the members: “As there is an
irreconcilable variance between Christ and Satan, so we also must keep
aloof from partnership with the wicked.” When, however, Paul says that a
Christian has no participation with an unbeliever, he does not mean as
to food, clothing, estates, the sun, the air, as I have mentioned above,
but as to those things that are peculiar to unbelievers, from which the
Lord has separated us.

<span id="xii.ii-p50"></span><span id="xii.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p51"></span>**16.** *What agreement hath the temple of
God with idols?* Hitherto he has in general terms prohibited believers
from associating with the wicked. He now lets them know what was the
chief reason, why he had prohibited them from such an association —
because they had ceased to reckon the profession of idolatry to be a
sin. He had censured that liberty, and had exposed it at great length in
the former Epistle. It is probable, however, that all had not yet been
gained over, so as to receive the counsel which he had given. Hence it
was that he complained of their being *straitened in their own bowels* —
the only thing that hindered their proficiency.  <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) He does not, however, resume that
subject anew, but contents himself with a short admonition, as we are
accustomed to do, when we treat of things that are well known. At the
same time his brevity does not prevent his giving sharp cuts. For how
much emphasis there is in that single word, where he teaches that there
is no agreement between the *temple of God* and *idols!* “It is a
sacrilegious profanation,  <span id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) when
an *idol* or any *idolatrous* service is introduced into the *temple of
God* Now we are the true *temples of God.* Hence it is sacrilege to
defile ourselves with any contamination of idols. This one
consideration, I say, should be to you as good as a thousand. If you are
a Christian, *what have you to do with idols,* (<span
id="xii.ii-p53.2"></span>[Ho 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008)<span
id="xii.ii-p53.2"></span>,) for you are the *temple of God?”* Paul,
however, as I have already in part noticed, contends rather by way of
exhortation than of doctrine, inasmuch as it would have been superfluous
to be still treating of it, as if it were a thing doubtful or obscure.

<span id="xii.ii-p54"></span>*As God saith, I will walk.* He proves that
we are the *temples of God* from this, that God of old promised to the
people of Israel that he would dwell in the midst of them. In the first
place, God cannot dwell *among* us, without dwelling in each one of us,
for he promises this as a singular privilege — *I will dwell in the
midst of you* Nor does this *dwelling* or presence consist merely in
earthly blessings, but must be understood chiefly of spiritual grace.
Hence it does not mean simply that God is near us, as though he were in
the air, flying round about us, but it means rather that he has his
abode in our hearts. If, then, any one objects, that the particle *in*
simply means *among,* I grant it; but I affirm that, from the
circumstance that God promises that he will dwell *among* us, we may
infer that he also remains *in* us.  <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) And such was the type of the ark, of
which mention is made by Moses in that passage, from which Paul appears
to have borrowed this quotation. (<span id="xii.ii-p55.2"></span>[Le
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012)<span id="xii.ii-p55.2"></span>.)
If, however, any one thinks that Paul had rather in his eye <span
id="xii.ii-p55.3"></span>[Eze
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#027)<span id="xii.ii-p55.3"></span>,
the argument will be the same. For the Prophet, when describing the
restoration of the Church, mentions as the chief good, the presence of
God, which he had himself in the beginning promised by Moses. Now what
was prefigured by the ark, was manifested to us more fully in Christ,
when he became to us Immanuel  <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619)
(<span id="xii.ii-p56.2"></span>[Mt
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="xii.ii-p56.2"></span>.)
On this account, I am of opinion that it is Ezekiel, rather than Moses,
that is here quoted, because Ezekiel alludes at the same time to the
type of the ark, and declares that it will have its fulfillment under
the reign of Christ. Now the Apostle takes it for granted, that God
dwells nowhere but in a sacred place. If we say of a man, “he dwells
here,” that will not make the place a *temple;* but as to God there is
this peculiarity, that whatever place he honors with his presence, he at
the same time sanctifies.

<span id="xii.ii-p57"></span><span id="xii.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p58"></span>**17.** *Wherefore come out from the midst
of them.* This exhortation is taken from <span
id="xii.ii-p58.2"></span>[Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)<span id="xii.ii-p58.2"></span>,
where the Prophet, when foretelling the deliverance, at length addresses
the priests in these terms. For he makes use of a circumlocution to
describe the priests, when he says, *Ye that bear the vessels of the
Lord,* inasmuch as they had the charge of the *vessels,* by means of
which the sacrifices, and other parts of divine worship, were performed.
There can be no doubt that his design is to admonish them, that, while
eagerly desirous to come forth,  <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620)
they should be on their guard against any contamination from the many
pollutions with which the country  <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) was overrun. Now this is no less
applicable to us, than to the ancient Levites, for if so much purity is
required on the part of the *keepers of the vessels,* how much more in
the *vessels* themselves!  <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) Now
all our members are *vessels,* set apart for the spiritual worship of
God; we are also a *royal priesthood.* (<span
id="xii.ii-p61.2"></span>[1Pe 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span
id="xii.ii-p61.2"></span>.) Hence, as we are redeemed by the grace of
God, it is befitting that we keep ourselves undefiled in respect of all
uncleanness, that we may not pollute the sanctuary of God. As, however,
while remaining in this world, we are nevertheless redeemed, and
rescued, from the pollutions of the world, so we are not to quit life
with the view of departing from all uncleanness, but must simply avoid
all participation. The sum is this. “If with a true affection of the
heart, we aim at the benefit of redemption, we must beware of defiling
ourselves by any contamination from its pollutions.”

<span id="xii.ii-p62"></span><span id="xii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p63"></span>**18.** *I will be a Father unto you.* This
promise does not occur in one passage merely, but is repeated in various
instances. Paul has added it with this view, that a recognition of the
great honor to which God has exalted us, might be a motive to stir us up
to a more ardent desire for holiness. For when God has restored his
Church which he has gathered from profane nations, their redemption is
attended with this fruit, that believers are seen to be his *sons and
daughters* It is no common honor that we are reckoned among the sons of
God: it belongs to us in our turn to take care, that we do not show
ourselves to be degenerate children to him. For what injury we do to
God, if while we call him father, we defile ourselves with abominations
of idols! Hence, the thought of the high distinction to which he has
elevated us, ought to whet our desire for holiness and purity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc40011.htm#fr_568) <span
id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p4.1"></span>Ainsi done en
ouurant auec luy, *ou*, estans ses ouuriers;” — “Thus then in working
with him, *or*, being his workmen.”

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc40011.htm#fr_569) <span
id="xii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p9.1"></span>Ne donnans
aucun scandale, *ou*, donnons;” — “Giving no offense, *or*, we give.”

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](cc40011.htm#fr_570) <span
id="xii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p12.1"></span>Mais nous
rendans louables en toutes choses, *ou*, Mais rendons nous louables;” —
“But rendering ourselves approvable in all things, *or*, We render
ourselves approvable.”

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](cc40011.htm#fr_571) <span
id="xii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p28.1"></span>Qu’ils ayent
lieu, et proufitent;” — “That they may have place, and may be
profitable.”

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](cc40011.htm#fr_572) <span
id="xii.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p29.1"></span>Les
exhortations par chacun iour;” — “Exhortations daily.”

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](cc40011.htm#fr_573) <span
id="xii.i-p29.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p30.1"></span>Les
ministres auec leur mandement qu’ils ont en charge, de declarer de par
Dieu, conioignent aussi leur diligence, et affection ardente;” —
“Ministers, along with their commission which they have in charge to
declare, as from God, conjoin also their diligence, and ardent desire.”

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](cc40011.htm#fr_574) <span
id="xii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span> “*The grace of God*,” says Dr. Brown, when
commenting on <span id="xii.i-p33.1"></span>[1Pe
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)<span id="xii.i-p33.1"></span>,
“properly signifies — the kindness, the free favor of God, as a
principle in the Divine mind; but is often employed to signify the deeds
of kindness, the gifts and benefits, in which the principle finds
expression. It has been common to interpret the phrase here as
equivalent to the gospel, the revelation of God’s grace; and the Apostle
has been considered as affirming that the doctrine which those he was
writing to had embraced, and to which they had adhered — to use the
Apostle Paul’s phrase, ‘which they had received, and in which they
stood,’ was the true gospel. But I doubt if the gospel is ever called
the grace of God in the New Testament; and I equally doubt whether the
words, thus understood, are an accurate statement of what this Epistle
actually contains. There are just two other passages in the New
Testament in which the grace of God has been supposed to be a
designation of the gospel. After stating the message of mercy, which the
ministers of reconciliation are called to deliver, the Apostle, in his
Second Epistle to the Corinthians, says — ’We beseech you that ye
receive not *the grace*, or *this grace of God in vain*,’ (<span
id="xii.i-p33.2"></span>[2Co 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)<span
id="xii.i-p33.2"></span>.) The reference here is, no doubt, to the
gospel, but the meaning of the phrase, *the grace of God*, is plainly
just this divine favor, this benefit which so expresses, and, as it
were, embodies, the divine grace. And in the Epistle to Titus, the same
Apostle states, that ‘the grace of God bringing salvation’ has been
manifested, or has ‘appeared, teaching’ those who apprehend it, ‘to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in the present world.’ (<span id="xii.i-p33.3"></span>Titus 2:11,
12.) The grace of God is often said to mean here the gospel, but the
gospel is the manifestation, the revelation of this grace; and the
truth, taught in the passage is, that the free, sovereign mercy of God,
when it is apprehended by the sinner, is the true principle of holiness
in the heart and life.” — *Brown’s* Expository Discourses on First
Peter, volume 3 pp. 295, 296. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_575"></span>[576](cc40011.htm#fr_575) <span
id="xii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p36.1"></span>Il ne faut
point douter, que le Prophete ne parle du regne de Christ;” — “There is
no room to doubt, that the Prophet speaks of the kingdom of Christ.”

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](cc40011.htm#fr_576) <span
id="xii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p39.1"></span>Quelle
similitude et proportion ou conuenance;” — “What a resemblance, and
proportion, or correspondence.”

<span id="fn_577"></span>[578](cc40011.htm#fr_577) <span
id="xii.i-p39.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span> The precise word in the Septuagint version
(with which the Apostle’s quotation exactly corresponds) is <span
id="xii.i-p40.1"></span>δεκτῳ, (acceptable.) Calvin had probably been
led to make use of the word <span id="xii.i-p40.2"></span>εὐπρόσδεκτον
from the circumstance, that that adjective is employed by the Apostle in
the latter part of the verse, when commenting upon the passage quoted. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_578"></span>[579](cc40011.htm#fr_578) <span
id="xii.i-p40.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span> The Hebrew term referred to is employed in
this sense in the following (among other) instances: <span
id="xii.i-p41.1"></span>[Ps. 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#012),
[Ps. 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)<span
id="xii.i-p41.1"></span>; <span id="xii.i-p41.2"></span>[Prov.
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#015), [Prov.
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012)<span id="xii.i-p41.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_579"></span>[580](cc40011.htm#fr_579) <span
id="xii.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span> Calvin makes a similar observation when
commenting on the expression here referred to, in <span
id="xii.i-p43.1"></span>[Ga 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="xii.i-p43.1"></span>. “<span id="xii.i-p43.2"></span>Pergit in
similitudine adducta, et suo instituto definitum a Patre tempus
accommodat: simul tamen ostendit, tempus illud, quod Dei providentia
ordinatum erat, maturum fuisse et opportunum. Ea igitur demum iusta est
opportunitas ac recta agendi dispensatio, qu’ providentia Dei regitur;”
— “He proceeds with the comparison which he had brought forward, and
applies to his purpose the expression which had been made use of — *the
time appointed by the father*, but still showing that that time, which
had been ordained by the providence of God, was proper and suitable.
That alone is the fit season, and that the right system of acting, which
is directed by the providence of God.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_580"></span>[581](cc40011.htm#fr_580) <span
id="xii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p47"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p47.1"></span>Tantost met
en auaut la rondeur de sa conscience en la predication d’iceluy;” —
“Sometimes he brings into view the uprightness of his conscience in the
preaching of it.”

<span id="fn_581"></span>[582](cc40011.htm#fr_581) <span
id="xii.i-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p48"></span> “Thrasones.” See Calvin on the Corinthians,
vol. 1, p. 98, n. 1.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[583](cc40011.htm#fr_582) <span
id="xii.i-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p49"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p49.1"></span>Ne faisans
cas que de masques, c’est A dire, de l’apparence externelle;” — “Setting
no value on anything but masks; that is to say, outward appearance.”

<span id="fn_583"></span>[584](cc40011.htm#fr_583) <span
id="xii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p54"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p54.1"></span>Afin que sa
fidelite fust tant plus notoire, et la certitude de son ministere tant
mieux approuvee;” — “In order that his faithfulness might be so much the
better known, and the stability of his ministry so much the better
approved.”

<span id="fn_584"></span>[585](cc40011.htm#fr_584) <span
id="xii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p56"></span> “The words <span id="xii.i-p56.1"></span>ἐν
ὑπομονὣ πολλὣ, (*in much patience*,) must be connected with the
following clauses up to <span id="xii.i-p56.2"></span>ἐν νηστεί*αις (in
watchings*,) and denote patient endurance of the various afflictions
specified in the words following, which are not to be treated (with
Rosenm.) as merely <span id="xii.i-p56.3"></span>*synonymes* denoting
evils *in general*, but considered *specially*, and (as I conceive the
Apostle meant) in *groups*.” — *Bloomfield*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_585"></span>[586](cc40011.htm#fr_585) <span
id="xii.i-p56.5"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p57"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p57.1"></span>Entre les
louanges temporelles et perpetuelles, c’est ... dire qui doyuent
tousiours estre es vrais ministres;” — “Between occasional grounds of
commendation and perpetual, that is to say, what ought to be found
invariably in true ministers.”

<span id="fn_586"></span>[587](cc40011.htm#fr_586) <span
id="xii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p60"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p60.1"></span>D’vne
courage magnanime;” — “With magnanimous heroism.”

<span id="fn_587"></span>[588](cc40011.htm#fr_587) <span
id="xii.i-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p61"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p61.1"></span>Veu que cela
est coustumier ... tous mutins de ne s’estonner point quand seditions
s’esmeuuent;” — “As it is customary for all riotous persons to be thrown
into no alarm when tumults break out.”

<span id="fn_588"></span>[589](cc40011.htm#fr_588) <span
id="xii.i-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p62"></span> A proverbial expression made use of by
Virgil. ‘n. I. 133,134 — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_589"></span>[590](cc40011.htm#fr_589) <span
id="xii.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p63"></span> “<span
id="xii.i-p63.1"></span>L’incommodite de ce qu’il estoit souuent
contraint de changer de pays, pource qu’ on ne le laissoit en paix en
quelque lieu qu’il fust;” — “The inconvenience of being frequently under
the necessity of changing his country, because they did not allow him to
be in peace in any place in which he might be.”

<span id="fn_590"></span>[591](cc40011.htm#fr_590) <span
id="xii.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p64"></span> *Semler* understands the term in the same
sense — “<span id="xii.i-p64.1"></span>Quod non licet diu manere et
quiescere quasi uno in loco, sed semper periculorum vitandorum causa
locum et solum mutare. Iud’i autem faciunt jam infensi et infesti hostes
Pauli, ut vel ex actibus Luc’ satis patet; Paulus <span
id="xii.i-p64.2"></span>ἀκατάστατος, (Jacobi 1:8) <span
id="xii.i-p64.3"></span>dici potest, licet sine animi sui vitio;” — (“As
not being allowed to remain long at rest, as it were, in one place, but
always changing his place and soil (for the sake of avoiding dangers.)
The Jews were enemies to Paul, so exasperated and deadly, as appears
even from Luke’s narrative in the Acts, that Paul may be said to have
been *unstable*, (<span id="xii.i-p64.4"></span>[Jas
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p64.4"></span>,)
though without any fault on his part.” — “I agree,” says Dr.
*Bloomfield*, “with Theophyl., Schleus., and Leun., that the term refers
to that *unsettled and wandering* *kind of life*, which, that the
Apostle thought very miserable, is plain from his connecting it at <span
id="xii.i-p64.5"></span>[1Co 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011)<span
id="xii.i-p64.5"></span>, with the endurance of hunger, thirst, and
nakedness,(<span id="xii.i-p64.6"></span>Πεινῶμεν καὶ διψῶμεν, καὶ
γυμνητεύομεν, καὶ ἀστατοῦμεν) which passage, indeed, is the best comment
on the present, and shows that <span id="xii.i-p64.7"></span>κόποις
(*labors*) must be chiefly understood of his labors at his trade, and
<span id="xii.i-p64.8"></span>νηστείαις, (*fastings*,) of that
insufficient support, which labors so interrupted by his ministerial
duties, could alone be expected to supply. <span
id="xii.i-p64.9"></span>᾿Αγρυπνίαις (*watchings*) seems to refer to the
abridgment of his rest by night, to make up for the time expended by day
on his ministerial labors.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_591"></span>[592](cc40011.htm#fr_591) <span
id="xii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p67"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p67.1"></span> ᾿Εν
πνεύματι ἁγίω — ’In demonstration of the *Holy Spirit* — so that I
showed that the Holy Spirit wrought by me.’ It is possible, that in
these words, Paul makes an allusion to the <span
id="xii.i-p67.2"></span>χαρίσματα, (*gifts*,) but it seems better,
nevertheless, to suppose with Calvin, that he sets <span
id="xii.i-p67.3"></span>*genus* and <span
id="xii.i-p67.4"></span>*species* over against each other.” —
*Billroth*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_592"></span>[593](cc40011.htm#fr_592) <span
id="xii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p70"></span> “Here the spiritual arms are not
*particularized*; yet the terms <span id="xii.i-p70.1"></span>τῶν δεξιῶν
καὶ ἀριστερῶν, (*on the right hand and the left*,) are very
*comprehensive*, referring to the complete armor and arms, on both
sides, with which the <span id="xii.i-p70.2"></span>ὁπλίτης, or
*completely* armed soldier was furnished, who was thus said to be <span
id="xii.i-p70.3"></span>ἀμφιδέξιος (<span
id="xii.i-p70.4"></span>*ambidexter*.) Thus the general sense is: ‘We
employ no other arms than the *panoply of righteousness*.’” —
*Bloomfield*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_593"></span>[594](cc40011.htm#fr_593) <span
id="xii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p73"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p73.1"></span>Il y en a eu
bien peu, qui estans irritez des iniures et mauuais traittemens que on
leur faisoit, ne se soyent descouragez, et n’ayent laissez leur train de
vertu;” — “There have been very few of them, who have not, on being
irritated by injuries and bad treatment shown them, felt discouraged,
and left off their virtuous career.”

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc40011.htm#fr_594) <span
id="xii.i-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p74"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p74.1"></span>Du bruit
qu’on fera courir de nous;” — “On reports that may be circulated against
us.”

<span id="fn_595"></span>[596](cc40011.htm#fr_595) <span
id="xii.i-p74.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p75"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p75.1"></span>Voulant
essayer si nous cheminons droit settlement pour l’amour de luy, sans
cercher autre recompense;” — “Wishing to try whether we walk aright,
purely from love to Him, without seeking any other reward.”

<span id="fn_596"></span>[597](cc40011.htm#fr_596) <span
id="xii.i-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p76"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p76.1"></span>*Gratuito*;”
— “*gratuitously*.” — There can be no doubt, that Calvln has here in his
eye <span id="xii.i-p76.2"></span>[Job
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#009)<span id="xii.i-p76.2"></span>.
“Doth Job fear God for nought?” The Hebrew word <span
id="xii.i-p76.3"></span>החנים (*hachinnam*,) is rendered in the
Septuagint <span id="xii.i-p76.4"></span>δωρεὰν — *gratuitously*

<span id="fn_597"></span>[598](cc40011.htm#fr_597) <span
id="xii.i-p76.5"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p77"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p77.1"></span>Mesme
faisant violence ... tous empeschemens, est venu, comme par force,
jusques au bout;” — “Even breaking violently through all impediments,
came, as it were, by fource to the goal.”

<span id="fn_598"></span>[599](cc40011.htm#fr_598) <span
id="xii.i-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p79"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p79.1"></span>Qui to
fournit et enrichit par son abundance;” — “Who furnishes and enriches
thee by his abundance.”

<span id="fn_599"></span>[600](cc40011.htm#fr_599) <span
id="xii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p6.1"></span>En vos
entrailles, ou, affections;” — “In your bowels, or, affections.”

<span id="fn_600"></span>[601](cc40011.htm#fr_600) <span
id="xii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p8.1"></span>Or ie
requier de vous la pareille, comme de mes enfans, ou, Or pour nous
recompenser de mesmes (ie parle comme ... mes enfans;)” — “But I require
the like from you — as from my children, or, But for a recompense to us
of the same, I speak as to my children.”

<span id="fn_601"></span>[602](cc40011.htm#fr_601) <span
id="xii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span> God promised to Ezekiel that he would give
him “*the opening of the mouth* in the midst of the house of Israel,”
(<span id="xii.ii-p23.1"></span>[Eze
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#021)<span id="xii.ii-p23.1"></span>,)
which is explained by *Gill* to mean, “*boldness* and *courage* of
speech when he should see his prophecies fulfilled.” Paul himself makes
use of a similar expression in <span id="xii.ii-p23.2"></span>[Eph
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019)<span id="xii.ii-p23.2"></span>,
“that utterance may be given unto me, that I may *open my mouth
boldly*.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_602"></span>[603](cc40011.htm#fr_602) <span
id="xii.ii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span> The same view, in substance, is taken by
Chrysostom. — <span id="xii.ii-p24.1"></span>Καθάπερ γὰρ τὸ θερμαῗνον
εὐρύνειν εἴωθεν, οὓτω καὶ τὢς ἀγάπης ἔργον τὸ πλατύνειν ἐστί· θερμν&lt;&
ga&gt;ρ ἐστιν ἠ ἀρετὴ· καὶ ζέουσα αὕτη καὶ τὸ στόμα ἀνεπέτασε Παύλου καὶ
τὴν καρδίαν ἐπλάτυνεν — “For as heat is wont to expand, so it is the
part of love to enlarge. For virtue is warm and fervent. It was this
that opened Paul’s mouth, and enlarged his heart.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_603"></span>[604](cc40011.htm#fr_603) <span
id="xii.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span> “From a tender and considerate regard to
the good of the Christians at Corinth, he” (Paul) “had determined not to
revisit them, until their unseemly heats and factions were allayed. How
was he affected while he waited at Ephesus to receive the tidings of
this longed-for but protracted issue? ‘O ye Corinthians! our mouth is
opened unto you; our heart is enlarged!’ What a picture of a heart! We
see him standing on the shore of the ‘gean Sea, over against Corinth,
with his arms extended towards that city, and in the attitude of
speaking. We hear the words by which he seeks to relieve his overcharged
breast, heaving and ready to burst with the fullness of those desires
which he had long felt to come among them, satisfy them of the sincerity
of his affection, and replenish their souls with the consolation with
which he himself had been comforted. ‘O ye Corinthians, our mouth is
open to you, our heart is enlarged! Ye are not straitened in us, but ye
are straitened in your own bowels. Now, for a recompense in the same, (I
speak as unto my children,) be ye also enlarged.’” — *M’Crie’s Sermons*,
p. 29. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_604"></span>[605](cc40011.htm#fr_604) <span
id="xii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p28.1"></span>Mon coeur
mesme s’ouuriroit volontiers pour vous mettre deuant les yeux
l’affection que i’ ay enuers vous;” — “My very heart would willingly
open itself up, so as to place before your eyes the affection which I
entertain towards you.”

<span id="fn_605"></span>[606](cc40011.htm#fr_605) <span
id="xii.ii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p31"></span> The term <span
id="xii.ii-p31.1"></span>ἀντιπελαργία is compounded of <span
id="xii.ii-p31.2"></span>αντι over against, and <span
id="xii.ii-p31.3"></span>λαργος, a stork. It is employed to denote
*reciprocal affection*, from an interesting peculiarity in the
disposition of the *stork*. “This bird,” says Paxton, in his
Illustrations of Scripture, (Edin. 1842,) volume 2, p. 432, “has long
been celebrated for her amiable and pious dispositions, in which she has
no rival among the feathered race. Her kind benevolent temper she
discovers in feeding her parents in the time of incubation, when they
have not leisure to seek their food, or when they have become old, and
unable to provide for themselves.” The English word *stork* is derived
from <span id="xii.ii-p31.4"></span>στοργὴ, affection, while the Hebrew
name for this animal, <span id="xii.ii-p31.5"></span>חסידה,
(*chasidah*,) is derived from <span id="xii.ii-p31.6"></span>חסד
(*chesed*,) *beneficence*, because, says *Bythner*, “the stork
nourishes, supports, and carries on its back, when weary, its aged
parents.” See Calvin on the Psalms, vol. 4, p. 158, n. 2 Calvin, when
commenting on <span id="xii.ii-p31.9"></span>[1Timothy
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004)<span id="xii.ii-p31.9"></span>,
says, “<span id="xii.ii-p31.10"></span>Ips’ quoque ciconi’ gratitudinem
suo exemplo nos docent. Unde et nomen <span
id="xii.ii-p31.11"></span>ἀντιπελαργία;” — “The very storks, too, teach
us gratitude by their example. Hence the term <span
id="xii.ii-p31.12"></span>ἀντιπελαργία — affection in return.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_606"></span>[607](cc40011.htm#fr_606) <span
id="xii.ii-p31.13"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p32"></span> The rendering of the Vulgate — “<span
id="xii.ii-p32.1"></span>Eandem remunerationem *habentes*;” — “*Having*
the same reward,” — is followed by. Wiclif, (1380,) *ye that haw the
same reward* and also in the Rheims version, (1582,) *hauing the same
reward*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_607"></span>[608](cc40011.htm#fr_607) <span
id="xii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p35"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p35.1"></span>Parlant
comme en puissance et authorite de pere;” — “Speaking as with the power
and authority of a father.”

<span id="fn_608"></span>[609](cc40011.htm#fr_608) <span
id="xii.ii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p36"></span> See vol. 1, p. 282.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[610](cc40011.htm#fr_609) <span
id="xii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p39"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p39.1"></span>Aux
infideles;” — “To unbelievers.”

<span id="fn_610"></span>[611](cc40011.htm#fr_610) <span
id="xii.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p41"></span> “*Joachim Camerarius*, in his Commentary
on the New Testament, (Cambridge 1642,) suggests, that <span
id="xii.ii-p41.1"></span>ἐτεροζυγοῦντες, may have a reference to a
*balance*, and that Paul — would not have the Corinthians *unequally
balanced* with unbelievers. The verb <span
id="xii.ii-p41.2"></span>ζυγοστατειν, as he observes, is employed to
denote the *adjusting of scales in balance*. It seems more natural,
however, to understand the word, as Calvin and most other interpreters
do, as derived from <span id="xii.ii-p41.3"></span>ἓτερος, (*Another*,)
and <span id="xii.ii-p41.4"></span>ζυγὸς, as meaning a *yoke*, and as
employed by Paul to mean, drawing on the other side of a yoke with
another; or, as *Beza* explains it, “<span id="xii.ii-p41.5"></span>Qui
cum sint divers’ conditionis, tamen in eodem opere mutuam operam
pr’stant;” — “Those who, while in a different condition from each other,
do nevertheless take their corresponding part in the same work.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_611"></span>[612](cc40011.htm#fr_611) <span
id="xii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p45"></span> *Beza*, when mentioning the different
views which have been taken of the etymology of the term *Belial*,
remarks, that some derive it from <span id="xii.ii-p45.1"></span>בלי יעל
*beli jahal*, (*not profitable*,) or from <span
id="xii.ii-p45.2"></span>בלי מועיל *beli mohil*, (*worthless*,) and that
the term, viewed as having this derivation, is peculiarly appropriate to
Satan, as being diametrically opposed to Christ, the Greatest and Best;
while Jerome derives it from <span id="xii.ii-p45.3"></span>בלי *beli*,
(*not*) and <span id="xii.ii-p45.4"></span>עיל *hol*, (*a yoke*,) as
though you should say — *without a yoke, not subject to the yoke*. Beza
gives the preference to the *former* etymology, while he observes that
the *latter* is also most appropriate to Satan as an *apostate* spirit.
— The original term *Belial* is rendered in various instances in the
Septuagint <span id="xii.ii-p45.5"></span>παράνομος, *lawless*. — There
is here a slight variation in reading. The Edit. Princ. and the Textus
Receptus have <span id="xii.ii-p45.6"></span>Βελίαλ. The Erasmian,
Stephanic, and other early editions have <span
id="xii.ii-p45.7"></span>Βελίαρ, which has been restored by Bengelius,
Matthias, Griesbach, and Tittmann; and justly, for both external and
internal evidence are in its favor; it being found in the majority of
the MSS., in many early ecclesiastical writers, and Greek Fathers.” —
*Bloomfield*. — Ed

<span id="fn_612"></span>[613](cc40011.htm#fr_612) <span
id="xii.ii-p45.8"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p46"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p46.1"></span>Et assez
notoire;” — “And is sufficiently well known.”

<span id="fn_613"></span>[614](cc40011.htm#fr_613) <span
id="xii.ii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p47"></span> Thus in <span id="xii.ii-p47.1"></span>[De
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#009)<span id="xii.ii-p47.1"></span>,
“Beware that there be not a thouqht in thy wicked heart.” The expression
made use of is <span id="xii.ii-p47.2"></span>פך-יחיה דבר עם-לבבך בליעל
“Lest there be in thine heart a *thing of Belial*.” The same expression
occurs in <span id="xii.ii-p47.3"></span>[Ps
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009)<span id="xii.ii-p47.3"></span>,
where David’s enemies represent him as suffering the punishment of
*detestable wickedness*,<span id="xii.ii-p47.4"></span>דבר בליעל *a
thing of Belial*.” — See Calvin on the Psalms, vol. 2, p. 120. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_614"></span>[615](cc40011.htm#fr_614) <span
id="xii.ii-p47.6"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p48"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p48.1"></span>Vne
meschante et abominable parolle ou pensee;” — “A wicked and abominable
word or thought.”

<span id="fn_615"></span>[616](cc40011.htm#fr_615) <span
id="xii.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p49"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p49.1"></span>Souvent en
l’Escriture;” — “Frequently in Scripture.”

<span id="fn_616"></span>[617](cc40011.htm#fr_616) <span
id="xii.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p52"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p52.1"></span>Ce qui
seul empeschoit que son enseignement ne proufitast enuers eux;” — “What
alone hindered his teaching from being of advantage to them.”

<span id="fn_617"></span>[618](cc40011.htm#fr_617) <span
id="xii.ii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p53"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p53.1"></span>C’est vn
profanation horrible, et vn sacrilege detestable;” — “It is a horrible
profanation, and a detestable sacrilege.”

<span id="fn_618"></span>[619](cc40011.htm#fr_618) <span
id="xii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p55"></span> “*I will dwell in them*. The words are
very significant in the original, <span
id="xii.ii-p55.1"></span>ἐνοικήσω ἐν αὐτοῖς, ‘I will indwell in them,’
so the words are. There are two ins in the original, as if God could
have never enough communion with them.” — Leigh’s Annotatiots. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_619"></span>[620](cc40011.htm#fr_619) <span
id="xii.ii-p55.4"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p56"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p56.1"></span>C’est dire
Dieu auce nous;” — “That is to say, God with us.”

<span id="fn_620"></span>[621](cc40011.htm#fr_620) <span
id="xii.ii-p58.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p59"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p59.1"></span>Cependant
qu’ils sont attendans auec ardent desir le iour de deliuerance;” —
“While they are waiting with eager desire for the day of deliverance.”

<span id="fn_621"></span>[622](cc40011.htm#fr_621) <span
id="xii.ii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p60"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p60.1"></span>O — ils
estoyent;” — “Where they were.”

<span id="fn_622"></span>[623](cc40011.htm#fr_622) <span
id="xii.ii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p61"></span> *Diodati*, in his Annotations, explains
the expression *ye that bear the vessels of the Lord*, (<span
id="xii.ii-p61.1"></span>[Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)<span id="xii.ii-p61.1"></span>,)
to mean — “You sacred officers, to whom only it belongeth to carry the
vessels and ornaments of the temple; and thereby are spiritually meant
all believers, whereof every one beareth a vessel sacred to the Lord,
viz., himself.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc40012)
