[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40016)  [Next](cc40018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)<span
id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** It is not expedient for me doubtless
to glory. I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Gloriari sane non expedit mihi:
veniam enim ad visiones et revelatones Domini.

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2.** I knew a man in Christ above
fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out
of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the
third heaven.

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Novi hominem in Christo ante annos
quatuordecim (sive in corpore, nescio: sive extra corpus, nescio, Deus
novit) eiusmodi, inquam, hominem raptum fuisse usque in tertium coelum:

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And I knew such a man, (whether in
the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;)

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Scio de eiusmodi homine (sive in
corpore, nescio: sive extra corpus, nescio, Deus scit.)

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>**4.** How that he was caught up into
paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man
to utter.

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quod raptus sit in Paradisum, et
audierit verba ineffabilia,  <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874)
quae non licet  <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875) homini loqui.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>**5.** Of such an one will I glory: yet of
myself I will not glory, but in mine infirmities.

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span>**5.** De eiusmodi homine gloriabor: de me
ipso non gloriabor, nisi in infirmitatibus meis.

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span><span id="xviii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>**1.** *It is not expedient for me to
glory* Now, when as it were in the middle of the course, he restrains
himself from proceeding farther, and in this way he most appropriately
reproves the impudence of his rivals and declares that it is with
reluctance, that he engages in this sort of contest with them. For what
a shame it was to scrape together from every quarter commendations, or
rather to go a-begging for them, that they might be on a level with so
distinguished a man! As to the latter, he admonishes them by his own
example, that the more numerous and the more excellent the graces by
which any one of us is distinguished, so much the less ought he to think
of his own excellence. For such a thought is exceedingly dangerous,
because, like one entering into a labyrinth, the person is immediately
dazzled, so as to be too quick-sighted in discerning his gifts,  <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) while in the mean time he is ignorant
of himself. Paul is afraid, lest this should befall him. The graces
conferred by God are, indeed, to be acknowledged, that we may be
aroused, — *first*, to gratitude for them, and *secondly,* to the right
improvement of them; but to take occasion from them to boast — *that* is
what cannot be done without great danger.

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span>*For I will come*  <span
id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) *to visions.* “I shall not creep on
the ground, but will be constrained to mount aloft. Hence I am afraid,
lest the height of my gifts should hurry me on, so as to lead me to
forget myself.” And certainly, if Paul had gloried ambitiously, he would
have fallen headlong from a lofty eminence; for it is humility alone
that can give stability to our greatness in the sight of God.

<span id="xviii.i-p20"></span>Between *visions* and *revelations* there
is this distinction — that a *revelation* is often made either in a
dream, or by an oracle, without any thing being presented to the eye,
while a *vision* is scarcely ever afforded without a *revelation,* or in
other words, without the Lord’s discovering what is meant by it.  <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878)

<span id="xviii.i-p23"></span><span id="xviii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p24"></span>**2.** *I knew a man in Christ* As he was
desirous to restrain himself within bounds, he merely singles out *one*
instance, and that, too, he handles in such a way as to show, that it is
not from inclination that he brings it forward; for why does he speak in
the person of another rather than in his own? It is as though he had
said, “I should have preferred to be silent, I should have preferred to
keep the whole matter suppressed within my own mind, but those persons
 <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) will not allow me. I shall
mention it, therefore, as it were in a stammering way, that it may be
seen that I speak through constraint.” Some think that the clause *in
Christ* is introduced for the purpose of confirming what he says. I view
it rather as referring to the disposition, so as to intimate that Paul
has not here an eye to himself, but looks to Christ exclusively.

<span id="xviii.i-p26"></span>When he confesses, that he does not know
whether he was *in the body,* or *out of the body,* he expresses thereby
the more distinctly the greatness of the revelation. For he means, that
God dealt with him in such a way,  <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) that he did not himself understand the
manner of it. Nor should this appear to us incredible, inasmuch as he
sometimes manifests himself to us in such a way, that the manner of his
doing so is, nevertheless, hid from our view.  <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) At the same time, this does not, in
any degree, detract from the assurance of faith, which rests simply on
this single point — that we are aware that God speaks to us. Nay more,
let us learn from this, that we must seek the knowledge of those things
only that are necessary to be known, and leave other things to God.
(<span id="xviii.i-p28.2"></span>[De
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)<span
id="xviii.i-p28.2"></span>.) He says, then, that he does not know,
whether he was wholly taken up — soul and body — into heaven, or whether
it was his soul only, that was *caught up*

<span id="xviii.i-p29"></span>*Fourteen years ago* Some  <span
id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) enquire, also, as to the place, but it
does not belong to us to satisfy their curiosity.  <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) The Lord manifested himself to Paul in
the beginning by a vision, when he designed to convert him from Judaism
to the faith of the gospel, but he was not then admitted as yet into
those secrets, as he needed even to be instructed by Ananias in the
first rudiments.  <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) (<span
id="xviii.i-p32.2"></span>[Ac
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#012)<span id="xviii.i-p32.2"></span>.)
That vision, therefore, was nothing but a preparation, with the view of
rendering him teachable. It may be, that, in this instance, he refers to
that vision, of which he makes mention also, according to Luke’s
narrative. (<span id="xviii.i-p32.3"></span>[Ac
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017)<span
id="xviii.i-p32.3"></span>.) There is no occasion, however, for our
giving ourselves much trouble as to these conjectures, as we see that
Paul himself kept silence respecting it for fourteen years,  <span
id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) and would not have said one word in
reference to it, had not the unreasonableness of malignant persons
constrained him.

<span id="xviii.i-p34"></span>*Even to the third heaven.* He does not
here distinguish between the different heavens in the manner of the
philosophers, so as to assign to each planet its own heaven. On the
other hand, the number *three* is made use of (<span
id="xviii.i-p34.2"></span>κατ ἐζοχὴν) *by way of eminence,* to denote
what is highest and most complete. Nay more, the term *heaven,* taken by
itself, denotes here the blessed and glorious kingdom of God, which is
above all the spheres,  <span id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) and the
firmament itself, and even the entire frame-work of the world. Paul,
however, not contenting himself with the simple term,  <span
id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) adds, that he had reached even the
greatest height, and the innermost *recesses.* For our faith scales
heaven and enters it, and those that are superior to others in knowledge
get higher in degree and elevation, but to reach the *third heavens* has
been granted to very few.

<span id="xviii.i-p37"></span><span id="xviii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p38"></span>**4.** *In paradise*  <span
id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) As every region that is peculiarly
agreeable and delightful  <span id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) is
called in the Scriptures the *garden of God,* it came from this to be
customary among the Greeks to employ the term *paradise* to denote the
heavenly glory, even previously to Christ’s advent, as appears from
Ecclesiasticus. (<span id="xviii.i-p40.2"></span>[Sir.
40:17](../../../bib/apo/sir040.htm#017), [Sir.
27:0](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#000)<span id="xviii.i-p40.2"></span>.)
It is also used in this sense in <span id="xviii.i-p40.3"></span>[Lu
23:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span id="xviii.i-p40.3"></span>,
in Christ’s answer to the robber — “To-day shalt thou be with me in
*paradise,*” that is, “Thou shalt enjoy the presence of God, in the
condition and life of the blessed.”

<span id="xviii.i-p41"></span>*Heard unspeakable words* By *words* here
I do not understand *things,* as the term is wont to be made use of
after the manner of the Hebrews;  <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) for the word *heard* would not
correspond with this. Now if any one inquires, what they were, the
answer is easy — that it is not without good reason that they are called
*unspeakable*  <span id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) *words,* and such
as it is unlawful to utter. Some one, however, will reply, that what
Paul heard was, consequently, needless and useless, for what purpose did
it serve to hear, what was to be buried in perpetual silence? I answer,
that this took place for the sake of Paul himself, for one who had such
arduous difficulties awaiting him, enough to break a thousand hearts,
required to be strengthened by special means, that he might not give
way, but might persevere undaunted.  <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) Let us consider for a little, how many
adversaries his doctrine had, and of what sort they were; and farther,
with what a variety of artifices it was assailed, and then we shall
wonder no longer, why he heard more than it was *lawful for him to
utter*

<span id="xviii.i-p45"></span>From this, too, we may gather a most
useful admonition as to setting bounds to knowledge. We are naturally
prone to curiosity. Hence, neglecting altogether, or tasting but
slightly, and carelessly, doctrine that tends to edification, we are
hurried on to frivolous questions. Then there follow upon this —
boldness and rashness, so that we do not hesitate to decide on matters
unknown, and concealed.

<span id="xviii.i-p46"></span>From these two sources has sprung up a
great part  <span id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) of scholastic
theology, and every thing, which that trifler Dionysius  <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) has been so daring as to contrive in
reference to the Heavenly Hierarchies, It becomes us so much the more to
keep within bounds,  <span id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) so as not
to seek to know any thing, but what the Lord has seen it good to reveal
to his Church. Let this be the limit of our knowledge.

<span id="xviii.i-p50"></span><span id="xviii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p51"></span>**5.** *Of such a man* It is as though he
had said “I have just ground for glorying, but I do not willingly avail
myself of it. For it is more in accordance with my design, to *glory in
my infirmities* If, however, those malicious persons harass me any
farther, and constrain me to boast more than I am inclined to do, they
shall feel that they have to do with a man, whom God has illustriously
honored, and raised up on high, with a view to his exposing their
follies.

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 12:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#006)<span
id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** For though I would desire to glory,
I shall not be a fool; for I will say the truth: but *now* I forbear,
lest any man should think of me above that which he seeth me *to be*, or
*that* he heareth of me.

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Nam si voluero gloriari, non ero
insipiens: veritatem enim dicam: sed supersedeo: ne quis de me cogitet
supra id quod videt esse me, aut quod audit ex me.

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span>**7.** And lest I should be exalted above
measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me
a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should
be exalted above measure.

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Et en exellentia revelationum
suppra modum efferrer, datus mihi fuit stimulus carni, nuntius Satanae
qui me colaphis caederet, ne supra modum efferrer.

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span>**8.** For this thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me.

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Supra hoc ter Dominum rogavi, ut
discederet a me:

<span id="xviii.ii-p8"></span>**9.** And he said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most
gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me.

<span id="xviii.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Et dixit mihi: Sufficit tibi gratia
mea: nam virtus mea in infirmitate perficitur: libentissime igitur
gloriabor super infirmitatibus meis, ut inhabitet in me virtus Christi.

<span id="xviii.ii-p10"></span>**10.** Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ’s sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong.

<span id="xviii.ii-p11"></span>**10.** Quamobrem placeo nihi in
infirmitatibus, in contumeliis, in necessitatibus, in persequutionibus,
in anxietatibus pro Christo: quum enim infirmus sum, tinc robustus sum.

<span id="xviii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *For if I should desire.* Lest
what he had said, as to his having no inclination to glory, should be
turned into an occasion of calumny, and malevolent persons should reply
— “You are not inclined for it, because it is not in your power, he
anticipates such a reply. “I would have it quite in my power,” says he,
“on good grounds; nor would I be justly accused of vanity, for I have
ground to go upon, but I refrain from it.” He employs the term *folly*
here in a different sense from what he had done previously, for even
those that boast on good grounds act a silly and disgusting part, if
there appears any thing of boasting or ambition. The folly, however, is
more offensive and insufferable, if any one boasts groundlessly, or, in
other words, pretends to be what he is not; for in that case there is
impudence in addition to silliness. The Apostle here proceeded upon it
as a set, tied matter, that his glorying was as humble as it was well
founded. Erasmus has rendered it — “I spare you,”  <span
id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) but I prefer to understand it as
meaning — “I refrain,” or, as I have rendered it, “I forbear.”

<span id="xviii.ii-p16"></span>*Lest any one should think of me* He adds
the reason — because he is contented to occupy the station, which God
has assigned him. “My appearance,” says he, “and speech do not give
promise of any thing illustrious in me: I have no objection, therefore,
to be lightly esteemed.” Here we perceive what great modesty there was
in this man, inasmuch as he was not at all concerned on account of his
meanness, which he *discovered* in his appearance and speech, while he
was replenished with such a superiority of gifts. There would, however,
be no inconsistency in explaining it in this way, that satisfied with
the reality itself, he says nothing respecting himself, that he may thus
reprove indirectly the false Apostles, who gloried in themselves as to
many things, none of which were to be seen. What I mentioned first,
however, is what I rather approve of.

<span id="xviii.ii-p17"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p18"></span>**7.** *And lest through the superiority
of revelations.* Here we have a *second* reason — that God, designing to
repress in him every approach to insolence, subdued him with a rod. That
rod he calls a *goad,* by a metaphor taken from oxen. The word *flesh*
is, in the Greek, in the dative  <span id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897)
Hence Erasmus has rendered it *“by* the flesh.” I prefer, however, to
understand him as meaning, that the prickings of this *goad* were *in*
his flesh.

<span id="xviii.ii-p20"></span>Now it is asked, what this *goad* was.
Those act a ridiculous part, who think that Paul was tempted to lust. We
must therefore repudiate that fancy.  <span
id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) Some have supposed, that he was
harassed with frequent pains in the head. Chrysostom is rather inclined
to think, that the reference is to Hymeneus and Alexander, and the like,
because, instigated by the devil, they occasioned Paul very much
annoyance. My opinion is, that under this term is comprehended every
kind of temptation, with which Paul was exercised. For *flesh* here, in
my opinion, denotes — not the body, but that part of the soul which has
not yet been regenerated. “There was given to me a *goad* that my flesh
might be spurred up by it, for I am not yet so spiritual, as not to be
exposed to temptations according to the flesh.”

<span id="xviii.ii-p22"></span>He calls it farther the *messenger of
Satan* on this ground, that as all temptations are sent by Satan, so,
whenever they assail us, they warn us that Satan is at hand. Hence, at
every apprehension of temptation, it becomes us to arouse ourselves, and
arm ourselves with promptitude for repelling Satan’s assaults. It was
most profitable for Paul to think of this, because this consideration
did not allow him to exult like a man that was off his guard.  <span
id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) For the man, who is as yet beset with
dangers, and dreads the enemy, is not prepared to celebrate a triumph.
“The Lord, says he, has provided me with an admirable remedy, against
being unduly elated; for, while I am employed in taking care that Satan
may not take advantage of me, I am kept back from pride.”

<span id="xviii.ii-p24"></span>At the same time, God did not cure him by
this means exclusively, but also by humbling him. For he adds, *to
buffet me;* by which expression he elegantly expresses this idea. — that
he has been brought under control.  <span
id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900) For to be *buffeted* is a severe kind
of indignity. Accordingly, if any one has had his face made black and
blue,  <span id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901) he does not, from a
feeling of shame, venture to expose himself openly in the view of men.
In like manner, whatever be the infirmity under which we labor, let us
bear in mind, that we are, as it were, *buffeted by the Lord,* with the
view of making us ashamed, that we may learn humility. Let this be
carefully reflected upon by those, especially, who are otherwise
distinguished by illustrious virtues, if they have any mixture of
defects, if they are persecuted by any with hatred, if they are assailed
by any revilings — that these things are not merely *rods* of the
Heavenly Master, but *buffetings,* to fill them with shame, and beat
down all forwardness.  <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902) Now let
all the pious *take* notice as to this, that they may see  <span
id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903) how dangerous a thing the “poison of
pride” is, as Augustine speaks in his third sermon “On the words of the
Apostle,” inasmuch as it “cannot be cured except by poison.”  <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904) And unquestionably, as it was the
cause of man’s ruin, so it is the last vice with which we have to
contend, for other vices have a connection with evil deeds, but *this*
is to be dreaded in connection with the best actions; and farther, it
naturally clings to us so obstinately, and is so deeply rooted, that it
is extremely difficult to extirpate it.

<span id="xviii.ii-p30"></span>Let us carefully consider, who it is that
here speaks — He had overcome so many dangers, tortures, and other evils
— had triumphed over all the enemies of Christ — had driven away the
fear of death — had, in fine, renounced the world; and yet he had not
altogether subdued pride. Nay more, there awaited him a conflict so
doubtful, that he could not overcome without being *buffeted.*
Instructed by his example, let us wage war with other vices in such a
way, as to lay out our main efforts for the subduing of this one.

<span id="xviii.ii-p31"></span>But what does this mean — that Satan, who
was a

<span id="xviii.ii-p32"></span>man-slayer  <span
id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905) from the beginning, (<span
id="xviii.ii-p33.4"></span>[Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span
id="xviii.ii-p33.4"></span>,)

<span id="xviii.ii-p34"></span>was a physician to Paul, and that too,
not merely in the cure of the body, but — what is of greater importance
— in the cure of the soul? I answer, that Satan, in accordance with his
disposition and custom, had nothing else in view than to *kill and to
destroy,* (<span id="xviii.ii-p34.1"></span>[Joh
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.ii-p34.1"></span>,) and that the *goad,* that Paul makes
mention of, was dipt in deadly poison; but that it was a special
kindness from the Lord, to render medicinal what was in its own nature
deadly.

<span id="xviii.ii-p35"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p36"></span>**8.** *For this thing I besought the
Lord thrice.* Here, also,  <span id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) the
number *three* is employed to denote frequent repetition.  <span
id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907) He means, however, to intimate, that
this annoyance had been felt by him distressing, inasmuch as he had so
frequently prayed to be exempted from it. For if it had been slight, or
*easy* to be endured, he would not have been so desirous to be freed
from it; and yet he says that he had not obtained this: hence it
appears, how much need he had of being humbled. He confirms, therefore,
what he had said previously — that he had, by means of this bridle, been
held back from being haughty; for if relief from it had been for his
advantage, he would never have met with a refusal.

<span id="xviii.ii-p39"></span>It may seem, however, to follow from
this, that Paul had not by any means prayed in faith, if we would not
make void all the promises of God.  <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908) “We read everywhere in Scripture, that
we shall obtain whatever we ask in faith: Paul prays, and does not
obtain.” I answer, that as there are different ways of asking, so there
are different ways of obtaining. We ask in simple terms those things as
to which we have an express promise — as, for example, the perfecting of
God’s kingdom, and the *hallowing of his name,* (<span
id="xviii.ii-p40.2"></span>[Mt
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)<span id="xviii.ii-p40.2"></span>,)
the remission of our sins, and every thing that is advantageous to us;
but, when we think that the kingdom of God *can,* nay *must* be
advanced, in this particular manner, or in that, and that this thing, or
that, is necessary for the *hallowing of his name,* we are often
mistaken in our opinion. In like manner, we often fall into a serious
mistake as to what tends to promote our own welfare. *Hence* we ask
those former things confidently, and without any reservation, while it
does not belong to us to prescribe the means. If, however, we specify
the means, there is always a condition implied, though not expressed.
Now Paul was not so ignorant as not to know this. Hence, as to the
*object* of his prayer, there can be no doubt that he was heard,
although he met with a refusal as to the express *form.* By this we are
admonished not to give way to despondency, as if our prayers had been
lost labor, when God does not gratify or comply with our wishes, but
that we must be *satisfied with his grace,* that is, in respect of our
not being forsaken by him. For the reason, why he sometimes mercifully
refuses to his own people, what, in his wrath, he grants to the wicked,
is this — that he foresees better what is expedient for us, than our
understanding is able to apprehend.

<span id="xviii.ii-p41"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p42"></span>**9.** *He said to me.* It is not
certain, whether he had this answer by a special revelation, and it is
not of great importance.  <span id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909) For
God answers us, when he strengthens us inwardly by his Spirit, and
sustains us by his consolation, so that we do not give up hope and
patience. He bids Paul be *satisfied with his grace,* and, in the mean
time, not refuse chastisement. Hence we must bear up under evil of ever
so long continuance, because we are admirably well dealt with, when we
have the grace of God to be our support.  <span
id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910) The term *grace,* here, does not mean
here, as it does elsewhere, the favor of God, but by *metonymy,* the aid
of the Holy Spirit, which comes to us from the unmerited favor of God;
and it ought to be *sufficient* for the pious, inasmuch as it is a sure
and invincible support against their ever giving way.

<span id="xviii.ii-p45"></span>*For my strength* Our weakness may seem,
as if it were an obstacle in the way of God’s perfecting his strength in
us. Paul does not merely deny this, but maintains, on the other hand,
that it is only when our weakness becomes apparent, that God’s
*strength* is duly *perfected.* To understand this more distinctly, we
must distinguish between God’s strength and ours; for the word *my* is
emphatic. “*My* strength,” says the Lord, (meaning that which helps
man’s need — which raises them up when they have fallen down, and
refreshes them when they are faint,) “is perfected in the weakness of
men;*”* that is, it has occasion to exert itself, when the weakness of
men becomes manifest; and not only so, but it is more distinctly
recognized as it ought to be. For the word *perfected* has a reference
to the perception and apprehension of mankind, because it is not
*perfected* unless it openly shines forth, so as to receive its due
praise. For mankind have no taste of it, unless they are first convinced
of the need of it, and they quickly lose sight of its value, if they are
not constantly exercised with a feeling of their own weakness.

<span id="xviii.ii-p46"></span>*Most gladly, therefore* This latter
statement confirms the exposition that I have given. *I will glory,*
says he, *in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me*
 <span id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911) Hence, the man that is ashamed
of this glorying, shuts the door upon Christ’s grace, and, in a manner,
puts it away from him. For *then* do we make room for Christ’s grace,
when in true humility of mind, we feel and confess our own weakness. The
*valleys* are watered with rain to make them fruitful, while in the mean
time, the high summits of the lofty mountains remain dry.  <span
id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912) Let that man, therefore, become a
*valley,* who is desirous to receive the heavenly rain of God’s
spiritual grace.  <span id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913)

<span id="xviii.ii-p52"></span>He adds *most gladly,* to show that he is
influenced by such an eager desire for the grace of Christ, that he
refuses nothing for the sake of obtaining it. For we see very many
yielding, indeed, submission to God, as being afraid of incurring
sacrilege in coveting his glory, but, at the same time, not without
reluctance, or at least, less cheerfully than were becoming.  <span
id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914)

<span id="xviii.ii-p54"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p55"></span>**10.** *I take pleasure in infirmities*
There can be no doubt, that he employs the term *weakness* in different
senses; for he formerly applied this name to the punctures that he
experienced in the flesh. He now employs it to denote those external
qualities, which occasion contempt in the view of the world. Having
spoken, however, in a general way, of *infirmities* of every kind, he
now returns to that particular description of them, that had given
occasion for his turning aside into this general discourse. Let us take
notice, then, that *infirmity* is a general term, and that under it is
comprehended the weakness of our nature, as well as all tokens of
abasement. Now the point in question was Paul’s outward abasement. He
proceeded farther, for the purpose of showing, that the Lord humbled him
in every way, that, in his defects, the glory of God might shine forth
the more resplendently, which is, in a manner, concealed and buried,
when a man is in an elevated position. He now again returns to speak of
his excellences, which, at the same time, made him contemptible in
public view, instead of procuring for him esteem and commendation.

<span id="xviii.ii-p56"></span>*For when I am weak,* that is — “The more
deficiency there is in me, so much the more liberally does the Lord,
from his strength, supply me with whatever he sees to be needful for
me.” For the fortitude of philosophers is nothing else than contumacy,
or rather a mad enthusiasm, such as fanatics are accustomed to have. “If
a man is desirous to be truly *strong,* let him not refuse to be at the
same time *weak* Let him,” I say, *“be weak* in himself that he may be
*strong in the Lord.”* (<span id="xviii.ii-p56.1"></span>[Eph
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.ii-p56.1"></span>.) Should any one object, that Paul speaks
here, not of a failure of strength, but of poverty, and other
afflictions, I answer, that all these things are exercises for
discovering to us our own weakness; for if God had not exercised Paul
with such trials, he would never have perceived so clearly his weakness.
Hence, he has in view not merely poverty, and hardships of every kind,
but also those effects that arise from them, as, for example, a feeling
of our own weakness, self-distrust, and humility.

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 12:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)<span
id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>**11.** I am become a fool in glorying;
ye have compelled me: for I ought to have been commended of you: for in
nothing am I behind the very chiefest apostles, though I be nothing.

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Factus sum insipiens gloriando:
vos me coegistis: nam ego debueram a vobis commendari: nulla enim in er
inferior fui summis Apostolis, tametsi nihil sum.

<span id="xviii.iii-p4"></span>**12.** Truly the signs of an apostle
were wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and
mighty deeds.

<span id="xviii.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Signa quidem apostoli peracta
fuerunt inter vos, in omni patientia, et signis, et prodigiis, et
virtutibus.

<span id="xviii.iii-p6"></span>**13.** For what is it wherein you were
inferior to other churches, except *it be* that I myself was not
burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong.

<span id="xviii.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Nam quid est, in quo fueritis
inferiores caeteris Ecclesiis, nisi quod ego ipse non fui vobis
onerosus? Condonate mihi hanc iniuriam.

<span id="xviii.iii-p8"></span>**14.** Behold, the third time I am ready
to come to you; and I will not be burdensome to you: for I seek not
yours, but you: for the children ought not to lay up for the parents,
but the parents for the children.

<span id="xviii.iii-p9"></span>**14.** Ecce, tertio propensus animo sum,
ut veniam ad vos, neque vobis ero oneri: non enim quaero quae vestra
sunt, sed vos: etenim non esd parentes filiis.

<span id="xviii.iii-p10"></span>**15.** And I will very gladly spend and
be spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be
loved.

<span id="xviii.iii-p11"></span>**15.** Ego vero libentissime impendam
et expendar pro animabus vestris: licet uberius bos diligens, minus
diligar.

<span id="xviii.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iii-p13"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p14"></span>**11.** *I have become a fool* Hitherto
he had, by various apologies, solicited their forgiveness for what was
contrary to his own custom and manner of acting, and contrary, also, to
propriety, and what was due to his office as an Apostle — the publishing
of his own praises. *Now,* instead of soliciting, he upbraids, throwing
the blame upon the Corinthians, who ought to have been beforehand in
this.  <span id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915) For when the false
Apostles calumniated Paul, they should have set themselves vigorously in
opposition to them, and should have faithfully borne the testimony that
was due to his excellences. He chides them, however, thus early, lest
those, who were unfavorably disposed towards them, should put a wrong
construction upon the defense which he brought forward, in consequence
of his being constrained to it by their ingratitude,  <span
id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916) or should persist in calumniating him.

<span id="xviii.iii-p17"></span>*For in nothing* We are ungrateful to
God, if we allow his gifts, of which we are witnesses, to be disparaged,
or contemned. He charges the Corinthians with this fault, for they knew
him to be equal to the *chiefest Apostles,* and yet they lent an ear to
calumniators, when they slandered him.

<span id="xviii.iii-p18"></span>By the *chiefest Apostles* some
understand his rivals, who arrogated to themselves the precedence.
 <span id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917) I understand it, however, as
meaning — those that were chief among the twelve. “Let me be compared
with any one of the Apostles,  <span id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918) I
have no fear, that I shall be found inferior.” For, although Paul was on
the best of terms with all the Apostles, so that he was prepared to
extol them above himself, he, nevertheless, contended against their
names when falsely assumed.  <span id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) For
the false Apostles abused this pretext, that they had been in the
company of the twelve — that they were in possession of all their views
 <span id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) — that they were fully
acquainted with all their institutions, and the like. Hence Paul,
perceiving that they falsely gloried in these masks and counterfeit
titles, and were successful, to some extent, among unlearned persons,
 <span id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921) reckoned it necessary to enter
upon a comparison of that nature.  <span
id="fr_922"></span>[923](#fn_922)

<span id="xviii.iii-p25"></span>The correction that he adds — *though I
am nothing,* means, that Paul was not disposed to claim any thing as his
own, but simply *gloried in the Lord,* (<span
id="xviii.iii-p25.1"></span>[2Co
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017)<span
id="xviii.iii-p25.1"></span>,) unless, perhaps, you prefer to consider
this as a concession, in which he makes mention of what is thrown out
against him by adversaries and slanderers.  <span
id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923)

<span id="xviii.iii-p27"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p28"></span>**12.** *The signs of an Apostle* By the
*signs of an Apostle* he means — the seals, that tend to confirm the
evidence of his Apostleship, or, at least, for the proofs and evidences
of it. “God has confirmed my Apostleship among you to such a degree,
that it stands in no need of proof being adduced.” The *first sign* he
makes mention of is *patience* — either because he had remained
invincible,  <span id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924) by nobly
withstanding all the assaults of Satan and his enemies, and on no
occasion giving way; or because, regardless of his own distinction, he
suffered all injuries patiently, endured in silence countless
grievances,  <span id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) and, by patience,
overcame indignities.  <span id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926) For a
virtue so heroic is, as it were, a heavenly seal, by which the Lord
marks out his Apostles.

<span id="xviii.iii-p32"></span>He assigns the *second* place to
*miracles,* for while he makes mention of *signs* and *wonders* and
*mighty deeds,* he makes use of *three* terms, as he does elsewhere,
(<span id="xviii.iii-p32.1"></span>[2Th
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)<span
id="xviii.iii-p32.1"></span>,) for expressing one and the same thing.
Now he calls them *signs,* because they are not empty shows, but are
appointed for the instruction of *mankind* — *wonders,* because they
ought, by their novelty, to arouse men, and strike them with
astonishment — and *powers* or *mighty deeds,* because they are more
signal tokens of Divine power,  <span id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927)
than what we behold in the ordinary course of nature. Farther, we know
that this was the main design of miracles, when the gospel began to be
preached — that its doctrine might have greater authority given to it.
Hence, the more that any one was endowed with the power of working
miracles, so much the more was his ministry confirmed, as has been
stated in the fifteenth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.  <span
id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928)

<span id="xviii.iii-p35"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p36"></span>**13.** *What is there in which.* Here
is an aggravation of their ingratitude — that he had been distinguished,
that they might receive benefit — that they had derived advantage from
the attestation furnished of his Apostleship, and had, notwithstanding,
given their concurrence to the slanders  <span
id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929) of the false Apostles. He subjoins one
exception — that he *had not been burdensome to them;* and this, by way
of *irony,* for in reality this was over and above so many acts of
kindness, which he had conferred upon them — that he had served them
gratuitously. To busy themselves after this, as they did, in pouring
contempt upon him, what was this but to insult his modesty? Nay, what
cruelty there was in it! Hence, it is not without good reason, that he
sharply reproves pride so frantic. *Forgive me this wrong,* says he. For
they were doubly ungrateful, inasmuch as they not only contemned the
man, by whose acts of kindness they had been brought under obligation,
but even turned his kind disposition into an occasion of reproach.
Chrysostom is of opinion, that there is no *irony* implied, and that,
instead of this, there is an expression of apology; but, if any one
examines the entire context more narrowly, he will easily perceive, that
this gloss is quite foreign to Paul’s intention.

<span id="xviii.iii-p38"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p39"></span>**14.** *Behold, this third time* He
commends his own deed, for which he had received a very poor requital
from the Corinthians. For he says, that he refrained from taking their
worldly substance for two reasons *first,* because he sought *them,* not
their wealth; and *secondly,* because he was desirous to act the part of
a father towards them. From this it appears, what commendation was due
to his modesty, which occasioned him contempt among the Corinthians.

<span id="xviii.iii-p40"></span>*I seek not yours.* It is the part of a
genuine and upright pastor, not to seek to derive gain from his sheep,
but to endeavor to promote their welfare; though, at the same time, it
is to be observed, that men are not to be sought with the view of having
 <span id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930) every one his own particular
followers. It is a bad thing, to be devoted to gain, or to undertake the
office of a pastor with the view of making a trade of it; but for a
person to *draw away disciples after him,* (<span
id="xviii.iii-p41.2"></span>[Ac
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030)<span
id="xviii.iii-p41.2"></span>,) for purposes of ambition, is greatly
worse. Paul, however, means, that he is not greedy of hire, but is
concerned only for the welfare of souls. There is, however, still more
of elegance in what he says, for it is as though he had said: “I am in
quest of a larger hire than you think of. I am not contented with your
wealth, but I seek to have you wholly, that I may present a sacrifice to
the Lord of the fruits of my ministry.” But, what if one is supported by
his labors? Will he in that case seek the worldly substance of the
people.  <span id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931) Unquestionably, if he
is a faithful Pastor, he will always seek the welfare of the sheep —
nothing else. His pay will, it is true, be an additional thing; but he
ought to have no other aim, than what we have mentioned. Woe to those,
that have an eye to any thing else!

<span id="xviii.iii-p43"></span>*Parents for their children* Was he then
no *father* to the Philippians, who supported him even when absent from
them? (<span id="xviii.iii-p43.1"></span>[Phil.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016)<span
id="xviii.iii-p43.1"></span>.) Was there no one of the other Apostles
that was a *father,* inasmuch as the Churches ministered to their
support? He did not by any means intend this; for it is no new thing for
even parents to be supported by their children in their old age. Hence,
those are not necessarily unworthy of the honor due to *fathers,* who
live at the expense of the Church; but Paul simply wished to show from
the common law of nature, that what he had done proceeded from fatherly
affection. This argument, therefore, ought not to be turned in a
contrary direction. For he did this as *a father;* but, though he had
acted otherwise, he would, notwithstanding, have been a *father* still.

<span id="xviii.iii-p44"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p45"></span>**15.** *And I will most gladly spend*
This, certainly, was an evidence of a more than fatherly affection —
that he was prepared to lay out in their behalf not merely his
endeavors, and everything in his power to do, but even life itself. Nay
more, while he is regarded by them with coldness, he continues,
nevertheless, to cherish this affection. What heart, though even as hard
as iron, would such ardor of love not soften or break, especially in
connection with such constancy? Paul, however, does not here speak of
himself, merely that we may admire him, but that we may, also, imitate
him. Let all Pastors, therefore, learn from this, what they owe to their
Churches.

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 12:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#016)<span
id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span>**16.** But be it so, I did not burden
you: nevertheless, being crafty, I caught you with guile.

<span id="xviii.iv-p3"></span>**16.** Sed esto: ipse non gravavi vos:
verum quum essem astutus, dolo vos cepi.

<span id="xviii.iv-p4"></span>**17.** Did I make a gain of you by any of
them whom I sent unto you?

<span id="xviii.iv-p5"></span>**17.** Num per quenquam eorum, quos nisi
ad vos, expilavi vos?  <span id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932)

<span id="xviii.iv-p7"></span>**18.** I desired Titus, and with *him* I
sent a brother. Did Titus make a gain of you? walked we not in the same
spirit? *walked we* not in the same steps?

<span id="xviii.iv-p8"></span>**18.** Rogavi Titume, et una cum illo
misi fratrem: num quid a vobis extorsit Titus? An non eodem spirtu
ambulavimus? An non iisdem vestigiis?

<span id="xviii.iv-p9"></span>**19.** Again, think ye that we excuse
ourselves unto you? we speak before God in Christ: but *we do* all
things, dearly beloved, for your edifying.

<span id="xviii.iv-p10"></span>**19.** Rursum arbitramini, quod nos
vobis excusemus? In conspectu Dei in christo loquimur: sed omnia,
carissimi, pro vestra aedificatione.

<span id="xviii.iv-p11"></span>**20.** For I fear, lest, when I come, I
shall not find you such as I would, and *that* I shall be found unto you
such as ye would not: lest *there be* debates, envyings, wraths,
strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults:

<span id="xviii.iv-p12"></span>**20.** Nam metuo, ne qua fiat, ut, si
venero, non quales velim reperiam vos: et ego reperiar a vobis, qualem
nolitis: ne quo modo sint contentiones, obtrectationes, susurri,
tumores, seditiones.

<span id="xviii.iv-p13"></span>**21.** *And* lest, when I come again, my
God will humble me among you, and *that* I shall bewail many which have
sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication
and lasciviousness which they have committed.

<span id="xviii.iv-p14"></span>**21.** Ne iterum, ubi venero, humiliet
me Deus meus apud vosm et lugeam multos eorum qui ante peccaverumt, nec
poenitentiam egerunt immunditiae libidinis et impudicitiae quam
patrarunt.

<span id="xviii.iv-p15"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iv-p16"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p17"></span>**16.** *But be it so.* These words
intimate, that Paul had been blamed by malevolent persons, as though he
had in a clandestine way procured, through means of hired persons, what
he had refused to receive with his own hands  <span
id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) — not that he had done any such thing,
but they *“measure* others,” as they say, “by their own ell.”  <span
id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934) For it is customary for the wicked
impudently to impute to the servants of God, whatever they would
themselves do, if they had it in their power. Hence, Paul is
constrained, with the view of clearing himself of a charge impudently
fabricated,  <span id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935) to defend the
integrity of those whom he sent, for if they had committed any error, it
would have been reckoned to his account. Now, who would be surprised at
his being so cautious as to alms, when he had been harassed by such
unfair judgments as to his conduct, after having made use of every
precaution?  <span id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936) Let his case,
however, be a warning to us, not to look upon it as a thing that is new
and intolerable, if at any time we find occasion to answer similar
calumnies; but, more especially, let this be an admonition to us to use
strict caution, not to furnish any handle to revilers. For we see, that
it is not enough to give evidence of being ourselves upright, if those,
whose assistance we have made use of, are not, also, found to be so.
Hence, our choice of them must not be made lightly, or as a matter of
mere form, but with the utmost possible care.

<span id="xviii.iv-p22"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p23"></span>**19.** *Do you again think.* As those
that are conscious to themselves of something wrong are sometimes more
anxious than others to clear themselves, it is probable, that this,
also, was turned into a ground of calumny — that Paul had in the former
Epistle applied himself to a defense of his ministry. Farther, it is a
fault in the servants of Christ, to be too much concerned as to their
own reputation. With the view, therefore, of repelling those calumnies,
he declares in the *first* place, that he speaks in the presence of God,
whom evil consciences always dread. In the *second* place, he maintains,
that he has not so much a *view* to himself, as to them. He was prepared
to go through *good report and bad report,* (<span
id="xviii.iv-p23.1"></span>[2Co
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008)<span id="xviii.iv-p23.1"></span>,)
nay, even to be reduced to nothing; but it was of advantage to the
Corinthians, that he should retain the reputation that he deserved, that
his ministry might not be brought into contempt.

<span id="xviii.iv-p24"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p25"></span>**20.** *For I fear* He declares, in what
way it tends to their edification, that his integrity should be
vindicated, for, on the ground that he had *come* into contempt, many
grew wanton, as it were, with loosened reins. Now respect for him would
have been a means of leading them to repentance*,* for they would have
listened to his admonitions.

<span id="xviii.iv-p26"></span>*I fear,* says he. This *fear* proceeded
from love, for, unless he had been concerned as to their welfare, he
would very readily have overlooked all this, from which he sought to
obtain no personal advantage. For otherwise we are afraid to give
occasion of offense, when we foresee that it will be hurtful to
ourselves.

<span id="xviii.iv-p27"></span>*And I shall be found by you.* Here is a
*second* ground of fear — lest he should be constrained to act with
greater severity. Now it is a token not merely of love, but even of
indulgence, to shun severity, and have recourse to milder measures. “As
to my striving at present to maintain my authority, and endeavoring to
bring you back to obedience, I do this, lest I should find occasion to
punish your obstinacy more severely, if I come, and find among you
nothing of amendment.” He teaches, accordingly, by his example, that
mild remedies must always be resorted to by Pastors, for the correction
of faults, before they have recourse to extreme severity; and, at the
same time, that we must, by admonitions and reproofs, prevent the
necessity of having recourse to the utmost rigor.

<span id="xviii.iv-p28"></span>*Lest, by any means, there be
contentions.* He enumerates the vices, which chiefly prevailed among the
Corinthians; almost all of which proceeded from the same source. For had
not every one been devoted to self, they would never have contended with
each other — they would never have envied one another — there would have
been no slandering among them.  <span id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937)
Thus the sum and substance of the first catalogue  <span
id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938) is want of love, because (<span
id="xviii.iv-p30.2"></span>φιλαυτία) self-love*,*  <span
id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939) and ambition prevailed.

<span id="xviii.iv-p32"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p33"></span>**21.** *Lest, when I come, my God should
humble me* His abasement was reckoned to him as a fault. The blame of it
he throws back upon the Corinthians, who, when they should have honored
his Apostleship, loaded it, on the contrary, with disgrace; for their
proficiency  <span id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940) would have been the
glory and honor of Paul’s Apostleship. When, therefore, they were,
instead of this, overrun with many vices, they heaped disgrace upon him
to the utmost of their power. He does not, indeed, charge them all with
this crime, but only a few, who had impudently despised all his
admonitions. The meaning, then, is this: “They think contemptuously of
me, because I appear contemptible. Let them, then, give me no occasion
of abasement: nay more, let them, on the contrary, laying aside their
forwardness, begin to feel shame; and let them, confounded at their
iniquities, prostrate themselves on the ground, instead of looking down
upon others with disdain.”

<span id="xviii.iv-p35"></span>In the mean time, he lets us know the
disposition of a true and genuine Pastor, when he says that he will look
upon the sins of others with grief. And, undoubtedly, the right way of
acting is this — that every Christian shall have his Church inclosed
within his heart, and be affected with its maladies, as if they were his
own, — sympathize with its sorrows, and bewail its sins. We see, how
Jeremiah entreats, that there may be given him *a fountain of tears,*
(<span id="xviii.iv-p35.1"></span>[Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001)<span id="xviii.iv-p35.1"></span>,)
that he may bewail the calamity of his people. We see, how pious kings
and prophets, to whom the government of the people was committed, were
touched with similar feelings. It is, indeed, a thing that is common to
all the pious, to be grieved in every case in which God is offended, and
to bewail the ruin of brethren, and present themselves before God in
their room as in a manner guilty, but it is more particularly requisite
on the part of Pastors.  <span id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941)
Farther, Paul here brings forward a second catalogue of vices, which,
however, belong to one general head — unchastity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_874"></span>[875](cc40017.htm#fr_874) <span
id="xviii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p10.1"></span>Parolles
inenarrables, ou, qui ne se doyuent dire;” — “Words unutterable, *or,*
that ought not to be spoken.”

<span id="fn_875"></span>[876](cc40017.htm#fr_875) <span
id="xviii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>Il n’est
possible, ou loisible;” — “It is not possible, or lawful.”

<span id="fn_876"></span>[877](cc40017.htm#fr_876) <span
id="xviii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p17.1"></span>Ses dons
et graces;” — “His gifts and graces.”

<span id="fn_877"></span>[878](cc40017.htm#fr_877) <span
id="xviii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p19"></span> “*I will come* Marg ‘*For* I will’ Our
Translators have omitted (<span id="xviii.i-p19.1"></span>γὰρ), *for,*
in the text, evidently supposing that it is a mere expletive. Doddridge
renders it ‘nevertheless.’ But it seems to me that it contains an
important sense, and that it should be rendered by *then.* ‘Since it is
not fit that I should glory, *then* I will refer to visions, etc. I will
turn away, *then,* from that subject, and come to another.’ Thus the
word (<span id="xviii.i-p19.2"></span>γὰρ), *for*, is used in <span
id="xviii.i-p19.3"></span>[Joh
7:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#041)<span id="xviii.i-p19.3"></span>,
‘Shall *then* (<span id="xviii.i-p19.4"></span>μὴ γὰρ) Christ come out
of Galilee?’ <span id="xviii.i-p19.5"></span>[Ac
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#031)<span id="xviii.i-p19.5"></span>,
‘How can I *then* (<span id="xviii.i-p19.6"></span>τῶς γὰρ) except some
man should guide me?’” — *Barnes. Granville Penn* renders the passage as
follows: “Must I needs boast? It is not good indeed, yet I will come to
visions and revelations of the Lord.” This rendering he adopts, as
corresponding with the reading of the *Vat.* and most ancient MS. <span
id="xviii.i-p19.7"></span>Καυχᾶσθαι δεῖ οὐ συμφέρον μὲν ἐλεύσομαι δὲ εἰς
ὀπτασίας καὶ ἀποκαλύψεις Κυρίου — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_878"></span>[879](cc40017.htm#fr_878) <span
id="xviii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p21"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p21.1"></span>C’est
qu’il signfie en ce qui s’est presente a nous;” — “What he intends in
what is presented to our view.”

<span id="xviii.i-p22"></span>“*Visions*” (<span
id="xviii.i-p22.1"></span>ὀπτασίας) — *symbolical* representations of
spiritual and celestial things, in which matters of the deepest
importance are exhibited to the eve of the mind by a variety of emblems,
the nature and properties of which serve to illustrate those spiritual
things. — *Revelations* (<span id="xviii.i-p22.2"></span>ἀποκαλύψεις) —
*a* manifestation of things not before known, and such as God alone can
make known, because they are a part of his own inscrutable counsels.” —
*Dr* *A. Clarke.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_879"></span>[880](cc40017.htm#fr_879) <span
id="xviii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p25.1"></span>Ces
opiniastres ambitieux;” — “Those ambitious, obstinate persons.”

<span id="fn_880"></span>[881](cc40017.htm#fr_880) <span
id="xviii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p27"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p27.1"></span>Que Dieu
a tellement besongne et precede enuers luy;” — That God had in such a
manner wrought and acted towards him.”

<span id="fn_881"></span>[882](cc40017.htm#fr_881) <span
id="xviii.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p28"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p28.1"></span>Est
incomprehensible a nostre sens;” — “Is incomprehensible to our mind.”

<span id="fn_882"></span>[883](cc40017.htm#fr_882) <span
id="xviii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p30"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p30.1"></span>Ne se
contentans point de ceci;” — “Not contenting themselves with this.”

<span id="fn_883"></span>[884](cc40017.htm#fr_883) <span
id="xviii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p31"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p31.1"></span>Mais
nous n’auons point delibere, et aussi il n’est pas en nous de satisfaire
a leur curiosite;” — “But we have not determined as to this, and it does
not belong to us to satisfy their curiosity.”

<span id="fn_884"></span>[885](cc40017.htm#fr_884) <span
id="xviii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p32"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p32.1"></span>Es
premiers commencemens de la religion;” — “In the first elements of
religion.”

<span id="fn_885"></span>[886](cc40017.htm#fr_885) <span
id="xviii.i-p32.4"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p33"></span> “This vision Paul had kept secret for
fourteen years. He had doubtless *often* thought of it; and the
remembrance of that glorious hour was doubtless one of the reasons why
he bore trials so patiently, and was willing to endure so much. But
before this he had had no occasion to mention it. He had other proofs in
abundance that he was called to the work of an Apostle; and to mention
this would savour of pride and ostentation. It was only when he was
*compelled* to refer to the evidences of his apostolic mission that he
refers to it here.” — *Barnes.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_886"></span>[887](cc40017.htm#fr_886) <span
id="xviii.i-p34.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p35"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p35.1"></span>Par
dessus tons les cieux;” — “Above all the heavens.”

<span id="fn_887"></span>[888](cc40017.htm#fr_887) <span
id="xviii.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p36"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p36.1"></span>Non
content de nommer simplement le ciel;” — “Not contented with simply
employing the term *heaven.*”

<span id="fn_888"></span>[889](cc40017.htm#fr_888) <span
id="xviii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p39"></span> “The word *paradise* (<span
id="xviii.i-p39.1"></span>παράδεισος) occurs but three times in the New
Testament, (<span id="xviii.i-p39.2"></span>[Lu
23:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span id="xviii.i-p39.2"></span>,
<span id="xviii.i-p39.3"></span>[2Co
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="xviii.i-p39.3"></span>,
and <span id="xviii.i-p39.4"></span>[Re
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007)<span id="xviii.i-p39.4"></span>.)
It occurs often in the Septuagint, as the translation of the word
garden, (<span id="xviii.i-p39.5"></span>גן) *gan;* and of the word
(<span id="xviii.i-p39.6"></span>פרדס) *pardes,* in <span
id="xviii.i-p39.7"></span>[Ne 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008)<span
id="xviii.i-p39.7"></span>, <span id="xviii.i-p39.8"></span>[Ec
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#005)<span id="xviii.i-p39.8"></span>,
<span id="xviii.i-p39.9"></span>[So
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#013)<span id="xviii.i-p39.9"></span>.
It is a word which had its origin in the language of Eastern Asia, and
which has been adopted in the Greek, the Roman, and other western
languages. In Sanscrit, the word *paradesha* means a land elevated and
cultivated; in Armenian, *pardes* denotes a garden around the house,
planted with trees, shrubs, grass for use and ornament. In Persia, the
word denotes the *pleasure-gardens,* and *parks* with wild animals,
around the country residences of the monarchs and princes. Hence it
denotes, in general, a garden of pleasure; and in the New Testament is
applied to the abodes of the blessed after death, the dwelling-place of
God, and of happy spirits; or to heaven as a place of blessedness.” —
*Barnes.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_889"></span>[890](cc40017.htm#fr_889) <span
id="xviii.i-p39.10"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p40"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p40.1"></span>Toute
region delectable et excellente en fertilite et abundance de biens de la
terre;” — “Every region that is delightful and distinguished by
fertility and abundance of the good things of the earth.”

<span id="fn_890"></span>[891](cc40017.htm#fr_890) <span
id="xviii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p42"></span> Calvin’s meaning evidently is, that <span
id="xviii.i-p42.1"></span>ῥήματα, here rendered *words,* is often made
use of, like the corresponding Hebrew word, <span
id="xviii.i-p42.2"></span>דברין (*dabarim,*) to mean *things.*
Accordingly <span id="xviii.i-p42.3"></span>דבר*,* (*dabar,*) when
employed to denote *thing,* is very frequently rendered in the
Septuagint by <span id="xviii.i-p42.4"></span>ῥήμα, as, for example, in
<span id="xviii.i-p42.5"></span>[Ge
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014)<span id="xviii.i-p42.5"></span>,
<span id="xviii.i-p42.6"></span>[Ex
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#017)<span id="xviii.i-p42.6"></span>,
<span id="xviii.i-p42.7"></span>[De
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p42.7"></span>.
Calvin, when commenting on the *expression* — *with God nothing shall be
impossible,* (<span id="xviii.i-p42.8"></span>[Lu
1:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#037)<span id="xviii.i-p42.8"></span>,)
remarks that “a *word* often means a *thing* in the idiom of the Hebrew
language, which the Evangelists followed, though they wrote in Greek.” —
Calvin’s Harmony, vol. 1, p. 45.— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_891"></span>[892](cc40017.htm#fr_891) <span
id="xviii.i-p42.10"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p43"></span> “<span
id="xviii.i-p43.1"></span>Secretes, ou impossibles a dire;” — “Secret,
or such as it is impossible to utter.”

<span id="fn_892"></span>[893](cc40017.htm#fr_892) <span
id="xviii.i-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p44"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p44.1"></span>Mais
qu’il perseuerast constamment, sans se laisser vainere;” — “But might
persevere steadfastly, without allowing himself to be overcome.”

<span id="fn_893"></span>[894](cc40017.htm#fr_893) <span
id="xviii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p47"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p47.1"></span>La plus
grande partie;” — “The greatest part.”

<span id="fn_894"></span>[895](cc40017.htm#fr_894) <span
id="xviii.i-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p48"></span> Calvin refers here to one Dionysius,
whose writings appear to have been looked upon by many in Calvin’s
times, as having been composed by Dionysius the Areopagite, who was
converted by Paul at Athens. (<span id="xviii.i-p48.2"></span>[Ac
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034)<span
id="xviii.i-p48.2"></span>.) A copy of the work referred to, printed at
Paris in 1555, bears the following title: “<span
id="xviii.i-p48.3"></span>S. Dionysii Areopagitae, Martyris Inclyti,
Athenarum Episcopi, et Galliarum Apostoli, opera-Translatio Noua
Ambrosii Florentini,” *etc*.; — “The works of St. Dionysius the
Areopagite, the renowned Martyr, Bishop of Athens, and Apostle of the
Gauls — a New Translation by Ambrosius Florentine,” etc. — Calvin, in
his Institutes, (volume 1,) when treating of angels, adverts to the
writings of Dionysius, in the following terms: “None can deny that
Dionysius (whoever he may have been) has many shrewd and subtle
disquisitions in his Celestial Hierarchy, but on looking at them more
closely, every one must see that they are merely idle talk. The duty of
a theologian, however, is not to tickle the ear, but confirm the
conscience, by teaching what is true, certain, and useful. When you read
the work of Dionysius, you would think that the man had come down from
heaven, and was relating, not what he had learned, but what he had
actually seen. Paul, however, though he was carried to the third heaven,
so far from delivering any thing of the kind positively, declares, that
it was not lawful for man to speak the secrets which he had seen.
Bidding adieu, therefore, to that nugatory wisdom, let us endeavor to
ascertain from the simple doctrine of Scripture, what it is the Lord’s
pleasure that we should know concerning angels.” — *Beza,* in his
Annotations on <span id="xviii.i-p48.4"></span>[1Co
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)<span id="xviii.i-p48.4"></span>,
when expounding the expression — “he himself shall be saved, yet so as
by fire,” makes mention of Dionysius, as having been, in his opinion,
Bishop of Corinth, and speaks of him as having devoted himself to
unprofitable speculations, and as harassing himself, for the most part
in vain, in describing the Celestial Hierarchy. — The Rhemish
Translators, when commenting on <span id="xviii.i-p48.5"></span>[Ac
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034)<span id="xviii.i-p48.5"></span>,
contend for the genuineness of the writings referred to. “<span
id="xviii.i-p48.6"></span>*Dionysius Areopaita* This is that famous
Denys that first converted France, and wrote those notable and divine
works — ’<span id="xviii.i-p48.7"></span>De Ecclesiastica et Caelesti
Hierarchia, de diuinis nominibus,’ and others; in which he confirmeth,
and proveth plainely, almost all things that the Church now useth in the
ministration of the Holy Sacrament, and affirmeth that he learned them
of the Apostles, giving also testimony for the Catholike faith in most
things now controuersed, so plainely that our adversaries have no shift
but to deny this Denys to have been the author of them, raining that
they be another’s of later age.” To these statements Dr. Fulke, in his
elaborate work in refutation of the errors of the Rhemish Translators,
(p. 403,) replies as follows: “That Dionysius Areopagita was author of
those bookes which now beare his name, you bring no proofe at all. We
alleage that Eusebius, Hierome, Gennadius, neuer heard of his writings,
for if they had heard, Dionysius Areopagita should have been registered
by them among ecclesiasticall writers.” — It is stated by *Mosheim* in
his Ecclesiastical History, (London 1825,) volume 2, *n.* (*u*)*,* that
“*the* spuriousness of these works is now universally granted by the
most learned and impartial of the Roman Catholic writers, as they
contain accounts of many events that happened several ages after the
time of Dionysius, and were not at all mentioned until after the fifth
century.” *Turretine* in his Theology brings forward, at considerable
length, evidence to show, that the work referred to was not, as
pretended, the production of Dionysius the Areopagite, who was “<span
id="xviii.i-p48.8"></span>σύγχρονος Apostolis,” (“a contemporary of the
Apostles,”) but was written by an author of much later date — born in
the fifth *century.* — *Turretini* Theologia, (Genevae, 1690,) tom. 3,
pp. 233, 234. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_895"></span>[896](cc40017.htm#fr_895) <span
id="xviii.i-p48.9"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p49"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p49.1"></span>Il faut
que nous soyons d’autant plus sobres et modestes;” — “It is necessary,
that we should be so much the more sober and modest.”

<span id="fn_896"></span>[897](cc40017.htm#fr_896) <span
id="xviii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p15"></span> The same rendering is given in Cranmer’s
version, (1539,) “Neuerthelesse I spare you.” The Vulgate reads: “<span
id="xviii.ii-p15.1"></span>Parco autem;” — (“But I spare.”) This
rendering is followed in Wiclif’s version, (1380,) Tyndale’s (1534,) and
the Rheims version, (1582.) The Geneva version (1557) has: “but I
*refraine.*” — *Joachim Camerarius* remarks, that <span
id="xviii.ii-p15.2"></span>φείδομαι, is elliptical, as being used
instead of <span id="xviii.ii-p15.3"></span>φείδομαι τοῦ ἐρεῖν, or,
<span id="xviii.ii-p15.4"></span>τοῦ μεγαλαυχεῖν; — “I refrain from
speaking, or from boasting.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_897"></span>[898](cc40017.htm#fr_897) <span
id="xviii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p19.1"></span>Selon
le Grec il faudroit dire *A la chair*;” — “According to the Greek, we
would require to say, To *the flesh.*”

<span id="fn_898"></span>[899](cc40017.htm#fr_898) <span
id="xviii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p21"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p21.1"></span>Il
faut reietter loin ce songe;” — “We must put far away from us that
dream.”

<span id="fn_899"></span>[900](cc40017.htm#fr_899) <span
id="xviii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p23"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p23.1"></span>Ceste
consideration ne luy donnoit point le loisir de s’egayer, comme vn homme
sans souci, mais l’admonestoit de se tenir sur ses gardes;” — “This
consideration did not allow him leisure to sport himself, like a man
that is devoid of care, but warned him to be upon his guard.”

<span id="fn_900"></span>[901](cc40017.htm#fr_900) <span
id="xviii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p25.1"></span>Qu’il
a este reprime et range a humilite;” — “That he has been restrained and
brought down to subjection.”

<span id="fn_901"></span>[902](cc40017.htm#fr_901) <span
id="xviii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p26.1"></span>Si
quelq’vn a este tellement frappe au visage, que les taches noires y
demeurent;” — “If any one has been struck on the face, in such a way, as
to leave black marks upon it.”

<span id="fn_902"></span>[903](cc40017.htm#fr_902) <span
id="xviii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p27.1"></span>Toute
orgueil et insolence;” — “All pride and insolence.”

<span id="fn_903"></span>[904](cc40017.htm#fr_903) <span
id="xviii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p28.1"></span>Or ie
prie maintenant sur cepassage tous fideles, qu’ils auisent;” — “But I
entreat now in connection with this passage all believers to take
notice.”

<span id="fn_904"></span>[905](cc40017.htm#fr_904) <span
id="xviii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p29.1"></span>Veu
qu’il ne pent estre guari que par d’autre poison;” — “Inasmuch as it
cannot be cured except by another poison.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[906](cc40017.htm#fr_905) <span
id="xviii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p33"></span> Dr. Campbell, in his Translation of the
Gospels, makes use of the term *manslayer,* as Calvin does here, and
makes the following observations in support of this rendering: “The
common term for *murderer* in the New Testament is <span
id="xviii.ii-p33.1"></span>φονεὺς. I have here made choice of a less
usual name, not from any disposition to trace etymologies, but because I
think it is not without intention, that the devil, as being not of
earthly extraction, is rather called <span
id="xviii.ii-p33.2"></span>ἀνθρωποκτόνος than <span
id="xviii.ii-p33.3"></span>φονεὺς, as marking, with greater precision,
his ancient enmity to the human race. When the name *murderer* is
applied to a rational being of a species different from ours, it
naturally suggests, that the being so denominated is a destroyer of
others of his own species. As this is not meant here, the Evangelist’s
term is peculiarly apposite. At the same time, I am sensible, that our
word *manslaughter* means, in the language of the law, such killing as
is, indeed, criminal, though not so atrocious as murder. But, in common
use, it is not so limited. Heylyn says, to the same purpose — a *slayer
of men.*” — *Campbell* on the Gospels, (Edin. 1807,) volume 2. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_906"></span>[907](cc40017.htm#fr_906) <span
id="xviii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p37"></span> Calvin alludes to what he had said as to
the number *three,* when commenting on an expression, which occurs in
<span id="xviii.ii-p37.1"></span>[2Co
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span id="xviii.ii-p37.1"></span>
— *third heavens*. See p. 368. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_907"></span>[908](cc40017.htm#fr_907) <span
id="xviii.ii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p38"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p38.1"></span>Τρὶς;
is considered by the commentators as a certain for an uncertain, but
large number, (i.e., *oftentimes.*) To the passages cited by them I add
Eurip. Hippol. 46; and <span id="xviii.ii-p38.2"></span>[Job
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#029)<span
id="xviii.ii-p38.2"></span>, which I would render — ‘So all these things
doth God work with man unto three times,’ namely, by divinely sent
disorders, by nocturnal visions, and by divine messengers.” —
*Bloomfield.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_908"></span>[909](cc40017.htm#fr_908) <span
id="xviii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p40.1"></span>Si
nous ne voulons faire toutes les promesses de Dieu vaines et in
u-tiles;” — “If we would not make all the promises of God vain and
useless.”

<span id="fn_909"></span>[910](cc40017.htm#fr_909) <span
id="xviii.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p43"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p43.1"></span>Et
aussi il n’est pas fort requis de la scauoir;” — “And besides, it is not
greatly requisite to know it.”

<span id="fn_910"></span>[911](cc40017.htm#fr_910) <span
id="xviii.ii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p44"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p44.1"></span>Et
c’est assez;” — “And that is enough.”

<span id="fn_911"></span>[912](cc40017.htm#fr_911) <span
id="xviii.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p47"></span> The original word, <span
id="xviii.ii-p47.1"></span>ἐπισκηνώσὟ, properly means, to *pitch a tent,
or tabernacle, upon.* Raphelius quotes two passages from Polybius, in
which the verb is used as meaning — to *enter into, and dwell in.* <span
id="xviii.ii-p47.2"></span>Τὸ δὲ τελευτασῖον ἐπισωκηνώσαντες ἐπὶ τὰς
οἰκίας “and at last, having *entered in, and taken possession of* the
houses.” <span id="xviii.ii-p47.3"></span>Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ταῖς οἰκίαις
ἐπισκηνώσαντες κατεῖχον τὴν πόλιν — “And after these things, having
*entered into* the houses, they took possession of the city.” —
CEcumenius, cited by Parkhurst, considers <span
id="xviii.ii-p47.4"></span>ἐπίσκηνώσὟ, as employed by the Apostle here,
to be equivalent to <span id="xviii.ii-p47.5"></span>ὁλη ἐν ὁλω
κατοικήσὟ — “may *entirely take possession of,me, and dwell in me.*” —
*It* is admirably well observed by Dr. Adam Clarke, that “the same
*Eternal* WORD,” (of whom it is said in <span
id="xviii.ii-p47.6"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="xviii.ii-p47.6"></span>,
that he “was made flesh, and *made his tabernacle among us, (*<span
id="xviii.ii-p47.7"></span>ἐσκήνωσεν ἐν ἡμῖν,) full of grace and
truth,”) “promised to make his *tabernacle* with the Apostle, and gives
him a proof that he was still the *same* — *full of grace and truth,* by
assuring him that his *grace should be sufficient for him.*” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_912"></span>[913](cc40017.htm#fr_912) <span
id="xviii.ii-p47.8"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p48"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p48.1"></span>*Sees
et steriles*;” — “Dry and barren.”

<span id="fn_913"></span>[914](cc40017.htm#fr_913) <span
id="xviii.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p49"></span> Much in accordance with this beautiful
sentiment is Bunyan’s description of the “Valley of Humiliation,” in the
*second* part of his “Pilgrim’s Progress.” “It is the best and most
fruitful piece of ground in all these parts. It is fat ground, and, as
you see, consisteth much in meadows; and if a man was to come here in
the summer-time, as we do now, if he knew not any thing before thereof,
and if he also delighted himself in the sight of his eyes, he might see
that which would be delightful to him.

<span id="xviii.ii-p50"></span>‘Behold how green this valley is! also
how beautiful with lilies!’  
(<span id="xviii.ii-p50.2"></span>[So
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001)<span id="xviii.ii-p50.2"></span>)

<span id="xviii.ii-p51"></span>I have known many labouring men that have
got good estates in this Valley of Humiliation. (<span
id="xviii.ii-p51.1"></span>[1Pe
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span id="xviii.ii-p51.1"></span>.)
‘For God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble.’ (<span
id="xviii.ii-p51.2"></span>[Jas
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="xviii.ii-p51.2"></span>.)
For indeed it is a very fruitful soil, and doth bring forth by
*handfuls.*” — *Bunyan’s Allegorical Works,* (Glasgow, 1843,) p. 164. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_914"></span>[915](cc40017.htm#fr_914) <span
id="xviii.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p53"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p53.1"></span>Ce
n’est point si nayfuement et franchement qu’il faloit;” — “It is not so
ingenuously and frankly, as it ought to be.”

<span id="fn_915"></span>[916](cc40017.htm#fr_915) <span
id="xviii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p15.1"></span>Qui
deuoyent les premiers faire cet office — ascauoir de le loyer;” — “Who
ought to have been the first to discharge that office — that of praising
him.”

<span id="fn_916"></span>[917](cc40017.htm#fr_916) <span
id="xviii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p16"></span> “The Apostle, in defending himself, was
aware how near he approached the *language* of a *fool,* that is, a man
desirous of vain glory, and how liable what he had written was to be
attributed to that motive. It is on this account that he obviates the
charge which he knew his adversaries would allege. ‘Yes,’ says he, ‘I
speak as a fool \[...\] but ye have *compelled* me.’ This was owning
that, as to his *words,* they might, indeed, be considered as vain
glorying, if the *occasion* were overlooked: but, if that were justly
considered, it would be found that *they* ought rather to be ashamed
than *he,* for having reduced him to the disagreeable necessity of
speaking in his own behalf.” — *Fuller s Works,* volume 3. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_917"></span>[918](cc40017.htm#fr_917) <span
id="xviii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p19.1"></span>Qui
s’attribuoyent le premier lieu et souuerain degre;” — “Who claimed for
themselves the first place and highest rank.”

<span id="fn_918"></span>[919](cc40017.htm#fr_918) <span
id="xviii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p20"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iii-p20.1"></span>Qu’on m’accompare auec lequel qu’on voudra
des Apostres;” — “Let them compare me with whom they choose among the
Apostles.”

<span id="fn_919"></span>[920](cc40017.htm#fr_919) <span
id="xviii.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p21"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iii-p21.1"></span>Faussement vsurpez et controuuez;” — “When
falsely claimed and counterfeited.”

<span id="fn_920"></span>[921](cc40017.htm#fr_920) <span
id="xviii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p22"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iii-p22.1"></span>Qu’ils entendoyent bien toute leur
intention;” — “That they understood well their entire design.”

<span id="fn_921"></span>[922](cc40017.htm#fr_921) <span
id="xviii.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p23.1"></span>Et
par ce moyen ils acqueroyent credit enuers les simples et idiots“ — “And
by this means they gained credit among the simple and unlearned.”

<span id="fn_922"></span>[923](cc40017.htm#fr_922) <span
id="xviii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p24.1"></span>Ne
pouuoit faire autrement qu’il ne veinst a faire ceste comparaison de soy
et des plus excellens Apostres;” — “Could not do otherwise than enter
upon this comparison between himself and the most eminent of the
Apostles.”

<span id="fn_923"></span>[924](cc40017.htm#fr_923) <span
id="xviii.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p26.1"></span>Ce
que les malueillans et detracteurs gazouilloyent de luy;” — “What
malevolent persons and slanderers chirped respecting him.”

<span id="fn_924"></span>[925](cc40017.htm#fr_924) <span
id="xviii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p29.1"></span>Il a
tousiours demure inuincible, et ferme sans se reculer;” — “He has always
remained invincible and firm, without shrinking back.”

<span id="fn_925"></span>[926](cc40017.htm#fr_925) <span
id="xviii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p30"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p30.1"></span>Il a
laisse passer beaucoup de fascheries sans en faire semblant de *rien*;”
— “He has allowed many grievances to pass, without seeming to take any
notice of them.”

<span id="fn_926"></span>[927](cc40017.htm#fr_926) <span
id="xviii.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p31"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iii-p31.1"></span>Beaucoup de lasches tours;” — “Many base
tricks.”

<span id="fn_927"></span>[928](cc40017.htm#fr_927) <span
id="xviii.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p33.1"></span>Ce
sont exemples et tesmoignages plus excellent et euidens de la vertu
Diuine;” — “Those are signal and manifest instances and evidences of
Divine power.”

<span id="fn_928"></span>[929](cc40017.htm#fr_928) <span
id="xviii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p34"></span> Calvin seems to refer here more
particularly to the observations made by him, when commenting on <span
id="xviii.iii-p34.2"></span>[Romans
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018)<span
id="xviii.iii-p34.2"></span>. “<span id="xviii.iii-p34.3"></span>*Hie*
nobilis est locus de miraculorum usu: nempe ut reverentiam
obedientiamque Deo apud homines comparent. Sic apud Marcum (<span
id="xviii.iii-p34.4"></span>[Mr
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020)<span
id="xviii.iii-p34.4"></span>,) <span id="xviii.iii-p34.5"></span>legis,
Dominum *confirmasse doetrinam subsequentibus signis.* Sic Lucas in
Actis (<span id="xviii.iii-p34.6"></span>[Ac
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003)<span
id="xviii.iii-p34.6"></span>,) <span id="xviii.iii-p34.7"></span>narrat,
Dominum *per miracula testimonium reddidisse sermoni gratiae suoe;*” —
“This is an admirable passage in reference to the use of miracles — that
they may secure among men reverence and obedience towards God. Thus you
read in <span id="xviii.iii-p34.8"></span>[Mr
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020)<span
id="xviii.iii-p34.8"></span>, that the Lord *confirmed their doctrine by
signs following.* So also Luke, in <span id="xviii.iii-p34.9"></span>[Ac
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003)<span
id="xviii.iii-p34.9"></span>, relates that the Lord *by miracles gave
testimony to the word.of his grace.*” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_929"></span>[930](cc40017.htm#fr_929) <span
id="xviii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p37"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p37.1"></span>Aux
injures et detractions;” — “The insults and slanders.”

<span id="fn_930"></span>[931](cc40017.htm#fr_930) <span
id="xviii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p41"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p41.1"></span>Que
les Ministres ne doyuent pas cercher les hommes a ceste intention
d’auoir, chacun des disciples a soy en particulier;” — “That Ministers
ought not to seek men with the intention of having, each *one,*
disciples to himself peculiarly.”

<span id="fn_931"></span>[932](cc40017.htm#fr_931) <span
id="xviii.iii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p42"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iii-p42.1"></span>Est-ce pourtant a dire que vn tel cerche la
substance du peuple?” — “Must we then say, that such a man seeks the
worldly substance of the people?”

<span id="fn_932"></span>[933](cc40017.htm#fr_932) <span
id="xviii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p6.1"></span>Vous
ay-ie affrontez, ou, pillez?” — “Did I take advantage of you, or plunder
you?”

<span id="fn_933"></span>[934](cc40017.htm#fr_933) <span
id="xviii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p18"></span> “This passage is so far from being
friendly to the exercise of guile, that it is a manifest disavowal of
it. It is an *irony.* The Apostle does not describe what had actually
been his conduct, but that of which he stood accused by the Corinthian
teachers. They insinuated, that he was a sly, crafty man, going about
preaching, persuading, and catching people with guile. Paul
acknowledges, that he and his colleagues did, indeed, ‘persuade men,’
and could not do otherwise, for ‘the love of Christ constrained them.’
(<span id="xviii.iv-p18.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#011),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014)<span id="xviii.iv-p18.1"></span>.)
But he indignantly repels the insinuation of its being from mercenary
motives. ‘We have wronged no man,’ says he, ‘we have corrupted no man;
we have defrauded no man.’ (<span id="xviii.iv-p18.2"></span>[2Co
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002)<span id="xviii.iv-p18.2"></span>.)
Having denied the charge, he shows the *absurdity* of it. Mercenary men,
who wish to draw people after them, have an *end* to answer: and ‘What
end,’ says Paul, ‘could I have in view, in *persuading* you to embrace
the gospel? Have I gained any thing by you? When I was with you, was I
burdensome to you? No: nor, as things are, will I be burdensome. *Yet
being crafty,* forsooth, *I caught you with guile.*’” — *Fuller’ s
Works,* volume 3. — Ed.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[935](cc40017.htm#fr_934) <span
id="xviii.iv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p19"></span> The reader will find the same proverb
made use of by Calvin, when commenting on <span
id="xviii.iv-p19.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
7:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#036)<span id="xviii.iv-p19.1"></span>.
(See vol. 1, p. 265.) He probably alludes, in both instances, to a
sentiment of Horace: “<span id="xviii.iv-p19.3"></span>Metiri se
quenquam suo modulo ac pede verum est;” — “It is proper, that every one
should measure himself by his own measure and foot.” (Hor. Epist. 1.7.
98.) — Ed.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[936](cc40017.htm#fr_935) <span
id="xviii.iv-p19.4"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p20.1"></span>Pour
refuter et repousser loin de soy le blasme qu’on auoit controuue
impudemment;” — “With the view of repelling, and putting far away from
himself the blame which they had inpudently contrived.”

<span id="fn_936"></span>[937](cc40017.htm#fr_936) <span
id="xviii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p21.1"></span>Veu
qu’on semoit de luy des souspectons et iugemens si iniques, apres qu’il
auoit si diligemment pourueu a toutes choses?” — “Inasmuch as they
propagated such unfair surmises and judgments respecting him, after he
had so carefully used precaution as to every thing?”

<span id="fn_937"></span>[938](cc40017.htm#fr_937) <span
id="xviii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p29.1"></span>Ils
n’eussent iamais mesdit l’vn de l’autre;” — “They would never have
slandered one another.”

<span id="fn_938"></span>[939](cc40017.htm#fr_938) <span
id="xviii.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p30"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p30.1"></span>Du
premier denombrement de leur vices qu’il fait yci;” — “Of the first
enumeration that he makes here of their vices.”

<span id="fn_939"></span>[940](cc40017.htm#fr_939) <span
id="xviii.iv-p30.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p31"></span> Calvin has here very probably in his eye
<span id="xviii.iv-p31.1"></span>[2Ti
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002)<span id="xviii.iv-p31.1"></span>,
in commenting on which, he calls his readers to remark, that the vice
first noticed by the Apostle in that passage — self-love (<span
id="xviii.iv-p31.2"></span>φιλαυτία), may be considered to be *the
fountain,* as it were, of all the other vices there enumerated by him —
avarice, boasting, pride, etc. — See Calvin’s *Harmony,* vol. 2, p. 69,
and vol. 3, p. 60; also Calvin’s *Institutes,* volume 1.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[941](cc40017.htm#fr_940) <span
id="xviii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p34"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p34.1"></span>Qu’ils
eussent proufite en sainctete de vie;” — “That they had made progress in
holiness of life.”

<span id="fn_941"></span>[942](cc40017.htm#fr_941) <span
id="xviii.iv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p36"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p36.1"></span>Des
Pasteurs et Ministres;” — “Of Pastors and Ministers.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](cc40018)
