<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act018)  [Next](act020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)

[Acts 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 19:1</span></span>

While Apollos was at Corinth - It is probable that he remained there a
considerable time.

Paul, having passed through the upper coasts - The upper, or more
elevated regions of Asia Minor. The writer refers here particularly to
the provinces of Phrygia and Galatia, [Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023). These regions were called
upper, because they were situated on the high table-land in the interior
of Asia Minor, while Ephesus was in the low maritime regions, and called
the low country.

Came to Ephesus - Agreeably to his promise, [Act
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#021).

And finding certain disciples - Certain persons who had been baptized
into John's baptism, and who had embraced John's doctrine that the
Messiah was soon to appear, Acts . [Act
19:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#003). It is very clear that they had
not yet heard that he had come, or that the Holy Spirit was given. They
were evidently in the same situation as Apollos. See the notes on [Act
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025).

[Acts 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 19:2</span></span>

Have ye received the Holy Spirit? - Have ye received the extraordinary
effusions and miraculous influences of the Holy Spirit? Paul would not
doubt that, if they had "believed," they had received the ordinary
converting influences of the Holy Spirit - for it was one of his
favorite doctrines that the Holy Spirit renews the heart. But, besides
this, the miraculous influences of the Spirit were conferred on many
societies of believers. The power of speaking with tongues, or of
working miracles, was imparted as an evidence of the presence of God,
and of their acceptance with him, [Act
10:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#045); 1 Cor. 14. It was natural
for Paul to ask whether this evidence of the divine favor has been
granted to them.

Since ye believed - Since you embraced the doctrine of John that the
Messiah was soon to come.

We have not so much as heard ... - This seems to be a very strange
answer. Yet we are to remember:

\(1\) That these were mere disciples of John's doctrine, and that his
preaching related particularly to the Messiah, and not to the Holy
Spirit.

\(2\) it does not even appear that they had heard that the Messiah had
come, or had heard of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts . [Act
19:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004).

\(3\) it is not remarkable, therefore, that they had no clear
conceptions of the character and operations of the Holy Spirit. Yet,

\(4\) They were just in that state of mind that they were willing to
embrace the doctrine when it was proclaimed to them, thus showing that
they were really under the influence of the Holy Spirit. God may often
produce important changes in the hearts and lives of sinners, even where
they have no clear and systematic views of religious doctrines. In all
such cases, however, there will be a readiness of heart to embrace the
truth where it is made known.

[Acts 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 19:3</span></span>

Unto what - Unto what faith or doctrine. What did you profess to believe
when you were baptized?

Unto John's baptism - See the notes on [Act
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025).

[Acts 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 19:4</span></span>

John verily baptized - John did indeed baptize.

With the baptism of repentance - Having special reference to repentance,
or as a profession that they did repent of their sins. See the notes on
[Mat 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006).

Saying unto the people - The design of his preaching was to tarn the
people from their sins, and to prepare them for the coming of the
Messiah. He therefore directed their attention principally to him that
was to come, [Joh 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015), [Joh
1:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#022).

That is, on Christ Jesus - These are the words of Paul, explaining what
John taught. John taught them to believe in the Messiah, and Paul now
showed them that the Messiah was Jesus of Nazareth. The argument of Paul
is, that it was highly proper for them now to profess publicly that
Saviour to whom John had borne such explicit testimony. "Jesus is the
Messiah for whom John came to prepare the way; and as you have em braced
John's doctrine, you ought now publicly to acknowledge that Redeemer by
baptism in his name.

[Acts 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 19:5</span></span>

When they heard this - When they heard what Paul had said respecting the
nature of John's baptism.

They were baptized ... - As there is no other instance in the New
Testament of any persons having been rebaptized, it has been made a
question by some critics whether it was done here; and they have
supposed that all this is the narrative of Luke respecting what took
place under the ministry of John: to wit, that he told them to believe
on Christ Jesus, and then baptized them in his name. But this is a most
forced construction; and it is evident that these persons were
rebaptized by the direction of Paul. For:

\(1\) This is the obvious interpretation of the passage - what would
strike all persons as correct, unless there were some previous theory to
support.

\(2\) it was not a matter of fact that John baptized in the name of
Christ Jesus. His was the baptism of repentance; and there is not the
slightest evidence that he ever used the name of Jesus in the form of
baptism.

\(3\) if it be the sense of the passage that John baptized them in the
name of Jesus, then this verse is a mere repetition of Acts . [Act
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004); a tautology of which the sacred
writers would not be guilty.

\(4\) it is evident that the persons on whom Paul laid his hands Acts .
[Act 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006), and those who were
baptized, were the same. But these were the persons who heard Acts .
[Act 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005) what was said. The narrative
is continuous, all parts of it cohering together as relating to a
transaction that occurred at the same time. If the obvious
interpretation of the passage be the true one, it follows that the
baptism of John was not strictly Christian baptism. It was the baptism
of repentance; a baptism designed to prepare the way for the
introduction of the kingdom of the Messiah. It will not follow, however,
from this that Christian baptism is now ever to be repeated. For this
there is no warrant in the New Testament. There is no command to repeat
it, as in the case of the Lord's Supper; and the nature and design of
the ordinance evidently supposes that it is to be performed but once.
The disciples of John were rebaptized, not because baptism is designed
to be repeated, but because they never had been, in fact, baptized in
the manner prescribed by the Lord Jesus.

In the name of the Lord Jesus - See the notes on [Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038).

[Acts 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 19:6</span></span>

And when Paul laid his hands ... - See the notes on [Act
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017).

And they spake with tongues - See the notes on [Act
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004); [Act
10:46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#046).

And prophesied - See the notes on [Act
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017); [Act
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027).

[Acts 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 19:7</span></span>

And all the men - The whole number.

[Acts 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 19:8</span></span>

Persuading the things - Endeavoring to persuade them of the truth of
what was affirmed respecting the kingdom of God.

[Acts 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 19:9</span></span>

But when divers - When some were hardened.

Were hardened - When their hearts were hardened, and they became
violently opposed to the gospel. When the truth made no impression on
them. The word "harden," as applied to the heart, is often used to
denote "insensibility, and opposition to the gospel."

But spake evil of that way - Of the gospel - the way, path, or manner in
which God saves people. See [Act
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017); [Act
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026); [Mat
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013).

Separated the disciples - Removed them from the influence and society of
those who were seeking to draw them away from the faith. This is often
the best way to prevent the evil influence of others. Christians, if
they wish to preserve their minds calm and peaceful; if they wish to
avoid the agitations of conflict, and the temptations of those who would
lead them astray, should withdraw from their society, and seek the
fellowship of their Christian brethren.

Disputing daily - This is not a happy translation. The word used here
διαλεγόμενος dialegomenos does not of necessity denote "disputation or
contention," but is often used in a good sense of "reasoning" [Act
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#002); [Act
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#004), [Act
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019); [Act
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025), or of "public preaching," [Act
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007), [Act
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#009). It is used in this sense here,
and denotes that Paul taught publicly, or reasoned on the subject of
religion in this place.

In the school of one Tyrannus - Who this Tyrannus was is not known. It
is probable that he was a Jew, who was engaged in this employment, and
who might not be unfavorably disposed toward Christians. In his school,
or in the room which he occupied for teaching, Paul instructed the
people when he was driven from the synagogue. Christians at that time
had no churches, and they were obliged to assemble in any place where it
might be convenient to conduct public worship.

[Acts 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 19:10</span></span>

This continued - This public instruction.

By the space ... - For two whole years.

So that all - That is, the great mass of the people.

Which dwelt in Asia - In that province of Asia Minor of which Ephesus
was the principal city. The name Asia was used sometimes to denote that
single province. See the notes on [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009). Ephesus was the capital; and
there was, of course, a constant and large influx of people there for
the purposes of commerce and worship.

Heard the word of the Lord Jesus - Heard the doctrine respecting the
Lord Jesus.

[Acts 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 19:11</span></span>

Special miracles - Miracles that were remarkable; that were not common,
or that were very unusual (οὐ τὰς τυχών ou tas tuchōn). This expression
is Classical Greek. Thus, Longinus says of Moses that he was no common
man - οὐχ ̓ ὁ τύχων ἀνήρ ouch ho tuchōn anēr.

[Acts 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 19:12</span></span>

So that from his body - That is, those handkerchiefs which had been
applied to his body, which he had used, or which he had touched. An
instance somewhat similar to this occurs in the case of the woman who
was healed by touching the hem of the Saviour's garment, [Mat
9:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020).Unto the sick - The sick who
were at a distance, and who were unable to go where he was. If it be
asked why this was done, it may be observed:

\(1\) That the working of miracles in that region would greatly
contribute to the spread of the gospel.

\(2\) we are not to suppose that there was any efficacy in the aprons
thus brought, or in the mere fact that they had touched the body of
Paul, anymore than there was in the hem of the Saviour's garment which
the woman touched, or in the clay which he made use of to open the eyes
of the blind man, [Joh 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#006).

\(3\) in this instance, the fact that the miracles were performed in
this manner by garments which had touched his body, was a mere sign, or
an evidence to the persons concerned, that it was done by the
instrumentality of Paul, as the fact that the Saviour put his fingers
into the ears of a deaf man, and spit and touched his tongue [Mar
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#033), was an evidence to those who saw
it that the power of healing came from him. The bearing of these aprons
to the sick was, therefore, merely evidence to all concerned that
miraculous power was given to Paul.

Handkerchiefs - The word used here σουδάρια soudaria is of Latin origin,
and properly denotes "a piece of linen" with which sweat was wiped from
the face; and then "any piece of linen used for tying up or containing
anything." In [Luk 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#020), it denotes
the "napkin" in which the talent of the unprofitable servant was
concealed; in [Joh 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044); [Joh
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#007), the "napkin" which was used to
bind up the face of the dead applied to Lazarus and to our Saviour.

Or aprons - σιμικίνθια simikinthia. This is also Latin word, and means
literally a half girdle, or covering half the person a piece of cloth
which was girded round the waist to preserve the clothes of those who
were engaged in any kind of work. The word "aprons" expresses the idea.

And the diseases departed - The sick were healed.

And the evil spirits - See the notes on [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024). It is evident that this power of
working miracles would contribute greatly to Paul's success among the
people.

[Acts 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 19:13</span></span>

The vagabond Jews - Greek: Jews going about - περιερχομένων
perierchomenōn. The word "vagabond" with us is now commonly used in a
bad sense, to denote "a vagrant; a man who has no home; an idle,
worthless fellow." The word, however, properly means "one wandering from
place to place, without any settled habitation, from whatever cause it
may be." Here it denotes "those Jews who wandered from place to place,
practicing exorcism."

Exorcists - ἐξορκιστῶν exorkistōn. This word properly denotes "those who
went about pretending to be able to expel evil spirits, or to cure
diseases by charms, incantations," etc. The word is derived from ὁρκίζω
horkizō, "to bind with an oath." It was applied in this sense, because
those who pretended to be able to expel demons used the formula of an
oath, or adjured them, to compel them to leave the possessed persons.
Compare [Mat 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027). They commonly used
the name of God, or called on the demons in the name of God to leave the
person. Here they used the name Jesus to command them to come out. Such
wanderers and pretenders are common in Oriental countries now. See Land
and the Book, vol. i. 224, 510.

To call over them - To name, or to use his name as sufficient to expel
the evil spirit.

The name of the Lord Jesus - The reasons why they attempted this were:

\(1\) That Jesus had expelled many evil spirits; and,

\(2\) That it was in his name that Paul had performed his miracles.
Perhaps they supposed there was some charm in this name to expel them.

We adjure you - We bind you by an oath; we command you as under the
solemnity of an oath, [Mar 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#007); [Th1
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027). It is a form of putting one
under oath, [Kg1 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#043); [Gen
24:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#037); [Kg2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004); [Neh
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#025) (Septuagint). That this art was
practiced then, or attempted, is abundantly proved from Irenaeus,
Origen, and Josephus (Antiq., book 8, chapter 2, section 5). See
Doddridge. The common name which was used was the incommunicable name of
God, Yahweh, by pronouncing which, in a special way, it was pretended
they had the power of expelling demons.

[Acts 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 19:14</span></span>

One Sceva - Sceva is a Greek name, but nothing more is known of him.

Chief of the priests - This cannot mean that he was high priest among
the Jews, as it is wholly improbable that his sons would be wandering
exorcists. But it denotes that he was of the sacerdotal order. He was a
Jewish chief priest; a priest of distinction, and had held the office of
a ruler. The word "chief priest," in the New Testament, usually refers
to men of the sacerdotal order who were also rulers in the Sanhedrin.

[Acts 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 19:15</span></span>

Jesus I know - His power to cast out devils I know. Compare [Mat
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029).

Paul I know - Paul's power to cast out devils, Acts . [Act
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012).

But who are ye? - What power have you over evil spirits? By what right
do you attempt to expel them? The meaning is, "You belong neither to
Jesus nor Paul, and you have no right or authority to at tempt to work
miracles in the name of either."

[Acts 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 19:16</span></span>

Leaped on them - Several such instances are recorded of the
extraordinary power and rage of those who were possessed with evil
spirits, [Mar 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#003); [Mar
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#029); [Luk
9:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#042).

[Acts 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 19:17</span></span>

The name of the Lord Jesus was magnified - Acquired increasing honor.
The transaction showed that the miracles performed in the name of the
Lord Jesus by Paul were real, and were performed in attestation of the
truth of the doctrine which he taught. Impostors could not work such
miracles; and they who pretended to be able to do it only exposed
themselves to the rage of evil spirits. It was thus shown that there was
a real, vital difference between Paul and these impostors, and their
failure only served to extend his reputation and the power of the
gospel.

[Acts 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 19:18</span></span>

Their deeds - Their actions; their evil course of life. The direct
reference here is to the magical arts which had been used, but the word
may also be designed to denote "iniquity" in general. They who make a
profession of religion will be willing to confess their transgressions,
and no man can have evidence that he is truly renewed who is not willing
to confess as well as to forsake his sins, [Rom
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010); [Pro
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013), "He that covereth his sins
shall not prosper; but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall find
mercy."

[Acts 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 19:19</span></span>

Curious arts - Arts or practices requiring skill, address, cunning. The
word used here (περίεργα perierga) denotes properly "those things that
require care or skill," and was thus applied to the arts of "magic,
jugglery, and sleight of hand" that were practiced so extensively in
Eastern countries. That such arts were practiced at Ephesus is well
known. The Ephesian letters, by which incantations and charms were
supposed to be produced, were much celebrated. They seem to have
consisted of certain combinations of letters or words, which, by being
pronounced with certain intonations of voice, were believed to be
effectual in expelling diseases, or evil spirits; or which, by being
written on parchment and worn, were supposed to operate as amulets, or
charms, to guard from evil spirits or from danger. Thus, Plutarch
(Sympos., 7) says, "The magicians compel those who are possessed with a
demon to recite and pronounce the Ephesian letters, in a certain order,
by themselves." Thus, Clemens Alex. (Strom. ii.) says, "Androcydes, a
Pythagorean, says that the letters which are called Ephesian, and which
are so celebrated, are symbols, etc." Erasmus says (Adagg. Cent., 2)
that there were certain marks and magical words among the Ephesians, by
using which they succeeded in every undertaking. Eustath. a.d. Homer,
Odyssey τ, says "that those letters were incantations which Croesus used
when on the funeral pile, and which greatly befriended him." He adds
that, in the war between the Milesians and Ephesians, the latter were
thirteen times saved from ruin by the use of these letters. See Grotius
and Kuinoel.

Brought their books - Books which explained the arts, or which contained
the magical forms and incantations - perhaps pieces of parchment, on
which were written the letters which were to be used in the incantations
and charms.

And burned them before all men - Publicly. Their arts and offences had
been public, and they sought now to undo the evil, as much as lay in
their power, as extensively as they had done it.

And they counted - The price was estimated. By whom this was done does
not appear. Probably it was not done by those who had been engaged in
this business, and who had suffered the loss, but by the people, who
were amazed at the sacrifice, and who were astonished at their folly in
thus destroying their own property.

Fifty thousand pieces of silver - What coin the word ἀργυρίου arguriou
here translated "silver" denotes, it is impossible to tell, and
consequently the precise value of this sacrifice cannot be ascertained.
If it refers to the Jewish shekel, the sum would be 25,000 (about 5,420
British pounds), since the shekel was worth about half a dollar (circa
1880's). If it refers to Grecian or Roman coin - which is much more
probable, as this was a pagan country, where the Jewish coin would not,
probably, be much used the value would be much less. Probably, however,
it refers to the Attic drachma, which was a silver coin worth about 9d.
sterling, or not far from 17 cents, and then the value would be about
8,500 (1,875 British pounds). The precise value is not material. It was
a large sum; and it is recorded to show that Christianity had power to
induce people to forsake arts that were most lucrative, and to destroy
the means of extending and perpetuating those arts, however valuable in
a pecuniary point of view they might be. We are to remember, however,
that this was not the intrinsic value of these books, but only their
value as books of incantation. In themselves they might have been of
very little worth. The universal prevalence of Christianity would make
much that is now esteemed valuable pro, retry utterly worthless, as, for
example, all that is used in gambling, in fraud, in counterfeiting, in
distilling ardent spirits for drink, in the slave-trade, and in attempts
to impose on and defraud mankind.

[Acts 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 19:20</span></span>

So mightily grew the word of God - So powerfully. It had such efficacy
and power in this wicked city. That power must have been mighty which
would thus make them willing not only to cease to practice imposition,
but to give up all hopes of future gains, and to destroy their property.
On this instructive narrative we may remark:

\(1\) That religion has power to break the hold of sinners on unjust and
dishonest means of living.

\(2\) that those who have been engaged in an unchristian and
dishonorable practice will abandon it when they become Christians.

\(3\) that their abhorrence of their former course will be, and ought to
be, expressed as publicly as was the offence.

\(4\) that the evil practice will be abandoned at any sacrifice, however
great. The question will be, what is right; not what will it cost.
Property, in the view of a converted man, is nothing when compared with
a good conscience.

\(5\) this conduct of those who had used curious arts shows us what
ought to be done by those who have been engaged in any evil course of
life and who are then converted. If what they did when they were
converted was right - and who can doubt it? - it settles a great
principle on which young converts should act. If a man has been engaged
in the slave-trade, he will abandon it, and his duty will not be to sell
his ship to one who he knows will continue the traffic. His property
should be withdrawn from the business publicly, either by being
destroyed, or by being converted to a useful purpose. If a man has been
a distiller of ardent spirits as a drink, his duty will be to forsake
his evil course. Nor will it be his duty to sell his distillery to one
who will continue the business, but to withdraw his property from it
publicly, either by destroying it, or converting it to some useful
purpose. If a man has been engaged in the traffic in ardent spirits, his
duty is not to sell his stock to those who will continue the sale of the
poison, but to withdraw it from public use - converting it to some
useful purpose, if he can; if not, by destroying it. All that has ever
been said by money-loving distillers, or venders of ardent spirits,
about the loss which they would sustain by abandoning the business,
might have been said by these practitioners of curious arts in Ephesus.
And if the excuses of rumselling people are valid, their conduct was
folly; and they should either have continued the business of practicing
"curious arts" after they were converted, or should have sold their
"books" to those who would have continued it. For assuredly it was not
worse to practice jugglery and fortune-telling than it is to destroy the
bodies and souls of people by the traffic in ardent spirits. And yet,
how few people there are in Christian lands who practice on the
principle of these honest, but comparatively unenlightened men at
Ephesus.

[Acts 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 19:21</span></span>

After these things were ended - After the gospel was firmly established
at Ephesus, so that his presence there was no longer necessary.

Purposed in the spirit - Resolved in his mind.

When he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia - In these places he had
founded flourishing churches. It is probable that his main object in
this visit was to take up a collection for the poor saints at Jerusalem.
See the notes on [Rom 15:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025).

To go to Jerusalem - To bear the contribution of the Gentile churches to
the poor and oppressed Christians in Judea.

I must also see Rome - See the notes on [Rom
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024). He did go to Rome, but he went
in chains, as a prisoner.

[Acts 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 19:22</span></span>

Timotheus - Timothy. He was a proper person to send there to visit the
churches, as he had been there before with Paul, when they were
established, [Act 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003); [Act
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014).

And Erastus - Erastus was chamberlain of Corinth ([Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023)), or, more properly, the
treasurer of the city (see the notes on that place), and he was,
therefore, a very proper person to be sent with Timothy for the purpose
of making the collection for the poor at Jerusalem. Paul had wisdom
enough to employ a man accustomed to monied transactions in making a
collection. On this collection his heart was intent, and he afterward
went up with it to Jerusalem. See [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009), and notes on [Rom
15:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025).

Stayed in Asia - At Ephesus.

For a season - How long is uncertain. He waited for a convenient
opportunity to follow them, probably intending to do it as soon as they
had fully prepared the way for the collection. See Paley's Horae
Paulinae, p. 1, chapter 2.

[Acts 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 19:23</span></span>

No small stir - No little excitement, disturbance, or tumult τάραχος
tarachos. Compare [Act 17:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004). "About
that way." Respecting the doctrines of Christianity which Paul preached.
See the notes on [Act 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002); [Act
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026); [Act
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009).

[Acts 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 19:24</span></span>

A silversmith - The word used here denotes "one who works in silver" in
any way, either in making money, in stamping silver, or in forming
utensils from it. It is probable that the employment of this man was
confined to the business here specified, that of making shrines, as his
complaint Acts . [Act 19:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#026) implied
that destroying this would be sufficient to throw them out of all
employment. Silver shrines ναοὺς naous. Temples. The word "shrine"
properly means "a case, small chest, or box"; particularly applied to a
box in which sacred things are deposited. Hence, we hear of the shrines
for relics (Webster). The word "shrines" here denotes "small portable
temples, or edifices," made of silver, so as to represent the temple of
Diana, and probably containing a silver image of the goddess. Such
shrines would be purchased by devotees and by worshippers of the
goddess, and by strangers, who would be desirous of possessing a
representation of one of the seven wonders of the world. See the notes
on [Act 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#027). The great number of
persons that came to Ephesus for her worship would constitute an ample
sale for productions of this kind, and make the manufacture a profitable
employment. It is well known that pagans everywhere are accustomed to
carry with them small images, or representations of their gods, as an
amulet or charm. The Romans had such images in all their houses, called
penates, or household gods. A similar thing is mentioned as early as the
time of Laban [Gen 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019), whose images
Rachel had stolen and taken with her. Compare [Jdg
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#005), "The man Micah had an house of
gods"; [Sa1 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013); [Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004). These images were usually
enclosed in a box, case, or chest, made of wood, iron, or silver; and
probably, as here, usually made to resemble the temple where the idol
was worshipped.

Diana - This was a celebrated goddess of the pagan, and one of the
twelve superior deities. In the heavens she was Luna, or Meui (the
moon); on earth, Diana; and in hell, Hecate. She was sometimes
represented with a crescent on her head, a bow in her hand, and dressed
in a hunting habit; at other times with a triple face, and with
instruments of torture. She was commonly regarded as the goddess of
hunting. She was also worshipped under the various names of Lucina,
Proserpine, Trivia, etc. She was also represented with a great number of
breasts, to denote her as being the fountain of blessings, or as
distributing her benefits to each in their proper station. She was
worshipped in Egypt, Athens, Cilicia, and among pagan nations generally;
but the most celebrated place of her worship was Ephesus, a city
especially dedicated to her.

Unto the craftsmen - To the laborers employed under Demetrius in the
manufacture of shrines.

[Acts 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 19:25</span></span>

With the workmen of like occupation - Those who were in his employ, and
all others engaged in the same business. As they would be all affected
in the same way, it was easy to produce an excitement among them all.

Sirs - Greek: Men.

By this craft - By this business or occupation. This is our trade.

Our wealth - Greek: our acquisition; our property. We are dependent on
it for a living. It does not mean that they were rich, but that they
relied on this for a subsistence. That it was a lucrative business is
apparent, but it is not affirmed that they were in fact rich.

[Acts 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 19:26</span></span>

Ye see and hear - You see at Ephesus, and you hear the same in other
places.

Throughout all Asia - All Asia Minor; or perhaps the province of which
Ephesus was the capital. See the notes on [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009).

This Paul hath persuaded - We have here the noble testimony of a pagan
to the zeal and success of the ministry of Paul. It is an acknowledgment
that his labors had been most strikingly successful in turning the
people from idolatry.

Saying that they be no gods ... - See the notes on [Act
14:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014).

[Acts 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 19:27</span></span>

So that not only ... - The grounds of the charge which Demetrius made
against Paul were two: first, that the business of the craftsmen would
be destroyed usually the first thing that strikes the mind of a sinner
who is influenced By self-interest alone; and, second, that the worship
of Diana would cease if Paul and his fellow-laborers were suffered to
continue their efforts.

This our craft - This business in which we are engaged, and on which we
are dependent. Greek: this part τὸ μέρος to meros which pertains to us.

To be set at nought - To be brought into contempt. It will become so
much an object of ridicule and contempt that we shall have no further
employment. Greek: "Is in danger of coming into refutation" εἰς
ἀπελεγμὸν eis apelegmon. Since what is refuted by argument is deemed
useless, so the word comes also to signify what is useless, or which is
an object of contempt or ridicule. We may here remark:

\(1\) That the extensive prevalence of the Christian religion would
destroy many kinds of business in which people now engage. It would put
an end to all that now ministers to the pride, vanity, luxury, vice, and
ambition of people. Let religion prevail, and wars would cease, and all
the preparations for war which now employ so many hearts and hands would
be useless. Let religion prevail, and temperance would prevail also; and
consequently all the capital and labor now employed in distilling and
vending ardent spirits would be withdrawn, and the business be broken
up. Let religion prevail, and licentiousness would cease, and all the
arts which minister to it would be useless. Let Christianity prevail,
and all that goes now to minister to idolatry, and the corrupt passions
of people, would be destroyed. No small part of the talent, also, that
is now worse than wasted in corrupting others by ballads and songs, by
fiction and licentious tales, would be withdrawn. A vast amount of
capital and talent would thus be at once set at liberty, to be employed
in nobler and better purposes.

\(2\) the effect of religion is often to bring the employments of people
into shame and contempt. A revival of religion often makes the business
of distilling an object of abhorrence. It pours shame on those who are
engaged in ministering to the vices and luxuries of the world. Religion
reveals the evil of such a course of life, and those vices are banished
by the mere prevalence of better principles. Yet,

\(3\) The talent and capital thins disengaged is not rendered useless.
It may be directed to other channels and other employment. Religion does
not make people idle. It leads people to devote their talents to useful
employments, and opens fields in which all may toil usefully to
themselves and to their fellow-men. If all the capital, the genius, and
the learning which are now wasted, and worse than wasted, were to be at
once withdrawn from their present pursuits, they might be profitably
employed. There is not now a useless man who might, not be useful; there
is not a cent wasted which might not be employed to advantage in the
great work of making the world better and happier.

But also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised -
This temple, so celebrated, was regarded as one of the seven wonders of
the world. It was 220 years in building before it was brought to
perfection. It was built at the expense of all Asia Minor. The original
object of worship among the Ephesians was a small statue of Diana, made
of wood, but of what kind of wood is unknown. Pliny says that the temple
was made of cedar, but that it was doubtful of what kind of wood the
image was made. Some have said that it was of ebony. Mucian, who was
three times consul, says that the Image was made of vine, and was never
changed, though the temple was rebuilt seven times (Pliny, 16:79). See
Vitruvius, ii. 9. It was merely an Egyptian hieroglyphic, with many
breasts, representing the goddess of Nature - under which idea Diana was
probably worshipped at Ephesus. Since the original figure became decayed
by age, it was propped up by two rods of iron like spits, which were
carefully copied in the image which was afterward made in imitation of
the first.

A temple, most magnificent in structure, was built to contain the image
of Diana, which was several times built and rebuilt. The first is said
to have been completed in the reign of Servius Tullius, at least 570
b.c. Another temple is mentioned as having been designed by Ctesiphon,
540 years before the Christian era, and which was completed by Daphnis
of Miletus and a citizen of Ephesus. This temple was partially destroyed
by fire on the very day on which Socrates was poisoned, in 400 b.c., and
again in 356 b.c., by the philosopher Herostratus, on the day on which
Alexander the Great was born. He confessed, upon being put to the
torture, that the only motive he had was to immortalize his name. The
four walls, and a few columns only, escaped the flames. The temple was
repaired, and restored to more than its former magnificence, in which,
says Pliny (lib. xxxvi. c. 14), 220 years were required to bring it to
completion.

It was 425 feet in length, 220 in breadth, and was supported by 127
pillars of Parian marble, each of which was 60 feet high. These pillars
were furnished by as many princes, and 36 of them were curiously carved,
and the rest were finely polished. Each pillar, it is supposed, with its
base, contained 150 tons of marble. The doors and panelling were made of
cypress wood, the roof of cedar, and the interior was rendered splendid
by decorations of gold, and by the finest productions of ancient
artists. This celebrated edifice, after suffering various partial
demolitions, was finally burned by the Goths, in their third naval
invasion, in 260 a.d. Travelers are now left to conjecture where its
site was. Amidst the confused ruins of ancient Ephesus, it is now
impossible to tell where this celebrated temple was, once one of the
wonders of the world. "So passes away the glory of this world." See the
Edinburgh Encyclopedia's "Ephesus" also Anacharsis' Travels, vol. vi. p.
188; Ancient Universal Hist., vol. vii. p. 416; and Pococke's Travels.

And her magnificence - Her majesty and glory; that is, the splendor of
her temple and her worship.

Whom all Asia - All Asia Minor.

And the world - Other parts of the world. The temple had been built by
contributions from a great number of princes, and doubtless multitudes
from all parts of the earth came to Ephesus to pay their homage to
Diana.

[Acts 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 19:28</span></span>

Were full of wrath - Were greatly enraged - probably at the prospect of
losing their gains.

Great is Diana ... - The term "great" was often applied by the Greeks to
Diana. Thus, in Xenophon (Ephes. i.), he says, "I adjure you by your own
goddess, the great (τὴν μεγάλην tēn megalēn) Diana of the Ephesians."
The design of this clamor was doubtless to produce a persecution against
Paul, and thus to secure a continuance of their employment. Often, when
people have no arguments, they raise a clamor; when their employments
are in danger of being ruined, they are filled with rage. We may learn,
also, that when people's pecuniary interests are affected, they often
show great zeal for religion, and expect by clamor in behalf of some
doctrine to maintain their own interest, and to secure their own gains.

[Acts 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 19:29</span></span>

Confusion - Tumult; disorder.

Gaius - He had lived at Corinth, and had kinky entertained Paul at his
house, [Co1 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014); [Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023).

Aristarchus - He attended Paul to Rome, and was there a prisoner with
him, [Col 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010).

With one accord - Tumultuously; or with one mind or purpose.

Into the theatre - The theaters of the Greeks were not only places for
public exhibitions, but also for holding assemblies, and often for
courts, elections, etc. The people, therefore, naturally rushed there,
as being a suitable place to decide this matter.

[Acts 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 19:30</span></span>

Would have entered in unto the people - Probably to have addressed them,
and to defend his own cause.

[Acts 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 19:31</span></span>

Certain of the chief of Asia - τῶν Ἀσιαρχῶν tōn Asiarchōn. Of the
Asiarchs. These were persons who presided over sacred things and over
the public games. It was their business to see that the proper services
of religion were observed, and that proper honor was rendered to the
Roman emperor in the public festivals, at the games, etc. They were
annually elected, and their election was confirmed at Rome before it was
valid They held a common council at the principal city within their
province, as at Ephesus, Smyrna, Sardis, etc., to consult and deliberate
about the interests committed to their charge in their various provinces
(Kuinoel and Schleusner). Probably they were assembled on such an
occasion now; and during their remaining there they had heard Paul
preach, and were friendly to his views and doctrines.

Which were his friends - It does not appear from ibis that they were
Christian converts; but they probably had feelings of respect toward
him, and were disposed to defend him and his cause. Perhaps, also, there
might have existed a personal acquaintance and attachment.

Would not adventure - Would not risk his life in the tumult, and under
the excited feelings of the multitude.

[Acts 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 19:32</span></span>

Some therefore cried one thing ... - This is an admirable description of
a mob, assembled for what purpose they knew not; but agitated by
passions, and strifes, and tumults.

And the more part knew not ... - The greater part did not know. They had
been drawn together by the noise and excitement, and but a small part
would know the real cause of the commotion. This is usually the case in
tumultuous meetings.

[Acts 19:33](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 19:33</span></span>

And they drew Alexander - Who this Alexander was is not known. Grotius
supposes that it was "Alexander the coppersmith, who had in some way
done Paul much harm [Ti2 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014); and
whom, with Philetus, Paul had excommunicated. He supposes that it was a
device of the Jews to put forward one who had been of the Christian
party, in order to accuse Paul, and to attempt to cast the odium of the
tumult on him. But it is not clear that the Alexander whom Paul had
excommunicated was the person concerned in this transaction. All that
appears in this narrative is, that Alexander was one who was known to be
a Jew, and who wished to defend the Jews from being regarded as the
authors of this tumult. It would be supposed by the pagan that the
Christians Were only a sect of the Jews, and the Jews wished, doubtless,
to show that they had not been concerned in giving occasion to this
tumult, but that it was to be traced wholly to Paul and his friends.

The Jews putting him forward - That he might have a convenient
opportunity to speak to the people.

Would have made his defence - Our translation, by the phrase "his
defense," would seem to imply that he was personally accused. But it was
not so. The Greek is simply, "was about to apologize to the people";
that is, to make a defense, not of himself particularly, but of the Jews
in general. The translation should have been "a defense."

[Acts 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 19:34</span></span>

But when they knew - When they perceived or ascertained.

That he was a Jew - There was a general prejudice against the Jews. They
were disposed to charge the whole difficulty on Jews - esteeming
Christians to be but a sect of the Jews. They were, therefore,
indiscriminate in their wrath, and unwilling to listen to any defense.

With one voice - Unitedly, in one continued shout and clamor.

About the space of two hours - The day, from sunrise to sunset, among
the Greeks and Romans, was divided into twelve equal parts, [Joh
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009). An hour, therefore, did not
differ materially from an hour with us. It is not at all improbable that
the tumult would continue for so long a time, before it would be
possible to allay the excitement.

Cried out ... - This they at first did to silence Alexander. The
shouting, however, was continued in order to evince their attachment to
Diana, as would be natural in an excited and tumultuous mob of pagan
worshippers.

[Acts 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 19:35</span></span>

And when the town-clerk - ὁ γραμματέυς ho grammateus. The scribe; the
secretary. This word is often used in the Bible, and is commonly
translated "scribe," and is applied to "public notaries in the
synagogues; to clerks; to those who transcribed books, and hence, to men
skilled in the law or in any kind of learning." Compare [Sa2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017); [Kg2
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#011); [Ezr
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006), [Ezr
7:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#011); [Mat
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020); [Mat
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038); [Mat
13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052); [Mat
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001); [Mat
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034); [Co1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020). It is, however, nowhere else
applied to a pagan magistrate. It probably denoted "a recorder; or a
transcriber of the laws; or a chancellor" (Kuinoel, Doddridge). This
officer had a seat in their deliberative assemblies, and on him it seems
to have devolved to keep the peace. The Syriac, "Prince of the city."
The Vulgate and Arabic, "Scribe."

Had appeased the people - καταστείλας katasteilas. Having restrained,
quieted, tranquillized, so as to be able to address them.

What man is there - Who is there that can deny this? It is universally
known and admitted. This is the language of strong confidence, of
reproof, and of indignation. It implied that the worship of Diana was so
well established that there was no danger that it could be destroyed by
a few Jews, and he therefore reproved them for what he deemed their
unreasonable fears. But he little knew the power of that religion which
had been the innocent cause of all this tumult; nor that, at no very
distant period, this despised religion would overturn not only the
worship of Diana at Ephesus, but the splendid idolatry of the mighty
Roman empire.

Is a worshipper - νεωκόρον neōkoron. Margin, temple-keeper. The word
used here does not occur elsewhere in the New Testament. It is derived
from νεὼς neōs, for ναὸς naos, a temple, and κορέω koreō, to sweep, to
cleanse. But among the ancients, the office of keeping their temples was
by no means as humble as that of sexton is with us. It was regarded as
an office of honor and dignity to have charge of the temples of the
gods, and to keep them in order. The term was also given to the cities
that were regarded as the special patrons or worshippers of certain gods
and goddesses. They esteemed it an honor to be regarded as the special
keepers of their temples and images, or as having adopted them as their
tutelar divinities. Such was Ephesus in regard to Diana. It was
considered to be a high honor that the city was everywhere regarded as
being entrusted with the worship of Diana, or with keeping the temple
regarded by the whole world as especially her own. See Schleusner on
this word.

And of the image - A special guardian of the image, or statue of Diana.

Which fell down ... - Which was reigned or believed to have been sent
down from heaven. See the notes on [Act
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#027). It is probable that the image
was so ancient that the maker of it was unknown, and it was therefore
reigned to have fallen from heaven. It was for the interest of the
priest to keep up this impression. Many cities pretended to have been
favored in a similar manner with images or statues of the gods, sent
directly from heaven. The safety of Troy was supposed to depend on the
Palladium, or image of Pallas Minerva, which was believed to have fallen
from heaven. Numa pretended that the ancilia, or sacred shields, had
descended from heaven. Herodian expressly affirms that "the Phoenicians
had no statue of the sun polished by the hand, but only a certain large
stone, circular below, and terminated acutely above in the figure of a
cone, of a black color, and that they believed it to have fallen from
heaven." The same thing was affirmed of the ancient Minerva of the
Athenian Acropolis (Paus., Att. 26); of the Paphian Venus, and the Ceres
of Sicily (Cic. in Verr., v. 187). It has been supposed by some that
this image at Ephesus was merely a conical or pyramidal stone which fell
from the clouds - a meteorite - and that it was regarded with
superstitious reverence, as having been sent from heaven. See the
Edinburgh Encyclopedia's article, "Meteorites."

From Jupiter - See the notes on [Act
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012).

[Acts 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 19:36</span></span>

Seeing then ... - Since no one can call in question the zeal of the
Ephesians on this subject, or doubt the sincerity of their belief, and
since there can be no danger that this well-established worship is to be
destroyed by the efforts of a few evil-disposed Jews, there is no
occasion for this tumult.

Be quiet - Be appeased. The same Greek word which is used in Acts . [Act
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035), "had appeased the people."

To do nothing rashly - To do nothing in a heated, inconsiderate manner.
There is no occasion for tumult and riot. The whole difficulty can be
settled in perfect consistency with the maintenance of order.

[Acts 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 19:37</span></span>

For ye ... - Demetrius and his friends. The blame was to be traced to
them.

Which are neither robbers of churches - The word "churches" we now apply
to edifices reared for purposes of Christian worship. Since no such
churches had then been built, this translation is unhappy, and is not at
all demanded by the original. The Greek word ἱεροσύλους hierosulous is
applied properly to those who commit sacrilege; who plunder temples of
their sacred things. The meaning here is that Paul and his companions
had not been guilty of robbing the temple of Diana, or any other temple.
The charge of sacrilege could not be brought against them. Though they
had preached against idols and idol worship, yet they had offered no
violence to the temples of idolaters, nor had they attempted to strip
them of the sacred utensils employed in their service. What they had
done, they had done peaceably.

Nor yet blasphemers of your goddess - They had not used harsh or
reproachful language of Diana. This had not been charged on them, nor is
there the least evidence that they had done it. They had opposed
idolatry; had reasoned against it; and had endeavored to turn the people
from it. But there is not the least evidence that they had ever done it
in harsh or reproachful language. This shows that people should employ
reason, and not harsh or reproachful language against a pervading evil;
and that the way to remove it is to enlighten the minds of people, and
to convince them of the error of their ways. People gain nothing by
bitter and reviling words; and it is much to obtain the testimony of
even the enemies of religion as Paul did of the chancellor of Ephesus -
that no such words had been used in describing their crimes and follies.

[Acts 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 19:38</span></span>

Have a matter against any man - Have a complaint of injury; if injustice
has been done them by anyone.

The law is open - See the margin. Ἀγόραιοι Agoraioi ἄγονται agontai,
that is, ἡμέραι hēmerai. There are court-days; days which are open, or
appointed for judicial trials, where such matters can be determined in a
proper manner. Perhaps the courts were then held, and the matter might
be immediately determined.

And there are deputies - Roman proconsuls. See the notes on [Act
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007). The cause might be brought
before them with the certainty that it would be heard and decided. The
Syriac reads this in the singular number "Lo, the proconsul is in the
city."

Let them implead one another - Let them accuse each other in the court.
The laws are equal, and impartial justice will be done.

[Acts 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 19:39</span></span>

But if we inquire - If you seek to determine any other matters than that
pertaining to the alleged wrong which Demetrius has suffered in his
business.

Other matters - Anything respecting public affairs; anything pertaining
to the government and the worship of Diana.

In a lawful assembly - In an assembly convened, not by tumult and riot,
but in conformity to law. This was a tumultuous assemblage, and it was
proper in the public officer to demand that they should disperse; and
that, if there were any public grievances to be remedied, it should be
done in an assembly properly convened. It may be remarked here that the
original word rendered assembly is what is usually in the New Testament
rendered church - ἐκκλησία ekklēsia. It is properly rendered by the word
"assembly" - not denoting here "a mixed or tumultuous assemblage, but
one called out, or convened in the legal manner." The proper meaning of
the word is "what is called out." "The church, the Christian assembly
ἐκκλησία ekklēsia of the faithful," is made up of those who are called
out from the world.

[Acts 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 19:40</span></span>

To be called in question - By the government; by the Roman authority.
Such a tumult, continued for so long. a time, would be likely to attract
the attention of the magistrates, and expose them to their displeasure.
Popular commotions were justly dreaded by the Roman government; and such
an assembly as this, convened without any good cause, would not escape
their notice. There was a Roman law which made it capital for anyone to
be engaged in promoting a riot. Sui coetum, et concursum fecerit, capite
puniatur: "He who raises a mob, let him be punished with death."

[Acts 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 19:41</span></span>

Dismissed the assembly - τὴν ἐκκλησίαν tēn ekklēsian. The word usually
translated "church." Here it is applied to the irregular and tumultuous
"assemblage" which had convened in a riotous manner.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 20](act020)

</div>
