<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act026)  [Next](act028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#001)

[Acts 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 27:1</span></span>

And when it was determined - By Festus [Act
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#012), and when the time was come when
it was convenient to send him.

That we should sail - The use of the term "we" here shows that the
author of this book, Luke, was with Paul. He had been his traveling
companion, and though he had not been accused, yet it was resolved that
he should still accompany him. Whether he went at his own expense, or
whether he was sent at the expense of the Roman government, does not
appear. There is a difference of reading here in the ancient versions.
The Syriac reads it, "And thus Festus determined that he (Paul) should
be sent to Caesar in Italy," etc. The Latin Vulgate and the Arabic also
read "he" instead of "we." But the Greek manuscripts are uniform, and
the correct reading is doubtless what is in our version.

Into Italy - The country still bearing the same name, of which Rome was
the capital.

And certain other prisoners - Who were probably also sent to Rome for a
trial before the emperor. Dr. Lardner has proved that it was common to
send prisoners from Judea and other provinces to Rome (Credibility, part
i. chapter 10, section 10, pp. 248, 249).

A centurion - A commander of 100 men.

Of Augustus' band - For the meaning of the word "band," see the [Mat
27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027) note; [Act
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001) note. It was a division in the
Roman army consisting of from 400 to 600 men. This was called "Augustus'
band" in honor of the Roman emperor Augustus (see the notes on [Act
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#021)), and was probably distinguished
in some way for the care in enlisting or selecting them. The Augustine
cohort or band is mentioned by Suetonius in his Life of Nero, 20.

[Acts 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 27:2</span></span>

A ship of Adramyttium - A maritime town of Mysia, in Asia Minor,
opposite to the island of Lesbos. This was a ship which had been built
there, or which sailed from that port, but which was then in the port of
Caesarea. It is evident, from [Act
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#006), that this ship was not expected
to sail to Italy, but that the centurion expected to find some other
vessel into which he could put the prisoners to take them to Rome.

We launched - We loosed from our anchorage, or we set sail. See [Act
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013).

By the coasts of Asia - Of Asia Minor. Probably the owners of the ship
designed to make a coasting voyage along the southern part of Asia
Minor, and to engage in traffic with the maritime towns and cities.

One Aristarchus, a Macedonian - This man is mentioned as Paul's
companion in travel in [Act 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029). He
afterward attended him to Macedonia, and returned with him to Asia, [Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004). He now appears to have attended
him, not as a prisoner, but as a voluntary companion, choosing to share
with him his dangers, and to enjoy the benefit of his society and
friendship. He went with him to Rome, and was a fellow-prisoner with him
there [Col 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010), and is mentioned [Plm
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#024) as Paul's fellow-laborer. It was
doubtless a great comfort to Paul to have with him two such valuable
friends as Luke and Aristarchus; and it was an instance of great
affection for him that they were not ashamed of his bonds, but were
willing to share his dangers, and to expose themselves to peril for the
sake of accompanying him to Rome.

[Acts 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 27:3</span></span>

We touched at Sidon - See the notes on [Mat
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021). Sidon was about 67 miles north
of Caesarea, and the passage could be easily accomplished, under
favorable circumstances, in 24 hours. It is probable that the vessel,
being a "coaster," put in there for purposes of trade. Sidon is the last
city on the Phoenician coast in which the presence of the apostle can be
traced.

And Julius courteously entreated Paul - Treated him kindly or humanely.

And gave him liberty ... - The same thing had been done by Felix, [Act
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#023).

Unto his friends - In Sidon. Paul had frequently traveled in that
direction in going to and returning from Jerusalem, and it is not
improbable, therefore, that he had friends in all the principal cities.

To refresh himself - To enjoy the benefit of their care; to make his
present situation and his voyage as comfortable as possible. It is
probable that they would furnish him with many supplies which were
needful for his long and perilous voyage.

[Acts 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 27:4</span></span>

We sailed under Cyprus - For an account of Cyprus, see the notes on [Act
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036). By sailing "under Cyprus" is
meant that they sailed along its coasts; they kept near to it; they thus
endeavored to break off the violent winds. Instead of steering a direct
course in the open sea, which would have exposed them to violent
opposing winds, they kept near this large island, so that it was between
them and the westerly winds. The force of the wind was thus broken, and
the voyage was rendered less difficult and dangerous. They went between
Cyprus and Asia Minor, leaving Cyprus to the left. A sailor would
express the idea by saying that they sailed under the lee of Cyprus. Had
it not been for the strong western winds, they would have left it on the
right.

The winds were contrary - Were from the west, or southwest, which thus
prevented their pursuing a direct course.

[Acts 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 27:5</span></span>

The sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia - The sea which lies off the, coast
from these two regions. For their situation, see the notes on [Act
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009), and [Act
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013).

We came to Myra, a city of Lycia - Lycia was a province in the
southwestern part of Asia Minor, having Phrygia and Pisidia on the
north, the Mediterranean on the south, Pamphylia on the east, and Carla
on the west.

[Acts 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 27:6</span></span>

A ship of Alexandria - A ship belonging to Alexandria. Alexandria was in
Egypt, and was founded by Alexander the Great. It appears from [Act
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#038) that the ship was laden with
wheat. It is well known that great quantities of wheat were imported
from Egypt to Rome, and it appears that this was one of the large ships
which were employed for that purpose. Why the ship was on the coast of
Asia Minor is not known But it is probable that it had been driven out
of its way by adverse winds or tempests.

[Acts 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 27:7</span></span>

Had sailed slowly - By reason of the prevalence of the western winds,
[Act 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#004).

Over against Cnidus - This was a city standing on a promontory of the
same name in Asia Minor, in the part of the province of Caria called
Doris, and a little northwest of the island of Rhodes.

The wind not suffering us - The wind repelling us in that direction; not
permitting us to hold on a direct course, we were driven off near to
Crete.

We sailed under Crete - See [Act 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#004).
We lay along near to Crete, so as to break the violence of the wind. For
the situation of Crete, see the notes on [Act
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#011).

Over against Salmone - Near to Salmone. This was the name of the
promontory which formed the eastern extremity of the island of Crete.

[Acts 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 27:8</span></span>

And, hardly passing it - Scarcely being able to pass by it without being
wrecked. Being almost driven on it. They passed round the east end of
the island because they had been unable to sail directly forward between
the island and the mainland,

The fair havens - This was on the southeastern part of the island of
Crete. It was probably not so much a harbor as an open roadstead, which
afforded good anchorage for a time. It is called by Stephen, the
geographer, "the fair shore." It still retains the name which it
formerly had. It is called in ancient Dutch and French Sailing
Directions "the beautiful bay."

Nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea - There was no town or city at the
"Fair Havens," but the city of Lasea seems to have been well known, and
it is mentioned here to identify the place.

[Acts 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 27:9</span></span>

When much time was spent - In sailing along the coast of Asia; in
contending with the contrary winds. It is evident that when they started
they had hoped to reach Italy before the dangerous time of navigating
the Mediterranean should arrive. But they had been detained and
embarrassed contrary to their expectation, so that they were now sailing
in the most dangerous and tempestuous time of the year.

Because the fast was now already past - By the "fast" here is evidently
intended the fast which occurred among the Jews on the great day of
atonement. That was on the tenth of the month Tisri, which answers to a
part of September and part of October. It was, therefore, the time of
the autumnal equinox, and when the navigation of the Mediterranean was
esteemed to be particularly dangerous, from the storms which usually
occurred about that time. The ancients regarded this as a dangerous time
to navigate the Mediterranean. See the proofs in Kuinoel on this place.

Paul admonished them - Paul exhorted, entreated, or persuaded them. He
was somewhat accustomed to the navigation of that sea, and endeavored to
persuade them not to risk the danger of sailing at that season of the
year.

[Acts 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 27:10</span></span>

Sirs - Greek: Men.

I perceive - It is not certain that Paul understood this by direct
inspiration. He might have perceived it from his own knowledge of the
danger of navigation at the autumnal equinox, and from what he saw of
the ship as unsuited to a dangerous navigation. But there is nothing
that should prevent our believing also that he was guided to this
conclusion by the inspiration of the Spirit of God. Compare [Act
27:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#023).

Will be with hurt - With injury or hazard. It is not meant that their
lives would be lost, but that they would be jeoparded.

The lading - The freight of the ship. It was laden with wheat, [Act
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#038). Paul evidently, by this,
intended to suggest the propriety of remaining where they were until the
time of dangerous navigation was past.

[Acts 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 27:11</span></span>

The master - The person who is here meant was the helmsman, who occupied
in ancient ships a conspicuous place on the stern, and steered the ship,
and gave directions to the crew.

The owner of the ship - Probably a different person from "the master."
He had the general command of the ship as his own property, but had
employed "the master," or the pilot, to direct and manage it. His
counsel in regard to the propriety of continuing the voyage would be
likely to be followed.

[Acts 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 27:12</span></span>

The haven - The fair havens, [Act
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#008).

Was not commodious to winter in - Not safe or convenient to remain
there. Probably it furnished rather a safe anchorage ground in time of a
storm than a convenient place for a permanent harbor.

The more part - The greater part of the crew.

To Phenice - In the original this is Phoenix - Φοῖνιξ Foinix. So it is
written by Strabo. The name was probably derived from the palmtrees
which were common in Crete. This was a port or harbor on the south side
of Crete, and west of the fair havens. It was a more convenient harbor,
and was regarded as more safe. It appears, therefore, that the majority
of persons on board concurred with Paul in the belief that it was not
advisable to attempt the navigation of the sea until the dangers of the
winter had passed by.

And lieth toward - Greek: looking toward; that is, it was open in that
direction.

The southwest - κατὰ λίβα kata liba. Toward Libya, or Africa. That
country was situated southwest of the mouth of the harbor. The entrance
of the harbor was in a southwest direction.

And northwest - κατὰ χῶρον kata chōron. This word denotes "a wind
blowing from the northwest." The harbor was doubtless curved. Its
entrance was in a southwest direction. It then turned so as to lie in a
direction toward the northwest. It was thus rendered perfectly safe from
the winds and heavy seas; and in that harbor they might pass the winter
in security. It is sometimes called "Lutro." Of this harbor Mr.
Urquhart, in a letter to James Smith, Esq., whose work on this voyage of
Paul has obtained so wide a reputation, says, "Lutro is an admirable
harbor. You open it like a box; unexpectedly the rocks stand apart, and
the town appears within ... We thought we had cut him off, and that we
were driving him right upon the rocks. Suddenly he disappeared - and,
rounding in after him, like a change of scenery, the little basin, its
shipping, and the town presented themselves ... Excepting Lutro, all the
roadsteads looking to the southward are perfectly exposed to the south
or east."

[Acts 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 27:13</span></span>

The south wind - The wind before had probably been a head-wind, blowing
from the west. When it veered round to the south, and when it blew
gently, though not entirely favorable, yet it was so that they supposed
they could sail along the coast of Crete.

Had obtained their purpose - The object of their desire; that is, to
sail safely along the coast of Crete.

Loosing thence - Setting sail from the fair havens.

Close by Crete - Near the shore. It is evident that they designed, if
possible, to make the harbor of Phenice to winter there. They weighed
anchor and passed around Cape Matala. The distance to this point is four
or five miles; the bearing west by south. With a gentle southerly wind,
the vessel would be able to weather the cape, and then the wind was fair
to Phoenix or Phenice (Lutro), which was 35 miles distant from the cape,
and bore from thence about west-northwest.

[Acts 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 27:14</span></span>

Arose - Beat violently.

Against it - Against the vessel. Greek: seizing her, and whirling her
around.

A tempestuous wind - Turbulent - violent - strong.

Called Euroclydon - Εὐροκλύδων Eurokludōn. Interpreters have been much
perplexed about the meaning of this word, which occurs nowhere else in
the New Testament. The most probable supposition is, that it denotes "a
wind not blowing steadily from any quarter, but a hurricane, or wind
veering about to different quarters." Such hurricanes are known to
abound in the Mediterranean, and are now called Levanters, deriving
their name from blowing chiefly in the Levant, or eastern part of the
Mediterranean. The name euroclydon is derived probably from two Greek
words, εῦρος euros, "wind," and κλύδων kludōn, "a wave"; so called from
its agitating and exciting the waves. It thus answers to the usual
effects of a hurricane, or of a wind rapidly changing its points of
compass.

[Acts 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 27:15</span></span>

The ship was caught - By the wind. It came suddenly upon them as a
tempest.

Could not bear up ... - Could not resist its violence, or the helmsman
could not direct the ship. It was seized by the wind, and driven with
such violence, that it became unmanageable.

We let her drive - We suffered the ship to be borne along by the wind
without attempting to control it.

[Acts 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 27:16</span></span>

And running under - Running near to an island. They ran near to it,
where the violence of the wind was probably broken by the island,

Which is called Clauda - This is a small island about 20 miles southwest
of Crete.

We had much work - Much difficulty; we were scarcely able to do it.

To come by the boat - This does not mean that they attempted here to
land in the boat, but they had much difficulty in saving the small boat
attached to the ship by lifting it into the ship. The importance of
securing the small boat is known by all seamen.

[Acts 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 27:17</span></span>

Which when they had taken up - When they had raised up the boat into the
ship, so as to secure it.

They used helps - They used ropes, cables, stays, or chains, for the
purpose of securing the ship. The danger was that the ship would be
destroyed, and they therefore made use of such aids as would prevent its
loss.

Undergirding the ship - The ancients were accustomed to pass cables or
strong ropes around a vessel to keep the planks from springing or
starting by the action of the sea. This is now called "frapping" a
vessel. The operation of "frapping" a vessel is thus described in
Falconer's Marine Dictionary. "To frap a ship is to pass four or five
turns of a large cable-laid rope round the hull or frame of a ship to
support her in a great storm, or otherwise, when it is apprehended that
she is not strong enough to resist the violent efforts of the sea." An
instance of this kind is mentioned in Lord Anson's voyage round the
world. Speaking of a Spanish man-of-war in a storm, he says, "They were
obliged to throw overboard all their upper-deck guns, and take six turns
of the cable round the ship to prevent her opening."

Lest they should fall into the quicksands - There were two celebrated
syrtes, or quicksands, on the coast of Africa, called the greater and
lesser. They were vast beds of sand driven up by the sea, and constantly
shifting their position, so that it could not be known certainly where
the danger was. As they were constantly changing their position, they
could not be accurately laid down in a chart. The sailors were afraid,
therefore, that they should be driven on one of those banks of sand, and
thus be lost.

Strake sail - Or, rather, lowered or took down the mast, or the yards to
which the sails were attached. There has been a great variety of
interpretations proposed on this passage. The most probable is that they
took down the mast, by cutting or otherwise, as is now done in storms at
sea, to save the ship. They were at the mercy of the wind and waves, and
their only hope was by taking away their sails.

And so were driven - By the wind and waves. The ship was unmanageable,
and they suffered it to be driven before the wind.

[Acts 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 27:18</span></span>

They lightened the ship - By throwing out a part of the cargo.

[Acts 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 27:19</span></span>

The tackling of the ship - The anchors, sails, cables, baggage, etc.
That is, everything that was not indispensable to its preservation, for
it seems still [Act 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#029) that they
retained some of their anchors on board.

[Acts 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 27:20</span></span>

Neither sun nor stars ... - As they could see neither san nor stars,
they could make no observations; and as they had no compass, they would
be totally ignorant of their situation, and they gave up all as lost.

[Acts 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 27:21</span></span>

But after long abstinence - By the violence of the storm, by their long
continued labor, and by their apprehension of danger, they had a long
time abstained from food.

And to have gained this harm - To have procured this harm, or have
subjected yourselves to it. Had you remained there you would have been
safe. It seems to be bad English to speak of gaining a loss, but it is a
correct translation of the original κερδῆσαί kerdēsai, which expresses
the idea of acquiring or procuring, whether good or evil. See [Act
27:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#009).

[Acts 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 27:22</span></span>

There shall be no loss - This must have been cheering news to those who
had given up all for lost. As Patti had manifested great wisdom in his
former advice to them, they might be now more disposed to listen to him.
The reason why he believed they would be safe, he immediately states.

[Acts 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 27:23</span></span>

There stood by me - There appeared to me.

The angel of God - The messages of God were often communicated by
angels. See [Heb 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014). This does not
mean that there was any particular angel, but simply an angel.

Whose I am - Of the God to whom I belong. This is an expression of
Paul's entire devotedness to him.

Whom I serve - In the gospel. To whom and to whose cause I am entirely
devoted.

[Acts 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 27:24</span></span>

Fear not, Paul - Do not be alarmed with the danger of the loss of life.

Thou must be brought ... - And therefore thy life will be spared.

God hath given thee all ... - That is, they shall all be preserved with
thee. None of their lives shall be lost. This does not mean that they
would be converted, but that their lives would be preserved. It is
implied here that it was for the sake of Paul, or that the leading
purpose of the divine interposition in rescuing them from danger was to
save his life. The wicked often derive important benefits from being
connected with Christians, and God often confers important favors on
them in his general purpose to save his own people. The lives of the
wicked are often spared because God interposes to save the righteous.

[Acts 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 27:26</span></span>

Howbeit - Nevertheless.

Upon a certain island - Malta. See [Act
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001).

[Acts 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 27:27</span></span>

The fourteenth night - From the time when the tempest commenced.

In Adria - In the Adriatic Sea. This sea is situated between Italy and
Dalmatia, now called the Adriatic Gulf. But among the ancients the name
was given not only to that gulf, but to the whole sea lying between
Greece, Italy, and Africa, including the Sicilian and Ionian Sea. It is
evident from the narrative that they were not in the Adriatic Gulf, but
in the vicinity of Malta.

Deemed - Judged. Probably by the appearance of the sea.

[Acts 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 27:28</span></span>

And sounded - To sound is to make use of a line and lead to ascertain
the depth of water.

Twenty fathoms - A fathom is six feet, or the distance from the
extremity of the middle finger on one hand to the extremity of the
other, when the arms are extended. The depth, therefore, was about 120
feet.

Fifteen fathoms - They knew, therefore, that they were drawing near to
shore.

[Acts 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 27:29</span></span>

They cast four anchors - On account of the violence of the storm and
waves, to make, if possible, the ship secure.

And wished for the day - To discern more accurately their situation and
danger.

[Acts 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 27:30</span></span>

The shipmen - The sailors, leaving the prisoners.

Under colour - Under pretence. They pretended that it was necessary to
get into the boat, and carry the anchors ahead of the ship so as to make
it secure, but with a real intention to make for the shore.

Out of the foreship - From the prow, so as to make the fore-part of the
ship secure. The reason why they did this was probably that they
expected the ship would go to pieces; and, since all on board could not
be saved in one small boat, they resolved to escape to a place of safety
as soon as possible.

[Acts 27:31](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 27:31</span></span>

Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers - The centurion had, it
appears, the general direction of the ship, [Act
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#011). Perhaps it had been pressed
into the service of the government.

Except these - These seamen. The soldiers and the centurion were
unqualified to manage the ship, and the presence of the sailors was
therefore indispensable to the preservation of any.

Abide in the ship - Remain on board.

Ye cannot be saved - You cannot be preserved from death. You will have
no hope of managing the ship. It will be remembered that Paul had been
informed by the angel, and had assured them [Act
27:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#022) that no lives would be lost;
but it was only in the use of the proper means that their lives would be
safe. Though it had been determined, and though Paul had the assurance
that their lives would be safe, yet this did not, in his view, prevent
the use of the proper means to secure it. From this we may learn:

\(1\) That the certainty of an event does not render it improper to use
means to obtain it.

\(2\) that, though the event may be determined, yet the use of means may
be indispensable to secure it. The event is not more certainly ordained
than the means requisite to accomplish it.

\(3\) that the doctrine of the divine purposes or decrees, making
certain future events, does not make the use of man's agency unnecessary
or improper. The means are determined as well as the end, and the one
will not be secured without the other.

\(4\) the same is true in regard to the decrees respecting salvation.
The end is not determined without the means; and as God has resolved
that his people shall be saved, so he has also determined the means. He
has ordained that they shall repent, shall believe, shall be holy, and
shall thus be saved.

\(5\) we have in this case a full answer to the objection that a belief
in the decrees of God will make people neglect the means of salvation,
and lead to licentiousness. It has just the contrary tendency. Here is a
case in which Paul certainly believed in the purpose of God to save
these people; in which he was assured that it was fully determined; and
yet the effect was not to produce indolence and unconcern, but to prompt
him to use strenuous efforts to accomplish the very effect which God had
determined should take place. So it is always. A belief that God has
purposes of mercy; that he designs, and has always designed, to save
some, will prompt to the use of all proper means to secure it. If we had
no such evidence that God had any such purpose, effort would be vain.
Where we have such evidence, it operates, as it did in the case of Paul,
to produce great and strenuous endeavors to secure the object.

[Acts 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 27:32</span></span>

Cut off the ropes ... - It is evident that the mariners had not yet got
on board the boat. They had let it down into the sea [Act
27:30](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#030), and were about to go on board.
By thus cutting the ropes which fastened the boat to the ship, and
letting it go, all possibility of their fleeing from the ship was taken
away, and they were compelled to remain on board.

[Acts 27:33](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 27:33</span></span>

And while the day was coming on - At daybreak. It was before they had
sufficient light to discern what they should do.

To take meat - Food. The word "meat" was formerly used to denote "food"
of any kind.

That ye have tarried - That you have remained or been fasting.

Having taken nothing - No regular meal. It cannot mean that they had
lived entirely without food, but that they had been in so much danger,
were so constantly engaged, and had been so anxious about their safety,
that they had taken no regular meal, or that what they had taken had
been at irregular intervals, and had been a scanty allowance. "Appian
speaks of an army which for 20 days together had neither food nor sleep;
by which he must mean that they neither made full meals nor slept whole
nights together. The same interpretation must be given to this phrase"
(Doddridge). The effect of this must have been that they would be
exhausted, and little able to endure the fatigues which yet remained.

[Acts 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 27:34</span></span>

Not a hair fall from the head ... - A proverbial expression, denoting
"that they would be preserved safe; that none of them would be lost, and
that "in their persons they should not experience the least damage,"
[Kg1 1:52](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#052); [Sa1
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#045).

[Acts 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 27:35</span></span>

And gave thanks ... - This was the usual custom among the Hebrews. See
the notes on [Mat 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019). Paul was
among those who were not Christians; but he was not ashamed of the
proper acknowledgment of God, and was not afraid to avow his dependence
on him, and to express his gratitude for his mercy.

[Acts 27:38](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 27:38</span></span>

They lightened the ship - By casting the wheat into the sea. As they had
no hope of saving the cargo, and had no further use for it, they hoped
that by throwing the wheat overboard the ship would draw less water, and
that thus they would be able to run the vessel on the shore.

[Acts 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 27:39</span></span>

They knew not the land - They had been driven with a tempest, without
being able to make any observation, and it is probable that they were
entire strangers to the coast and to the whole island,

A certain creek with a shore - Greek: a certain bosom κόλπος kolpos or
bay. By its having a shore is probably meant that it had a level shore,
or one that was convenient for landing. It was not a high bluff of
rocks, but was accessible. Kuinoel thinks that the passage should be
construed, "they found a certain shore, having a bay," etc.

Were minded - Were resolved.

[Acts 27:40](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 27:40</span></span>

Had taken up the anchors - The four anchors with which they had moored
the ship, [Act 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#029). See the margin.
The expression may mean that they slipped or cut their cables, and that
thus they left the anchors in the sea. This is the most probable
interpretation.

And loosed the rudder bands - The rudder, in navigation, is that by
which a ship is steered. It is that part of the helm which consists of a
piece of timber, broad at the bottom, which enters the water, and is
attached by hinges to the stern-post on which it turns (Webster). But
what was the precise form of the rudder among the ancients is not
certainly known. Sometimes a vessel might be steered by oars. Most ships
appear to have had a rudder at the prow as well as at the stern. In some
instances, also, they had them on the sides. The word used here in the
Greek is in the plural τῶν πηδαλίον tōn pēdalion, and it is evident that
they had in this ship more than one rudder. The bands mentioned here
were probably the cords or fastenings by which the rudder could be made
secure to the sides of the ship, or could be raised up out of the water
in a violent storm, to prevent its being carried away. And as, in the
tempest, the rudders had become useless [Act
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#015), [Act
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#017), they were probably either
raised out of the water, or made fast. Now that the storm was past, and
they could be used again, they were loosed, and they endeavored to
direct the vessel into port.

The mainsail - ἀρτέμωνα artemōna. There have been various explanations
of this word. Luther translates it as "the mast." Erasmus: "the yards."
Grotius, who supposes that the mainmast had been cast away [Act
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#017), thinks that this must mean "the
foremast" or "the bowsprit." The word usually means the "mainsail." The
Syriac and Arabic understand it of a "small sail," that was hoisted for
a temporary purpose. Mr. Smith, in his work on this voyage of Paul,
supposes that it was "the foresail." Others translate it "a jib." "The
mainsail (foresail) being hoisted showed good judgment, though the
distance was so small, as it would not only enable them to steer more
correctly than without it, but would press the ship farther on upon the
land, and thus enable them the more easily to get to the shore"
(Penrose).

[Acts 27:41](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 27:41</span></span>

And falling - Being carried by the wind and waves.

Into a place where two seas met - Greek: into a place of a double sea -
διθάλασσον dithalasson. That is, a place which was washed on both sides
by the sea. It refers properly to an isthmus, tongue of land, or a
sand-bar stretching out from the mainland, and which was washed on both
sides by the waves. It is evident that this was not properly an isthmus
that was above the waves, but was probably a long sand-bank that
stretched far out into the sea, and which they did not perceive. In
endeavoring to make the harbor, they ran into this bar (sand-bank).

They ran the ship aground - Not designedly, but in endeavoring to reach
the harbor, [Act 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#039).The hinder part
was broken - The stern was broken or staved in. By this means the
company was furnished with boards, etc., on which they were safely
conveyed to shore, [Act 27:44](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#044).

[Acts 27:42](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 27:42</span></span>

And the soldiers' counsel ... - Why they gave this advice is not known.
It was probably, however, because the Roman military discipline was very
strict, and if they escaped it would be charged on them that it had been
done by the negligence and unfaithfulness of the soldiers. They
therefore proposed to kill them, though contrary to all humanity,
justice, and laws; presuming, probably, that it would be supposed that
they had perished in the wreck. This is a remarkable proof that people
can be cruel even when experiencing the tender mercy of God, and that
the most affecting scenes of divine goodness will not mitigate the
natural ferocity and cruelty of those who delight in blood.

[Acts 27:43](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 27:43</span></span>

But the centurion, willing to save Paul - He had at first been disposed
to treat Paul with kindness, [Act
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#003). And his conduct on board the
ship; the wisdom of his advice [Act
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#010); the prudence of his conduct in
the agitation and danger of the tempest; and not improbably the belief
that he was under the divine protection and blessing, disposed him to
spare his life.

Kept them from their purpose - Thus, for the sake of this one righteous
man, the lives of all were spared. The instance here shows:

\(1\) That it is possible for a pious man, like Paul, so to conduct in
the various trying scenes of life - the agitations, difficulties, and
temptations of this world - as to conciliate the favor of the people of
this world; and.(2) That important benefits often result to sinners from
the righteous. Paul's being on board was the means of saving the lives
of many prisoners; and God often confers important blessings on the
wicked for the sake of the pious relatives, friends, and neighbors with
whom they are connected. Ten righteous men would have saved Sodom [Gen
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#032); and Christians are in more ways
than one the salt of the earth, and the light of the world, [Mat
5:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013). It is a privilege to be
related to the friends of God - to be the children of pious parents, or
to be connected with pious partners in life. It is a privilege to be
connected with the friends of God in business; or to dwell near them; or
to be associated with them in the various walks and dangers of life. The
streams of blessings which flow to fertilize their lands, flow also to
bless others; the dews of heaven which descend on their habitations,
descend on all around; and the God which crowns them with
loving-kindness, often fills the abodes of their neighbors and friends
with the blessings of peace and salvation.

And commanded - Probably they were released from their chains.

[Acts 27:44](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 27:44</span></span>

And the rest - Those who could not swim.

They escaped all safe to land - According to the promise which was made
to Paul, [Act 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#022). This was done by
the special providence of God. It was a remarkable instance of divine
interposition to save so many through so long-continued dangers; and it
shows that God can defend in any perils, and can accomplish all his
purposes. On the ocean or the land we are safe in his keeping, and he
can devise ways that shall fulfill all his purposes, and that can
protect his people from danger.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 28](act028)

</div>
