<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act009)  [Next](act011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 10:0</span></span>

This chapter Acts 10 commences a very important part of the history of
the transactions of the apostles. Before this, they had preached the
gospel to the Jews only. They seemed to have retained the feelings of
their countrymen on this subject, that the Jews were to be regarded as
the especially favored people, and that salvation was not to be offered
beyond the limits of their nation. It was important, indeed, that the
gospel should be offered to them first; but the whole tendency of the
Christian religion was to enlarge and liberalize the mind; to overcome
the narrow policy and prejudices of the Jewish people; and to disuse
itself over all the nations of the earth. In various ways, and by
various parables, the Saviour had taught the apostles, indeed, that his
gospel should he spread among the Gentiles. He had commanded them to go
and preach it to every creature, [Mar
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015). But he had told them to tarry
in Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high, [Luk
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049).

It was natural, therefore, that they should receive special instructions
and divine revelation on a point so important as this; and God selected
the case of Cornelius as the instance by which he would fully establish
his purpose of conveying the gospel to the Gentile world. It is worthy
of observation, also, that he selected Peter for the purpose of
conveying the gospel first to the Gentiles. The Saviour had told him
that on him he would build his church; that he would give to him first
the keys of the kingdom of heaven; that is, that he should be the agent
in opening the doors of the church to both Jews and Gentiles. See the
notes on [Mat 16:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018). Peter had, in
accordance with these predictions, been the agent in first presenting
the gospel to the Jews Acts 2; and the prediction was now to be
completely fulfilled in extending the same gospel to the Gentile world.
The transaction recorded in this chapter is one, therefore, that is
exceedingly important in the history of the church, and we are not to be
surprised that it is recorded at length. It should be remembered, also,
that this point became afterward the source of incessant controversy in
the early church. The converts from Judaism insisted on the observance
of the whole of the rites of their religion; the converts from among the
Gentiles claimed exemption from them all. To settle these disputes; to
secure the reception of the gospel among the Gentiles, and to introduce
them to the church with all the privileges of the Jews, required all the
wisdom, talent, and address of the apostles. See Acts 11:1-18; Acts 15;
Rom. 14; Rom. 15; [Gal 2:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011).

[Acts 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 10:1</span></span>

In Cesarea - See the notes on [Act
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040).

Cornelius - This is a Latin name, and shows that the man was doubtless a
Roman. It has been supposed by many interpreters that he was "a
proselyte of the gate"; that is, one who had renounced idolatry, and who
observed some of the Jewish rites, though not circumcised, and not
called a Jew. But there is no sufficient evidence of this. The reception
of the narrative of I Peter [Act
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001) shows that the other apostles
regarded him as a Gentile. In [Act
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028), Peter evidently regards him as
a foreigner - one who did not in any sense esteem himself to be a Jew.
In [Act 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001), it is expressly said
that "the Gentiles" had received the Word of God, evidently alluding to
Cornelius and to those who were with him.

A centurion - One who was the commander of a division in the Roman army,
consisting of 100 men. A captain of 100. See the notes on [Mat
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005).

Of the band - A division of the Roman army, consisting of from 400 to
600 men. See the notes on [Mat 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027).

The Italian band - Probably a band or regiment that was composed of
soldiers from Italy, in distinction from those which were composed of
soldiers born in provinces. It is evident that many of the soldiers in
the Roman army would be those who were born in other parts of the world;
and it is altogether probable that those who were born in Rome or Italy
would claim pre-eminence over those enlisted in other places.

[Acts 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 10:2</span></span>

A devout man - Pious, or one who maintained the worship of God. See the
notes on [Luk 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025). Compare [Act
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005); [Act
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002).

And one that feared God - This is often a designation of piety. See
notes on [Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031). It has been
supposed by many that the expressions here used denote that Cornelius
was a Jew, or was instructed in the Jewish religion, and was a
proselyte. But this by no means follows. It is probable that there might
have been among the Gentiles a few at least who were fearers of God, and
who maintained his worship according to the light which they had. So
there may be now persons found in pagan lands who in some unknown way
have been taught the evils of idolatry and the necessity of a purer
religion, and who may be prepared to receive the gospel. The Sandwich
Islands were very much in this state when the American missionaries
first visited them. They had thrown away their idols, and seemed to be
waiting for the message of mercy and the Word of eternal life, as
Cornelius was. A few other instances have been found by missionaries in
pagan lands of those who have thus been prepared by a train of
providential events, or by the teaching of the Spirit, for the gospel of
Christ.

With all his house - With all his family. It is evident here that
Cornelius instructed his family, and exerted his influence to train them
in the fear of God. True piety will always lead a man to seek the
salvation of his family.

Much alms - Large and liberal charity. This is always an effect of
piety. See [Jam 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027); [Psa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001).

Prayed to God alway - Constantly; meaning that he was in the regular
habit of prayer. Compare [Rom 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012);
[Luk 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001); [Psa
119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002); [Pro
2:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#002). As no particular kind of prayer
is mentioned except secret prayer, we are not authorized to affirm that
he offered prayer in any other manner. It may be observed, however, that
he who prays in secret will usually pray in his family; and as the
facially of Cornelius is mentioned as being also under the influence of
religion, it is, perhaps, not a forced inference that he observed family
worship.

[Acts 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 10:3</span></span>

He saw in a vision - See the notes on [Act
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010).

Evidently - Openly; manifestly.

About the ninth hour - About 3 o'clock p. m. This was the usual hour of
evening worship among the Jews.

An angel of God - See the notes on [Mat
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020). Compare [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014). This angel was sent to signify
to Cornelius that his alms were accepted by God as an evidence of his
piety, and to direct him to send for Peter to instruct him in the way of
salvation. The importance of the occasion - the introduction of the
gospel to a Gentile, and hence, to the entire Gentile world - was
probably the chief reason why an angel was commissioned to visit the
Roman centurion. Compare [Act 16:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009).

[Acts 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 10:4</span></span>

And when he looked on him - Greek: Having fixed his eyes attentively on
him.

He was afraid - At the suddenness and unexpected character of the
vision.

What is it, Lord? - This is the expression of surprise and alarm. The
word "Lord" should have been translated "sir," since there is no
evidence that this is an address to God, and still less that he regarded
the personage present as the Lord. Compare the notes on [Act
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005). It is such language as a man
would naturally use who was suddenly surprised; who should witness a
strange form appearing unexpectedly before him; and who should exclaim,
Sir, what is the matter?"

Are come up for a memorial - Are remembered before God. Compare [Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019). They were an evidence of piety
toward God, and were accepted as such. Though he had not offered
sacrifice according to the Jewish laws; though he had not been
circumcised; yet, having acted according to the light which he had, his
prayers were hard, and his alms were accepted. This was done in
accordance with the general principle of the divine administration, that
God prefers the offering of the heart to external forms; the expressions
of love to sacrifice without it. This he had often declared, [Isa
1:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011); [Amo
5:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021); [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022), "To obey is better than
sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams," [Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006); [Ecc
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001). It should be remembered, however,
that Cornelius was not depending on external morality. His heart was in
the work of religion. It should be remembered, further, that he was
ready to receive the gospel when it was offered to him, and to become a
Christian. In this there was an important difference between him and
those who are depending for salvation on their morality in Christian
lands. Such people are inclined to defend themselves by the example of
Cornelius, and to suppose that as he was accepted before he embraced the
gospel, so they may be without embracing it. But there is an important
difference in the two cases. For:

\(1\) There is no evidence that Cornelius was depending on external
morality for salvation. His offering was that of the heart, and not
merely an external offering.

\(2\) Cornelius did not rely on his morality at all. His was a work of
religion. He feared God; he prayed to him; he exerted his influence to
bring his family to the same state. Moral people do neither. "All their
works they do to be seen of men"; and in their heart there is "no good
thing toward the Lord God of Israel." Compare [Kg1
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#013); [Ch2
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#003). Who ever hears of a man that
"fears God," and that prays, and that instructs his household in
religion, that depends on morality for salvation?

\(3\) Cornelius was disposed to do the will of God as far as it was made
known to him. Where this exists there is religion. The moral man is not.

\(4\) Cornelius was willing to embrace a Saviour when he was made known
to him. The moral man is not. He hears of a Saviour with unconcern; he
listens to the message of God's mercy from year to year without
embracing it. In all this there is an important difference between him
and the Roman centurion; and while we hope that there may be many in
pagan lands who are in the same state of mind that he was - disposed to
do the will of God as far as made known, and therefore accepted and
saved by his mercy in the Lord Jesus, yet this cannot be adduced to
encourage the hope of salvation in those who do know his will, and yet
will not do it.

[Acts 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 10:6</span></span>

He lodgeth - He remains as a guest at his house. See [Act
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#043).

By the sea-side - Joppa was a seaport on the Mediterranean. Tanneries
are erected on the margin of streams or of any body of water to convey
away the filth produced in the operation of dressing skins.

[Acts 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 10:7</span></span>

A devout soldier - A pious man. This is an instance of the effect of
piety in a military officer. Few people have more influence; and in this
case the effect was seen not only in the piety of his family, but of
this attending soldier. Such men have usually been supposed to be far
from the influence of religion; but this instance shows that even the
disadvantages of a camp are not necessarily hostile to the existence of
piety. Compare [Luk 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014).

[Acts 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 10:8</span></span>

And when ... - "It has been remarked that from Joppa, Jonah was sent to
preach to the Gentiles at Nineveh, and that from the same place Peter
was sent to preach to the Gentiles at Caesarea" (Clarke).

[Acts 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 10:9</span></span>

Peter went up ... - The small room in the second story, or on the roof
of the house, was the usual place for retirement and prayer. See the
notes on [Mat 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006); [Mat
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002). Even when there was no room
constructed on the roof, the roof was a common resort for retirement and
prayer. Around the edge a battlement or parapet was commonly made,
within which a person could be quite retired from public view. "At
Jaffa, the ancient Joppa," says Prof. Hackett (lllustrations of
Scripture, p. 81), "where Peter was residing at the time of his vision
on the house-top, I observed houses furnished with a wall around the
roof, within which a person could sit or kneel without any exposure to
the view of others, whether on the adjacent houses or in the streets. At
Jerusalem I entered the house of a Jew early one morning, and found a
member of the family, sitting secluded and alone on one of the lower
roofs, engaged in reading the Scriptures and offering his prayers."

Dr. Thomson (Land and the Book, vol. i. p. 52) says of these roofs,
"When surrounded with battlements, and shaded by vines trained over
them, they afford a very agreeable retreat, even at the sixth hour of
the day - the time when Peter was favored with that singular vision, by
which the kingdom of heaven was thrown open to the Gentile world."

About the sixth hour - About twelve o'clock (at noon). The Jews had two
stated seasons of prayer, morning and evening. But it is evident that
the more pious of the Jews frequently added a third season of devotion,
probably at noon. Thus, David says [Psa
55:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017), "Evening and morning, and at
noon, will I pray, and cry aloud." Thus, Daniel "kneeled upon his knees
three times a day and prayed," [Dan
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010), [Dan
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#013). It was also customary in the
early Christian church to offer prayer at the third, sixth, and ninth
hours (Clem. Alex. as quoted by Doddridge). Christians will, however,
have not merely stated seasons for prayer, but they will seize upon
moments of leisure, and when their feelings strongly incline them to it,
to pray.

[Acts 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 10:10</span></span>

And he became very hungry - Prom the connection, where it is said that
they were making ready, that is, preparing a meal, it would seem that
this was the customary hour of dining. The Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans,
however, had but two meals, and the first was usually taken about ten or
eleven o'clock. This meal usually consisted of fruit, milk, cheese, etc.
Their principal meal was about six or seven in the afternoon, at which
time they observed their feasts. See Jahn's Bible. Archaeol. section
145.

He fell into a trance - Greek: an ecstasy, ἔκστασις ekstasis, fell upon
him. In [Act 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#005), Peter says that in
a trance he saw a vision. The word "trance, or ecstasy," denotes "a
state of mind when the attention is absorbed in a particular train of
thought, so that the external senses are partially or entirely
suspended." It is a high species of abstraction from external objects,
when the mind becomes forgetful of surrounding things, and is fixed
solely on its own thoughts, so that appeals to the external senses do
not readily rouse it. The soul seems to have passed out of the body, and
to be conversant only with spiritual essences. Thus, Balaam is said to
have seen the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance [Num
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#004), [Num
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#016); thus Paul, in praying in the
temple, fell into a trance [Act 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017);
and perhaps a similar state is described in [Co2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002). This effect seems to be caused
by so intense and absorbing a train of thought as to overcome the senses
of the body, or wholly to withdraw the mind from their influence, and to
fix it on the unseen object that engrosses it. It is often a high state
of reverie, or absence of mind, which Dr. Rush describes as "induced by
the stimulus of ideas of absent subjects, being so powerful as to
destroy the perception of present objects" (Diseases of the Mind, p.
310, ed. Philadelphia, 1812). In the case of Peter, however, there was a
supernatural influence that drew his attention away from present
objects.

[Acts 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 10:11</span></span>

And saw heaven opened - [Act 7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056). See
the notes on [Mat 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016). This language
is derived from a common mode of speaking in the Hebrew Scriptures, as
if the sky above us was a solid, vast expanse, and as if it were opened
to present an opportunity for anything to descend. It is language that
is highly figurative.

And a certain vessel - See the notes on [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015).

As it had been - It is important to mark this expression. The sacred
writer does not say that Peter literally saw such an object descending;
but he uses this as an imperfect description of the vision. It was not a
literal descent of a vessel, but it was such a kind of representation to
him, producing the same impression, and the same effect, as if such a
vessel had descended.

Knit at the four corners - Bound, united, or tied. The corners were
collected, as would be natural in putting anything into a great sheet.

[Acts 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 10:12</span></span>

Wherein ... - This particular vision was suggested by Peter's hunger,
[Act 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010). It was designed, however,
to teach him an important lesson in regard to the introduction of all
nations to the gospel. Its descending from heaven may have been an
intimation that that religion which was about to abolish the distinction
between the Jews and other nations was of divine origin. See [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002).

[Acts 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 10:14</span></span>

I have never eaten ... - In the Old Testament God had made a distinction
between clean and unclean animals. See Lev. 11:2-27; Deut. 14:3-20. This
law remained in the Scriptures, and Peter pled that he had never
violated it, implying that he could not now violate it, as it was a law
of God, and that, as it was unrepealed, he did not dare to act in a
different manner from what it required. Between that law and the command
which he now received in the vision there was an apparent variation, and
Peter naturally referred to the well known and admitted written Law. One
design of the vision was to show him that that Law was now to pass away.

That is common - This word properly denotes "what pertains to all," but
among the Jews, who were bound by special laws, and who were prohibited
from many things that were freely indulged in by other nations, the word
"common" came to be opposed to the word "sacred," and to denote what was
in common use among the pagans, hence, that which was "profane," or
"polluted." Here it means the same as "profane," or "forbidden."

Unclean - Ceremonially unclean; that is, what is forbidden by the
ceremonial law of Moses.

[Acts 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 10:15</span></span>

What God hath cleansed - What God has pronounced or declared pure. If
God has commanded you to do a thing, it is not impure or wrong. Perhaps
Peter would suppose that the design of this vision was to instruct him
that the distinction between clean and unclean food, as recognized by
the Jews, was about to be abolished, [Act
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#017). But the result showed that it
had a higher and more important design. It was to show him that they who
had been esteemed by the Jews as unclean or profane - the entire Gentile
world - might now be admitted to similar privileges with the Jews. That
barrier was robe broken down, and the whole world was to be admitted to
the same fellowship and privileges in the gospel. See [Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014); [Gal
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028). It was also true that the
ceremonial laws of the Jews in regard to clean and unclean beasts was to
pass away, though this was not directly taught in this vision. But when
once the barrier was removed that separated the Jews and Gentiles, all
the laws which were founded on such a distinction, and which were framed
to keep up such a distinction, passed away of course. The ceremonial
laws of the Jews were designed solely to keep up the distinction between
them and other nations. When the distinction was abolished; when other
nations were to be admitted to the same privileges, the laws which were
made to keep up such a difference received their death-blow, and expired
of course. For it is a maxim of all law, that when the reason why a law
was made ceases to exist, the law becomes obsolete. Yet it was not easy
to convince the Jews that their laws ceased to be binding. This point
the apostles labored to establish; and from this point arose most of the
difficulties between the Jewish and Gentile converts to Christianity.
See Acts 15; and Rom. 14-15:

[Acts 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 10:16</span></span>

This was done thrice - Three times, doubtless to impress the mind of
Peter with the certainty and importance of the vision. Compare [Gen
41:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#032).

[Acts 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 10:17</span></span>

Doubted in himself - Doubted in his own mind. He was perplexed, and did
not know how to understand it.

Behold, the men ... - We see here an admirable arrangement of the events
of Providence to fit each other. Every part of this transaction is made
to harmonize with every other part; and it was so arranged that just in
the moment when the mind of Peter was filled with perplexity, the very
event should occur which would relieve him of his embarrassment. Such a
coincidence is not uncommon. An event of divine Providence may be as
clear an expression of his will, and may as certainly serve to indicate
our duty, as the most manifest revelation would do, and a state of mind
may, by an arrangement of circumstances, be produced that will be
extremely perplexing until some event shall occur, or some field of
usefulness shall open, that will exactly correspond to it, and indicate
to us the will of God. We should then carefully mark the events of God's
providence. We should observe and record the train of our own thoughts,
and should watch with interest any event that occurs, when we are
perplexed and embarrassed, to obtain, if possible, an expression of the
will of God.

Before the gate - The word here rendered "gate," πυλῶνα pulōna refers
properly to the porch or principal entrance to an Eastern house. See the
notes on [Mat 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002); [Mat
26:71](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#071). It does not mean, as with us, a
gate, but rather a door. See [Act
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#013).

[Acts 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 10:19</span></span>

The Spirit - See the notes on [Act
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#029). Compare [Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024), "And it shall come to pass,
that before they call I will answer," etc.

[Acts 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 10:22</span></span>

To hear words of thee - To be instructed by thee.

[Acts 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 10:23</span></span>

And lodged them - They remained with him through the night. Four days
were occupied before Peter met Cornelius at Caesarea. On the first the
angel appeared to Cornelius. On the second the messengers arrived at
Joppa, [Act 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009). On the third, Peter
returned with them, [Act 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#023); and on
the fourth they arrived at Caesarea, [Act
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#024), [Act
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#030).

And certain brethren - Some Christians. They were six in number, [Act
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#012). It was usual for the early
Christians to accompany the apostles in their journeys. See [Rom
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024); [Act
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003); [Jo3
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#006); [Co1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006), [Co1
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#011). As this was an important event
in the history of the church - the bearing of the gospel to a Gentile -
it was more natural and proper that Peter should be attended with
others.

[Acts 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 10:24</span></span>

His kinsmen - His relatives, or the connections of his family. A man may
often do vast good by calling his kindred and friends to hear the
gospel.

[Acts 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 10:25</span></span>

Fell down at his feet - This was an act of profound regard for him as an
ambassador of God. In Oriential countries it was usual for persons to
prostrate themselves at length on the ground before men of rank and
honor. "Worshipped him" This does not mean religious homage, but civil
respect - the homage, or profound regard which was due to one in honor.
See the notes on [Mat 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002).

[Acts 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 10:26</span></span>

Stand up ... - This does not imply that Peter supposed that Cornelius
intended to do him religious reverence. It was practically saying to
him, "I am nothing more than a man as thou art, and pretend to no right
to such profound respects as these, but am ready in civil life to show
thee all the respect that is due" (Doddridge).

[Acts 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 10:27</span></span>

And as he talked with him - He probably met him at the door, or at a
small distance from the house. It was an expression of joy thus to go
out to meet him.

[Acts 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 10:28</span></span>

It is an unlawful thing - This was not explicitly enjoined by Moses, but
it seemed to be implied in his institutions, and was, at any rate, the
common understanding of the Jews. The design was to keep them a separate
people. To do this, Moses forbade alliances by contract, or marriage,
with the surrounding nations, which were idolatrous. See [Lev
18:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024); [Deu
7:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003); compare [Ezr
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#011). This command the Jews
perverted, and explained it as referring to contact of all kinds, even
to the exercise of friendly offices and commercial transactions. Compare
[Joh 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009).

Of another nation - Greek: another tribe. It refers here to all who were
not Jews.

God hath showed me - Compare [Act
15:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008). He had showed him by the
vision, [Act 10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011).

Any man common or unclean - See the notes on [Act
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014). That no man was to be regarded
as excluded from the opportunity of salvation, or was to be despised and
abhorred. The gospel was to be preached to all; the barrier between Jews
and Gentiles was broken down, and all were to be regarded as capable of
being saved.

[Acts 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 10:29</span></span>

Without gainsaying - without "saying anything against it"; without
hesitation or reluctance.

I ask, therefore ... - The main design for which Cornelius had sent for
him had been mentioned to Peter by the messenger, [Act
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022). But Peter now desired from his
own lips a more particular statement of the considerations which had
induced him to send for him.

For what intent - For what purpose or design.

[Acts 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 10:30</span></span>

Four days ago - See the notes on [Act
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#023).

Until this hour - The ninth hour, or three o'clock, p. m. See [Act
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003).

A man - Called, in [Act 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003), an
angel. He had the appearance of a man. Compare [Mar
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005).

In bright clothing - See the notes on [Mat
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#003).

[Acts 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 10:33</span></span>

Thou hast well done - This is an expression of grateful feeling.

Before God - In the presence of God. It is implied that they believed
that God saw them; that they were assembled at his command, and that
they were disposed to listen to his instructions.

[Acts 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 10:34</span></span>

Then Peter opened his mouth - Began to speak, [Mat
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#002).

Of a truth - Truly, evidently. That is, I have evidence here that God is
no respecter of persons.

Is no respecter of persons - The word used here denotes "the act of
showing favor to one on account of rank, family, wealth, or partiality
arising from any cause." It is explained in [Jam
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001). A judge is a respecter of
persons when he favors one of the parties on account of private
friendship, or because he is a man of rank, influence, or power, or
because he belongs to the same political party, etc. The Jews supposed
that they were especially favored by God. and that salvation was not
extended to other nations, and that the fact of being a Jew entitled
them to this favor. Peter here says that he had learned the error of
this doctrine, and that a man is not to be accepted because he is a Jew,
nor to be excluded because he is a Gentile. The barrier is broken down;
the offer is made to all; God will save all on the same principle; not
by external privileges or rank, but according to their character.

The same doctrine is elsewhere explicitly stated in the New Testament,
[Rom 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011); [Eph
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009); [Col
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025). It may be observed here that
this does not refer to the doctrine of divine sovereignty or election.
It simply affirms that God will not save a man because he is a Jew, or
because he is rich, or learned, or of elevated rank, or on account of
external privileges; nor will he exclude a man because he is destitute
of these privileges. But this does not affirm that he will not make a
difference in their character, and then treat them according to their
character, nor that he will not pardon whom he pleases. That is a
different question. The interpretation of this passage should be limited
strictly to the case in hand - to mean that God will not accept and save
a man on account of external national rank and privileges. That he will
not make a difference on other grounds is not affirmed here, nor
anywhere in the Bible. Compare [Co1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007); [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006). It is worthy of remark further,
that the most strenuous advocate for the doctrines of sovereignty and
election - the apostle Paul - is also the one that labored most to
establish the doctrine that God is no respecter of persons - that is,
that there is no difference between the Jews and Gentiles in regard to
the way of salvation; that God would not save a man because he was a
Jew, nor destroy a man because he was a Gentile. Yet in regard to "the
whole race viewed as lying on a level," he maintained that God has a
right to exercise the prerogatives of a sovereign, and to have mercy on
whom he will have mercy. The doctrine may be thus stated:

\(1\) The barrier between the Jews and Gentiles was broken down.

\(2\) all people thus were placed on a level none to be saved by
external privileges, none to be lost by the lack of them.

\(3\) all were guilty Rom. 1-3, and none had a claim on God.

\(4\) if any were saved, it would be by God showing mercy on such of
this common mass as he chose. See [Rom
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022); [Rom
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012); [Rom
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011); [Gal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006); compare with Rom. 9; and Eph. 1:

[Acts 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 10:35</span></span>

But in every nation ... - This is given as a reason for what Peter had
just said, that God was no respecter of persons. The sense is, that he
now perceived that the favors of God were not confined to the Jew, but
might be extended to all others on the same principle. The remarkable
circumstances here - the vision to him, and to Cornelius, and the
declaration that the alms of Cornelius were accepted - now convinced him
that the favors of God were no longer to be confined to the Jewish
people, but might be extended to all. This was what the vision was
designed to teach, and to communicate this knowledge to the apostles was
an important step in their work of spreading the gospel.

In every nation - Among all people. Jews or Gentiles. Acceptance with
God does not depend on the fact of being descended from Abraham, or of
possessing external privileges, but on the state of the heart.

He that feareth him - This is put for piety toward God in general. See
notes on [Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031). It means that he
who honors God and keeps His Law; he who is a true worshipper of God,
according to the light and privileges which he has, is approved by him,
as giving evidence that he is his friend.

And worketh righteousness - Does what is right and just. This refers to
his conduct toward man. He that discharges conscientiously his duty to
his fellow-men, and evinces by his conduct that he is a righteous man.
These two things comprehend the whole of religion, the sum of all the
requirements of God - piety toward God, and justice toward people; and
as Cornelius had showed these, he showed that, though a Gentile, he was
actuated by true religion. We may observe here:

\(1\) That it is not said that Cornelius was accepted on accouter of his
good works. Those works were simply an evidence of true piety in the
heart; a proof that he feared and loved God, and not a meritorious
ground of acceptance.

\(2\) he improved the light which he had.

\(3\) "he embraced the Saviour when he was offered to him." This
circumstance makes an essential difference between Cornelius and those
who depend on their morality in Christian lands. They do not embrace the
Lord Jesus, and they are, therefore, totally unlike the Roman centurion.
His example should not be pled, therefore, by those who neglect the
Saviour, for it furnishes no evidences that they will be accepted when
they are totally unlike him.

[Acts 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 10:36</span></span>

The word - That is, this is the Word, or "the doctrine." Few passages in
the New Testament have perplexed critics more than this. It has been
difficult to ascertain to what the term "word" in the accusative case
τὸν λόγον ton logon here refers. Our translation would lead us to
suppose that it is synonymous with what is said in the following verse.
But it should be remarked that the term used there, and translated
"word," as if it were a repetition of what is said here, is a different
term. It is not λόγον logon, but ῥῆμα rēma - a word, a thing; not a
doctrine. I understand the first term "word" to be an introduction of
the doctrine which Peter set forth, and to be governed by a preposition
understood. The whole passage may be thus expressed: Peter had been
asked to teach Cornelius and his assembled friends. It was expected, of
course, that he would instruct him in regard to the true doctrines of
religion - the doctrine which had been communicated to the Jews. He
commences, therefore, with a statement respecting the true doctrine of
the Messiah, or the way of salvation which was now made known to the
Jews. "In regard to the Word, or the doctrine which God sent to the
children of Israel, proclaiming peace through Jesus Christ (who is Lord
of all), you know already what was done, or the transactions which
occurred throughout all Judea, from Galilee, where he commenced his
ministry after John had preached, that this was by Jesus Christ, since
God had anointed him," etc. Peter here assumes that Cornelius had some
knowledge of the principal events of the life of the Saviour, though it
was obscure and imperfect; and his discourse professes only to state
this more fully and clearly.

Unto the children of Israel - To the Jews. The Messiah was promised to
them, and spent his life among them.

Preaching - That is, proclaiming, or announcing. God did this by Jesus
Christ.

Peace - This word sometimes refers to the peace or union which was made
between Jews and Gentiles, by breaking down the wall of division between
them. But it is used here in a wider sense, to denote "peace or
reconciliation with God." He announced the way by which man might be
reconciled to God, and might find peace.

He is Lord of all - That is, Jesus Christ. He is sovereign, or ruler of
both Jews and Gentiles, and hence, Peter saw the propriety of preaching
the gospel to one as to the other. See [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002); [Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018); [Eph
1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020). The word "Lord" used here
does not necessarily imply divinity, but only that the Lord Jesus, as
Mediator, had been constituted or appointed Lord or Ruler over all
nations. It is true, however, that this is a power which we cannot
conceive to have been delegated to one that was not divine. Compare [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005).

[Acts 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 10:37</span></span>

That word - Greek: ῥῆμα rēma - a different word from that in the
previous verse. It may be translated "thing" as well as "word."

Which was published - Greek: which was done. "You know, though it may be
imperfectly, what was done or accomplished in Judea," etc.

Throughout all Judea - The miracles of Christ were not confined to any
place, but were performed in every part of the land. For an account of
the divisions of Palestine, see the notes on [Mat
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022).

And began ... - Greek: having been begun in Galilee. Galilee was not far
from Caesarea. There was, therefore, the more probability that Cornelius
had heard of what had occurred there. Indeed, the gospels themselves
furnish the highest evidence that the fame of the miracles of Christ
spread into all the surrounding regions.

[Acts 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 10:38</span></span>

How God anointed ... - That is, set him apart to this work, and was with
him, acknowledging him as the Messiah. See the notes on [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

With the Holy Ghost - See the notes on [Luk
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#019). The act of anointing kings and
priests seems to have been emblematic of the influences of the Holy
Spirit. Here it means that God impaled to him the influences of the Holy
Spirit, thus consecrating him for the work of the Messiah. See [Mat
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016); [Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034), "God giveth not the Holy Spirit
by measure unto him."

And with power - The power of healing the sick, raising the dead, etc.

Who went about doing good - Whose main business it was to travel from
place to place to do good. He did not go for applause, or wealth, or
comfort, or ease, but to diffuse happiness as far as possible. This is
the simple but sublime record of his life. It gives us a distinct
portrait of his character, as he is distinguished from conquerors and
kings, from false prophets and from the mass of people.

And healing ... - Restoring to health.

All that were oppressed of the devil - All that were possessed by him.
See the notes on [Mat 4:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023).

God was with him - God appointed him, and furnished by his miracles the
highest evidence that he had sent him. His miracles were such that they
could be performed only by God.

[Acts 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 10:39</span></span>

And we are witnesses - We who are apostles. See the notes on [Luk
24:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#048).

In the land of the Jews - In the country of Judea.

Whom they slew ... - Our translation would seem to imply that there were
two separate acts - first executing him, and then suspending him. But
this is neither according to truth nor to the Greek text. The original
is simply, "whom they put to death, suspending him on a tree."

On a tree - On a cross. See the notes on [Act
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030).

[Acts 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 10:40</span></span>

Showed him openly - Manifestly; so that there could be no deception, no
doubt of his resurrection.

[Acts 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 10:41</span></span>

Not to all the people - Not to the nation at large, for this was not
necessary in order to establish the truth of his resurrection. He,
however, showed himself to many persons. See the Harmony of the Accounts
of the Resurrection of Jesus.

Chosen of God - Appointed by God, or set apart by his authority through
Jesus Christ.

Who did eat and drink ... - And by doing this he furnished the clearest
possible proof that he was truly risen; that they were not deceived by
an illusion of the imagination or by a phantom. Compare [Joh
21:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#012).

[Acts 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 10:42</span></span>

And he commanded us ... - ; [Mat
28:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019); [Mar
16:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015).

And to testify - To bear witness.

That it is he ... - See the notes on [Joh
5:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022). Compare the references in the
margin.

Of quick - The living. The doctrine of the New Testament is, that those
who are alive when the Lord Jesus shall return to judge the world, will
be caught up in vast numbers like clouds, to meet him in the air,
without seeing death, [Th1 4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016).
Yet before this they will experience such a change in their bodies as
shall fit them for the judgment and for their eternal residence - a
change which will liken them to those who have died, and have risen from
the dead. What this change will be, speculation may fancy, but the Bible
has not revealed. See [Co1 15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052), "The
dead shall be raised, and we shall be changed."

[Acts 10:43](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 10:43</span></span>

To him give ... - See the notes on [Luk
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027), [Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044).

That through his name ... - This was implied in what the prophets said.
See [Rom 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011). It was not, indeed,
expressly affirmed that they who believed in him should be pardoned, but
this was implied in what they said. They promised a Messiah, and their
religion consisted mainly in believing in a Messiah to come. See the
reasoning of the apostle Paul in Rom. 4:

[Acts 10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 10:44</span></span>

The Holy Ghost fell ... - Endowing them with the power of speaking with
other tongues, [Act 10:46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#046). Of this the
apostle Peter makes much in his argument in [Act
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#017). By this, God showed that the
Gentiles were to be admitted to the same privileges with the Jews, and
to the blessings of salvation in the same manner. Compare [Act
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001).

Which heard the word - The Word of God; the message of the gospel.

[Acts 10:45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 10:45</span></span>

And they of the circumcision - Who had been Jews.

Were astonished - Were amazed that Gentiles should be admitted to the
same favor as themselves.

[Acts 10:46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 10:46</span></span>

Speak with tongues - In other languages than their own native tongue,
[Act 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004).

And magnify God - And praise God.

[Acts 10:47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">act 10:47</span></span>

Can any man forbid water ... - They have shown that they are favored in
the same way as the Jewish converts. God has manifested himself to them
as he did to the Jews on the day of Pentecost. Is it not clear,
therefore, that they are entitled to the privilege of Christian baptism?
The expression used here is one that would naturally refer to water as
being brought; that is, to a small quantity; and would seem to imply
that they were baptized, not by immersion, but by pouring or sprinkling.

[Acts 10:48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">act 10:48</span></span>

And he commanded them ... - Why Peter did not himself baptize them is
unknown. It might be, perhaps, because he chose to make use of the
ministry of the brethren who were with him, to prevent the possibility
of future cavil. If they did it themselves, they could not so easily be
led by the Jews to find fault with it. It may be added, also, that it
seems not to have been the practice of the apostles themselves to
baptize very extensively. See [Co1
1:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014), "Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the gospel."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 11](act011)

</div>
