<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act027)  [Next](rom000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)

[Acts 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 28:1</span></span>

They knew - Either from their former acquaintance with the island, or
from the information of the inhabitants.

Was called Melita - Now called "Malta." It was celebrated formerly for
producing large quantities of honey, and is supposed to have been called
Melita from the Greek word signifying honey. It is about 20 miles in
length from east to west, and 12 miles in width from north to south, and
about 60 miles in circumference. It is about 60 miles from the coast of
Sicily. The island is an immense rock of white soft freestone, with a
covering of earth about one foot in depth, which has been brought from
the island of Sicily. There was also another island formerly called
"Melita," now called "Meleda," in the Adriatic Sea, near the coast of
Illyricum, and some have supposed that Paul was shipwrecked on that
island. But tradition has uniformly said that it was on the island now
called "Malta." Besides, the other "Melita" would have been far out of
the usual track in going to Italy; and it is further evident that Malta
was the place, because from the place of his shipwreck he went directly
to Syracuse, Rhegium, and Puteoli, thus sailing in a direct course to
Rome. In sailing from the other Melita to Rhegium, Syracuse would be far
out of the direct course.

[Acts 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 28:2</span></span>

And the barbarous people - See the notes on [Rom
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014). The Greeks regarded all as
barbarians who did not speak their language, and applied the name to all
other nations but their own. It does not denote, as it does sometimes
with us, "people of savage, uncultivated, and cruel habits, but simply
those whose speech was unintelligible." See [Co1
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#011). The island is supposed to have
been populated at first by the Phoecians, afterward by the Phoenicians,
and afterward by a colony from Carthage. The language of the Maltese was
that of Africa, and hence it was called by the Greeks the language of
"barbarians." It was a language which was unintelligible to the Greeks
and Latins.

The rain - The continuance of the storm.

And ...of the cold - The exposure to the water in getting to the shore,
and probably to the coldness of the weather. It was now in the month of
October.

[Acts 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 28:3</span></span>

Had gathered a bundle of sticks - For the purpose of making a fire.

There came a viper - A poisonous serpent. See the notes on [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007). The viper was doubtless in the
bundle of sticks or limbs of trees which Paul had gathered, but was
concealed, and was torpid. But when the bundle was laid on the fire, the
viper became warmed by the heat, and came out and fastened on the hand
of Paul.

And fastened on his hand - καθῆψεν kathēpsen. This word properly means
to join oneself to; to touch; to adhere to. It might have been by
coiling around his hand and arm, or by fastening its fangs in his hand.
It is not expressly affirmed that Paul was bitten by the viper, yet it
is evidently implied; and it is wholly incredible that a viper, unless
miraculously prevented, should fasten himself to the hand without
biting.

[Acts 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 28:4</span></span>

The venomous beast - The English word "beast" we usually apply to an
animal of larger size than a viper. But the original θηρίον thērion is
applicable to animals of any kind, and was especially applied by Greek
writers to serpents. See Schleusner.

No doubt - The fact that the viper had fastened on him; and that, as
they supposed, he must now certainly die, was the proof from which they
inferred his guilt.

Is a murderer - Why they thought he was a murderer rather than guilty of
some other crime is not known. It might have been:

\(1\) Because they inferred that he must have been guilty of some very
atrocious crime, and as murder was the highest crime that man could
commit, they inferred that he had been guilty of this. Or,

\(2\) More probably, they had an opinion that when divine vengeance
overtook a man, he would be punished in a manner similar to the offence;
and as murder is committed usually with the hand, and as the viper had
fastened on the hand of Paul, they inferred that he had been guilty of
taking life. It was supposed among the ancients that persons were often
punished by divine vengeance in that part of the body which had been the
instrument of the sin.

Whom, though he hath escaped the sea - They supposed that vengeance and
justice would still follow the guilty; that, though he might escape one
form of punishment, yet he would be exposed to another. And this, to a
certain extent, is true. These barbarians reasoned from great original
principles, written on the hearts of all people by nature, that there is
a God of justice, and that the guilty will be punished. They reasoned
incorrectly, as many do, only because that they supposed that every
calamity is a judgment for some particular sin. People often draw this
conclusion, and suppose that suffering is to be traced to some
particular crime, and to be regarded as a direct judgment from heaven.
See the notes on [Joh 9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001). The
general proposition that all sin will be punished at some time is true,
but we are not qualified to affirm of particular calamities always that
they are direct judgments for sin. In some cases we may. In the case of
the drunkard, the gambler, and the profligate, we cannot doubt that the
loss of property, health, and reputation is the direct result of
specific crime. In the ordinary calamities of life, however, it requires
a more profound acquaintance with the principles of divine government
than we possess to affirm of each instance of suffering that it is a
particular judgment for some crime.

Yet vengeance - ἡ δίκη hē dikē. "Justice" was represented by the pagan
as a goddess, the daughter of Jupiter, whose office it was to take
vengeance, or to inflict punishment for crimes.

Suffereth not to live - They regarded him as already a dead man. They
supposed the effect of the bite of the viper would be so certainly fatal
that they might speak of him as already, in effect, dead (Beza).

[Acts 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 28:5</span></span>

And he shook off ... - In this was remarkably fulfilled the promise of
the Saviour [Mar 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018); "They shall
take up serpents," etc.

[Acts 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 28:6</span></span>

When he should have swollen - When they expected that he would have
swollen from the bite of the viper. The poison of the viper is rapid,
and they expected that he would die soon. The word rendered "swollen"
πίμπρασθαι pimprasthai means properly "to burn; to be inflamed," and
then "to be swollen from inflammation." This was what they expected
here, that the poison would produce a violent inflammation.

Or fallen down dead suddenly - As is sometimes the case from the bite of
the serpent when a vital part is affected.

They changed their minds - They saw that he was uninjured, and
miraculously preserved; and they supposed that none but a god could be
thus kept from death.

That he was a god - That the Maltese were idolaters there can be no
doubt; but what gods they worshipped is unknown, and conjecture would be
useless. It was natural that they should attribute such a preservation
to the presence of a divinity. A similar instance occurred at Lystra.
See the notes on [Act 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011).

[Acts 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 28:7</span></span>

In the same quarters - In that place, or that part of the island,

Possessions - Property. His place of residence.

The chief man - Greek: the first man. Probably he was the governor of
the island,

[Acts 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 28:8</span></span>

A bloody flux - Greek: dysentery.

And laid his hands on him ... - In accordance with the promise of the
Saviour, [Mar 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018). This miracle was
a suitable return for the hospitality of Publius, and would serve to
conciliate further the kindness of the people, and prepare the way for
Paul's usefulness.

[Acts 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 28:10</span></span>

Who also honoured us - As people who were favored by heaven, and who had
been the means of conferring important benefits on them in healing the
sick, etc. Probably the word "honors" here means "gifts, or marks of
favor."

They laded us - They gave us, or conferred on us. They furnished us with
such things as were necessary for us on our journey.

[Acts 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 28:11</span></span>

And after three months - Probably they remained there so long because
there was no favorable opportunity for them to go to Rome. If they
arrived there, as is commonly supposed, in October, they left for Rome
in January.

In a ship of Alexandria - See the notes on [Act
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#006).

Whose sign - Which was ornamented with an image of Castor and Pollux. It
was common to place on the prow of the ship the image of some person or
god, whose name the ship bore. This custom is still observed.

Castor and Pollux - These were two semi-deities. They were reputed to be
twin brothers, sons of Jupiter and Leda, the wife of Tyndarus, king of
Sparta. After their death, they are fabled to have been transported to
heaven, and made constellations under the name of Gemini, or the Twins.
They then received divine honors, and were called the sons of Jupiter.
They were supposed to preside over sailors, and to be their protectors;
hence it was not uncommon to place their image on ships. Compare
Lempriere's Dictionary.

[Acts 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 28:12</span></span>

And landing at Syracuse - Syracuse was the capital of the island of
Sicily, on the eastern coast. It was in the direct course from Malta to
Rome. It contains about 18,000 inhabitants.

[Acts 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 28:13</span></span>

We fetched a compass - We coasted about; or we sailed along the eastern
side of Sicily.

And came to Rhegium - This was a city of Italy, in the kingdom of
Naples, on the coast near the southwest extremity of Italy. It was
nearly opposite to Messina, in Sicily. It is now called "Reggio."

The south wind - A wind favorable for their voyage.

To Puteoli - The wells. This place was celebrated for its warm baths,
and from these and its springs it is supposed to have derived its name
of The Wells. It is now called "Pozzuoli," and is in the campania of
Naples, on the north side of the bay, and about 8 miles northwest from
Naples. The town contains at present (circa 1880's) about 10,000
inhabitants.

[Acts 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 28:14</span></span>

Brethren - Christian brethren. But by whom the gospel had been preached
there is unknown.

[Acts 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 28:15</span></span>

And from thence - From Puteoli.

When the brethren heard of us - The Christians who wore at Rome.

As far as the Appii Forum - This was a city about 56 miles from Rome.
The remains of an ancient city are still seen there. It is on the
borders of the Pontine Marshes. The city was built on the celebrated
Appian Way, or the road from Rome to Capua. The road was made by Appius
Claudius, and probably the city was founded by him also. It was called
the forum or market-place of Appius, because it was a convenient place
for travelers on the Appian Way to stop for purposes of refreshment. It
was also a famous resort for peddlers and merchants. See Horace, book i.
Sat. 5, 3.

And the Three Taverns - This place was about 8 or 10 miles nearer Rome
than the Appii Forum (Cicero, a.d. Art., ii. 10). It undoubtedly
received its name because it was distinguished as a place of refreshment
on the Appian Way. Probably the greater part of the company of
Christians remained at this place while the remainder went forward to
meet Paul, and to attend him on his way. The Christians at Rome had
doubtless heard much of Paul. His Epistle to them had been written about
the year of our Lord 57 a.d., or at least five years before this time.
The interest which the Roman Christians felt in the apostle was thus
manifested by their coming so far to meet him, though he was a prisoner.

He thanked God - He had long ardently desired to see the Christians of
Rome, [Rom 1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009); [Rom
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#023), [Rom
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#032). He was now grateful to God that
the object of his long desire was at least granted, and that he was
permitted to see them, though in bonds.

And took courage - From their society and counsel. The presence and
counsel of Christian brethren is often of inestimable value in
encouraging and strengthening us in the toils and trials of life.

[Acts 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 28:16</span></span>

The captain of the guard - The commander of the Praetorian cohort, or
guard. The custom was, that those who were sent from the provinces to
Rome for trial were delivered to the custody of this guard. The name of
the prefect or captain of the guard at this time was Burrhus Afranius
(Tacitus, History, 12, 42, 1).

But Paul was suffered ... - Evidently by the permission of the
centurion, whose favor he had so much conciliated on the voyage. See
[Act 27:43](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#043).

With a soldier that kept him - That is, in the custody of a soldier to
whom he was chained, and who, of course, constantly attended him. See
[Act 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#023); [Act
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006).

[Acts 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 28:17</span></span>

Paul called the chief of the Jews - He probably had two objects in this:
one was to vindicate himself from the suspicion of crime, or to convince
them that the charges alleged against him were false; and the other, to
explain to them the gospel of Christ. In accordance with his custom
everywhere, he seized the earliest opportunity of making the gospel
known to his own countrymen; and he naturally supposed that charges
highly unfavorable to his character had been sent forward against him to
the Jews at Rome by those in Judea.

Against the people - Against the Jews, [Act
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#012).

Or customs ... - The religious rites of the nation. See the notes on
[Act 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#014).

Was I delivered prisoner ... - By the Jews, [Act
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#033), etc.

[Acts 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 28:18</span></span>

When they had examined me ... - Acts 24:10-27; Acts 25; [Act
26:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#031).

No cause of death - No crime worthy of death.

[Acts 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 28:19</span></span>

The Jews spake against it - Against my being set at liberty.

I was constrained - By a regard to my own safety and character.

To appeal unto Caesar - See the notes on [Act
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#011).

Not that I had aught ... - I did it for my own preservation and safety,
not that I wished to accuse my countrymen. Paul had been unjustly
accused and injured; yet, with the true spirit of the Christian
religion, he here says that he cherished no unkind feelings toward those
who had done him wrong.

[Acts 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 28:20</span></span>

Because that for the hope of Israel - On account of the hope which the
Jews cherish of the coming of the Messiah; of the resurrection; and of
the future state. See this explained in the notes on [Act
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006).

I am bound with this chain - See the notes on [Act
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#029). Probably he was attached
constantly to a soldier by a chain.

[Acts 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 28:21</span></span>

We neither received letters ... - Why the Jews in Judea had not
forwarded the accusation against Paul to their brethren at Rome, that
they might continue the prosecution before the emperor, is not known. It
is probable that they regarded their cause as hopeless, and chose to
abandon the prosecution. Paul had been acquitted successively by Lysias,
Felix, Festus, and Agrippa; and as they had not succeeded in procuring
his condemnation before them, they saw no prospect of doing it at Rome,
and resolved, therefore, not to press the prosecution any further.

Neither any of the brethren that came - Any of the Jews. There was a
very constant contact between Judea and Rome, but it seems that the Jews
who had come before Paul had arrived had not mentioned his case, so as
to prejudice them against him.

[Acts 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 28:22</span></span>

What thou thinkest - What your belief is; or what are the doctrines of
Christians respecting the Messiah.

This sect - The sect of Christians.

Spoken against - Particularly by Jews. This was the case then, and, to a
great extent, is the case still. It has been the common lot of the
followers of Christ to be spoken "against." Compare [Act
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005).

[Acts 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 28:23</span></span>

Appointed him a day - A day when they would hear him.

Into his lodging - To the house where he resided, [Act
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030).

He expounded - He explained or declared the principles of the Christian
religion.

And testified the kingdom of God - Bore witness to, or declared the
principles and doctrines of the reign of the Messiah. See the notes on
[Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002).

Persuading them concerning Jesus - Endeavoring to convince them that
Jesus was the Messiah.

Both out of the law of Moses - Endeavoring to convince them that he
corresponded with the predictions respecting the Messiah in the books of
Moses, and with the types which Moses had instituted to prefigure the
Messiah.

And out of the prophets - Showing that he corresponded with the
predictions of the prophets. See the notes on [Act
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#003).

From morning till evening - An instance of Paul's indefatigable toil in
endeavoring to induce his countrymen to believe in Jesus as the Messiah.

[Acts 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 28:24</span></span>

And some believed ... - See the notes on [Act
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#004).

[Acts 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 28:25</span></span>

Had spoken one word - One solemn declaration, reminding them that it was
the characteristic of the nation to reject the testimony of God, and
that it was to be expected. It was the last warning which we know Paul
to have delivered to his countrymen the Jews.

Well spake - Or he spoke the truth; he justly described the character of
the Jewish people. The passage here quoted was as applicable in the time
of Paul as of Isaiah.

The Holy Ghost - A full proof of the inspiration of Isaiah.

By Esaias - By Isaiah, [Isa 6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009).

[Acts 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 28:26</span></span>

Saying ... - See this passage explained in the [Mat
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014) note, and [Joh
12:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039) notes.

[Acts 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 28:28</span></span>

The salvation of God - The knowledge of God's mode of saving people.

Is sent unto the Gentiles - Since you have rejected it, it will be
offered to them. See the notes on [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046).

And that they will hear it - They will embrace it. Paul was never
discouraged. If the gospel was rejected by one class of people he was
ready to offer it to another. If his own countrymen despised it, he
never allowed himself to suppose that Christ had died in vain, but
believed that others would embrace its saving benefits. How happy would
it be if all Christians had the same unwavering faith and zeal as Paul.

[Acts 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 28:29</span></span>

And had great reasoning - Great discussion or debates. That is, the part
which believed that Jesus was the Messiah [Act
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#024) discussed the subject warmly
with those who did not believe. This whole verse is missing in the
Syriac version, and in some Greek mss., and is supposed by Mill and
Griesbach to be spurious.

[Acts 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 28:30</span></span>

Paul dwelt two whole years - Doubtless in the custody of the soldiers.
Why he was not prosecuted before the emperor during this time is not
known. It is evident, however [Act
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#021), that the Jews were not disposed
to carry the case before Nero, and the matter, during this time, was
suffered quietly to sleep. There is great probability that the Jews did
not dare to prosecute him before the emperor. It is clear that they had
never been in favor of the appeal to Rome, and that they had no hope of
gaining their cause. Probably they might remember the former treatment
of their people by the emperor (see the notes on [Act
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002)); they might remember that they
were despised at the Roman capital, and not choose to encounter the
scorn and indignation of the Roman court; and as there was no
prosecution, Paul was suffered to live in quietness and safety. Lardner,
however, supposed (vol. v. p. 528, 529, ed. 8vo, London, 1829) that the
case of Paul was soon brought before Nero and decided, and that the
method of confinement was ordered by the emperor himself. Lightfoot also
supposes that Paul's "accusers, who had come from Judea to lay their
charge against him, would be urgent to get their business despatched,
that they might be returning to their own home again, and so would bring
him to trial as soon as they could." But nothing certainly is known on
the subject. It is evident, indeed, from [Ti2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016), that he was at some time
arraigned before the emperor; but when it was, or what was the decision
or why he was at last set at liberty, are all involved in impenetrable
obscurity.

In his own hired house - In a house which he was permitted to hire and
occupy as his own. Probably in this he was assisted by the kindness of
his Roman friends.

And received all ... - Received all hospitably and kindly who came to
him to listen to his instructions. It is evident from this that he was
still a prisoner, and was not permitted to go at large.

[Acts 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 28:31</span></span>

Preaching the kingdom of God - See the notes on [Act
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#025).

With all confidence - Openly and boldly, without anyone to hinder him.
It is known also that Paul was not unsuccessful even when a prisoner at
Rome. Several persons were converted by his preaching, even in the court
of the emperor. The things which had happened to him, he says [Phi
1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012), had fallen out rather to the
furtherance of the gospel, so that his bonds in Christ were manifested
in all the palace, and in all other places; and many brethren in the
Lord, says he, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak
the Word without fear. In this situation he was remembered with deep
interest by the church at Philippi, who sent Epaphroditus to him with a
contribution to supply his needs. Of their kindness he speaks in terms
of the tenderest gratitude in [Phi
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025); [Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018). During his confinement also, he
was the means of the Conversion of Onesimus, a runaway servant of
Philemon, of Colosse in Phrygia [Plm
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010), whom he sent back to his master
with a letter to himself, and with an epistle to the church at that
place. See the Epistle to the Colossians, [Col
4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#008), [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018). During this imprisonment, he
wrote, according to Lardner, the following epistles, in the order and
time mentioned, namely,:

Ephesians, April of 61 a.d. 2 Timothy, May of 61 a.d. Philippians,
before the end of 62 a.d. Colossians 62 a.d. Philemon 62 a.d. Hebrews,
the spring of 63 a.d.

Here closes the inspired account of the propagation of Christianity; of
the organization of the Christian church, and of the toils and
persecutions of the apostle Paul. Who can but be deeply affected when he
comes to the conclusion of this inspired book recording the history of
the spread of the Christian religion, and the labors and trials of that
wonderful man, the apostle Paul. Who can help heaving a sigh of regret
that the historian did not carry forward the history of Paul until his
death, and that henceforward, in the history of the church, we want this
faithful, inspired guide; and that, from the close of this book,
everything becomes at once so involved in obscurity and uncertainty?
Instead, however, of pouring forth unavailing regrets that the sacred
historian has carried us no further onward, we should rather employ the
language of praise that God inspired the writer of this book to give a
history of the church for 30 years after the ascension of the Saviour;
that he has recorded the accounts of the first great revivals of
religion; that he has presented us the examples of the early missionary
zeal; that he has informed us how the early Christians endured
persecution and toil; that he has conducted us from land to land, and
from city to city, showing us everywhere how the gospel was propagated,
until we are led to the seat of the Roman power, and see the great
apostle of Christianity there proclaiming, in that mighty capital of the
world, the name of Jesus as the Saviour of people.

Perhaps there could be no more appropriate close to the book of the
inspired history than thus to have conducted the apostle of the Gentiles
to the capital of the Roman world, and to leave the principal agent in
the establishment of the Christian religion in that seat of
intelligence, influence, and power. It is the conducting of Christianity
to the very height of its earthly victories; and having shown its power
in the provinces of the empire, it was proper to close the account with
the record of its achievements in the capital.

Why Luke closed his history here is not known. It may have been that he
was not afterward the companion of Paul; or that he might have been
himself removed by death. It is agreed on all hands that he did not
attend Paul in his subsequent travels; and we should infer from the
conclusion of this book that he did not survive the apostle, as it is
almost incredible, if he did, that he did not mention his release and
death. It is the uniform account of antiquity that Luke, after the
transactions with which the Acts of the Apostles closes, passed over
into Achaia, where he lived a year or two, and there died at the age of
84 years.

Everything in regard to the apostle Paul, after the account with which
Luke closes this book, is involved in doubt and uncertainty. By what
means he was set at liberty is not known; and there is a great
contradiction of statements in regard to his subsequent travels, and
even in regard to the time of his death. It is generally agreed, indeed,
that he was set at liberty in the year of our Lord 63 a.d. After this
some of the fathers assert that he traveled over Italy and passed into
Spain. But this account is involved in great uncertainty. Lardner, who
has examined all the statements with care, and than whom no one is
better qualified to pronounce an opinion on these subjects, gives the
following account of the subsequent life of Paul (Works, vol. v. pp.
331-336, London edition, 1829). He supposes that after his release he
went from Rome to Jerusalem as soon as possible; that he then went to
Ephesus, and from thence to Laodicea and Colosse; and that he returned
to Rome by Troas, Philippi, and Corinth. The reason why he returned to
Rome, Lardner supposes, was that he regarded that city as opening before
him the widest and most important field of labor, and that, therefore,
he proposed there to spend the remainder of his life.

In the year of our Lord 64 a.d., a dreadful fire happened at Rome which
continued for six or seven days. It was generally supposed that the city
had been set on fire by order of the Emperor Nero. In order to divert
the attention of the people from this charge against himself, he accused
the Christians of having been the authors of the conflagration, and
excited against them a most furious and bloody persecution. In this
persecution it is generally supposed that Paul and Peter suffered death,
the former by being beheaded, and the latter by crucifixion. Paul is
supposed to have been beheaded rather than crucified, because he was a
Roman citizen, and because it was unlawful to put a Roman citizen to
death on a cross. Lardher thinks that this occurred in the year 65.
Where Paul was beheaded is not certainly known. It is generally supposed
to have occurred at a place called the Salvian Waters, about 3 miles
from Rome, and that he was buried in the Ostian Way, where a magnificent
church was afterward built. But of this there is no absolute certainty.

It is far more important and interesting for us to be assured from the
character which he evinced, and from the proofs of his zeal and toil in
the cause of the Lord Jesus, that his spirit rested in the bosom of his
Saviour and his God. Wherever he died, his spirit, we doubt not, is in
heaven. And where that body rested at last, which he labored "to keep
under," and which he sought to bring "into subjection" [Co1
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027), and which was to him so much the
source of conflict and of sin [Rom
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005), [Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023), is a matter of little
consequence. It will be guarded by the eye of that Saviour whom he
served, and will be raised up to eternal life. In his own inimitable
language, it was "sown in corruption, it shall be raised in
incorruption; it was sown in dishonor, it shall be raised in glory; it
was sown in weakness, it shall be raised in power; it was sown a natural
body, it shall be raised a spiritual body," [Co1
15:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042). And in regard to him, and to
all other saints, "when that corruptible shall have put on incorruption,
and that mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory," [Co1
15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054).

To Paul now, what are all his sorrows, and persecutions, and toils in
the cause of his Master? What but a source of thanksgiving that he was
permitted thus to labor to spread the gospel through the world? So may
we live - imitating his life of zeal, and self-denial, and faithfulness,
that when we rise from the dead we may participate with him in the
glories of the resurrection of the just.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Introduction](rom000)

</div>
