<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act012)  [Next](act014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)

[Acts 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 13:1</span></span>

The church that was at Antioch - See the notes on [Act
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#020).

Certain prophets - See the notes on [Act
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027).

And teachers - Teachers are several times mentioned in the New Testament
as an order of ministers, [Co1
12:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028); [Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011); [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001). Their precise rank and duty are
not known. It is probable that those mentioned here as prophets were the
same persons as the teachers. They might discharge both offices,
predicting future events, and instructing the people.

As Barnabas - Barnabas was a preacher [Act
4:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035); [Act
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027); [Act
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022), [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026); and it is not improbable that
the names "prophets and teachers" here simply designate the preachers of
the gospel.

Simeon that was called Niger - "Niger" is a Latin name meaning "black."
Why the name was given is not known. Nothing more is known of him than
is mentioned here.

Lucius of Cyrene - Cyrene was in Africa. See the notes on [Mat
27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032). Lucius is afterward mentioned
as with the apostle Paul when he wrote the Epistle to the Romans, [Rev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021).

And Manaen - He is not mentioned elsewhere in the New Testament.

Which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch - Herod Antipas, not
Herod Agrippa. Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, [Luk
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001). The word translated here as
"which had been brought up," σύντροφος suntrophos, denotes "one who is
educated or nourished at the same time with another." It is not used
elsewhere in the New Testament. He might have been connected with the
royal family, and, being nearly of the same age, was educated by the
father of Herod Antipas with him. He was, therefore, a man of rank and
education, and his conversion shows that the gospel was not confined
entirely in its influence to the poor.

And Saul - Saul was an apostle; and yet he is mentioned here among the
"prophets and teachers," showing that these words denote "ministers of
the gospel" in general, without reference to any particular order or
rank.

[Acts 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 13:2</span></span>

As they ministered to the Lord - It is probable that this took place on
some day set apart for fasting and prayer. The expression "ministered to
the Lord" means as they were engaged in prayer to the Lord, or as they
were engaged in divine service. The Syriac thus renders the passage.

The Holy Ghost said - Evidently by direct revelation.

Separate me - Set apart to me, or for my service. It does not mean to
ordain, but simply to designate, or appoint to this specific work.

For the work whereunto I have called them - Not the apostolic office,
for Saul was called to that by the express revelation of Jesus Christ
[Gal 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012), and Barnabas was not an
apostle. The "work" to which they were now set apart was that of
preaching the gospel in the regions round about Antioch. It was not any
permanent office in the church, but was a temporary designation to a
missionary enterprise in extending the gospel, especially through Asia
Minor, and the adjacent regions. Accordingly, when, in the fulfillment
of this appointment, they had traveled through Seleucia, Cyprus, Paphos,
Pamphylia, Pisidia, etc., they returned to Antioch, having fulfilled the
work to which they were separated. See [Act
14:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#026). "Whereunto I have called
them." This proves that they received their commission to this work
directly from God the Holy Spirit. Paul and Barnabas had been influenced
by the Spirit to engage in this work, but they were to be sent forth by
the concurrence and designation of the church.

[Acts 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 13:3</span></span>

And when they had fasted - They were fasting when they were commanded to
set them apart. Yet this probably refers to an appointed day of prayer,
with reference to this very purpose. The first formal mission to the
Gentiles was an important event in the church, and they engaged in this
appointment with deep solemnity and with humbling themselves before God.

And prayed - This enterprise was a new one. The gospel had been preached
to the Jews, to Cornelius, and to the Gentiles at Antioch. But there had
been no solemn, public, and concerted plan of sending it to the
Gentiles, or of appointing a mission to the pagan. It was a new event,
and was full of danger and hardships. The primitive church felt the need
of divine direction and aid in the great work. Two missionaries were to
be sent forth among strangers, to be exposed to perils by sea and land;
and the commencement of the enterprise demanded prayer. The church
humbled itself, and this primitive missionary society sought, as all
others should do, the divine blessing to attend the labors of those
employed in this work. The result showed that the prayer was heard.

And laid their hands on them - That is, those who are mentioned in [Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001). This was not to set them apart
to the apostolic office. Saul was chosen by Christ himself, and there is
no evidence that any of the apostles were ordained by the imposition of
hands (see [Act 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026) notes; [Mat
10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001) notes; [Luk
6:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012) notes), and Barnabas was not
an apostle in the original and unique sense of the word. Nor is it meant
that this was an ordination to the ministry, to the once of preaching
the gospel, for both had been engaged in this before. Saul received his
commission directly from the Saviour, and began at once to preach, [Act
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020); [Gal
1:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011). Barnabas had preached at
Antioch, and was evidently recognized as a preacher by the apostles,
[Act 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027); [Act
11:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022). It follows, therefore, that
this was not an ordination in the doctrinal sense of this term, either
Episcopal or Presbyterian, but was a designation to a particular work -
a work of vast importance; strictly a missionary appointment by the
church, under the authority of the Holy Spirit. The act of laying hands
on any person was practiced not only in ordination, but in conferring a
favor, and in setting apart for any purpose. See [Lev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002), [Lev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#008),[Lev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013); [Lev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004), [Lev
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#029); [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021); [Num
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#012); [Mar
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#023); [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018); [Mat
21:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#046). It means in this case that they
appointed them to a particular field of labor, and by laying hands on
them they implored the blessing of God to attend them.

They sent them away - The church by its teachers sent them forth under
the direction of the Holy Spirit. All missionaries are thus sent by the
church; and the church should not forget its ambassadors in their great
and perilous work.

[Acts 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 13:4</span></span>

Being sent forth by the Holy Ghost - Having been called to this world by
the Holy Spirit, and being under his direction.

Departed unto Seleucia - This city was situated at the mouth of the
river Orontes, where it fails into the Mediterranean. Antioch was
connected with the sea by the Orontes River. Strabo says that in his
time they sailed up the river in one day. The distance from Antioch to
Seleucia by water is about 41 miles, while the journey by land is only
16 12 miles (Life and Epistles of Paul, vol. 1, p. 185. "Seleucia united
the two characters of a fortress and a seaport. It was situated on a
rocky eminence, which is the southern extremity of an elevated range of
hills projecting from Mount Aranus. From the southeast, where the ruins
of the Antioch gate are still conspicuous, the ground rose toward the
northeast into high and craggy summits; and round the greater part of
the circumference of 4 miles the city was protected by its natural
position. The harbor and mercantile suburb were on level ground toward
the west; but here, as on the only weak point at Gibraltar, strong
artificial defenses had made compensation for the weakness of nature.
Seleucus, who had named his metropolis in his father's honor (p. 122),
gave his own name to this maritime fortress; and here, around his tomb,
his successors contended for the key of Syria. 'Seleucia by the sea' was
a place of great importance under the Seleucidae and the Ptolemies, and
so it remained under the sway of the Romans. In consequence of its bold
resistance to Tigranes when he was in possession of all the neighboring
country, Pompey gave it the privileges of a 'free city;' and a
contemporary of Paul speaks of it as having those privileges still.

Here, in the midst of unsympathizing sailors, the two missionary
apostles, with their younger companion, stepped on board the vessel
which was to convey them to Salamis. As they cleared the port, the whole
sweep of the bay of Antioch opened on their left - the low ground by the
mouth of the Orontes; the wild and woody country beyond it; and then the
peak of Mount Casius, rising symmetrically from the very edge of the sea
to a height of 5000 feet. On the right, in the southwest horizon, if the
day was clear, they saw the island of Cyprus from the first. The current
sets northerly and northeast between the island and the Syrian coast.
But with a fair wind, a few hours would enable them to run down from
Seleucia to Salamis, and the land would rapidly rise in forms well known
and familiar to Barnabas and Mark" (Life and Epistles of Paul, vol. 1,
pp. 135, 138).

They sailed to Cyprus - An island in the Mediterranean, not far from
Seleucia. See the notes on [Act 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036).

[Acts 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 13:5</span></span>

And when they were at Salamis - This was the principal city and seaport
of Cyprus. It was situated on the southeast part of the island, and was
afterward called Constantia.

In the synagogues of the Jews - Jews were living in all the countries
adjacent to Judea, and in those countries they had synagogues. The
apostles uniformly preached first to them.

And they had also John to their minister - John Mark, [Act
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012). He was their attendant, yet not
pretending to be equal to them in circe. They had been specifically
designated to this work. He was with them as their friend and traveling
companion; perhaps also employed in making the needful arrangements for
their comfort, and for the supply of their needs in their travels.

[Acts 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 13:6</span></span>

And when they had gone through the isle - The length of the island,
according to Strabo, was 1,400 stadia, or nearly 170 miles.

Unto Paphos - Paphos was a city at the western extremity of the island.
It was the residence of the proconsul, and was distinguished for a
splendid temple erected to Venus, who was worshipped throughout the
island. Cyprus was fabled to be the place of the birth of this goddess.
It had, besides Paphos and Salamis, several towns of note Citium, the
birthplace of Zeno, Areathus, sacred to Venus, etc. Its present capital
is Nicosia. Whether Paul preached at any of these places is not
recorded. The island is formerly supposed to have had one million
inhabitants.

A certain sorcerer - Greek: magus, or magician. See the notes on [Act
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009).

A false prophet - Pretending to be endowed with the gift of prophecy; or
a man, probably, who pretended to be inspired.

Bar-jesus - The word "Bar" is Syriac, and means "son." Jesus (Joshua)
was not an uncommon name among the Jews. The name was given from his
father - son of Jesus, or Joshua; as Bar-Jonas, son of Jonas.

[Acts 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 13:7</span></span>

Which was with the deputy - Or with the proconsul. The exact accuracy of
Luke in this statement is worthy of special remark. In the time when
Augustus united the world under his own power, the provinces were
divided into two classes. Augustus found two names which were applied to
public officers in existence, one of which was henceforward inseparably
blended with the imperial dignity and with military command, and the
other with the authority of the senate and its civil administration. The
first of these names was "Praetor"; the other was "Consul." What is to
be accounted for here is that the latter is the name given by Luke to
Sergius Paulus, as if he derived his authority from the senate. The
difficulty in the ease is this: that Augustus told the senate and the
people of Rome that he would resign to them those provinces where
soldiers were unnecessary to secure a peaceful administration, and that
he would himself take the care and risk of the other provinces where the
presence of the Roman legions would be necessary.

Hence, in the time of Augustus, and in the subsequent reigns of the
emperors, the provinces were divided into these two classes; the one
governed by men who went forth from the senate, and who would be styled
Proconsul, ἀνθύπατος anthupatos - the term used here; and the other
those sent forth by the emperor, and who would be styled Procurator,
Ἐπίτροπος Epitropos or Proproetor, Ἀντιστράτηγος Antistratēgos. Both
these kind of officers are referred to in the New Testament. Now we are
told by Strabo and Dio Cassius that "Asaia" and "Achaia" were assigned
to the senate, and the title, therefore, of the governor would be
Proconsul, as we find in [Act 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012);
[Act 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#038). At the same time, Dio
Cassius informs us that Cyprus was retained by the emperor for himself,
and the title of the governor, therefore, would naturally have been, not
"Proconsul," as here, but "Procurator." Yet it so happens that Dio
Cassius has stated the reason why the title "Proconsul" was given to the
governor of Cyprus, in the fact which he mentions that "Augustus
restored Cyprus to the senate in exchange for another district of the
empire." It is this statement which vindicates the strict accuracy of
Luke in the passage before us. See Life and Epistles of Paul, vol. 1,
pp. 142-144, and also Lardner's Credibility, part 1, chapter 1, section
11, where he has fully vindicated the accuracy of the appellation which
is here given to Sergius by Luke.

Sergius Paulus, a prudent man - The word here rendered "prudent" means
"intelligent, wise, learned." It also may have the sense of candid, and
may have been given to this man because he was of large and liberal
views; of a philosophic and inquiring turn of mind; and was willing to
obtain knowledge from any source. Hence, he had entertained the Jews;
and hence, he was willing also to listen to Barnabas and Saul. It is not
often that men of rank are thus willing to listen to the instructions of
the professed ministers of God.

Who called for Barnabas and Saul - It is probable that they had preached
in Paphos, and Sergius was desirous himself of hearing the import of
their new doctrine.

And desired to hear ... - There is no evidence that he then wished to
listen to this as divine truth, or that he was anxious about his own
salvation, but it was rather as a speculative inquiry. It was a
professed characteristic of many ancient philosophers that they were
willing to receive instruction from any quarter. Compare [Act
17:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#019).

[Acts 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 13:8</span></span>

}}But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) -
Elymas the magician. Elymas is the interpretation, not of the name
Bar-jesus, but of the word rendered "the sorcerer." It is an Arabic
word, and means the same as Magus. It seems that he was better known by
this foreign name than by his own.

Withstood them - Resisted them. He was sensible that if the influence of
Saul and Barnabas should be extended over the proconsul, that he would
be seen to be an impostor, and his power be at an end. His interest,
therefore, led him to oppose the gospel. His own popularity was at
stake; and being governed by this, he opposed the gospel of God. The
love of popularity and power, the desire of retaining some political
influence, is often a strong reason why people oppose the gospel.

To turn away the deputy from the faith - To prevent the influence of the
truth on his mind; or to prevent his be coming the friend and patron of
the Christians.

[Acts 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 13:9</span></span>

}}Then Saul, (who is also called Paul) - This is the last time that this
apostle is called "Saul." Henceforward, he is designated by the title by
which he is usually known, as "Paul." When, or why, this change occurred
in the name, has been a subject on which commentators are not agreed.
From the fact that the change in the name is here first intimated, it
would seem probable that it was first used in relation to him at this
time. By whom the name was given him whether he assumed it himself, or
whether it was first given him by Christians or by Romans - is not
intimated. The name is of Roman origin. In the Latin language the name
Paulus signifies little, dwarfish; and some have conjectured that it was
given by his parents to denote that he was small when born; others, that
it was assumed or conferred in subsequent years because he was little in
stature. The name is not of the same signification as the name Saul.
This signifies one that is asked, or desired. After all the conjectures
on this subject, it is probable:

\(1\) That this name was first used here; for before this, even after
his conversion, he is uniformly called Saul.

\(2\) that it was given by the Romans, as being a name with which they
were more familiar, and one that was more consonant with their language
and pronunciation. It was made by the change of a single letter; and
probably because the name Paul was common among them, and pronounced,
perhaps, with greater facility.

\(3\) Paul suffered himself to be called by this name, as he was
employed chiefly among the Gentiles. It was common for names to undergo
changes quite as great as this, without our being able to specify any
particular cause, in passing from one language to another. Thus, the
Hebrew name Jochanan among the Greeks and Latins was Johannes, with the
French it is Jean, with the Dutch Hans, and with us John (Doddridge).
Thus, Onias becomes Menelaus; Hillel, Pollio; Jakim, Alcimus; Silas,
Silvanus, etc. (Grotius).

Filled with the Holy Ghost - Inspired to detect his sin; to denounce
divine judgment; and to inflict punishment on him. See the notes on [Act
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004).

Set his eyes on him - Looked at him intently.

[Acts 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 13:10</span></span>

O full of all subtilty and all mischief - The word "subtilty" denotes
"deceit and fraud," and implies that he was practicing an imposition,
and that he knew it. The word rendered "mischief" ῥᾳδιουργίας
radiourgias denotes properly "facility of acting," and then "sleight of
hand; sly;, cunning arts, by which one imposes on another, and deceives
him with a fraudulent intention." It is not used elsewhere in the New
Testament. The art of Elymas consisted probably in sleight of hand,
legerdemain, or trick, aided by skill in the abstruse sciences, by which
the ignorant might be easily imposed on. See the notes on [Act
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009).

Child of the devil - Under his influence; practicing his arts; promoting
his designs by deceit and imposture, so that he may be called your
father. See the notes on [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044).
Satan is represented here as the author of deceit and the father of
lies.

Enemy of all righteousness - Practicing deceit and iniquity, and thus
opposed to righteousness and honesty. A man who lives by wickedness
will, of course, be the foe of every form of integrity. A man who lives
by fraud will be opposed to the truth; a panderer to the vices of people
will hate the rules of chastity and purity; a manufacturer or vendor of
ardent spirits will be the enemy of temperance societies.

Wilt thou not cease to pervert - In what way he had opposed Paul and
Barnabas is not known. It may have been either by misrepresenting their
doctrines, or by representing them as apostate Jews thus retarding or
hindering the progress of the gospel. The expression "wilt thou not
cease." implies that he had been engaged sedulously in doing this,
probably from the commencement of their work in the city.

The right ways of the Lord - The straight paths or doctrines of the
Christian religion, in opposition to the crooked and perverse arts of
deceivers and impostors. Straight paths denote "integrity, sincerity,
truth," [Jer 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009); [Heb
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#013); compare [Isa
40:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003); [Isa
42:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#016); [Luk
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#005). Crooked ways denote "the ways of
the sinner, the deceiver, the impostor," [Deu
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005); [Psa
125:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001); [Pro
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#015); [Isa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008); [Phi
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015).

[Acts 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 13:11</span></span>

The hand of the Lord is upon thee - God shall punish thee. By this
sudden and miraculous punishment he would be awed and humbled, and the
proconsul and others would be convinced that he was an impostor, and
that the gospel was true. His wickedness deserved such punishment; and
at the same time that due punishment was inflicted, it was designed that
the gospel should be extended by this means. In all this there was the
highest evidence that Paul was under the inspiration of God. He was full
of the Holy Spirit; he detected the secret feelings and desires of the
heart of Elymas; and he inflicted on him a punishment that could have
proceeded from none but God. That the apostles had the power of
inflicting punishment is apparent from various places in the New
Testament, [Co1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005); [Ti1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020). The punishment inflicted on
Elymas, also, would be highly emblematic of the darkness and
perverseness of his conduct.

Not seeing the sun for a season - For how long a time this blindness was
to continue is nowhere specified. It was, however, in mercy ordained
that the blindness should not be permanent and final; and though it was
a punishment, it was at the same time benevolent, for nothing would be
more likely to lead him to reflection and repentance than such a state
of blindness. It was such a manifest proof that God was opposed to him
it was such a sudden divine judgment; it so completely cut him off from
all possibility of practicing his arts of deception, that it was adapted
to bring him to repentance. Accordingly there is a tradition in the
early church that he became a Christian. Origen says that "Paul, by a
word striking him blind, by anguish converted him to godliness" (Clark).

A mist - The word used here properly denotes "a darkness or obscurity of
the air; a cloud," etc. But it also denotes "an extinction of sight by
the drying up or disturbance of the tumors of the eye" (Hippocrates, as
quoted by Schleusner).

And a darkness - Blindness, night. What was the precise cause or
character of this miracle is not specified.

And he went about ... - This is a striking account of the effect of the
miracle. The change was so sudden that he knew not where to go. He
sought someone to guide him in the paths with which he had before been
familiar. How soon can God bring down the pride of man, and make him as
helpless as an infant! How easily can He touch our senses, the organs of
our most exquisite pleasures, and wither away all our enjoyments! How
dependent are we upon Him for the inestimable blessing of sight! And how
easily can He annihilate all the sinner's pleasures, break up all his
plans, and humble him in the dust! Sight is his gift; and it is a mercy
unspeakably great that He does not overwhelm us in thick darkness, and
destroy forever all the pleasure that through this organ is conveyed to
the soul.

[Acts 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 13:12</span></span>

Then the deputy ...believed - Was convinced that Elymas was an impostor,
and that the doctrine of Paul was true. There seems no reason to doubt
that his faith was what is connected with eternal life; and if so, it is
an evidence that the gospel was not always confined to the poor, and to
those in obscure ranks of life.

At the doctrine of the Lord - The word "doctrine" here seems to denote,
not the "teaching" or "instruction," but the wonderful effects which
were connected with the doctrine. It was particularly the miracle with
which he was astonished; but he might have been also deeply impressed
and amazed at the purity and sublimity of the truths which were now
expanded to his view. We learn nothing further respecting him in the New
Testament.

[Acts 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 13:13</span></span>

Paul and his company - Those with him - Barnabas and John - and perhaps
others who had been converted at Paphos; for it was common for many of
the converts to Christianity to attend on the apostles in their travels.
See [Act 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003) O.

Loosed from Paphos - Departed from Paphos. See the notes on [Act
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006).

They came to Perga in Pamphylia - Pamphylia was a province of Asia
Minor, lying over against Cyprus, having Cilicia east, Lycia west,
Pisidia north, and the Mediterranean south. Perga was the metropolis of
Pamphylia, and was situated, not on the seacoast, but on the river
Cestus, at some distance from its mouth. There was on a mountain near it
a celebrated temple of Diana.

And John departing from them ... - Why he departed from them is unknown.
It might have been from fear of danger; or from alarm in traveling so
far into unknown regions. But it is plain from [Act
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038), that it was from some cause
which was deemed blameworthy, and that his conduct now was such as to
make Paul unwilling again to have him as a companion.

[Acts 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 13:14</span></span>

They came to Antioch in Pisidia - Pisidia was a province of Asia Minor,
and was situated north of Pamphylia. Antioch was not in Pisidia, but
within the limits of Phrygia; but it belonged to Pisadia, and was called
Antioch of Pisidia to distinguish it from Antioch in Syria - Pliny, Nat.
Hist., 5, 27; Strabo, 12, p. 577 (Kuinoel; Robinson's Calmet). The city
was built by Seleucus, the founder of the Antioch in Syria, and was
called after the name of his father, Antiochus. He is said to have built
16 cities of that name ("Life and Epistles of Paul," vol. 1, p. 122).

Went into the synagogue - Though Paul and Barnabas were on a special
mission to the Gentiles, yet they availed themselves of every
opportunity to offer the gospel to the Jews first.

[Acts 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 13:15</span></span>

And after the reading of the law and the prophets - See notes on [Luk
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016).

The rulers of the synagogue - Those were persons who had the general
charge of the synagogue and its service, to keep everything in order,
and to direct the affairs of public worship. They designated the
individuals who were to read the Law; and called on those whom they
pleased to address the people, and had the power also of inflicting
punishment, and of excommunicating, etc. (Schleusner), [Mar
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#022), [Mar
5:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035), [Mar
5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#038); [Luk
8:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#049); [Luk
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#014); [Act
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008), [Act
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017). Seeing that Paul and Barnabas
were Jews, though strangers, they sent to them, supposing it probable
that they would wish to address their brethren.

Men and brethren - An affectionate manner of commencing a discourse,
recognizing them as their own countrymen, and as originally of the same
religion.

Say on - Greek: "speak!"

[Acts 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 13:16</span></span>

Men of Israel - Jews. The design of this discourse of Paul was to
introduce to them the doctrine that Jesus was the Messiah. To do this,
he evinced his usual wisdom and address. To have commenced at once on
this would have probably excited their prejudice and rage. He therefore
pursued a train of argument which showed that he was a firm believer in
the Scriptures; that he was acquainted with the history and promises of
the Old Testament; and that he was not disposed to call in question the
doctrines of their fathers. The passage which had been read had probably
given occasion for him to pursue this train of thought. By going over,
in a summary way, their history, and recounting the former dealings of
God with them, he showed them that he believed the Scriptures; that a
promise had been given of a Messiah; and that he had actually come
according to the promise.

Ye that fear God - Probably proselytes of the gate, who had not yet been
circumcised, but who had renounced idolatry, and were accustomed to
worship with them in their synagogues.

Give audience - Hear.

[Acts 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 13:17</span></span>

The God of this people - Who has manifested himself as the special
friend and protector of this nation. This implied a belief that he had
been particularly their God; a favorite doctrine of the Jews, and one
that would conciliate their favor toward Paul.

Of Israel - The Jews.

Chose our fathers - Selected the nation to be a chosen and special
people to himself, [Deu 7:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006).

And exalted the people - Raised them up from a low and depressed state
of bondage, to freedom, and to special privileges as a nation.

When they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt - ἐν τῇ παροικίᾳ en tē
paroikia. This properly refers to their dwelling there as foreigners.
They were always strangers there in a strange land. It was not their
home. They never mingled with the people; never became constituent parts
of the government; never used their language; never united with their
usages and laws. They were a strange, separate, depressed people there;
not less so than Africans are strangers and foreigners a depressed and
degraded people in this land (America), [Gen
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007); [Exo
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#004); [Exo
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021); [Exo
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#009); [Lev
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#034); [Deu
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#019).

And with an high arm - This expression denotes "great power." The arm
denotes "strength," as that by which we perform anything. A high arm, an
arm lifted up, or stretched out, denotes that "strength exerted to the
utmost." The children of Israel are represented as having been delivered
with an "outstretched arm," [Deu 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#008);
[Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006). "With a strong hand," [Exo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001). Reference is made in these places
to the plagues inflicted on Egypt, by which the Israelites were
delivered; to their passage through the Red Sea; to their victories over
their enemies, etc.

[Acts 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 13:18</span></span>

And about the time of forty years - They were this time going from Egypt
to the land of Canaan. [Exo 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035);
[Num 33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038).

Suffered he their manners - This passage has been very variously
rendered. See the margin. Syriac, "He nourished them," etc. Arabic, "He
blessed them, and nourished them," etc. The Greek word is not elsewhere
used in the New Testament. It properly means to tolerate, or endure the
conduct of anyone, implying that that conduct is evil, and tends to
provoke to punishment. This is doubtless its meaning here. Probably Paul
referred to the passage in [Deu 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#031),
"The Lord thy God bare thee." But instead of this word, ἐτροποφόρησεν
etropophorēsen to bear with, many mss. read ἐτροφοφόρησεν
etrofoforēsen), "he sustained or nourished." This reading was followed
by the Syriac, Arabic, and has been admitted by Griesbach into the text.
This is also found in the Septuagint, in [Deu
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#031), which place Paul doubtless
referred to. This would well suit the connection of the passage; and a
change of a single letter might easily have occurred in a ms. It adds to
the probability that this is the true reading, that it accords with [Deu
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#031); [Num
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012); [Deu
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010). It is furthermore not probable
that Paul would have commenced a discourse by reminding them of the
obstinacy and wickedness of the nation. Such a course would rather tend
to exasperate than to conciliate; but by reminding them of the mercies
of God to them, and showing them that He had been their protector, he
was better fitting them for his main purpose - that of showing them the
kindness of the God of their fathers in sending to them a Saviour.

In the wilderness - The desert through which they passed in going from
Egypt to Canaan.

[Acts 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 13:19</span></span>

And when he had destroyed - Subdued, cast out, or extirpated them as
nations. It does not mean that all were put to death, for many of them
were left in the land; but that they were subdued as nations, they were
broken up and overcome, [Deu 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001), "And
hath cast out many nations before them," etc.

Seven nations - The Hittites, the Girgashites, the Amorites, the
Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001); [Jos
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010); [Neh
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#008).

In the land of Canaan - The whole land Was called by the name of one of
the principal nations. This was the promised land; the holy land, etc.

He divided ... - See an account of this in Jos. 14-15: The lot was often
used among the Jews to determine important questions. See the note at
[Act 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026).

[Acts 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 13:20</span></span>

He gave unto them judges - Men who were raised up in an extraordinary
manner to administer the affairs of the nation, to defend it from
enemies, etc. See [Jdg 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016).

About the space of four hundred and fifty years - This is a most
difficult passage, and has exercised all the ingenuity of chronologists.
The ancient versions agree with the present Greek text. The difficulty
has been to reconcile it with what is said in [Kg1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001), "And it came to pass in the four
hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of
the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel
...he began to build the house of the Lord." Now if to the 40 years that
the children of Israel were in the wilderness there be added the 450
said in Acts to have been passed under the administration of the judges,
and about 17 years of the time of Joshua, 40 years for Samuel and the
reign of Saul together, and 40 years for the reign of David, and three
years of Solomon before he began to build the temple, the sum will be
590 years, a period greater by 110 years than that mentioned in [Kg1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001). Various ways have been proposed
to meet the difficulty. Doddridge renders it, "After these transactions,
(which lasted) 450 years, he gave them a series of judges," etc.,
reckoning from the birth of Isaac, and supposing that Paul meant to
refer to this whole time. But to this there are serious objections:

\(1\) It is a forced and constrained interpretation, and one manifestly
made to meet a difficulty.

\(2\) there is no propriety in commencing this period at the birth of
Isaac. That was in no manner remarkable, so far as Paul's narrative was
concerned; and Paul had not even referred to it. This same solution is
offered also by Calovius, Mill, and DeDieu. Luther and Beza think it
should be read 300 instead of 400. But this is a mere conjecture,
without any authority from mss. Vitringa and some others suppose that
the text has been corrupted by some transcriber, who has inserted this
without authority. But there is no evidence of this; and the mss. and
ancient versions are uniform. None of these explanations are
satisfactory. In the solution of the difficulty we may remark:

\(1\) That nothing is more perplexing than the chronology of ancient
facts. The difficulty is found in all writings; in profane as well as
sacred. Mistakes are so easily made in transcribing numbers, where
letters are used instead of writing the words at length, that we are not
to wonder at such errors.

\(2\) Paul would naturally use the chronology which was in current,
common use among the Jews. It was not his business to settle such
points; but he would speak of them as they were usually spoken of, and
refer to them as others did.

\(3\) there is reason to believe that what is mentioned here was the
common chronology of his time. It accords remarkably with that which is
used by Josephus. Thus, (Antiq., book 7, chapter 3, section 1), Josephus
says expressly that Solomon "began to build the temple in the fourth
year of his reign, 592 years after the exodus out of Egypt," etc. This
would allow 40 years for their being in the wilderness, 17 years for
Joshua, 40 for Samuel and Saul, 40 for the reign of David, and 452 years
for the time of the judges and the times of anarchy that intervened.
This remarkable coincidence shows that this was the chronology which was
then used, and which Paul had in view.

\(4\) this chronology has the authority, also, of many eminent names.
See Lightfoot and Boyle's Lectures, Acts 20. In what way this
computation of Josephus and the Jews originated it is not necessary here
to inquire. It is a sufficient solution of the difficulty that Paul
spake in their usual manner, without departing from his regular object
by settling a point of chronology.

[Acts 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 13:21</span></span>

And afterward they desired a king - See [Sa1
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#005); [Hos
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#010). It was predicted that they
would have a king, [Deu 17:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014).

Saul, the son of Cis - is the Greek mode of writing the Hebrew name
Kish. In the Old Testament it is uniformly written as "Kish," and it is
to be regretted that this has not been retained in the New Testament.
See [Sa1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001).

By the space of forty years - During forty years. The Old Testament has
not mentioned the time during which Saul reigned. Josephus says (Antiq.,
book 6, chapter 14, section 9) that he reigned for 18 years while Samuel
was alive, and 22 years after his death. But Dr. Doddridge (note in
loco) has shown that this cannot be correct, and that he probably
reigned, as some copies of Josephus have it, but two years after the
death of Samuel. Many critics suppose that the term of 40 years
mentioned here includes also the time in which Samuel judged the people.
This supposition does not violate the text in this place, and may be
probable. See Doddridge and Grotius on the place.

[Acts 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 13:22</span></span>

And when he had removed him - This was done because he rebelled against
God in sparing the sheep and oxen and valuable property of Amalek,
together with Agag the king, when he was commanded to destroy all, 1
Sam. 15:8-23. He was put to death in a battle with the Philistines, [Sa1
31:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001). The phrase "when he removed
him" refers probably to his rejection as a king, and not to his death;
for David was anointed king before the death of Saul, and almost
immediately after the rejection of Saul on account of his rebellion in
the business of Amalek. See [Sa1
16:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012).

He gave testimony - He bore witness, [Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014).

I have found David ... - This is not quoted literally, but contains the
substance of what is expressed in various places. Compare [Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014), with [Psa
89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020), and [Sa1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001), [Sa1
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012).

A man after mine own heart - This expression is found in [Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014). The connection shows that it
means simply a man who would not be rebellious and disobedient as Saul
was, but would do the will of God and keep his commandments. This
refers, doubtless, rather to the public than to the private character of
David; to his character as a king. It means that he would make the will
of God the great rule and law of his reign, in contradistinction from
Saul, who, as a king, had disobeyed God. At the same time it is true
that the prevailing character of David, as a pious, humble, devoted man,
was that he was a man after God's own heart, and was beloved by him as a
holy man. He had faults; he committed sin; but who is free from it? He
was guilty of great offences; but he also evinced, in a degree equally
eminent, repentance (see Ps. 51); and not less in his private than his
public character did he evince those traits which were prevailingly such
as accorded with the heart, that is, the earnest desires, of God.

Which shall fulfill all my will - Saul had not done it. He had disobeyed
God in a case where he had received an express command. The
characteristic of David would be that he would obey the commands of God.
That David did this - that he maintained the worship of God, opposed
idolatry, and sought to promote universal obedience to God among the
people is expressly recorded of him, [Kg1
14:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#008), "And thou Jeroboam hast not
been as my servant David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me
with all his heart, to do that only which was right in mine eyes," etc.,
[Kg1 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#003), [Kg1
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#005).

[Acts 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 13:23</span></span>

Of this man's seed - Of his posterity.

According to his promise - See the notes on [Act
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030).

Raised unto Israel - See the notes on [Act
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030).

A Saviour, Jesus - See the notes on [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021).

[Acts 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 13:24</span></span>

When John had first preached ... - After John had preached and prepared
the way, Mat. 3:

[Acts 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 13:25</span></span>

And as John fulfilled his course - As he was engaged in completing his
work. His ministry is called a course or race, that which was to be run,
or completed.

He said ... - These are not the precise words which the evangelists have
recorded, but the sense is the same. See the [Joh
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020) note; [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011) note.

[Acts 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 13:26</span></span>

Men and brethren - Paul now exhorts them to embrace the Lord Jesus as
the Messiah. He uses, therefore, the most respectful and fraternal
language.

Children of the stock of Abraham - Descendants of Abraham; you who
regard Abraham as your ancestor. He means here to address particularly
the native-born Jews; and this appellation is used because they valued
themselves highly on account of their descent from Abraham (see the
notes on [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)); and because the
promise of the Messiah had been specially given to him.

And whosoever ... - Proselytes. See the notes on [Act
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016).

Is the word of this salvation sent - This message of salvation. It was
sent particularly to the Jewish people. The Saviour was sent to that
nation [Mat 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024); and the design was
to offer to them first the message of life. See the notes on [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046).

[Acts 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 13:27</span></span>

Because they knew him not - The statement in this verse is designed, not
to reproach the Jews at Jerusalem, but to introduce the fact that Jesus
had died, and had risen again. With great wisdom and tenderness, Paul
speaks of the murderers of the Saviour in such a manner as not to
exasperate, but, as far as possible, to mitigate their crime. There was
sufficient guilt in the murder of the Son of God to fill the nation with
alarm, even after all that could be said to mitigate the deed. See [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023), [Act
2:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036). When Paul says, "They knew
him not," he means that they did not know him to be the Messiah (see
[Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)); they were ignorant of the
true meaning of the prophecies of the Old Testament; they regarded him
as an impostor. See the notes on [Act
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017).

Nor yet the voices of the prophets - The meaning of the predictions of
the Old Testament respecting the Messiah. They expected a prince and a
conqueror, but did not expect a Messiah that was poor and despised; that
was a man of sorrows and that was to die on a cross.

Which are read every sabbath-day - In the synagogues. Though the
Scriptures were read so constantly, yet they were ignorant of their true
meaning. They were blinded by pride, and prejudice, and preconceived
opinions. People may often in this way read the Bible a good part of
their lives and never understand it.

They have fulfilled them ... - By putting him to death they have
accomplished what was foretold.

[Acts 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 13:28</span></span>

And though they found ... - They found no crime which deserved death.
This is conclusively shown by the trial itself. After all their efforts;
after the treason of Judas; after their employing false witnesses; still
no crime was laid to his charge. The Sanhedrin condemned him for
blasphemy; and yet they knew that they could not substantiate the charge
before Pilate, and they therefore endeavored to procure his condemnation
on the ground of sedition. Compare [Luk
22:70-71](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#070), with [Luk
23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001).

Yet desired they Pilate ... - [Mat
27:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001); [Luk
23:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#004).

[Acts 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 13:29</span></span>

They took him down ... - That is, it was done by the Jews. Not that it
was done by those who put him to death, but by Joseph of Arimathea, and
by Nicodemus, who were Jews. Paul is speaking of what was done to Jesus
by the Jews at Jerusalem; and he does not affirm that the same persons
put him to death and laid him in a tomb, but that all this was done by
Jews. See [Joh 19:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038).

[Acts 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 13:30</span></span>

But God raised him ... - See the notes on [Act
2:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023).

[Acts 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 13:31</span></span>

And he was seen - See the notes at the end of Matthew.

Many days - Forty days, [Act 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003).

Of them which came up - By the apostles particularly. He was seen by
others; but they are especially mentioned as having been chosen for this
object, to bear witness to him, and as having been particularly
qualified for it.

[Acts 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 13:32</span></span>

And we - We who are here present. Paul and Barnabas.

Declare unto you glad tidings - We preach the gospel the good news. To a
Jew, nothing could be more grateful intelligence than that the Messiah
had come; to a sinner convinced of his sins nothing can be more cheering
than to hear of a Saviour.

The promise ... - The promise here refers to all that had been spoken in
the Old Testament respecting the advent, sufferings, death, and
resurrection of Christ.

[Acts 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 13:33</span></span>

God hath fulfilled - God has completed or carried into effect by the
resurrection of Jesus. He does not say that every part of the promise
had reference to his resurrection; but his being raised up completed or
perfected the fulfillment of the promises which had been made respecting
him.

In the second psalm - [Act 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007).

Thou art my Son - This psalm has been usually understood as referring to
the Messiah. See the notes on [Act
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025).

This day have I begotten thee - It is evident that Paul uses the
expression here as implying that the Lord Jesus is called the Son of God
because he raised him up from the dead, and that he means to imply that
it was for this reason that he is so called. This interpretation of an
inspired apostle fixes the meaning of this passage in the psalm, and
proves that it is not there used with reference to the doctrine of
eternal generation, or to his incarnation, but that he is called his Son
because he was raised from the dead. And this interpretation accords
with the scope of the psalm. In [Act
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001) the psalmist records the
combination of the rulers of the earth against the Messiah, and their
efforts to cast off his reign. This was done, and the Messiah was
rejected. All this pertains, not to his previous existence, but to the
Messiah on the earth. In [Act 13:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004),
the psalmist shows that their efforts would not be successful; that God
would laugh at their designs; that is, that their plans should not
succeed.

In [Act 13:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006), he shows that the
Messiah would be established as a king; that this was the fixed decree,
and that he had been begotten for this. All this is represented as
subsequent to the raging of the pagan, and to the counsel of the kings
against him, and must, therefore, refer, not to his eternal generation
or his incarnation, but to something succeeding his death; that is, to
his resurrection, and his establishment as King at the right hand of
God. This interpretation by the apostle Paul proves, therefore, that
this passage is not to be used to establish the doctrine of the eternal
generation of Christ. Christ is called the Son of God for various
reasons. In [Luk 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035), because he was
begotten by the Holy Spirit. In this place, on account of his
resurrection. In [Rom 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004) it is also
said that he was declared to be the Son of God by the resurrection from
the dead. See the notes on that place. The resurrection from the dead is
represented as in some sense the beginning of life, and it is with
reference to this that the terms "Son," and "begotten from the dead,"
are used, as the birth of a child is the beginning of life. Thus, Christ
is said, [Col 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018), to be "the
first-born from the dead"; and thus, in [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005); he is called "the firsthegotten
of the dead"; and with reference to this renewal or beginning of life he
is called a Son. In whatever other senses he is called a Son in the New
Testament, yet it is here proved:

\(1\) That he is called a Son from his resurrection; and,

\(2\) That this is the sense in which the expression in the psalm is to
be used.

This day - The words "this day" would naturally, in the connection in
which they are found, refer to the time when the "decree" was made. The
purpose was formed before Christ came into the world; it was executed or
carried into effect by the resurrection from the dead. See the notes on
[Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007).

Have I begotten thee - This evidently cannot be understood in a literal
sense. It literally refers to the relation of an earthly father to his
children; but in no such sense can it be applied to the relation of God
the Father to the Son. It must, therefore, be figurative. The word
sometimes figuratively means "to produce, to cause to exist in any way";
[Ti2 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023), "Unlearned questions avoid,
knowing that they do gender (beget) strifes." It refers also to the
labors of the apostles in securing the conversion of sinners to the
gospel: [Co1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015), "In Christ Jesus I
have begotten you through the gospel"; [Plm
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010), Whom (Onesimus) I have begotten
in my bonds. It is applied to Christians: [Joh
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013), "Which were born (begotten), not
of blood, etc., but of God"; [Joh 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003),
Except a man be born (begotten) again," etc. In all these places it is
used in a figurative sense to denote "the commencement of spiritual life
by the power of God; so raising up stoners from the death of sin, or so
producing spiritual life that they should sustain to him the relation of
sons." Thus, he raised up Christ from the dead, and imparted life to his
body; and hence, he is said figuratively to have begotten him from the
dead, and thus sustains toward the risen Saviour the relation of father.
Compare [Col 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018); [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005); [Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005).

[Acts 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 13:34</span></span>

And as concerning - In further proof of this. To show that he actually
did it, he proceeds to quote another passage of Scripture.

No more to return to corruption - The word "corruption" is usually
employed to denote "putrefaction, or the mouldering away of a body in
the grave; its returning to its native dust." But it is certain ([Act
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035). See the notes on [Act
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027)) that the body of Christ never in
this sense saw corruption. The word is therefore used to denote "death,
or the grave, the cause and place of corruption." The word is thus used
in the Septuagint. It means here simply that he should not die again.

He said on this wise - He said thus ὅυτως houtōs.

I will give you - This quotation is made from [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003). It is quoted from the
Septuagint, with a change of but one word, not affecting the sense. In
Isaiah the passage does not refer particularly to the resurrection of
the Messiah, nor is it the design of Paul to affirm that it does. His
object in this verse is not to prove that he would rise from the dead,
but that, being risen, he would not again die. That the passage in
Isaiah refers to the Messiah there can be no doubt, [Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001), [Act
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004). The passage here quoted is an
address to the people, an assurance to them that the promise made to
David would be performed, a solemn declaration that he would make an
everlasting covenant with them through the Messiah, the promised
descendant of David.

The sure mercies of David - The word "mercies" here refers to the
promise made to David; the mercy or favor shown to him by promising to
him a successor that should not fail to sit on his throne, [Sa2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016); [Psa
89:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004); [Psa
132:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011). These mercies and promises
are called "sure," as being true or unfailing; they would certainly be
accomplished. Compare [Co2 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020). The
word "David" here does not refer, as many have supposed, to the Messiah,
but to the King of Israel. God made to David a promise, a certain
pledge; he bestowed on him this special mercy, in promising that he
should have a successor who should sit forever on his throne. This
promise was understood by the Jews, and is often referred to in the New
Testament, as relating to the Messiah. Paul here says that that promise
is fulfilled. The only question is how it refers to the subject on which
he was discoursing. The point was not mainly to prove his resurrection,
but to show particularly that he would never die again, or that he would
forever live and reign. And the argument is, that as God had promised
that David should have a successor who should sit forever on his throne,
and as this prediction now terminated in the Messiah, the Lord Jesus, it
followed that, as that promise was sure and certain, he would never die
again. He must live if the promise was fulfilled. And though he had been
put to death, yet under that general promise there was a certainty that
he would live again. It was impossible, the meaning is, that the
Messiah, the promised successor of David, the perpetual occupier of his
throne, should remain under the power of death. Under this assurance the
church now reposes its hopes. Zion's King now lives, ever able to
vindicate and save his people.

[Acts 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 13:35</span></span>

Wherefore - Διὸ Dio. To the same intent or end. In proof of the same
thing - that he must rise and live forever.

He saith - God says by David, or David spake the promises made by God.

In another psalm - [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010).

Thou wilt not suffer ... - See this explained in the notes on [Act
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027).

[Acts 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 13:36</span></span>

For David ... - This verse is designed to show that the passage in [Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001); could not refer to David, and
must therefore relate to some other person. In [Act
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#037) it is affirmed that this could
refer to no one, in fact, but to the Lord Jesus.

After he had served his own generation - See the margin. Syriac, "David
in his own generation having served the will of God, and slept," etc.
Arabic, "David served in his own age, and saw God." The margin probably
most correctly expresses the sense of the passage. To serve a
generation, or an age, is an unusual and almost unintelligible
expression.

Fell on sleep - Greek: "slept," that is, "died." This is the usual word
to denote "the death of saints." It is used of David in [Kg1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#010). See notes on [Mat
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052).

And was laid unto ... - And was buried with his fathers, etc., [Kg1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#010).

And saw corruption - Remained in the grave, and returned to his native
dust. See this point argued more at length by Peter in [Act
2:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029), and explained in the notes on
that place.

[Acts 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 13:37</span></span>

But he, whom God raised again - The Lord Jesus.

Saw no corruption - Was raised without undergoing the usual change that
succeeds death. As David had returned to corruption, and the Lord Jesus
had not, it followed that this passage in [Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001) referred to the Messiah.

[Acts 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 13:38</span></span>

Be it known ... - Paul, having proved his resurrection, and shown that
he was the Messiah, now states the benefits that were to be derived from
his death.

Through this man - See the notes on [Luk
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047).

[Acts 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 13:39</span></span>

And by him - By means of him; by his sufferings and death.

All that believe - See the notes on [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016).

Are justified - Are regarded and treated as if they were righteous. They
are pardoned, and admitted to the favor of God, and treated as if they
had not offended. See this point explained in the notes on [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); [Rom
3:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024); [Rom
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001).

From all things - From the guilt of all offences.

From which ye could not ... - The Law of Moses commanded what was to be
done. It appointed sacrifices and offerings as typical of a greater
sacrifice. But those sacrifices could not take away sin. See the notes
on [Heb 9:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007); [Heb
10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001), [Heb
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#011). The design of the Law was not
to reveal a way of pardon. That was reserved to be the unique purpose of
the gospel.

The law of Moses - The commands and institutions which he, under the
direction of God, established.

[Acts 13:40](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 13:40</span></span>

Beware, therefore - Avoid what is threatened. It will come on some; and
Paul exhorted his hearers to beware lest it should come on them. It was
the more important to caution them against this danger, as the Jews held
that they were safe.

Lest that come - That calamity; that threatened punishment.

In the prophets - In that part of the Scriptures called "the Prophets."
The Jews divided the Old Testament into three parts, of which "the Book
of the Prophets" was one. See the notes on [Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044). The place where this is
recorded is [Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005). It is not taken
from the Hebrew, but substantially from the Septuagint. The original
design of the threatening was to announce the destruction that would
come upon the nation by the Chaldeans. The original threatening was
fulfilled. But it was as applicable to the Jews in the time of Paul as
in the time of Habakkuk. The principle of the passage is, that if they
held in contempt the doings of God, they would perish. The work which
God was to do by means of the Chaldeans was so fearful, so unusual, and
so remarkable, that they would not believe it in time to avoid the
calamity. In the same way, the manner in which God gave the Messiah was
so little in accordance with their expectation, that they might see it,
yet disbelieve it; that they might have the fullest proof, and yet
despise it; that they might wonder, and be amazed and astonished, and
yet refuse to believe it, and be destroyed.

[Acts 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 13:41</span></span>

Behold, ye despisers - Hebrew, "Behold, ye among the pagan." The change
from this expression to "ye despisers" was made by the Septuagint
translators by a very slight alteration in the Hebrew word - probably
from a variation in the copy which they used. It arose from reading
בּוגדים bowgadiym instead of בגּוים bagowyim. The Syriac, the Arabic, as
well as the Septuagint, follow this reading.

And wonder - Hebrew, "And regard, and wonder marvelously."

And perish - Thin is not in the Hebrew, but is in the Septuagint and the
Arabic. The word means literally "to be removed from the sight; to
disappear; and then to corrupt, defile, destroy," [Mat
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#016), [Mat
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019). The word, however, may mean "to
be suffused with shame; to be overwhelmed and confounded" (Schleusner);
and it may perhaps have this meaning here, corresponding to the Hebrew.
The word used here is not what is commonly employed to denote "eternal
perdition," though Paul seems to use it with reference to their
destruction for rejecting the gospel.

For I work a work - I do a thing. The thing to which the prophet
Habakkuk referred was, that God would bring upon them the Chaldeans,
that would destroy the temple and nation. In like manner Paul says that
God in that time might bring upon the nation similar calamities. By
rejecting the Messiah and his gospel, and by persevering in wickedness,
they would bring upon themselves the destruction of the temple, the
city, and the nation. It was this threatened destruction doubtless to
which the apostle referred.

Which ye shall in no wise believe - Which you will not believe. So
remarkable, so unusual, so surpassing anything which had occurred. The
original reference in Habakkuk is to the destruction of the temple by
the Chaldeans; a thing which the Jews would not suppose could happen.
The temple was so splendid; it had been so manifestly built by the
direction of God; it had been so long under his protection, that they
would suppose that it could not be given into the hands of their enemies
to be demolished; and even though it were predicted by a prophet of God,
still they would not believe it. The same feelings the Jews would have
respecting the temple and city in the time of Paul. Though it was
foretold by the Messiah, yet they were so confident that it was
protected by God, that they would not believe that it could possibly be
destroyed. The same infatuation seems to have possessed them during the
siege of the city by the Romans.

Though a man ... - Though it be plainly predicted. We may learn:

\(1\) That people may be greatly amazed and impressed by the doings or
works of God, and yet be destroyed.

\(2\) there may be a prejudice so obstinate that even a divine
revelation will not remove it.

\(3\) the fancied security of sinners will not save them.

\(4\) there are people who will not believe in the possibility of their
being lost, though it be declared by prophets, by apostles, by the
Saviour, and by God. They will still remain in fancied security, and
suffer nothing to alarm or rouse them. But,

\(5\) As the fancied security of the Jew furnished no safety against the
Babylonians or the Romans, so it is true that the indifference and
unconcern of sinners will not furnish any security against the dreadful
wrath of God. Yet there are multitudes who live amidst the displays of
God's power and mercy in the redemption of sinners, and who witness the
effects of his goodness and truth in revivals of religion, who live to
despise it all; who are amazed and confounded by it; and who perish.

[Acts 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 13:42</span></span>

And when the Jews ... - There is a great variety in the mss. on this
verse, and in the ancient versions. Griesbach and Knapp read it, "And
when they were gone out, they besought them that these words might be
spoken, etc." The Syriac reads it, "When they departed from them, they
sought from them that these words might be spoken to them on another
Sabbath." The Arabic, "Some of the synagogue of the Jews asked of them
that they would exhort the Gentiles with them, etc." If these readings
be correct, then the meaning is, that some of the Jews exhorted the
apostles to proclaim these truths at some other time, particularly to
the Gentiles. The mss. greatly vary in regard to the passage, and it is,
perhaps, impossible to determine the true reading. If the present
reading in the English translation is to be regarded as genuine of
which, however, there is very little evidence the meaning is, that a
part of the Jews, perhaps a majority of them, rejected the message, and
went out, though many of them followed Paul and Barnabas, [Act
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043).

The Gentiles besought - This expression is missing in the Vulgate,
Coptic, Arabic, and Syriac versions, and in a great many mss. (Mill). It
is omitted by Griesbach, Knapp, and others, and is probably spurious.
Among other reasons which may be suggested why it is not genuine, this
is one, that it is not probable that the Gentiles were in the habit of
attending the synagogue. Those who attended there were called
"proselytes." The expression, if genuine, might mean either that the
Gentiles besought, or that they besought the Gentiles. The latter would
be the more probable meaning.

The next sabbath - The margin has probably the correct rendering of the
passage. The meaning of the verse is, that a wish was expressed that
these doctrines might be repeated to them in the intermediate time
before the next Sabbath.

[Acts 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 13:43</span></span>

When the congregation - Greek: when the synagogue was dissolved.

Broken up - Dismissed. It does not mean that it was broken up by
violence or disorder. It was dismissed in the usual way.

Many of the Jews - Probably the majority of them rejected the message.
See [Act 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045). Still a deep
impression was made on many of them.

And religious proselytes - See [Act
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016). Compare the notes on [Mat
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015). Greek: proselytes worshipping.

Persuaded them to continue ... - It would appear from this that they
professedly received the truth and embraced the Lord Jesus. This success
was remarkable, and shows the power of the gospel when it is preached
faithfully to people.

In the grace of God - In his favor - in the faith, and prayer, and
obedience which would be connected with his favor. The "gospel" is
called the grace (favor) of God and they were exhorted to persevere in
their attachment to it.

[Acts 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 13:44</span></span>

And the next sabbath-day - This was the regular day for worship, and it
was natural that a greater multitude should convene on that day than on
the other days of the week.

Came almost the whole city - Whether this was in the synagogue is not
affirmed; but it is probable that that was the place where the multitude
convened. The news of the presence of the apostles, and of their
doctrines, had been circulated, doubtless, by the Gentiles who had heard
them, and curiosity attracted the multitude to hear them. Compare the
notes on [Act 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007).

[Acts 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 13:45</span></span>

They were filled with envy - Greek: "zeal." The word here denotes "wrath
in dignation," that such multitudes should be disposed to hear a message
which they rejected, and which threatened to overthrow their religion.

Spake against - Opposed the doctrine that Jesus was the Messiah; that
the Messiah would be humble, lowly, despised, and put to death.

Contradicting - Contradicting the apostles. This was evidently done in
their presence, [Act 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046), and would
cause great tumult and disorder.

And blaspheming - See the notes on [Mat
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#003). The sense evidently is, that they
reproached and vilified Jesus of Nazareth; they spake of him with
contempt and scorn. To speak thus of him is denominated blasphemy, [Luk
22:65](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#065). When people are enraged, they
have little regard for the words which they utter, and care little how
they may be regarded by God. When people attached themselves to a sect
or a party, in religion or politics, and they have no good arguments to
employ, they attempt to overwhelm their adversaries by bitter and
reproachful words. People in the heat of strife, and in professed zeal
for special doctrines, more frequently utter blasphemy than they are
aware. Precious and pure doctrines are often thus vilified fled because
we do not believe them; and the heart of the Saviour is pierced anew,
and his cause bleeds, by the wrath and wickedness of his professed
friends. Compare [Act 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006).

[Acts 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 13:46</span></span>

Waxed bold - Became bold; spake boldly and openly. They were not
terrified by their strife, or alarmed by their opposition. The
contradictions and blasphemies of sinners often show that their
consciences are alarmed; that the truth has taken effect; and then is
not the time to shrink, but to declare more fearlessly the truth.

It was necessary - It was so designed; so commanded. They regarded it as
their duty to offer the gospel first to their own countrymen. See the
notes on [Luk 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047).

Ye put it from you - You reject it.

And judge yourselves - By your conduct, by your rejecting it, you
declare this. The word "judge" here does not mean they "expressed such
an opinion," or that "they regarded themselves" as unworthy of eternal
life - for they thought just the reverse; but that by their conduct they
condemned themselves. By such conduct they did, in fact, pass sentence
on themselves, and show that they were unworthy of eternal life, and of
having the offer of salvation any further made to them. Sinners by their
conduct do, in fact, condemn themselves, and show that they are not only
unfit to be saved, but that they have advanced so far in wickedness that
there is no hope of their salvation, and no propriety in offering them,
any further, eternal life. See the notes on [Mat
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006).

Unworthy ... - Unfit to be saved. They had deliberately and solemnly
rejected the gospel, and thus shown that they were not suited to enter
into everlasting life. We may remark here:

\(1\) When people, even but once, deliberately and solemnly reject the
offers of God's mercy, it greatly endangers their salvation. The
probability is, that they then put the cup of salvation forever away
from themselves.

\(2\) the gospel produces an effect wherever it is preached.

\(3\) when sinners are hardened, and spurn the gospel, it may often be
the duty of ministers to turn their efforts toward others where they may
have more prospect of success. A man will not long labor on a rocky,
batten, sterile soil, when there is near him a rich and fertile valley
that will abundantly reward the pains of cultivation.

Lo, we turn ... - We shall offer the gospel to them, and devote
ourselves to seeking their salvation.

[Acts 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">act 13:47</span></span>

For so ... - Paul, as usual, appeals to the Scriptures to justify his
course. Here he appeals to the Old Testament rather than to the command
of the Saviour, because the Jews recognized the authority of their own
Scriptures, while they would have turned in scorn from the command of
Jesus of Nazareth.

I have set thee ... - I have constituted or appointed thee. This passage
is found in [Isa 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006). See the notes
on [Isa 49:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001).

To be a light - See the notes on [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004).

Of the Gentiles - This was in accordance with the uniform doctrines of
Isaiah, [Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001); [Isa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003); [Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003), [Isa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005),[Isa
60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016); [Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006), [Isa
61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009); [Isa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002); [Isa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012); compare [Rom
15:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009).

For salvation - To save sinners.

Unto the ends of the earth - To all lands; in all nations. See the notes
on [Act 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008).

[Acts 13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">act 13:48</span></span>

When the Gentiles heard this - Heard that the gospel was to be preached
to them. The doctrine of the Jews had been that salvation was confined
to themselves. The Gentiles rejoiced that from the mouths of Jews
themselves they now heard a different doctrine.

They glorified the word of the Lord - They honored it as a message from
God; they recognized and received it as the Word of God. The expression
conveys the idea of praise on account of it, and of reverence for the
message as the Word of God.

And as many as were ordained - ὅσοι ἦσαν τεταγμένοι hosoi ēsan
tetagmenoi. Syriac, "Who were destined," or constituted. Vulgate, "As
many as were foreordained (quotquot erant praeordinati) to eternal life
believed." There has been much difference of opinion in regard to this
expression. One class of commentators has supposed that it refers to the
doctrine of election - to God's ordaining people to eternal life, and
another class to their being disposed themselves to embrace the gospel -
to those among them who did not reject and despise the gospel, but who
were disposed and inclined to embrace it. The main inquiry is, what is
the meaning of the word rendered "ordained"? The word is used only eight
times in the New Testament: [Mat
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#016), "Into a mountain where Jesus
had appointed them"; that is, previously appointed - before his death;
[Luk 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#008), "For I also am a man set
under authority"; appointed, or designated as a soldier, to be under the
authority of another; [Act 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002), "They
determined that Paul and Barnabas, etc., should go to Jerusalem"; [Act
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#010), "It shall be told thee of all
things which are appointed for thee to do"; [Act
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#023), "And when they appointed him a
day," etc.: [Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001), "the powers
that be are ordained of God; [Co1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015), They have addicted themselves
to the ministry of saints." The word τάσσω tassō, properly means "to
place" - that is, to place in a certain rank or order. Its meaning is
derived from arranging or disposing a body of soldiers in regular
military order. In the places which have been mentioned above, the word
is used to denote the following things:

\(1\) To command, or to designate, [Mat
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#016); [Act
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#010); [Act
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023).

\(2\) to institute, constitute, or appoint, [Rom
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001); compare [Sa2
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#011); [Sa1
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007).

\(3\) to determine, to take counsel, to resolve, [Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002).

\(4\) to subject to the authority of another, [Luk
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#008).

\(5\) to addict to; to devote to, [Co1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015). The meaning may be thus
expressed:

\(1\) The word is never used to denote an internal disposition or
inclination arising from one's own self. It does not mean that they
disposed themselves to embrace eternal life.

\(2\) it has uniformly the notion of an ordering, disposing, or
arranging from without; that is, from some other source than the
individual himself; as of a soldier, who is arranged or classified
according to the will of the proper officer. In relation to these
persons it means, therefore, that they were disposed or inclined to this
from some other source than themselves.

\(3\) it does not properly refer to an eternal decree, or directly to
the doctrine of election - though that may be inferred from it; but it
refers to their being then in fact disposed to embrace eternal life.
They were then inclined by an influence from without themselves, or so
disposed as to embrace eternal life. That this was done by the influence
of the Holy Spirit is clear from all parts of the New Testament, [Tit
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005); [Joh
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013). It was not a disposition or
arrangement originating with themselves, but with God.

\(4\) this implies the doctrine of election. It was, in fact, that
doctrine expressed in an act. It was nothing but God's disposing them to
embrace eternal life. And that he does this according to a plan in his
own mind a plan which is unchangeable as he himself is unchangeable is
clear from the Scriptures. Compare [Act
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010); [Rom
8:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028); [Rom
9:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015), [Rom
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021), [Rom
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023); [Eph
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004), [Eph
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011). The meaning may be expressed in
few words - who were then disposed, and in good earnest determined, to
embrace eternal life, by the operation of the grace of God upon their
hearts.

Eternal life - Salvation. See the notes on [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036).

[Acts 13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">act 13:50</span></span>

But the Jews stirred up - Excited opposition.

Honourable women - See the notes on [Mar
15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043). Women of influence, and
connected with families of rank. Perhaps they were proselytes, and were
connected with the magistrates of the city.

And raised persecution - Probably on the ground that they produced
disorder. The aid of "chief men" has often been called into oppose
revivals of religion, and to put a period, if possible, to the spread of
the gospel.

Out of their coasts - Out of the regions of their country; out of their
province.

[Acts 13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">act 13:51</span></span>

But they shook off the dust ... - See the notes on [Mat
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014).

And came unto Iconium - This was the capital of Lycaonia. It is now
called Konieh, and is the capital of Caramania. "Konieh extends to the
east and south over the plain far beyond the walls, which are about two
miles in circumference ... Mountains covered with snow rise on every
side, excepting toward the east, where a plain, as flat as the desert of
Arabia, extends far beyond the reach of the eye" (Capt. Kinnear).
"Little, if anything, remains of Greek or Roman Iconium, if we except
the ancient inscriptions and the fragments of sculptures which are built
into the Turkish walls." "The city wall is said to have been erected by
the Seljukian sultans: it seems to have been built from the ruins of
more ancient buildings, as broken columns, capitals, pedestals,
bas-reliefs, and other pieces of sculpture contribute toward its
construction. It has 80 gates, of a square form, each known by a
separate name, and, as well as most of the towers, embellished with
Arabic inscriptions ... I observed a few Greek characters on the walls,
but they were in so elevated a situation that I could not decipher them"
(Capt. Kinneir). See Colonel Leake's description; and also the work of
Col. Chesney (1850) on the Euphrates Expedition, vol. i, p. 348, 349.

[Acts 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">act 13:52</span></span>

And the disciples - The disciples in Antioch.

Were filled with joy - This happened even in the midst of persecution,
and is one of the many evidences that the gospel is able to fill the
soul with joy even in the severest trials.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 14](act014)

</div>
