<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo006)  [Next](amo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 7:0</span></span>

The visions of this chapter Amos 7 continue the direct prophecy of the
last. That closed in the prophecy of the affliction of Israel through
the Assyrian: this foretells three gradations, in which it took place.
That spoke of a recovery of Israel after its extreme depression under
Hazael; the first of these visions exhibit it as a field shorn to the
ground, shooting out anew, but threatened with a fresh destruction. The
chastisements are three-fold. Two, at the intercession of Amos, stop
short of utter destruction; the third was final. Each also increased in
severity. Such were the three invasions of the Assyrians. Pul, invited
by Menahem, amid civil war, to establish him on his throne, exacted only
a heavy fine. Tiglath-pileser, called in by Ahaz against Pekah, carried
off the inhabitants of the east and north of Israel; the invasion of
Shalmaneser ended the empire and its idolatry.

[Amos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 7:1</span></span>

And behold He formed - (that is, He was forming.) The very least things
then are as much in His infinite Mind, as what we count the greatest. He
has not simply made "laws of nature," as people speak, to do His work,
and continue the generations of the world. He Himself was still framing
them, giving them being, as our Lord saith, "My Father worketh hitherto,
and I work" [Joh 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017). The same power
of God is seen in creating the locust, as the universe. The creature
could as little do the one as the other. But further, God was "framing"
them for a special end, not of nature, but of His moral government, in
the correction of man. He was "framimg the locust," that it might, at
His appointed time, lay waste just those tracts which He had appointed
to them. God, in this vision, opens our eyes, and lets us see Himself,
framing the punishment for the deserts of the sinners, that so when
hail, mildew, blight, caterpillars, or some other hitherto unknown
disease, (which, because we know it not, we call by the name of the crop
which it annihilates), waste our crops, we may think, not of secondary
causes, but of our Judge. Lap.: "Fire and hail, snow and vapors, stormy
wind, fulfill His word, [Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008), in
striking sinners as He wills. To be indignant with these, were like a
dog who bit the stone wherewith it was hit, instead of the man who threw
it." Gregory on Job L. xxxii. c. 4. L.: "He who denies that he was
stricken for his own fault, what does he but accuse the justice of Him
who smiteth?"

Grasshoppers - that is, locusts. The name may very possibly be derived
from their "creeping" simultaneously, in vast multitudes, from the
ground, which is the more observable in these creatures, which, when the
warmth of spring hatches the eggs, creep forth at once in myriads. This
first meaning of their name must, however, have been obliterated by use
(as mostly happens), since the word is also used by Nahum of a flying
locust .

The king's mowings - must have been some regalia, to meet the
state-expenses. The like custom still lingers on, here and there, among
us, the "first mowth" or "first vesture," that with which the fields are
first clad, belonging to one person; the pasturage afterward, or
"after-grass," to others. The hay-harvest probably took place some time
before the grain-harvest, and the "latter grass," "after-grass," (לקשׁ
leqesh) probably began to spring up at the time of the "latter rain"
(מלקושׁ malqôsh). Had the grass been mourn after this rain, it would
not, under the burning sun of their rainless summer, have sprung up at
all. At this time, then, upon which the hope of the year depended, "in
the beginning of the shooting up of the latter grass," Amos saw, in a
vision, God form the locust, and "the green herb of the land" (the word
includes all, that which is "for the service of man" as well as for
beasts,) destroyed. Striking emblem of a state, recovering after it had
been mown down, and anew overrun by a numerous enemy! Yet this need but
be a passing desolation. Would they abide, or would they carry their
ravages elsewhere? Amos intercedes with God, in words of that first
intercession of Moses, "forgive now" [Num
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#019). "By whom," he adds, "shall
Jacob arise?" literally, "Who shall Jacob arise?" that is, who is he
that he should arise, so weakened, so half-destroyed? Plainly, the
destruction is more than one invasion of locusts in one year. The
locusts are a symbol (as in Joel) in like way as the following visions
are symbols.

[Amos 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 7:3</span></span>

The Lord repented for this - God is said to "repent, to have strong
compassion upon" or "over" evil, which He has either inflicted [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036); [Ch1
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#015), or has said that He would
inflict [Exo 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012); [Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013); [Jon
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010); [Jer
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#008), and which, upon repentance or
prayer, He suspends or checks. Here, Amos does not intercede until after
the judgment had been, in part, inflicted. He prayed, when in vision the
locust "had made an end of eating the grass of the land," and when "the
fire had eaten up a part." Nor, until Israel had suffered what these
visions foretold, was he "small," either in his own or in human sight,
or in relation to his general condition. The "this" then, "of which God
repented" and said, "it shall not be," is that further undefined evil,
which His first infliction threatened. Evil and decay do not die out,
but destroy. Oppression does not weary itself out, but increases.
Visitations of God are tokens of His displeasure, and, in the order of
His justice, rest on the sinner. Pul and Tiglath-pileser, when they came
with their armies on Israel, were instruments of God's chastening.
According to the ways of God's justice, or of man's ambition, the evil
now begun, would have continued, but that God, at the prayer of the
prophet, said, "Hitherto shalt thou come, and no further" [Job
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#011).

[Amos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 7:4</span></span>

God called to contend by fire - that is, He "called" His people to
maintain their cause with Him "by fire," as He says, "I will plead" in
judgment "with him" (Gog) "with" (that is," by") pestilence and blood"
[Eze 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022); and, "by fire and by His
sword will the Lord plead with all flesh" [Isa
66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016); and, "The Lord standeth up to
plead and standeth to judge the people" [Isa
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#013). Man, by rebellion, challenges
God's Omnipotence. He will have none of Him; he will find his own
happiness for himself, apart from God and in defiance of Him and His
laws; he plumes himself on his success, and accounts his strength or
wealth or prosperity the test of the wisdom of his policy. God, sooner
or later, accepts the challenge. He brings things to the issue, which
man had chosen. He "enters into judgment" ([Isa
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014), etc.) with him. If man escapes
with impunity, then he had chosen well, in rejecting God and choosing
his own ways. If not, what folly and misery was his short-sighted
choice; short-lived in its gain; its loss, eternal! "Fire" stands as the
symbol and summary of God's most terrible judgments. It spares nothing,
leaves nothing, not even the outward form of what it destroys. Here it
is plainly a symbol, since it destroys "the sea" also, which shall be
destroyed only by the fire of the Day of Judgment, when "the elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are
therein shall be burned up" [Pe2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010).
The sea is called the "great deep," only in the most solemn language, as
the history of the creation or the flood, the Psalms and poetical books.
Here it is used, in order to mark the extent of the desolation
represented in the vision.

And did eat up a part - Rather literally, "The portion," that is,
probably the definite "portion" foreappointed by God to captivity and
desolation. This probably our English Version meant by "a part." For
although God calls Himself "the Portion" of Israel [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009); [Jer
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016); [Zac
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#012), and of those who are His ([Psa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005); [Psa
73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026), etc; [Jer
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016)), and reciprocally He calls the
people "the Lord's portion [Jer 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010),
and the land, the portion [Mic 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004) of
God's people; yet the land is nowhere called absolutely "the portion,"
nor was the country of the ten tribes specially "the portion," given by
God. Rather God exhibits in vision to the prophet, the ocean burned up,
and "the portion" of Israel, upon which His judgments were first to
fall. To this Amos points, as "the portion." God knew "the portion,"
which Tiglath-Pileser would destroy, and when he came and had carried
captive the east and north of Israel, the pious in Israel would
recognize the second, more desolating scourge, foretold by Amos; they
would own that it was at the prayer of the prophet that it was stayed
and went no further, and would await what remained.

[Amos 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 7:5</span></span>

As our Lord repeated the same words in the Garden, so Amos interceded
with God with words, all but one, the same, and with the same plea,
that, if God did not help, Israel was indeed helpless. Yet a second time
God spared Israel. To human sight, what so strange and unexpected, as
that the Assyrian and his army, having utterly destroyed the kingdom of
Damascus, and carried away its people, and having devoured, like fire,
more than half of Israel, rolled back like an ebb-tide, swept away to
ravage other countries, and spared the capital? And who, looking at the
mere outside of things, would have thought that that tide of fire was
rolled back, not by anything in that day, but by the prophet's prayer
some 47 years before? Man would look doubtless for motives of human
policy, which led Tiglath-pileser to accept tribute from Pekah, while he
killed Rezin; and while he carried off all the Syrians of Damascus, to
leave half of Israel to be removed by his successor.

Humanly speaking, it was a mistake. He "scotched" his enemy only, and
left him to make alliance with Egypt, his rival, who disputed with him
the possession of the countries which lay between them. If we knew the
details of Assyrian policy, we might know what induced him to turn aside
in his conquest. There were, and always are, human motives. They do not
interfere with the ground in the mind of God, who directs and controls
them. Even in human contrivances, the wheels, interlacing one another,
and acting one on the other, do but transmit, the one to the other, the
motion and impulse which they have received from the central force. The
revolution of the earth around its own center does not interfere with,
rather it is a condition of its revolving round the center of our
system, and, amidst the alternations of night and day, brings each
several portion within the influence of the sun around which it
revolves. The affairs of human kingdoms have their own subordinate
centers of human policy, yet even thereby they the more revolve in the
circuit of God's appointment. In the history of His former people God
gives us a glimpse into a hidden order of things, the secret spring and
power of His wisdom, which sets in motion that intricate and complex
machinery which alone we see, and in the sight of which people lose the
consciousness of the unseen agency. While man strives with man, prayer,
suggested by God, moves God, the Ruler of all.

[Amos 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 7:7</span></span>

Stood upon - (Rather "over" "a wall" made by "a plumbline;" lit. "a wall
of a plumbline," that is, (as our's has it) "made" straight,
perpendicular, "by" it. The wall had been "made by a lead" or
"plumbline;" by it, that is, according to it, it should e destroyed. God
had made it upright, He had given to it an undeviating rule of right, He
had watched over it, to keep it, as He made it. Now "He stood over it,"
fixed in His purpose, to destroy it. He marked its inequalities. Yet
this too in judgment. He destroys it by that same rule of right
wherewith He had built it. By that law, that right, those providential
leadings, that grace, which we have received, by the same we are judged.

[Amos 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 7:8</span></span>

Amos, what seest thou? - o: "He calls the prophet by name, as a familiar
friend, known and approved by Him, as He said to Moses, "I know thee by
name" [Exo 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#012), [Exo
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#017). For "the Lord knoweth them that
are His. What seest thou?" [Ti2 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019).
God had twice heard the prophet. Two judgments upon His people He had
mitigated, not upon their repentance, but on the single intercession of
the prophet. After that, He willed to be no more entreated. And so He
exhibits to Amos a symbol, whose meaning He does not explain until He
had pronounced their doom. "The plumbline" was used in pulling down, as
well as in building up. Whence Jeremiah says, "The Lord hath purposed to
destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion; He hath stretched out a line;
He hath not withdrawn His hand from destroying; therefore He made the
rampart and wall to lament" [Lam 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#008) :
and Isaiah; "He shall stretch out upon it the line of wasteness" (as in
[Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)) "and the stone of emptiness"
[Isa 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011) (as in [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)): and God said of Judah, "I will
stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria and the plummet of the house
of Ahab" [Kg2 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#013).

Accordingly God explains the vision, "Behold I will set," that is,
shortly, (literally, "am setting") "a plumbline in the midst of My
people Israel." The wall, then, is not the emblem of Samaria or of any
one city. It is the strength and defense of the whole people, whatever
held it together, and held out the enemy. As in the vision to
Belshazzar, the word "Tekel," He "weighed," was explained, "Thou art
weighed in the balances and art found wanting" [Dan
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#027), so God here applies the
plumbline, at once to convict and to destroy upon conviction. In this
Judgment, as at the Last Day, God would not condemn, without having
first made clear the justice of His condemnation. He sets it "in the
midst of" His "people," showing that He would make trial of all, one by
one, and condemn in proportion to the guilt of each. But the day of
grace being past, the sentence was to be final. "I will not pass by
them," literally, "I will not pass over" (that is, their transgressions)
"to them (as in [Amo 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#002)) anymore,"
that is, I will no more forgive them.

[Amos 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 7:9</span></span>

The high places of Isaac - He probably calls the ten tribes by the name
of Isaac, as well as of Israel, in order to contrast their deeds with
the blameless, gentle piety of Isaac, as well as the much-tried
faithfulness of Israel. It has been thought too that he alludes to the
first meaning of the name of Isaac. His name was given from the joyous
laughter at the unheard-of promise of God, to give children to those
past age; their high places should be a laughter, but the laughter of
mockery . The "sanctuaries" were perhaps the two great idol-temples at
Bethel and Dan, over against the one "sanctuary" of God at Jerusalem;
the "high places" were the shrines of idolatry, especially where God had
shown mercy to the patriarchs and Israel, but also all over the land.
All were to be wasted, because all were idolatrous.

I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword - God speaks
after the manner of people, who, having been still, arise against the
object of their enmity. He makes Himself so far one with the instruments
of His sentence, that, what they do, He ascribes to Himself. Jeroboam II
must, from his military success, have been popular among his people.
Successful valor is doubly prized, and he had both valor and success.
God had "saved Israel by" His "hand" [Kg2
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#027). A weak successor is often borne
with for the merits of his father. There were no wars from without which
called for strong military energy or talent, and which might furnish an
excuse for superseding a faineant king. Ephraim had no ambition of
foreign glory, to gratify. Zechariah, Jeroboam's son, was a sensualist ;
but many sensualists have, at all times, reigned undisturbed. Shallum
who murdered Zechariah was simply a "conspirator" [Kg2
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#010); he represented no popular
impulse, and was slain himself a month [Kg2
15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#013) after. Yet Amos foretells
absolutely that the house of Jeroboam should perish by the sword, and in
the next generation his name was clean put out.

[Amos 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 7:10</span></span>

Amaziah, the priest of Bethel - Was probably the high priest, in
imitation of the high priest of the order of Aaron and of God's
appointment. For the many high places around Bethel required many
idol-priests; and a splendid counterfeit of the ritual at Jerusalem,
which should rival it in the eyes of Israel, was part of the policy of
the first Jeroboam. Amaziah was at the head of this imposture, in a
position probably of wealth and dignity among his people. Like
"Demetriers the silversmith" Acts 19, he thought that the craft whereby
he had his wealth was endangered. To Jeroboam, however, he says nothing
of these fears. To the king he makes it an affair of state. He takes the
king by what he expected to be his weak side, fear for his own power or
life. "Amos hath conspired against thee." So to Jeremiah "the captain of
the ward" said, "Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans" [Jer
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#013).

And the princes; "Let this man be put to death, for thus he weakeneth
the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of
all the people, in speaking such words unto them: for this man seeketh
not the welfare of this people, but the hurt" [Jer
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004). And of our Lord they said to
Pilate, "If thou let this Man go, thou art not Caesar's friend.
Whosoever maketh himself a king, is an enemy to Caesar" [Joh
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012). And of the Apostles; "these
men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city, and teach customs
which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being
Romans" [Act 16:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#020); and, "these
that have turned the world upside down are come hither also - and these
all do contrary to the decrees of Cesar, saying that there is another
king, Jesus" [Act 17:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006). And so the
pagan, who were ever conspiring against the Roman Emperors, went on
accusing the early Christians as disloyal to the Emperors, factious,
impious, because they did not offer sacrifices for them to false gods,
but prayed for them to the True God . Some doubtless, moved by the words
of Amos, had forsaken the state-idolatry, reformed their lives,
worshiped God with the prophet; perhaps they were called in contempt by
his name, "Amosites" or "Judaizers," and were counted as "his"
adherents, not as the worshipers of the one true God, "the God of their
fathers." Whence Amaziah gained the plea of a "conspiracy," of which
Amos was the head. For a "conspiracy" cannot be of one man. The word, by
its force, signifies "banded;" the idiom, that he "banded" others
"together against" [Sa1 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#008), [Sa1
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#013); [Kg1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#027); [Kg1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#009), [Kg1
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#016); [Kg2
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#009); [Kg2
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#019); [Kg2
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#010), [Kg2
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#015), [Kg2
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#025); [Kg2
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#023) the king. To us Amaziah attests
the power of God's word by His prophet; "the land," that is, the whole
people, "is not able to bear his words," being shaken through and
through.

[Amos 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 7:11</span></span>

For thus Amos saith - Amos had said, "Thus saith the Lord;" he never
fails to impress on them, whose words he is speaking. Amaziah, himself
bound up in a system of falsehood and imposture, which, being a
creature-worship, gave itself out as the worship of the true God,
believed all besides to be fraud. Fraud always suspects fraud; the
irreligious think devotion, holiness, saintliness to be hypocrisy: vice
imagines virtue to be well-masked vice. The false priest, by a sort of
law of corrupt nature, supposed that Amos also was false, and treats his
words as the produce of his own mind.

Jeroboam shall die by the sword - Amos had not said this. The false
prophet distorts the last words of Amos, which were yet in his ears, and
reports to Jeroboam, as said of himself, what Amos had just said of his
"house." Amos "was" opposed to the popular religion or irreligion of
which Jeroboam was the head, to the headship over which he had
succeeded. Jeroboam, like the Roman Emperors, was high priest, Pontifex
Maximus, in order to get the popular worship under his control. The
first Jeroboam had himself consecrated the calf-priests [Sa1
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#008), [Sa1
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#013); [Kg1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#027); [Kg1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#009), [Kg1
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#016); [Kg2
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#009); [Kg2
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#019); [Kg2
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#010), [Kg2
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#015), [Kg2
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#025); [Kg2
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#023). Amos bore also the message from
God, that the reprieve, given to the house of Jehu, would not be
extended, but would end. Amaziah would act on the personal fears of the
king, as though there had been some present active conspiracy against
him. A lie, mixed with truth, is the most deadly form of falsehood, the
truth serving to gain admittance for the lie, and color it, and seeming
to require explanation, and being something to full back upon. Since
thus much is certainly true, why should not the rest be so? In slander,
and heresy which is slander against God, truth is used to commend the
falsehood; and falsehood, to destroy the truth. The poison is received
the more fearlessly because wrapt up in truth, but loses none of its
deadliness.

And Israel shall surely be led away captive - This was a suppression of
truth, as the other was a falsification of it. Amaziah omits both the
ground of the threat, and the hope of escape urged and impressed upon
them. On the one side he omits all mention of what even such a king as
Jeroboam would respect, the denunciation of oppression of the poor,
injustice, violence, robbery, and all their other sins against man. On
the other hand, he omits the call to repentance and promises on it,
"seek ye the Lord and live." He omits too the prophet's intercession for
his people, and selects the one prophecy, which could give a mere
political character to the whole. Suppression of truth is a yet subtler
character of falsehood. Hence, witnesses on oath are required to tell,
not the truth only., but the whole truth. Yet in daily life, or in
accusation of others, in detraction, or evil-speaking, people daily act,
as though, suppression were no lie.

[Amos 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 7:12</span></span>

Jeroboam apparently took no account of the false priest's message.
Perhaps the memory of the true prophecies of Elisha as to the successes
of his father, and of Jonah as to his own, fulfilled in his own person
and still recent, inspired him with a reverence for God's prophets. To
know his motive or motives, we must know his whole character, which we
do not. Amaziah, failing of his purpose, uses his name as far as he
dares. "Seer, go flee thee." He probably uses the old title for a
prophet, in reference to the visions which he had just related. Perhaps,
he used it in irony also . "Thou who seest, as thou deemest, what others
see not, "visionary! visionist!" flee thee," that is, for thy good; (he
acts the patron and the counselor;) "to the land of Judah, and there eat
bread, and there prophesy." Worldly people always think that those whose
profession is religious make "a gain of godliness." "He is paid for it,"
they say. "Whose bread I eat, his song I sing." Interested people cannot
conceive of one disinterested; nor the worldly, of one unworldly; nor
the insincere, of one sincere. Amaziah thought then that Amos, coming
out of Judah, must he speaking in the interests of Judah; perhaps, that
he was in the pay of her king. Anyhow, prophecies, such as his against
Israel, would be acceptable there and be well paid. The words are
courteous, like so much patronizing language now, as to God or His
revelation, His prophets or His Apostles, or His divine word. The words
are measured: the meaning blasphemy. Perhaps, like the Scribes and
Pharisees afterward, "he feared the people" [Mat
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#026); [Act
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#026). : "Seeing that there were many
among the people who beard him gladly, he dared not do him any open
wrong, lest he should offend them."

[Amos 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 7:13</span></span>

It is the king's chapel - Better, as in the English margin, "sanctuary."
It is the name for "the sanctuary" of God. "Let them make Me a
sanctuary, that I may dwell among them" [Exo
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#008). "Ye shall reverence My
sanctuary: I am the Lord" [Lev 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#030);
[Lev 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#002). It is most often spoken of
as, "The sanctuary" ; elsewhere, but always with emphasis, of reverence,
sanctity, devotion, protection, it is called "His sanctuary; My
sanctuary; Thy sanctuary; the sanctuary of the Lord of God, of his God ;
whence God Himself is called "a sanctuary" [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014); [Eze
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016), as a place of refuge. In three
places only, is it called the sanctuary of Israel; "her sanctuary." God,
in His threat to cast them off, says, "I will bring your sanctuaries to
desolation" [Lev 26:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#031); Jeremiah
laments, "the pagan have entered into her sanctuary" [Lam
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#010); he says, "the place of our
sanctuary is a glorious high throne from the beginning" [Jer
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012), inasmuch as God was enthroned
there.

In this case too it is "the sanctuary for" Israel, not a mere property
of Israel. "The sanctuary of God" could not he called the sanctuary of
any man. One man could not so appropriate "the sanctuary." God had
ordained it for Himself. His presence had sanctified it. Heresy, in
unconsciousness, lets out more truth than it means. A high priest at
Jerusalem could not have said this. He knew that "the temple" was the
"sanctuary" of God, and could not have called it the "king's sanctuary."
The sanctuary at Bethel had no other sanction, than what it had from the
king. Jeroboam I consecrated it and its priests [Kg1
12:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#031); and from him it and they had
their authority. Amaziah wished to use a popular plea to rid himself of
Amos. Bethel was "the king's sanctuary and the house," not of God, but
"of the kingdom," that is, "the house," which had the whole royal
sanction, which with its Worship was the creature of royal authority,
bound up in one with the kingdom, and belonging to it.

Or it may be, "a royal house," (not a palace, or court, for the king's
palace was at Samaria, but) "a royal temple," the state-Church. So the
Arians betrayed their worldliness by dating one of their Creeds from the
Roman Consuls of the year, its month and day" , thereby to show all
thinking people, that their faith dates, not of old but now." Their
faith was of yesterday. "They are accustomed to say," says Jerome, "the
Emperor communicates with us, and, if anyone resists them, immediately
they calumniate. 'Actest thou against the Emperor? Despisest thou the
Emperor's mandate?' And yet we may think, that many Christian kings who
have persecuted the Church of God, and essayed to establish the Arian
impiety in the whole world, surpass in guilt Jeroboam king of Israel. He
despised the message of a false priest, nor would he make any answer to
his suggestions. But these, with their many Amaziahpriests, have slain
Amos the prophet and the priest of the Lord by hunger and penury,
dungeons and exile."

[Amos 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 7:14</span></span>

I was no prophet - The order of the words is emphatic. "No prophet I,
and no prophet's son I, for a herdsman I, and dresser of sycamores." It
may be, Amos would meet, for the people's sake, Amaziah's taunt. He had
a living, simple indeed, yet that of the prophets was as simple. But
chiefly he tells them of the unusual character of his mission. He did
not belong to the order of the prophets, nor had he been educated in the
schools of the prophets, nor had he any human training. He was thinking
of nothing less; he was doing the works of his calling, until "God took
him from following the flock," and gave him his commission. Rup.: "He
promises humbly what he had been, what he had been made, not by merits,
but by grace, that he had not assumed the prophetic office by hereditary
right, nor had he begun to prophesy out of his own mind, but, being
under the necessity of obeying, he had fulfilled the grace and the
command of God who inspired and sent Him." Twice he repeats, "The Lord
took me; the Lord said unto me;" inculcating that, what Amaziah forbade,
God bade. All was of God. "He" had but obeyed. Jerome: "As then the
Apostles, when the Scribes and Pharisees forbade them to teach in the
Name of Jesus, answered, 'We must obey God rather than man' [Act
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029), so Amos, when forbidden by the
idol-priests to prophesy, not only prophesies, shewing that he feared
God bidding, more than their forbidding, but he boldly and freely
denounces the punishment of him who endeavored to forbid and hinder the
word of God." Rup.: "heaven thundered and commanded him to prophesy; the
frog croaked in answer out of his marsh, 'prophesy no more. '"

[Amos 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">amo 7:16</span></span>

Amaziah then was in direct rebellion and contradiction against God. He
was in an office forbidden by God. God's word came to him. He had his
choice; and, as people do, when entangled in evil courses, he chose the
more consciously amiss. He had to resign his lucrative office and to
submit to God speaking to him through a shepherd, or to stand in direct
opposition to God, and to confront God; and in silencing Amos, he would
silence God. But, like one who would arrest the lightning, he draws it
on his own head. Amos contrasts the word of Amaziah, and the word of
God; Rup.: "Hear thou the word of the Lord; Thou sayest; prophesy not
against Israel. Therefore thus saith the Lord." Not only will I not
cease to prophesy against Israel, but I will also prophesy to thee. Hear
now thine own part of the prophecy."

Drop not - The form of expression, (not the word) is probably taken from
Moses. "My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as
the dew; as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon
the grass" [Deu 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002). Micah speaks of
the word as used by those who forbade to prophesy, as though the
prophecy were a continual wearisome "dropping." God's word comes as a
gentle dew or soft rain, not beating down but refreshing; not sweeping
away, like a storm, but sinking in and softening even hard ground, all
but the rock; gentle, so as they can bear it. God's word was to people,
such as they were toward it; dropping like the dew on those who received
it; wearing, to those who hardened themselves against it. It drops in
measure upon the hearts which it fertilizes, being adapted to their
capacity to receive it. And so contrariwise as to the judgments with
which God's prophets are charged. : "The prophets do not discharge at
once the whole wrath of God, but, in their threatenings, denounce little
drops of it."

[Amos 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">amo 7:17</span></span>

Thy wife shall be a harlot - These were, and still are, among the
horrors of war. His own sentence comes last, when he had seen the rest,
unable to hinder it. Against his and her own will, she should suffer
this. Jerome: "Great is the grief, and incredible the disgrace, when the
husband, in the midst of the city and in the presence of all, cannot
hinder the wrong done to his wife , for the husband had rather hear that
his wife had been slain, than defiled." What he adds "thy daughters" (as
well as his "sons") "shall fall by the sword," is an unwonted barbarity,
and not part of the Assyrian customs, who carried off women in great
numbers, as wives for their soldiery .

Perhaps Amos mentions the unwonted cruelty, that the event might bring
home the more to the minds of the people the prophecies which relate to
themselves. When this had been fulfilled before his eyes , "Amaziah
himself, who now gloried in the authority of the priesthood, was to be
led into captivity, die in a land polluted by idols, yet not before be
saw the people whom he had deceived, enslaved and captive." Amos closes
by repeating emphatically the exact words, which Amaziah had alleged in
his message to Jeroboam; "and Israel shall surely go into captivity
forth of his land." He had not said it before in these precise words.
Now he says it, without reserve of their repentance, as though he would
say, "Thou hast pronounced thine own sentence; thou hast hardened
thyself against the word of God; thou hardenest thy people against the
word of God; it remains then that it should fall on thee and thy
people." Rup.: "How and when the prophecy against Amaziah was fulfilled,
Scripture does not relate. He lies hid amid the mass of miseries" .
Scripture hath no leisure to relate all which befalls those of the viler
sort "The majesty of Holy Scripture does not lower itself to linger on
baser persons, whom God had rejected.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 8](amo008)

</div>
