<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo008)  [Next](oba000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)

[Amos 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 9:1</span></span>

I saw the Lord - He saw God in vision; yet God no more, as before, asked
him what he saw. God no longer shows him emblems of the destruction, but
the destruction itself. Since Amos had just been speaking of the
idolatry of Samaria, as the ground of its utter destruction, doubtless
this vision of such utter destruction of the place of worship, with and
upon the worshipers, relates to those same idolaters and idoltries .
True, the condenmation of Israel would become the condemnation of Judah,
when Judah's sins, like Israel's, should become complete. But directly,
it can hardly relate to any other than those spoken of before and after,
Israel. "The altar," then, "over" which Amos sees God "stand," is
doubtless the altar on which Jeroboam sacrificed, "the altar" which he
set up over-against the altar at Jerusalem, the center of the
calf-worship, whose destruction the man of God foretold on the day of
its dedication.

There where, in counterfeit of the sacrifices which God had appointed,
they offered would-be-atoning sacrifices and sinned in them, God
appeared, standing, to behold, to judge, to condemn. "And He said, smite
the lintel," literally, "the chapter," or "capital," probably so called
from "crowning" the pillar with a globular form, like a pomegranate.
This, the spurious outward imitation of the true sanctuary, God commands
to be stricken, "that the posts," or probably "the thresholds, may
shake." The building was struck from above, and reeled to its base. It
does not matter, whether any blow on the capital of a pillar would make
the whole fabric to shake. For the blow was no blow of man. God gives
the command probably to the Angel of the Lord, as, in Ezekiel's vision
of the destruction of Jerusalem, the charge to destroy was given to six
men [Eze 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002). So the first-born of
Egypt, the army of Sennacherib, were destroyed by an Angel [Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023); [Kg2
19:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#034). An Angel stood with his
sword over Jerusalem [Sa2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001), [Sa2
24:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015), when God punished David's
presumption in numbering the people. At one blow of the heavenly Agent
the whole building shook, staggered, fell.

And cut them in the head, all of them - o This may be either by the
direct agency of the Angel, or the temple itself may be represented as
falling on the heads of the worshipers. As God, through Jehu, destroyed
all the worshipers of Baal in the house of Baal, so here He foretells,
under a like image, the destruction of all the idolaters of Israel. He
had said, "they that swear by the sin of Samaria - shall fall and never
rise up again." Here he represents the place of that worship the
idolaters, as it seems, crowded there, and the command given to destroy
them all. All Israel was not to be destroyed. "Not the least grain" was
to "fall upon the earth [Amo 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009).
Those then here represented as destroyed to the last man, must be a
distinct class. Those destroyed in the temple must be the worshipers in
the temple. In the Temple of God at Jerusalem, none entered except the
priests. Even the space "between the porch and the altar" was set apart
for the priests. But heresy is necessarily irreverent, because, not
worshiping the One God, it had no Object of reverence. Hence, the temple
of Baal was full "from end to end [Kg2
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#021), and the worshipers of the sun
at Jerusalem turned "their backs toward the Temple," and "worshiped the
sun toward the east, at the door of the Temple, between the porch and
the altar" [Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016); [Eze
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001). The worshipers of the calves
were commanded to "kiss" [Hos 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002)
them, and so must have filled the temple, where they were.

And I will slay the last of them - The Angel is bidden to destroy those
gatered in open idolatry in one place. God, by His Omniscience, reserved
the rest for His own judgment. All creatures, animate or inanimate,
rational or irrational, stand at His command to fulfill His will. The
mass of idolaters having perished in their idolatry, the rest, not
crushed in the fall of the temple, would fain flee away, but "he that
fleeth shall not flee," God says, to any good "to themselves;" yea,
although they should do what for man is impossible, they should not
escape God.

[Amos 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 9:2</span></span>

Height or depth are alike open to the Omnipresent God. The grave is not
so awful as God. The sinner would gladly "dig through" into hell, bury
himself, the living among the dead, if so he could escape the sight of
God. But thence, God says, "My hand shall take them," to place them in
His presence, to receive their sentence. Or if, like the rebel angels,
they could "place" their "throne amid the stars [Isa
14:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012) of God thence will I bring
them down," humbling, judging, condemning.

[Amos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 9:3</span></span>

He had contrasted heaven and hell, as places impossible for man to
reach; as I David says, "If I ascend into heaven, Thou art there: If l
make my bed in hell, behold Thee" [Psa
139:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#008). Now, of places in a manner
accessible, he contrasts Mount Carmel, which rises abruptly out of the
sea, with depths of that ocean which it overhangs. Carmel was in two
ways a hiding place.

1\) Through its caves (some say 1,000 , some 2,000) with which it is
perforated, whose entrance sometimes scarcely admits a single man; so
close to each other, that a pursuer would not discern into which the
fugitive had vanished; so serpentine within, that, "10 steps apart,"
says a traveler , "we could hear each others' voices, but could not see
each other." : "Carmel is perforated by a hundredfold greater or lesser
clefts. Even in the garb of loveliness and richness, the majestic Mount,
by its clefts, caves, and rocky battlements, excites in the wanderer who
sees them for the first time, a feeling of mingled wonder and fear. A
whole army of enemies, as of nature's terrors, could hide themselves in
these rock-clefts."

2\) Its summit, about 1800 feet above the sea , "is covered with pines
and oaks, and lower down with olive and laurel trees" . These forests
furnished hiding places to robberhordes at the time of our Lord. In
those caves, Elijah probably at times was hidden from the persecution of
Ahab and Jezebel. It seems to be spoken of as his abode [Kg1
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019), as also one resort of Elishas
[Kg2 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#025); [Kg2
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#025). Carmel, as the western extremity
of the land, projecting into the sea, was the last place which a
fugitive would reach. If he found no safety there, there was none in his
whole land. Nor was there by sea;

And though they be hid - (rather, "hide themselves") from My sight in
the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent The sea too has
its deadly serpents. Their classes are few; the individuals in those
classes are much more numerous than those of the land-serpents . Their
shoals have furnished to sailors tokens of approaching land . Their
chief abode, as traced in modern times, is between the Tropics .

The ancients knew of them perhaps in the Persian gulf or perhaps the Red
Sea . All are "highly venomous" and "very ferocious." : "The virulence
of their venom is equal to that of the "most" pernicious land-serpents."
All things, with their will or without it through animal instinct, as
the serpent, or their savage passions, as the Assyrian, fulfill the will
of God. As, at His command, the fish whom He had prepared, swallowed
Jonah, for his preservation, so, at His "command, the serpent" should
come forth from the recesses of the sea to the sinner's greater
suffering.

[Amos 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 9:4</span></span>

Captivity - , at least, seemed safe. The horrors of war are over. Men
enslave, but do not commonly destroy those whom they have once been at
the pains to carry captive. Amos describes them in their misery, as
"going" willingly, gladly, "into captivity before their enemies," like a
flock of sheep. Yet "thence" too, out of "the captivity," God would
command the sword, and it should slay them. So God had forewarned them
by Moses, that captivity should be an occasion, not an end, of
slaughter. "I will scatter you among the pagan, and will draw out a
sword after you" [Lev 26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033). "And
among these nations shalt thou find no ease - and thy life shall hang in
doubt before thee, and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have
none assurance of thy life" [Deu
28:65-66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065). The book of Esther shows how
cheaply the life of a whole nation was held by Eastern conquerors; and
the book of Tobit records, how habitually Jews were slain and cast out
unburied (Tobit 1:17; 2:3). The account also that Sennacherib (Tobit
1:18) avenged the loss of his army, and "in his wrath killed many," is
altogether in the character of Assyrian conquerors. Unwittingly he
fulfilled the command of God, "I will command the sword and it shall
slay them."

I will set mine eyes upon them for evil - So David says, "The eyes of
the Lord are over the righteous, and His ears are open to their prayers.
The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to root out the
remembrance of them from off the earth" [Psa
34:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015). The Eye of God rests on each
creature which He hath made, as entirely as if He had created it alone.
Every moment is passed in His unvarying sight. But, as man "sets his
eye" on man, watching him and with purpose of evil, so God's Eye is felt
to be on man in displeasure, when sorrow and calamity track him and
overtake him, coming he knows not how in unlooked-for ways and strange
events. The Eye of God upon us is our whole hope and stay and life. It
is on the Confessor in prison, the Martyr on the rack, the poor in their
sufferings, the mourner in the chamber of death, for good. What when
everywhere that Eye, the Source of all good, rests on His creature only
for evil! "and not for good," he adds; "not," as is the wont and the
Nature of God; "not," as He had promised, if they were faithful; "not,"
as perhaps they thought, "for good." He utterly shuts out all hope of
good. It shall be all evil, and no good, such as is hell.

[Amos 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 9:5</span></span>

And who is He who should do this? God, at whose command are all
creatures. This is the hope of His servants; from where Hezekiah begins
his prayer, "Lord of hosts, God of Israel" [Isa
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#016). This is the hopelessness of His
enemies. "That toucheth the land" or "earth, and it shall melt," rather,
"hath melted." His Will and its fulfillment are one. "He spake, and it
was; He commanded and it stood fast" [Psa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009). His Will is first, as the cause
of what is done; in time they co-exist. He hath no need to put forth His
strength; a touch, the slightest indication of His Will, sufficeth. If
the solid earth, how much more its inhabitants! So the Psalmist says,
"The pagan raged, the kingdoms were moved; He uttered His voice, the
earth melted" [Psa 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006). The hearts of
men melt when they are afraid of His presence; human armies melt away,
dispersed; the great globe itself shall dissolve into its ancient chaos
at His Will.

[Amos 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 9:6</span></span>

He that buildeth His stories - The word commonly means "steps," nor is
there any reason to alter it. We read of "the third heavens [Co2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002), the heavens of heavens [Deu
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014); [Kg1
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027); [Psa
148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004); that is, heavens to which this
heaven is as earth. They are different ways of expressing the vast
unseen space which God has created, divided, as we know, through the
distance of the fixed stars, into countless portions, of which the
lower, or further removed, are but as "steps" to the presence of the
Great King, where, "above all heavens" [Eph
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010), Christ sitteth at the Right Hand
of God. It comes to the same, if we suppose the word to mean "upper
chambers." The metaphor would still signify heavens above our heavens.

And hath founded His troop - (literally, band in the earth Probably,
"founded His arch upon the earth," that is, His visible heaven, which
seems, like an arch, to span the earth. The whole then describes" all
things visible and invisible;" all of this our solar system, and all
beyond it, the many gradations to the Throne of God. : "He daily
"buildeth His stories in the heavens," when He raiseth up His saints
from things below to heavenly places, presiding over them, ascending in
them. In devout wayfarers too, whose "conversation is in heaven [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020), He ascendeth, sublimely and
mercifully indwelling their hearts. In those who have the fruition of
Himself in those heavens, He ascendeth by the glory of beatitude and the
loftiest contemplation, as He walketh in those who walk, and resteth in
those who rest in Him."

To this description of His power, Amos, as before [Amo
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008), adds that signal instance of its
exercise on the ungodly, the flood, the pattern and type of judgments
which no sinner escapes. God then hath the power to do this. Why should
He not?

[Amos 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 9:7</span></span>

Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto Me, O children of Israel!
- Their boast and confidence was that they were children of the
patriarch, to whom God made the promises. But they, not following the
faith nor doing the deeds of Israel, who was a "prince with God," or of
Abraham, the father of the faithful, had, for "Bene Israel," children of
Israel, become as "Bene Cushiim, children of the Ethiopians,"
descendants of Ham, furthest off from the knowledge and grace of God,
the unchangeableness of whose color was an emblem of unchangeableness in
evil. "Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then
may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil" [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023).

Have I not brought up - (Did I not bring up) Israel out of the land of
Egypt? Amos blends in one their plea and God's answer. God by bringing
them up out of Egypt, pledged His truth to them to be their to protect
and preserve them. True! so long as they. retained God as their God, and
kept His laws. God chose them, that they might choose Him. By casting
Him off, as their Lord and God, they cast themselves off and out of
God's protection. By estranging themselves from God, they became as
strangers in His sight. His act in bringing them up from Egypt had lost
its meaning for them. It became no more than any Other event in His
Providence, by which He brought up "the Philistines from Caphtor," who
yet were aliens from Him, and "the Syrians from Kir," who, He had
foretold, should be carried back there.

This immigration of the Philistines from Caphtor must have taken place
before the return of Israel from Egypt. For Moses says, "The Caphtorim,
who came forth from Caphtor" had at this time "destroyed the Avvim who
dwelt in villages unto Gazah, and dwelt in their stead" [Deu
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023) An entire change in their affairs
had also taken place in the four centuries and a half since the days of
Isaac. In the time of Abraham and Isaac, Philistia was a kingdom; its
capital, Gerar. Its king had a standing army, Phichol being "the captain
of the host" [Gen 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#022); [Gen
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#026) : he had also a privy
councillor, Ahuzzath [Gen 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#026). From
the time after the Exodus, Philistia had ceased to be a kingdom, Gerar
disappears from history; the power of Philistia is concentrated in five
new towns, Gaza, Ashdod, Askelon, Gath, Ekron, with five heads, who
consult and act as one (see above, the note at [Amo
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006)).

The Caphtorim are in some sense also distinct from the old Philistines.
They occupy a district not co-extensive with either the old or the new
land of the Philistines. In the time of Saul, another Philistine clan is
mentioned, the Cherethite. The Amalekites made a marauding inroad into
the south country of the Cherethites; [Sa1
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#014); which immediately afterward is
called "the land of the Philistines" [Sa1
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#016). Probably then, there were
different immigrations of the same tribe into Palestine, as there were
different immigrations of Danes or Saxons into England, or as there have
been and are from the old world into the new, America and Australia.
They, were then all merged in one common name, as English, Scotch,
Irish, are in the United States. The first immigration may have been
that from the Casluhim, "out of whom came Philistim" [Gen
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014); a second, from the Caphtorim, a
kindred people, since they are named next to the Casluhim [Gen
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014), as descendants of Mizraim. Yet
a third were doubtless the Cherethim. But all were united under the one
name of Philistines, as Britons, Danes, Saxons, Normans, are united
under the one name of English. Of these immigrations, that from Caphtor,
even if (as seems probable) second in time, was the chief; which agrees
with the great accession of strength, which the Philistines had received
at the time of the Exodus; from where the Mediterranean had come to be
called by their name, "the sea of the Philistines" [Exo
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031) : and, in Moses' song of
thanksgiving, "the inhabitants of Philistia" are named on a level with
"all the inhabitants of Canaan" [Exo
15:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014); and God led His people by
the way of Mount Sinai, in order not to expose them at once to so
powerful an enemy [Exo 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017).

A third immigration of Cherethim, in the latter part of the period of
the Judges, would account for the sudden increase of strength, which
they seem then to have received. For whereas heretofore those whom God
employed to chasten Israel in their idolatries, were Kings of
Mesopotamia, Moab, Hazor, Midian, Amalek, and the children of the East
Judg. 3-10:5, and Philistia had, at the beginning of the period, lost
Gaza, Ashkelon, and Ekron [Jdg 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#018),
to Israel, and was repulsed by Shamgar, thenceforth, to the time of
David, they became the great scourge of Israel on the west of Jordan, as
Ammon was on the east.

The Jewish traditions in the Septuagint, the Vulgate, and three Targums,
agree that Caphtor was Cappadocia, which, in that it extended to the
Black Sea, might be callad "I, seacoast," literally, "habitable land, as
contrasted with the sea which washed it, whether it surrounded it or no.
The Cherethites may have come from Crete, as an intermediate resting
place in their migrations.

[Amos 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 9:8</span></span>

Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon the sinful kingdom - The sinful
kingdom may mean each "sinful kingdom," as Paul says, God "will render
unto every man according to his deeds - unto them who do not obey the
truth but obey unrighteousness, tribulation and anguish upon every soul
of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile" [Rom
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006). His "Eyes" are "on the sinful
kingdom," whatsoever or wheresoever it be, and so on Israel also: "and I
will destroy it from off the face of the earth." In this case, the
emphasis would be on the, "I will not "utterly" destroy." God would
destroy sinful kingdoms, yet Israel, although sinful, He would not
"utterly" destroy, but would leave a remnant, as He had so often
promised. Yet perhaps, and more probably, the contrast is between "the
kingdom" and "the house of Israel. The kingdom," being founded in sin,
bound up inseparably with sin, God says, "I will destroy from off the
face of the earth," and it ceased forever. Only, with the kingdom, He
says, "I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob," to whom were the
promises, and to whose seed, whosoever were the true Israel, those
promises should be kept. So He explains;

[Amos 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 9:9</span></span>

For lo! I will command! - Literally, "lo! see, I am commanding." He
draws their attention to it, as something which shall shortly be; and
inculcates that He is the secret disposer of all which shall befall
them. "And I will sift the house of Israel among all nations." Amos
enlarges the prophecy of Hosea, "they shall be wanderers among the
nations." He adds two thoughts; the violence with which they shall be
shaken, and that this their unsettled life, to and fro, shall be not
"among the nations" only, but "in all" nations. In every quarter of the
world, and in well-nigh every nation in every quarter, Jews have been
found. The whole earth is, as it were, one vast sieve in the Hands of
God, in which Israel is shaken from one end to the other. There has been
one ceaseless tossing to and fro, as the grain in the sieve is tossed
from side to side, and rests nowhere, until all is sifted.

Each nation in whom they have been found has been an instrument of their
being shaken, sifted, severed, the grain from the dirt and chaff; And
yet in their whole compass, "not the least grain," no solid grain, not
one grain, should "fall to the earth." The chaff and dust would be blown
away by the air; the dirt which clave to it would fall through; but "no
one grain." God, in all these centuries, has had an eye on each soul of
His people in their dispersion throughout all lands. The righteous too
have been shaken up and down, through and through; yet not one soul has
been lost, which, by the help of God's Holy Spirit, willed truly and
earnestly to be saved. Before Christ came, they who were His, believed
in Him who should come; when He came, they who were His were converted
to Him; as Paul saith, "Hath God cast away His people? God forbid! For I
also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin -
God hath not cast away His people which He foreknew - At this present
time also there is a remnant, according to the election of grace" [Rom
11:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001), [Rom
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005).

Rib.: "What is here said of all, God doth daily in each of the elect.
For they are 'the wheat" of God, which, in order to be "laid up in" the
heavenly "garner," must be pure from chaff and dust. To this end He
sifts them by afflictions and troubles, in youth, manhood, old age,
wheresoever they are, in whatsoever occupied, and proves them again and
again. At one time the elect enjoyeth tranquility of mind, is bedewed by
heavenly refreshments, prayeth as he wills, loveth, gloweth, hath no
taste for ought except God. Then again he is dry, experienceth the
heaven to be as brass, his prayer is hindered by distracting thoughts,
his feet are as lead to deeds of virtue, his "hands bang down," his
"knees" are "feeble" [Heb 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012), he
dreads death; he sticks fast, languishes. He is shaken in a sieve, that
he may mistrust self, place his hope in God, and the dust of vain-glory
may be shaken off. He is proved, that it may appear whether he cleave to
God for the reward of present enjoyment, or for the hope of future, for
longing for the glory of God and for love of Himself. God suffereth him
also to be sifted by the devil through various temptations to sin, as he
said to the Apostle, "Simon, lo! Satan hath desired you, to sift you as
wheat" [Luk 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031). But this is the
power of God, this His grace to the elect, this the devil attaineth by
his sifting, that the dust of immoderate self love, of vain confidence,
of love of the world, should fall off: this Satan effecteth not, that
the least deed which pertaineth to the inward house and the dwelling
which they prepare in their souls for God, should perish. Rather, as we
see in holy Job, virtues will increase, grow, be strengthened."

[Amos 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 9:10</span></span>

All the sinners of My people shall perish - At the last, when the
longsuffering of God has been despised to the uttermost, His Providence
is exact in His justice, as in His love. As not "one grain should fall
to the earth," so not one sinner should escape. Jerome: "Not because
they sinned aforetime, but because they persevered in sin until death.
The Aethiopians are changed into sons of God, if they repent; and the
sons of God pass away into Aethiopians, if they fall into the depth of
sin."

Which say, The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us - Their security
was the cause of their destruction. They perished the more miserably,
being buoyed up by the false confidence that they should not perish. So
it was in both destructions of Jerusalem. Of the first, Jeremiah says to
the false prophet Hananiah, "Thus saith the Lord, Thou hast broken the
yokes of wood; but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron" [Jer
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#013); and to Zedekiah, "Obey, I
beseech thee, the voice of the Lord, which I speak unto thee; so shall
it be well unto thee, and thy soul shall live. But if thou refuse to go
forth - thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be taken by
the hand of the king of Babylon, and thou shalt burn this city with
fire" ([Jer 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#020), [Jer
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#023); add [Jer
27:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#009), [Jer
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#019)). At the second, while thee
Christians (mindful of our Lord's words) fled to Pella, the Jews were,
to the last, encouraged by their false prophets to resist. "The cause of
this destruction," at the burning of the temple, says their own
historian , "was a false prophet, who on that day proclaimed to those in
the city, 'God commands to go up to the temple, to receive the signs of
deliverance.' There were too, at that time, among the people many
prophets suborned by the tyrants, bidding them await the help from God,
that they might not desert, and that hope might prevail with those, who
were above fear and restraint. Man is soon persuaded in calamity. And
when the deceiver promises release from the evils which are upon him,
the sufferer gives himself wholly up to hope. These dcceivers then and
liars against God at this time mispersuaded the wretched people, so that
they neither regarded, nor believed, the plain evident prodigies, which
foretokened the coming desolation, but, like men stupefied, who had
neither eyes nor mind, disobeyed the warnings of God." Then, having
related some of the prodigies which occurred, he adds ; "But of these
signs' some they interpreted after their own will, some they despised,
until they were convicted of folly by the capture of their country and
their own destruction."

So too now, none are so likely to perish forever, as they "who say, The
evil shall not overtake us." "I will repent hereafter." "I will make my
peace with God before I die." "There is time enough yet." "Youth is for
pleasure, age for repentance." "God will forgive the errors of youth,
and the heat of our passions." "Any time will do for repentance; health
and strength promise long life;" "I cannot do without this or that now."
"I will turn to God, only not yet." "God is merciful and full of
compassion." Because Satan thus deludes thousands upon thousands to
their destruction, God cuts away all such vain hopes with His word, "All
the sinners of My people shall die which say, the evil shall not
overtake nor come upon us."

[Amos 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 9:11</span></span>

In that day I will raise up - Amos, as the prophets were taught to do,
sums up his prophecy of woe with this one full promise of overflowing
good. For the ten tribes, in their separate condition, there was no
hope, no future. He had pronounced the entire destruction of "the
kingdom" of Israel. The ten tribes were, thenceforth, only an aggregate
of individuals, good or bad. They had no separate corporate existence.
In their spiritual existence, they still belonged to the one family of
Israel; and, belonging to it, were heirs of the promises made to it.
When no longer separate, individuals out of its tribes were to become
Apostles to their whole people and to the Gentiles. Of individuals in
it, God had declared His judgment, anticipating the complete exactness
of the Judgment of the Great Day. "All the sinners of" His "people"
should "die" an untimely death "by the sword;" not one of those who were
the true grain should perish with the chaff.

He now foretells, how that salvation, of those indeed His own, should be
effected through the house of David, in whose line Christ was to come.
He speaks of the house of David, not in any terms of royal greatness; he
tells, not of its palaces, but of its ruins. Under the word
"tabernacle," he probably blends the ideas, that it should be in a poor
condition, and yet that it should be the means whereby God should
protect His people. The "succah, tabernacle" (translated "booth" in
Jonah) [Jon 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#005); [Gen
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017), was originally a rude hut,
formed of "intertwined" branches. It is used of the cattle-shed [Gen
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017), and of the rough tents used by
soldiers in war [Sa2 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#011), or by the
watchman in the vineyard [Isa 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008);
[Job 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#018), and of those wherein God
"made the children of Israel to dwell, when" He "brought them out of the
land of Egypt [Lev 23:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#043). The name of
the feast of "tabernacles, Succoth," as well as the rude temporary huts
in which they were commanded to dwell, associated the name with a state
of outward poverty under God's protection.

Hence, perhaps, the word is employed also of the secret place of the
presence of God [Psa 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011); [Job
36:29](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#029). Isaiah, as well as Amos, seems,
in the use of the same word [Isa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006),
to hint that what is poor and mean in man's sight would be, in the Hands
of God, an effectual protection. This "hut of David" was also at that
time to be "fallen." When Amos prophesied, it had been weakened by the
schism of the ten tribes, but Azariah, its king, was mighty [Ch2
26:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006). Amos had already foretold the
destruction of the "palaces of Jerusalem by fire" [Amo
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#005). Now he adds, that the abiding
condition of the house of David should be a state of decay and weakness,
and that from that state, not human strength, but God Himself should
"raise" it. "I will raise up the hut of David, the fallen." He does not
say, of "that" time, "the hut that is fallen," as if it were already
fallen, but "the hut, the fallen," that is, the hut of which the
character should then be its falling, its caducity.

So, under a different figure, Isaiah prophesied, "There shall come forth
a rod out of the stump [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001) of
Jesse, and a Branch shall put forth from its roots." When the trunk was
hewn down even with the ground, and the rank grass had covered the
"stump," that "rod" and "Branch" should come forth which should rule the
earth, and "to" which "the Gentiles should seek" [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010). From these words of Amos, "the
Son of the fallen," became, among the Jews, one of the titles of the
Christ. Both in the legal and mystical schools the words of Amos are
alleged, in proof of the fallen condition of the house of David, when
the Christ should come. "Who would expect," asks one , "that God would
raise up the fallen tabernacle of David? and yet it is said, "I will
raise up the tabernacle of David which is fallen down." And who would
hope that the whole world should become one band? as it is written,
"Then I will turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call
upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one shoulder" [Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009). This is no other than the king
Messiah." And in the Talmud ; "R. Nachman said to R. Isaac; Hast thou
heard when 'the Son of the fallen' shall come? He answered, Who is he?
R. Nachman; The Messiah. R. Isaac; Is the Messiah so called? R. Nachman;
Yes; 'In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David which is
fallen down. '"

And close up - Literally, "wall up, the breaches thereof." The house of
David had at this time sustained breaches. It had yet more serious
breaches to sustain thereafter. The first great breach was the rending
off of the ten tribes. It sustained breaches, through the Assyrians; and
yet more when itself was carried away captive to Babylon, and so many of
its residue fled into Egypt. Breaches are repaired by new stones; the
losses of the house of David were to be filled up by accessions from the
Gentiles. God Himself should "close up the breaches;" so should they
remain closed; and "the gates of hell should not prevail against" the
Church which He builded. Amos heaps upon one another the words implying
destruction. A "hut" and that "falling; breaches; ruins;" (literally,
"his ruinated, his destructions"). But he also speaks of it in a way
which excludes the idea of "the hut of David," being "the royal Dynasty"
or "the kingdom of Judah." For he speaks of it, not as an abstract
thing, such as a kingdom is, but as a whole, consisting of individuals.

He speaks not only of "the hut of David," but of "'their (fem.)'
breaches," "'his' ruins," that God would "build 'her' up," "that 'they'
(masc.) may inherit;" using apparently this variety of numbers and
genders , in order to show that he is speaking of one living whole, the
Jewish Church, now rent in two by the great schism of Jeroboam, but
which should be reunited into one body, members of which should win the
pagan to the true faith in God. "I will raise up," he says, "the
tabernacle of David, the fallen, and will wall up 'their' breaches,"
(the breaches of the two portions into which it had been rent) and I
will raise up "his" ruins (the "ruinated places" of David) and I will
build "her" (as one whole) as in the days of old, (before the rent of
the ten tribes, when all worshiped as one), that "they," (masculine)
that is, individuals who should go forth out of her, "may inherit, etc."

[Amos 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 9:12</span></span>

That they may possess - rather, "inherit

The remnant of Edom - The restoration was not to be for themselves
alone. No gifts of God end in the immediate object of His bounty and
love. They were restored, in order that they, the first objects of God's
mercies, might win others to God; not Edom only, "but all nations, upon
whom," God says, "My Name is called." Plainly then, it is no temporal
subjugation, nor any earthly kingdom. The words, "upon whom the name is
called," involve, in any case, belonging to, and being owned by, him
whose name is called upon them. It is said of the wife bearing the name
of the husband and becoming his, "let thy name be called upon us [Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001). When Jacob especially adopts
Ephraim and Manasseh as his he says, "let my name be named upon them,
and the name of My fathers, Abraham and Isaac" [Gen
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016). In relation to God, the words
are used of persons and of places especially appropriated to God; as the
whole Jewish Church and people, His Temple [Kg1
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#043); [Jer
7:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#010), [Jer
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#014), [Jer
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030); [Jer
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#015), His prophets [Jer
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#016), the city of Jerusalem [Dan
9:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#018) by virtue of the temple built
there. Contrariwise, Isaiah pleads to God, that the pagan "were never
called by Thy Name" [Isa 63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019). This
relation of being "called" by the "Name" of God, was not outward only,
nor was it ineffective. Its characteristics were holiness imparted by
God to man, and protection by God. Thus Moses, in his blessing on Israel
if obedient, says, "The Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto
Himself, as He hath sworn to thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments
of the Lord thy God, and walk in His ways; and all the people of the
earth shall see that the Name of the Lord thy God is called upon thee,
and they shall fear thee" [Deu
28:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#009). And Jeremiah says to God ,
"Thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart, for Thy name
was called upon me, O Lord God of Hosts."

Israel then, or the Jewish Church, was to inherit, or take into itself,
not Edom only, but all nations, and that, by their belonging to God.
Edom, as the brother of Israel and yet his implacable enemy, stands as a
symbol of all who were alien from God, over against His people. He says,
the "residue of Edom," because he had foretold the destruction which was
first to come upon Edom; and Holy Scripture everywhere speaks of those
who should be converted, as a "remnant" only. The Jews themselves are
the keepers and witnesses of these words. Was it not foretold? It stands
written. Is it not fulfilled? The whole world from this country to
China, and from China round again to us, as far as it is Christian, and
as, year by year, more are gathered into the fold of Christ, are the
inheritance of those who were the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

James quoted these words in the Council of Jerusalem, to show how the
words of the prophet were in harmony with what Peter had related, how
"God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people
for His Name" [Act 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014). He quotes
the words as they stood in the version which was understood by the
Gentiles who came from Antioch. In it the words are paraphrased, but the
meaning remains the same. The Greek translators took away the metaphor,
in order, probably, to make the meaning more intelligible to Greeks, and
paraphrased the Hebrew words, imagining other words, as like as might be
to the Hebrew. They render, "that the residue of men may seek, and all
the nations upon whom My name is called." The force of the prophecy lies
in these last words, that "the Name of God should be called upon all
nations." James, then, quoted the words as they were familiar to his
hearers, not correcting those which did not impair the meaning. The so
doing, he shows us incidentally, that even imperfection of translation
does not empty the fullness of God's word. The words, "shall seek the
Lord," although not representing anything expressed here in the
original, occur in the corresponding prophecy of Isaiah as to the root
of Jesse, "In that day there shall be a root" (that is, a sucker from
the root) "of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people, and
to it shall the Gentiles seek" [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010). It may be, that James purposely
uses the plural, "the words of the prophets," in order to include,
together with the prophet Amos, other prophets who had foretold the same
thing. The statements, that the Jewish Church should inherit the
Gentiles, that the Name of God should be called upon the Gentiles, and
that the Gentiles should seek the Lord, are parts of one whole; that
they should be called, that they should obey the call, and, obeying, he
enrolled in the one family of God.

[Amos 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 9:13</span></span>

Behold the days are coming - The Day of the Lord is ever coming on:
every act, good or bad, is drawing it on: everything which fills up the
measure of iniquity or which "hastens the accomplishment of the number
of the elect;" all time hastens it by. "The plowman shall overtake the
reaper and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed." The image is
taken from God's promise in the law; "Your threshing shall reach unto
the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time" [Lev
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#005); which is the order of
agriculture. The harvest should be so copious that it should not be
threshed out until the vintage: the vintage so large, that, instead of
ending, as usual, in the middle of the 7th month, it should continue on
to the seed-time in November. Amos appears purposely to have altered
this. He describes what is wholly beyond nature, in order that it might
the more appear that he was speaking of no mere gifts of nature, but,
under natural emblems, of the abundance of gifts of grace. "The
plowman," who breaks up the fallow ground, "shall overtake," or "throng,
the reaper. The "plowman" might "throng," or "join on to the reaper,"
either following upon him, or being followed by him; either preparing
the soil for the harvest which the reaper gathers in, or breaking it up
anew for fresh harvest after the in-gathering.

But the vintage falls between the harvest and the seed-time. If then by
the "plowmen thronging on the reaper," we understand that the harvest
should, for its abundance, not be over before the fresh seed-time, then,
since the vintage is much nearer to the seed-time than the harvest had
been, the words, "he that treadeth out the grapes, him that soweth the
seed," would only say the same less forcibly. In the other way, it is
one continuous whole. So vast would be the soil to be cultivated, so
beyond all the powers of the cultivator, and yet so rapid and unceasing
the growth, that seed-time and harvest would be but one. So our Lord
says, "Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then cometh harvest?
Behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields, for
they are white already to harvest" [Joh
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035). "Four months" ordinarily
intervened between seed-time and harvest. Among these Samaritans,
seed-time and harvest were one.

They had not, like the Jews, had teachers from God; yet, as soon as our
Lord taught them, they believed. But, as seed time and harvest should be
one, so should the vintage be continuous with the following seed-time.
"The treader of grapes," the last crowning act of the year of
cultivation, should join on to "him that soweth" (literally, "draweth"
forth, soweth broadcast, scattereth far and wide the) "seed." All this
is beyond nature, and so, the more in harmony with what went before, the
establishment of a kingdom of grace, in which "the pagan" should have
"the Name of God called upon" them. He had foretold to them, how God
would "send famine on the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for
water, but of hearing the words of the Lord" [Amo
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011). Now, under the same image, he
declares the repeal of that sentence. He foretells, not the fullness
only of God's gifts, but their unbroken continuance.

Jerome: "All shall succeed one another, so that no day should be void of
grain, wine, and gladness." And they shall not follow only on one
another, but shall all go on together in one perpetual round of toil and
fruitfulness. There shall be one unceasing inpouring of riches; no break
in the heavenly husbandry; labor shall at once yield fruit; the harvest
shall but encourage fresh labor. The end shall come swiftly on the
beginning; the end shall not close the past only, but issue forth anew.
Such is the character of the toils of the Gospel. All the works of grace
go on in harmony together; each helps on the other; in one, the
fallow-ground of the heart is broken up; in another, seed is sown, the
beginning of a holy conversation; in another, is the full richness of
the ripened fruit, in advanced holiness or the blood of martyrs. And so,
also, of the ministers of Christ, some are adapted especially to one
office, some to another; yet all together carry on His one work. All,
too, patriarchs, prophets, Apostles, shall meet together in one; they
who, before Christ's coming , "sowed the seed, the promises of the
Blessed Seed to come," and they who "entered into their labors," not to
displace, but to complete them; all shall rejoice together in that Seed
which is Christ.

And the mountains shall drop sweet wine and all the hills shall melt -
Amos takes the words of Joel, in order to identify their prophecies, yet
strengthens the image. For instead of saying, "the hills shall flow with
milk," he says, "they shall melt, dissolve themselves. Such shall be the
abundance and super-abundance of blessing, that it shall be as though
the hills dissolved themselves in the rich streams which they poured
down. The mountains and hills may be symbols, in regard either to their
height, or their natural barrenness or their difficulty of cultivation.
In past times they were scenes of idolatry. In the time of the Gospel,
all should be changed; all should be above nature. All should be
obedient to God: all, full of the graces and gifts of God. What was
exalted, like the Apostles should be exalted not for itself, but in
order to pour out the streams of life-giving doctrine and truth, which
would refresh and gladden the faithful. And the lesser heights, "the
hills," should, in their degree, pour out the same streams. Everything,
heretofore barren and unfruitful, should overflow with spiritual
blessing. The mountains and hills of Judaea, with their terraced sides
clad with the vine were a natural symbol fruitfulness to the Jews, but
they themselves could not think that natural fruitfulness was meant
under this imagery. It would have been a hyperbole as to things of
nature; but what, in naturl things, is a hyperbole, is but a faint
shadow of the joys and rich delights and glad fruitfulness of grace.

[Amos 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 9:14</span></span>

And I will bring again the captivity of My people - Where all around is
spiritual, there is no reason to take this alone as earthly. An earthly
restoration to Canaan had no value, except as introductory to the
spiritual. The two tribes were, in a great measure, restored to their
own land, when Zachariah, being "filled with the Holy Spirit,
prophesied," as then about to accomplished, that "God hath visited and
redeemed his people, and hath raised up a horn of salvation to us in the
house of His servant David, as He spake by the mouth of His holy
prophets - that we, being delivered from the hands of our enemies, might
serve Him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before Him" [Luk
1:68-70](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068), [Luk
1:74-75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074). So our Lord said; "ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. Whosoever committeth
sin, is the servant of sin. If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be
free indeed" [Joh 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032), [Joh
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034), [Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036). And Paul, "The law of the Spirit
of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death"
[Rom 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002).

And they shall build the waste - (Rather "shall build waste") "cities."
"As they who are freed from captivity and are no longer in fear of the
enemy, "build cities and plant vineyards" and gardens," so shall these
unto God. "This," says one of old , "needs no exposition, since,
throughout the world, amid the desert of pagandom, which was before
deserted by God, Churches of Christ have arisen, which, for the firmness
of faith may be called "cities," and, for the gladness of "hope which
maketh not ashamed, vineyards," and for the sweetness of charity,
gardens; wherein they dwell, who have builded them through the word;
whence they drink the wine of gladness, who formed them by precepts;
whence they eat fruits, who advanced them by counsels, because, as "he
who reapeth," so he too who "buildeth" such "cities," and he who
"planteth" such "vineyards," and he who "maketh" such "gardens,
receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal" [Joh
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#036).

[Amos 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">amo 9:15</span></span>

And I will plant them upon their own land - The promises and
threatenings of God are, to individuals, conditional upon their
continuing to be of that character, to which God annexes those promises
or threats. Theodoret: "The God of all often promises, when those who
receive the promises, by joying in iniquity hinder those promises from
taking effect. At times also he threatens heavy things, and they who for
their offences were the objects of those threats, being, through fear of
them, converted, do not in act experience them." The two tribes received
some little shadow of fulfillment of these promises on the return from
Babylon. "They were planted in their own land." The non-fulfillment of
the rest, as well as the evident symbolic character of part of it, must
have shown them that such fulfillment was the beginning, not the end.
Their land was "the Lord's land;" banishment from it was banishment from
the special presence of God, from the place where He manifested Himself,
where alone the typical sacrifices, the appointed means of
reconciliation, could be offered.

Restoration to their own land was the outward symbol of restoration to
God's favor, of which it was the fruit. it was a condition of the
fulfillment of those other promises, the coming of Him in whom the
promises were laid up, the Christ. He was not simply to be of David's
seed, according to the flesh. Prophecy, as time went on, declared His
birth at Bethlehem, His revelation in Galilee, His coming to His Temple,
His sending forth His law from Jerusalem. Without some restoration to
their own land, these things could not be. Israel was restored in the
flesh, that, after the flesh, the Christ might be born of them, where
God foretold that He should be born. But the temporal fulfillment ended
with that event in time in which they were to issue, for whose sake they
were; His coming. They were but the vestibule to the spiritual. As
shadows, they ceased when the Sun arose. As means, they ended, when the
end, whereto they served, came.

There was no need of a temporal Zion, when He who was to send forth His
law thence, had come and sent it forth. No need of a temple when He who
was to be its glory, had come, illumined it, and was gone. No need of
one of royal birth in Bethlehem, when "the Virgin" had "conceived and
borne a Son," and "God" had been "with us." And so as to other
prophecies. All which were bound to the land of Judah, were
accomplished. As the true Israel expanded and embraced all nations, the
whole earth became "the land" of God's people. Palestine had had its
prerogatives, because God manifested Himself there, was worshiped there.
When God's people was enlarged, so as "to inherit the pagan," and God
was worshiped everywhere, His land too was everywhere. His promises
accompanied His people, and these were in all lands. His words then, "I
will plant them upon their own land, and they shall no more be pulled up
out of their land which I have given them," expanded with their
expansion. It is a promise of perpetuity, like that of our Lord; "Lo! I
am with you alway, even to the end of the world. The gates of hell shall
not prevail against" the Church, the people of God. The world may gnash
its teeth; kings may oppress; persecutors may harass; popular rage may
trample on her; philosophy may scoff at her; unbelief may deny the
promises made to her; the powers of darkness may rage around her; her
own children may turn against her. In vain! Jerome: "She may be shaken
by persecutions, she cannot be uprooted; she may be tempted, she cannot
be overcome. For the Lord God Almighty, the Lord her God, hath promised
that He will do it, whose promise is the law to nature."

Saith the Lord thy God - Rib.: "O Israel of God, O Catholic Church, to
be gathered out of Jews and Gentiles, doubt not, he would say, thy
promised happiness. For thy God who loveth thee and who from eternity
hath chosen thee, hath commanded me to say this to thee in His Name."
Rup.: "He turneth too to the ear of each of us, giving us joy, in His
word, 'saith the Lord thy God.'" "They too who are plants which God hath
planted, and who have so profited, that through them many daily profit,
"shall be planted upon their own ground," that is, each, in his order
and in that kind of life which he has chosen, shall strike deep roots in
true piety, and they shall be so preserved by God, that by no force of
temptations shall they be uprooted, but each shall say with the holy
prophet, "I am like a green olive tree in the house of God; I trust in
the mercy of God forever and ever" [Psa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009). Not that every tree, planted in
the ground of the Church militant, is so firm that it cannot be plucked
up, but many there are, which are not plucked up, being protected by the
Hand of Almighty God. O blessed that land, where no tree is plucked up,
none is injured by any worm, or decays through any age. How many great,
fruit-bearing, trees do we see plucked up in this land of calamity and
misery! Blessed day, when we shall be there, where we need fear no
storm!" Yet this too abideth true; "none shall be plucked up." Without
our own will, neither passions within, nor temptations without, nor the
malice or wiles of Satan, can "pluck" us "up." None can "be plucked up,"
who doth not himself loose his hold, whose root is twisted round the
Rock, which is Thou, O Blessed Jesus. For Thou hast said, "they shall
never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of My Hand" [Joh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah Introduction](oba000)

</div>
