<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](joe003)  [Next](amo001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Amos

Theodoret: "He who made, one by one, the hearts of men, and understands
all their works, knowing the hardness and contrariousness of the heart
of Israel, reasons with them not through one prophet only, but,
employing as His ministers many prophets and wondrous men, admonishes
them and foretells the things to come, evidencing through the harmony of
many the truthfulness of their predictions."

As the contradiction of false teachers gave occasion to Paul to speak of
himself, so the persecution of the priest of Bethel has brought out such
knowledge as we have of the life of Amos, before God called him to be a
prophet. "I," he says, "was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son"
[Amo 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014). He had not received any of
the training in those schools of the prophets which had been founded by
Samuel, and through which, amid the general apostasy and corruption,
both religious knowledge and religious life were maintained in the
remnant of Israel. He was a "herdsman," whether (as this word, בקר
bâqâr, would naturally mean being used always of the "ox" or "herd" in
contrast with the "flocks" of sheep or goats, and the name being derived
from "plowing") "a cowherd" or (less obviously) "a shepherd." He was
"among the herdsmen of Tekoah"; among them, and, outwardly, as they, in
nothing distinguished from them.

The sheep which he tended (because he also kept sheep) may have been his
own. There is nothing to prove or to disprove it. Anyhow, he was not
like the king of Moab, "a sheep-master" , as the Jews, following out
their principle, that "prophecy was only bestowed by God upon the rich
and noble" (see the note at [Joe
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#029)), wish to make him. Like David,
he was following the sheep , as their shepherd. But his employment as "a
gatherer" (or, more probably, "a cultivator") "of sycamore fruit"
designates him instead as one living by a rural employment for hire.
Probably, the word designates the artificial means by which the sycamore
fruit was ripened, irritating, scraping, puncturing, wounding it .

Amos does not say that these were his food, but that one of his jobs was
to perform a gardener's function in maturing the figs. So he was
something of a gardener and a shepherd among other shepherds. The sheep
which he fed were also probably a matter of trade. The breed of sheep
and goats, נקד naqad in keeping with his special name of shepherd נקד
nôqêd, was derived, is still known by the same name in Arabia; a race,
small, thin, short-legged, ugly, and stunted. It furnished a proverb,
"viler than a naqad"; yet the wool of the sheep was accounted the very
best. The goats were found especially in Bahrein. Among the Arabs also,
the shepherd of these sheep was known by a name derived from them. They
were called "naqad;" and their shepherd was called a "noqad" .

The prophet's birthplace, Tekoah, was a town which, in the time of
Josephus and of Jerome, had dwindled into a "village" , "a little
village" , on a high hill, twelve miles from Jerusalem, "which," Jerome
adds, "we see daily." "It lay" Jerome says , "six miles southward from
holy Bethlehem where the Saviour of the world was born, and beyond it is
no village except some rude huts and movable tents. Such is the wide
waste of the desert which stretches to the Red Sea, and the bounds of
the Persians, Ethiopians, and Indians. And no grain whatever being grown
upon this dry and sandy soil, it is all full of shepherds, in order, by
the multitude of the flocks, to make amends for the barrenness of the
land." From Tekoah Joab brought the "wise woman" [Sa1
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#002) to intercede for Absalom;
Rehoboam built it [Ch2 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#006); i. e.,
whereas it had been before (what it afterward again became) a village,
and so was not mentioned in the Book of Joshua, he made it a fortified
town toward his southeastern border.

The neighboring wilderness was called after it ([Ch2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#020); 1 Macc. 9:33). Besides its
sycamores, its oil was the best in Judah . War and desolation have
extirpated both from this as well as from other parts of Palestine . Its
present remains are Christian , "ruins of 4 or 5 acres." It, as well as
so many other places near the Dead Sea, is identified by the old name,
slightly varied in pronunciation, Theku'a, as also by its distance from
Jerusalem . In the sixth century a.d. we hear of a chapel in memory of
the holy Amos at Tekoa , where the separated monks of the lesser laura
of Saba communicated on the Lord's day. The wide prospect from Tekoa
embraced both the dead and the living - God's mercies and His judgments.

To the Southeast "the view is bounded only by the level mountains of
Moab, with frequent bursts of the Dead Sea, seen through openings among
the rugged and desolate mountains which intervene." On the North, the
Mount of Olives is visible, at that time dear to sight, as overhanging
the place, which God had "chosen to place His Name there." Tekoah,
however, although the birthplace, was not the home of the prophet. He
was "among the herdsmen from Tekoah" (מתקוע mı̂teqôa‛) their employment,
as shepherds, leading them away "from Tekoah." In the wilds of the
desert while he was following his sheep, God saw him and revealed
Himself to him, as he had to Jacob and to Moses, and said to him, "Go
prophesy unto My people Israel." And, just as the apostles left their
nets and their father, and Matthew abandoned the receipt of custom, and
followed Jesus, so Amos left his sheep and his cultivation of sycamores,
and appeared suddenly in his shepherd's dress at the royal but
idolatrous [Amo 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#013) sanctuary, the
temple of the state, to denounce the idolatry sanctioned by the state,
to foretell the extinction of the Royal family, and the captivity of the
people. This, like Hosea, he had to do in the reign of the mightiest of
the sovereigns of Israel, in the midst of her unclouded prosperity.
Bethel was only twelve miles north of Jerusalem , since Tekoah was
twelve miles toward the southeast. Six or seven hours would suffice to
transport the shepherd from his sheep and the wilderness to that
fountain of Israel's corruption, the high places of Bethel, and for the
inspired peasant to confront the priests and the prophets of the
state-idolatry.

There doubtless he said, "the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste"
[Amo 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009); and there, like the former
"man of God," while standing opposite "the altar," he renewed the
prophecy against it, and prophesied that in its destruction it should
involve its idolatrous worshipers [Amo
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001). Yet although he did deliver a
part of his prophecy at Bethel, still, like his great predecessors
Elijah and Elisha, doubtless he did not confine his ministry there. His
summons to the luxurious ladies of Samaria, whose expenses were
supported by the oppressions of the poor [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001), was without question delivered in
Samaria itself. The call to the pagan to look down into Samaria from the
heights which girt in the valley out of which it rose (see the notes at
[Amo 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)), thence to behold its din
and its oppressions, to listen to the sound of its revelries and the
wailings of its oppressed, and so to judge between God and His people,
would also be most effectively given within Samaria. The consciences of
the guilty inhabitants to whom he preached would populate the heights
around them, their wall of safety, as they deemed, between them and the
world, with pagan witnesses of their sins, and pagan avengers.

The prophet could only know the coming destruction of the house of
Jeroboam and the captivity of Israel by inspiration. The sins which he
rebuked, he probably knew from being among them. As Paul's "spirit was
stirred in him" at Athens, "when he saw the city wholly given to
idolatry" [Act 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016), so the spirit of
Amos must have been stirred to its depths by that grievous contrast of
luxury and penury side by side, which he describes in such vividness of
detail. The sins which he rebukes are those of the outward prosperity
especially of a capital, the extreme luxury [Amo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012), [Amo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015); [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001); [Amo
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011); [Amo
6:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004), revelries [Amo
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#008); [Amo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009), debauchery [Amo
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007), of the rich, who supported their
own reckless expenditure by oppression of the poor [Amo
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007); [Amo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009); [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001); [Amo
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011); [Amo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003); [Amo
8:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004), extortion [Amo
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010), hard bargains with their
necessities [Amo 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#008), perversion of
justice [Amo 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007); [Amo
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#007), [Amo
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012), with bribing, [Amo
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006); [Amo
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012), false measures [Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005), a griping, hard-fisted, and
probably usurious sale of grain [Amo
8:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005). In grappling with sin, Amos
deals more with the details and circumstances of it than Hosea. Hosea
touches the center of the offence; Amos shows the hideousness of it in
the details into which it branches out. As he is everywhere graphic, so
here he points out the events of daily life in which the sin showed
itself, as the vile price or, it may be, the article of luxury, "the
pair of sandals" [Amo 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006); [Amo
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#006), for which the poor was sold, or
the "refuse of wheat" (he coins the term) which they sold, at high
prices and with short measure to the poor [Amo
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#006).

According to the title which Amos prefixes to his prophecy, his office
fell within the 25 years, during which Uzziah and Jeroboam II were
contemporaries (809-784 B. C). This falls in with the opinion already
expressed that the bloodshed mentioned by Hosea in the list of their
sins, was instead political bloodshed in their revolutions after the
death of Jeroboam II, than individual murder. For Amos, while upbraiding
Israel for the sins incidental to political prosperity and wealth (such
as was the time of Jeroboam II) does not mention bloodshed.

It has been thought that the mention of the earthquake, two years before
which Amos began his prophecy, furnishes us with a more definite date.
That earthquake must have been a terrible visitation, since it was
remembered after the captivity, two and a half centuries afterward. "Ye
shall flee," says Zechariah [Zac 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005),
as of a thing which his hearers well knew by report, "as ye fled before
the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah." Josephus connects
the earthquake with Uzziah's act of pride in offering the incense, for
which God struck him with leprosy. He relates it as a fact (Antiquities
ix. 10): "Meanwhile a great earthquake shook the ground, and, the temple
parting, a bright ray of the sun shone forth, and fell upon the king's
face, so that immediately the leprosy came over him. And before the
city, at the place called Eroge, the Western half of the hill was broken
off and rolled half a mile to the mountain Eastward, and there stayed,
blocking up the ways and the king's gardens." This account of Josephus,
however, is altogether unhistorical. Not to argue from the
improbability, that such an event as the rending of the temple itself
should not have been mentioned, Josephus has confused Zechariah's
description of an event yet future with the past earthquake under
Uzziah. Nor can the date be reconciled with the history. For when Uzziah
was stricken with leprosy, "Jotham, his son, was over the king's house,
judging the people of the land" [Ch2
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#021). But Jotham was only 25 years
old at his father's death, "when he himself began to reign" [Ch2
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001). And, Uzziah survived Jeroboam by
26 years. So Jotham, who judged for his father after his leprosy, was
not born when Jeroboam died. Uzziah then must have been stricken with
leprosy some years after Jeroboam's death; and consequently, after the
earthquake also, since Amos, who prophesied in the days of Jeroboam,
prophesied "two years before the earthquake."

An ancient Hebrew interpretation of the prophecy of Isaiah, "within
threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken that it is no more a
people" [Isa 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008), assumed that Isaiah
was foretelling the commencement of the captivity under Tiglath-Pileser
or Sargon, and since the period of Isaiah's own prophecy to that
captivity was not 65 years, supposed that Isaiah counted from a prophecy
of Amos, "Israel shall surely be led captive out of his own land" [Amo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#011), [Amo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017). They placed this prophecy of
Amosin the 25th year of Uzziah. Then his remaining 27 years, Jotham's 16
years, Ahaz' 16 years, and the first 6 years of Hezekiah would have made
up the 65 years. This calculation was not necessarily connected with the
error as to the supposed connection of the earthquake and the leprosy of
Uzziah. However, it is plain from the words of Isaiah, "in yet
threescore and five years," that he is dating from the time when he
uttered the prophecy; and so the prophecy relates, not to the imperfect
captivity which ended the "kingdom" of Israel, but to that more complete
deportation under Esarhaddon [Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002);
[Ch2 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011); [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024), when the ten tribes ceased to
be "anymore a people" (Ahaz-14 years + Hezekiah-29 years + Manasseh-22
years =65 years total). Neither then does this fix the date of Amos.

Nor does the comparison, which Amos bids Israel make between his own
borders, and those of Calneh, Hamath and Gath, determine the date of the
prophecy. Since Uzziah broke down the walls of Gath [Ch2
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006), and Hamath was recovered by
Jeroboam II to Israel [Kg2 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#028), it
is probable that the point of comparison lay between the present
disasters of these nations, and those with which Amos threatened Israel,
and which the rich men of Israel practically did not believe. For it
follows, "ye that put far away the evil day" [Amo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003). It is probable then that Calneh
(the very ancient city [Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010)
which subsequently became Ctesiphon,) on the other side of the
Euphrates, had lately suffered from Assyria, as Gath and Hamath from
Judah and Israel. But we know none of these dates. Isaiah speaks of the
Assyrian as boasting that "Calno" was "as Carchemish [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009), Hamath as Arpad, Samaria as
Damascus." But this relates to times long subsequent, when Hamath,
Damascus, and Samaria, had fallen into the hands of Assyria. Our present
knowledge of Assyrian history gives us no clue to the event, which was
well known to those to whom Amos spoke.

Although, however, the precise time of the prophetic office of Amos
cannot thus be fixed, it must have fallen within the reign of Jeroboam,
to whom Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, accused him [Amo
7:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010). For this whole prophecy
implies that Israel was in a state of prosperity, ease, and security,
whereas it fell to a state of anarchy immediately upon Jeroboam's death.
"The mention of the entering in of Hamath" [Amo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014) as belonging to Israel implies
that this prophecy was after Jeroboam had recovered it to Israel [Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025); and the ease, pride, luxury,
which he upbraids, evince that the foreign oppressions [Kg2
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#026) had ceased for some time. This
agrees with the title of the prophecy, but does not limit it further.
Since he prophesied while Uzziah and Jeroboam II reigned together, Amos'
prophetic office must have fallen between 809 b.c. and 784 b.c. - in the
last 25 years of the reign of Jeroboam II. His office, then, began
probably after that of Hosea, and closed long before its close. He is,
in a manner then, both later and earlier than Hosea, later than the
earliest period of Hosea's prophetic office, and far earlier than the
latest.

Within this period, there is nothing to limit the activity of Amos to a
very short time. The message of Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, implies
that Amos' words of woe had shaken Israel through and through. "Amos
hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel; the
land is not able to bear all his words" [Amo
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010). It may be that God sent him to
the midst of some great festival at Bethel, as, at Jeroboam's
dedication-feast, He sent the prophet who afterward disobeyed Him, to
foretell the desecration of the altar, which Jeroboam was consecrating,
in God's Name, against God. In this case, Amos might, at once, like
Elijah, have been confronted with a great. concourse of the
idol-worshipers. Yet the words of Amaziah seem, in their obvious
meaning, to imply that Amos had had a more pervading influence than
would be produced by the delivery of God's messsage in one place. He
says of "the land," that is, of all the ten tribes generally, it "is not
able to bear all his words." The accusation also of a "conspiracy"
probably implies, that some had not been only shaken, but they had been
converted by the words of Amos, and were known by their adherence to him
and his belief.

Amos seems also to speak of the prohibition to God's prophets to
prophesy, as something habitual, beyond the one opposition of Amaziah,
which he rebuked on the spot. "I raised up of your sons for prophets;
but ye commanded the prophets, saying, Prophesy not" [Amo
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#011). Nor, strictly speaking, was
Amos a son of Ephraim. The series of images in [Amo
4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001) seem to be an answer to the
objection as to why he prophesied among them. People, he would say, were
not, in the things of nature, surprised that the effect followed the
cause. God's command was the cause; Amos' prophesying was the effect
[Amo 3:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003). "Then they put away from
them the evil day" [Amo 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003),
forgetting future evil in present luxury; or they professed that God was
with them; "the Lord, the God of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have
spoken" [Amo 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#014); or trusting in
their half-service of God and His imagined presence among them, they
jeered at Amos' prophecies of ill, and professed to desire the Day of
the Lord, with which he threatened them; they said that evil would not
reach them; "Woe unto you that desire the Day of the Lord! To what end
is it to you?" [Amo 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018). "All the
sinners of My people shall die by the sword, which say, the evil shall
not overtake nor prevent us" [Amo
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#010). They showed also in deed that
they hated those who publicly reproved them [Amo
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#010); and Amos, like Hosea, declares
that they are hardened, so that wisdom itself must leave them to
themselves [Amo 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#013). All this implies
a continued contact between the prophet and the people, so that his
function was not discharged in a few sermons, so to say, or inspired
declarations of God's purpose, but must have been that of a pastor among
them over the course of several years. His present book (like Hosea's
book) is a summary of his prophecies.

That book (since Amos himself subsequently gathered his prophetic
teaching into a whole) is one well-ordered whole. He himself (in the
title) states that it had been spoken before it was written. For in that
he says, these are "the words" which in prophetic vision he "saw, two
years before the earthquake," this portion of his prophecies must have
preceded his writings by those two years at least. That terrible
earthquake was probably the occasion of his collecting those prophecies.
But that earthquake doubtless was no mere note of time. If he had
intended only a date, he would probably have named (as other prophets
do) the year of the king of Judah. He himself mentions earthquakes [Amo
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#011), as one of the warnings of God's
displeasure. This more destructive earthquake was probably the first
great token of God's displeasure during the prosperous reign of Jeroboam
II, the first herald of those heavier judgments which Amos had
predicted, and which broke upon Israel, wave after wave, until the last,
carried him away captive. For two years, Israel had been forewarned; now
"the beginning of sorrows" [Mat 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008)
had set in.

Amos, at the beginning of his book (as has been already noticed) joins
on his book with the book of the prophet Joel. Joel had foretold, as
instances of God's judgments on sin, how He would recompense the wrong,
which Tyre, Zidon, Philistia and Edom had done to Judah, and that He
would make Egypt desolate. Amos, omitting Egypt, adds Damascus, Amman
and Moab, and Judah itself. It may be, that he selects seven nations in
all, as a sort of whole (since that number is so often used), or that he
includes all the special enemies of the theocracy, the nations who hated
Israel and Judah, because they were the people of God, and God's people
itself, as far as it too was alienated from its God. Certainly, the sins
denounced are sins against the theocracy or government of God. It may
be, that Amos would exhibit to them the truth, that "God is no respecter
of persons;" that He, the Judge of the whole earth, punishes every
sinful nation; and that he would, by this declaration of God's
judgments, prepare them for the truth, from which sinful man so shrinks;
- that God punishes most, where He had most shown His light and love
[Amo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002). The thunder-cloud of God's
judgments, having passed over all the nations round about, Syria and
Philistia, Tyre, Edom, Ammon, Moab, and even discharged the fire from
heaven on Judah and Jerusalem, settles finally upon Israel. The summary
which closes this circle of judgments on Israel, is fuller in regard to
their sins, since they were the chief objects of his mission. In that
summary Amos gathers into one the sins with which he elsewhere upbraids
them, and sets before them their ingratitude and their endeavors to
extinguish the light which God gave them.

Our chapters follow a natural division, in that each (like those of
Hosea) ends in woe. [Amo 3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001), [Amo
4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001), and Amos 5 are distinguished
by the threefold summons - "Hear ye this word!" In each, he sets before
them some of their sins, and in each he pronounces God's sentence upon
them. "Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Therefore thus will I do unto
thee, O Israel; Therefore the Lord, the God of hosts, the Lord, saith
thus" ([Amo 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#011); [Amo
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#012); [Amo
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#016), as before, [Amo
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#014)). On this follows a twofold woe,
"Woe unto you that desire" [Amo 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018);
"Woe to them that are at ease" [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001); both which sections alike end in
renewed sentences of God's judgment; the first, of the final captivity
of Israel "beyond Damascus;" the second, of their nearer afflictions
through the first invasion of Tiglath-pileser (see the note at [Amo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014)). In Amos 7 he begins a series of
visions. In the first two visions, God forgives, at the intercession of
the prophet [Amo 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#003), [Amo
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#006).

In the third vision God interprets that He would no longer forgive [Amo
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#008). Upon this followed the
prohibition from Amaziah to prophesy, and God's sentence against him. In
[Amo 8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001), Amos resumes (as though
nothing had intervened), the series of visions, upon which Amaziah had
broken in. He resumes them exactly where he had been stopped. Amaziah
interrupted when Amos declared that God would not "pass by" the house of
Israel "anymore," but would desolate the idol-sanctuaries of israel and
bring a sword against the house of Jeroboam. The vision (in which Amos
resumes) renews the words, "I will not again pass by them anymore" [Amo
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#002), and foretells that the songs of
the idol-temple should be turned into howlings. Amos heads the last
chapter with a vision, that not only should the idol-altar and temple be
destroyed, but that it should be the destruction of its worshipers [Amo
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001). Amos makes each of these visions
a theme which he expands, both ending in woe; the first, with the utter
destruction of the idolaters of Israel [Amo
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014); the second, with that of the
sinful "kingdom" of Israel [Amo 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008).
With this he unites the promise to the "house" of Israel, that, "sifted"
as they would be "among the nations, not one grain would fall to the
earth" [Amo 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009). To this he, like
Hosea, adds a closing promise (the first in his whole book) that God
would raise the fallen tabernacle of David, convert the pagan, and
therewith restore the captivity of Israel, amid promises, which had
already (in Joel) symbolized spiritual blessings [Amo
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013).

Amos, like Hosea, was a prophet for Israel. After the second chapter in
which he includes Judah in the circle of God's visitations, because he
had "despised the law of the Lord" [Amo
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#004), Amos only notices him
incidentally. He there foretells that Jerusalem should (as it was) be
burned with fire. Judah also must be included in the words, "against the
whole family which God brought up out of the land of Egypt" [Amo
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001), and "woe" is pronounced against
those who are "at ease in Zion [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001). Elsewhere, "Israel," "the house
of Israel," "the virgin of Israel," "the sanctuaries of Israel,"
"Jacob," "the house of Jacob," and (in the same sense) "the high places
of Isaac," "the house of Isaac"; "the house of Joseph," "the remnant of
Joseph," "the affliction of Joseph," "the mountain," or "the mountains
of Samaria," "Samaria" itself, "Bethel" [Amo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009), [Amo
3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012); [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001), [Amo
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004), [Amo
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#012); [Amo
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#001), [Amo
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#004), [Amo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#006), [Amo
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#015), [Amo
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#025); [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001), [Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006), [Amo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008), [Amo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014); [Amo
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#002), [Amo
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#005), [Amo
7:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#008), [Amo
7:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016); [Amo
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#002), [Amo
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014); [Amo
9:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007), occur interchangeably as the
object of his prophecy. Amaziah's taunt, that his words, as being
directed against Israel and Bethel, would be acceptable in the kingdom
of Judah, implies the same; and Amos himself declares that this was his
commission, "go, prophesy unto My people Israel." In speaking of the
idolatry of Beersheba, Amos uses the word, "pass not over to Beersheba"
[Amo 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#005), adding the idolatries of
Judah to their own. The word, "pass not over," could only be used by one
prophesying in Israel. Therefore, it must have been the more impressive
to the faithful in Israel, that Amos closed his prophecy by the promise,
not to them primarily, but to the house of David, and to Israel through
its restoration. Amos, like Hosea, foretells the utter destruction of
"the kingdom of Israel," even while pronouncing that God would not
utterly destroy "the house of Jacob" [Amo
9:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008), but would save the elect
within it.

The opposition of Amaziah stands out, as one signal instance of the
manifold cry, "Prophesy not," with which people to drown the Voice of
God. Jeroboam left the complaint unheeded. His great victories had been
foretold to him by the prophet Jonah; and he would not interfere with
the prophet of God, although he predicted, not as Amaziah distorted his
words, that "Jeroboam" should "die by the sword," but that "the house of
Jeroboam" [Amo 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009) would so perish.
But his book is all comprised within the reign of Jeroboam and the
kingdom of Israel. He was called by God to be a prophet there; nor is
there even the slightest trace of his having exercised his function in
Judah, or having retired there in life.

A somewhat late tradition places Amos among the many prophets whom our
Lord says His people killed. The tradition bore, "that after he (Amos)
had been beaten often (the writer uses the same word which occurs in
[Heb 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#035)) by Amaziah the priest of
Bethel, the son of that priest, Osee, pierced his temples with a stake.
He was carried half-dead to his own land, and, after some days, died of
the wound, and was buried with his fathers." But the anonymous Greek
writer who relates it, (although it is in itself probable) has not, in
other cases, trustworthy information, and Jerome and Cyril of Alexandria
knew nothing of it. Jerome relates only that the tomb of Amos was still
shown at Tekoa, his birthplace.

The influence of the shepherd-life of Amos appears most in the sublimest
part of his prophecy, his descriptions of the mighty workings of
Almighty God [Amo 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013); [Amo
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008); [Amo
9:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#005). With those awful and sudden
changes in nature, whereby what to the idolaters was an object of
worship, was suddenly overcast, and "the day made dark with night," his
shepherd-life had made him familiar. The starry heavens had often
witnessed the silent conversation of his soul with God. In the calf, the
idolaters of Ephraim worshiped "nature." Amos then delights in
exhibiting to them His God, whom they too believed that they worshiped,
as the Creator of "nature," wielding and changing it at His Will. All
nature too should be obedient to its Maker in the punishment of the
ungodly [Amo 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#008), nor should anything
hide from Him [Amo 9:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002), [Amo
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#005). The shepherd-life would also make
the prophet familiar with the perils from wild beasts which we know of
as facts in David's youth. The images drawn from them were probably
reminiscences of what he had seen or encountered [Amo
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#004), [Amo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012); [Amo
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019). But Amos, a shepherd in a barren
and for the most part treeless wild, lived not as a farmer. His was not
a country of grain, nor of cedars and oaks; so that images from stately
trees [Amo 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#009), a heavy-laden wain
[Amo 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#013), or the sifting of corn [Amo
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009), were not the direct results of
his life amid sights of nature. The diseases of grain, locusts, drought,
which, the prophet says, God had sent among them, were inflictions which
would be felt in the grain-countries of Israel, rather than in the
wilderness of Tekoah. The insensibility for which he upbraids Israel
was, of course, their hardness of heart amid their own sufferings [Amo
4:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007); the judgments, with which he
threatens them in God's Name [Amo
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001), can have no bearing on his
shepherd-life in his own land.

Even Jerome, while laying down a true principle, inadvertently gives as
an instance of the images resulting from that shepherd-life, the opening
words of his book, which are in part words of the prophet Joel. "It is
natural," he says, "that all who exercise an art, should speak in terms
of their art, and that each should bring likenesses from that wherein he
hath spent his life. Why say this? In order to show, that Amos the
prophet too, who was a shepherd among shepherds, and that, not in
cultivated places, or amid vineyards, or woods, or green meadows, but in
the wide waste of the desert, where were witnessed the fierceness of
lions and the destruction of cattle, used the language of his art, and
called the awful and terrible Voice of the Lord, the roaring of lions,
and compared the overthrow of the cities of Israel to the lonely places
of shepherds or the drought of mountains."

The truth may be, that the religious life of Amos, amid scenes of
nature, accustomed him, as well as David, to express his thoughts in
words taken from the great picture-book of nature, which, as being also
written by the Hand of God, so wonderfully expresses the things of God.
When his prophet's life brought him among other scenes of cultivated
nature, his soul, so practiced in reading the relations of the physical
to the moral world, took the language of his parables alike from what he
saw, or from what he remembered. He was what we should call "a child of
nature," endued with power and wisdom by his God. Still more mistaken
has it been, to attribute to the prophet any inferiority even of outward
style, in consequence of his shepherd-life. Even a pagan has said,
"words readily follow thought;" much more, when thoughts and words are
poured into the soul together by God the Holy Spirit. On the contrary,
scarcely any prophet is more glowing in his style, or combines more
wonderfully the natural and moral world, the Omnipotence and Omniscience
of God [Amo 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013).

Visions, if related, are most effectively related in prose. Their
efficacy depends, in part, on their simplicity. Their meaning might be
overlaid and hidden by ornament of words. Thus, much of the Book of
Amos, then, is naturally in prose. The poetry, so to speak, of the
visions of Amos or of Zechariah is in the thoughts, not in the words.
Amos has also chosen the form of prose for his upbraidings of the
wealthy sinners of Israel. Yet, in the midst of this, what more poetic
than the summons to the pagan enemies of Israel, to populate the heights
around Samaria, and behold its sins [Amo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)? What is more graphic than that
picture of utter despair which did not dare to name the Name of God [Amo
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#009)? What is bolder than the
summons to Israel to come, if they desired, at once to sin and to atone
for their sin [Amo 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004)? What is more
striking in power than the sudden turn, "You only have I known.
Therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities" [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002)? Or the sudden summons "because I
will do this unto thee" [Amo 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#012) (the
silence (what the "this" is) is more thrilling than words) "prepare to
meet thy God, O Israel?" Or what is more pathetic than the close of the
picture of the luxurious rich, when, having said, how they heaped
luxuries one upon another, he ends with what they did not do; "they are
not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph" [Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006)?

Augustine selects Amos, as an instance of unadorned eloquence. Having
given instances from Paul, he says , "These things, when they are taught
by professors, are accounted great, bought at a great price, sold amid
great boasting. I fear these discussions of mine may savor of the like
boasting. But I have to do with men of a spurious learning, who think
meanly of our writers, not because they have not, but because they make
no show of the eloquence which these prize too highly.

"I see that I must say something of the eloquence of the prophets. And
this I will do, chiefly out of the book of that prophet, who says that
he was a shepherd or a cowherd, and was taken thence by God and sent to
prophesy to His people.

"When then this peasant, or peasant-prophet, reproved the ungodly,
proud, luxurious, and therefore most careless of brotherly love, he
cries aloud, "Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, etc." Would they
who, as being learned and eloquent, despise our prophets as unlearned
and ignorant of elocution, had they had aught of this sort to say, or
had they to speak against such, would they, as many of them as would
fain not be senseless, wish to speak otherwise? For what would any sober
ear desire more than is there said? First, the inveighing itself, with
what a crash is it hurled as it were, to awaken their stupefied senses!"

Therefore, having analyzed these verses, he says, "How beautiful this
is, and how it affects those who, reading, understand, there is no use
in saying to one who does not himself feel it. More illustrations of the
rules of rhetoric may be found in this one place, which I have selected.
But a good hearer will not be so much instructed by a diligent
discussion of them, as he will be kindled by their glowing reading. For
these things were not composed by human industry, but were poured forth
in eloquent wisdom from the Divine Mind, wisdom not aiming at eloquence,
but eloquence not departing from wisdom." "For if, as some most eloquent
and acute men could see and tell, those things which are learned as by
an art of rhetoric, would not be observed and noted and reduced to this
system, unless they were first found in the genius of orators, what
wonder if they be found in those also, whom "He" sends, who creates
genius? Wherefore we may well confess that our canonical writers and
teachers are not wise only but eloquent, with that eloquence which
beseems their character."

Jerome, in applying to Amos words which Paul spoke of himself, "rude in
speech but not in knowledge" [Co2
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006), doubtless was thinking mostly of
the latter words, for he adds, "For the same Spirit who spoke through
all the prophets, spake in him." Dr. Lowth says happily (de Poesi Hebr.
Prael. xxi.), "Jerome calls Amos, rude in speech but not in knowledge,
implying of him what Paul modestly professed as to himself, on whose
authority many have spoken of this prophet, as though he were altogether
rude, ineloquent, unadorned. Far otherwise! Let any fair judge read his
writings, thinking not who wrote them, but what he wrote, he will think
that our shepherd was "in no wise behind the very chiefest" prophets; in
the loftiness of his thoughts and the magnificence of his spirit, nearly
equal to the highest, and in the splendor of his diction and the
elegance of the composition scarcely inferior to any. For the same
Divine Spirit moved by His inspiration Isaiah and Daniel in the court,
David and Amos by the sheepfold; always choosing fitting interpreters of
God's Will and sometimes perfecting praise out of the mouth of babes. Of
some He uses the eloquence; others He makes eloquent."

It has indeed been noticed that in regularity of structure he has an
elegance unique to himself. The strophaic form, into which he has cast
the heavy prophecies of the two first chapters adds much to their
solemnity; the recurring "burden" of the fourth chapter, "Yet have ye
not returned unto Me, saith the Lord" [Amo
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#006), [Amo
4:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#008), gives it a deep pathos of its
own. Indeed no other prophet has bound his prophecies into one, with so
much care as to their outward form, as this inspired shepherd. Amos (to
use human terms) was not so much the poet as the sacred orator. One of
those energetic turns which have been already instanced, would suffice
to stamp the human orator. Far more, they have shaken through and
through souls steeped in sin from the prophet's time until now. It has
been said of human eloquence, "he lightened, thundered, he commingled
Greece." The shepherd has shaken not one country, but the world; not by
a passing earthquake, but by the awe of God which, with electric force,
streamed through his words.

Some variation of dialect, or some influence of his shepherd-life upon
his pronunciation, has been imagined in Amos. But it relates to five
words only. In three, his orthography differs by a single letter from
that found elsewhere in Hebrew. In two cases, the variation consists in
the use of a different sibilant; the third in the use of a weaker
guttural. Besides these, he uses a softer sound of the name Isaac, which
also occurs in Jeremiah and a Psalm; and in another word, he, in common
with two Psalms, employs a root with a guttural, instead of that common
in Hebrew which has a strong sibilant. In four of these cases, Amos uses
the softer form; in the fifth, we only know that the two sibilants were
pronounced differently once, but cannot guess what the distinction was.
The two sibilants are interchanged in several Hebrew words, and on no
rule, that we can discover. In another of the sibilants, the change made
by Amos is just the reverse of that of the Ephrainmites who had only the
pronunciation of "s" for "sh"; "sibboleth" for "shibboleth." But the
Ephraimites could not pronounce the "sh" at all; the variation in Amos
is limited to a single word. The like variations to these instances in
Amos are also found in other words in the Bible. On the whole, we may
suspect the existence of a softer pronunciation in the South of Judaea,
where Amos lived; but the only safe inference is, the extreme care with
which the words have been handed down to us, just as the prophet spoke
and wrote them.

It has been noticed already that Amos and Hosea together show, that all
the Mosaic festivals and sacrifices, priests, prophets, a temple, were
retained in Israel, only distorted to calf-worship Even the third-year's
tithes they had not ventured to get rid of Amos supplies some yet more
minute traits of ritual; that they had the same rules in regard to
leaven [Amo 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#005); that their altar too
had horns (as prescribed in the law), on which the blood of the
sacrifices was to be sprinkled ([Amo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#014), see [Exo
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#002); [Exo
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#012); [Lev
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#025)), they had the altar-bowls [Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006) from where the blood of the victim
was sprinkled , such as the princes of the congregation offered in the
time of Moses [Num 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013), and their
rich men, at times at least, plundered to drink wine from.

They had also true Nazarites, raised up among them, as well as true
prophets; and they felt the weight of the influence of these religious
people against them, since they tried by fraud or violence to make them
break their vow [Amo 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#012). Amos, while
upbraiding their rich men for breaking the law between man and man,
presupposes that the Law of Moses was, in this respect also,
acknowledged among them. For in his words, "they turn aside the way of
the meek" ([Amo 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007); [Amo
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012), see [Exo
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#006); [Deu
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019); [Deu
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#017); [Deu
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#019)) "they turn aside the poor in
the gate" ([Amo 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#008), see [Exo
22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026)) "they take a ransom" [Amo
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012) (from the rich for their
misdeeds), he retains the unique term of the Pentateuch; as also in
that, "on clothes laid to pledge ([Amo
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#008), see [Exo
22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026)) they lie down by every
altar;" "who make the Ephah small" ([Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005), see [Deu
25:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#014)). "Balances of deceit" [Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005) are the contrary of what are
enjoined in the law, "balances of right" [Lev
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#036).

In upbraiding them for a special impurity, forbidden in principle by the
law [Deu 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001) he uses the sanction
often repeated in the law "to profane My Holy Name" [Amo
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007); [Lev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#003). In the punishments which he
mentions, he uses terms in which God threatens those punishments. The
two remarkable words, rendered "blasting and mildew" [Amo
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009); [Deu
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022), occur only in Deuteronomy, and
in Solomon's prayer founded upon it [Kg1
8:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#037), and in Haggai [Hag
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#017) where he is referring to Amos. In
the words, "as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah" [Amo
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#011); [Deu
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023), the special term and form of
Deuteronomy, as well as the threat, are retained. The threat, "Ye have
built houses of hewn stone, and ye shall not dwell therein; ye have
planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink the wine thereof;"
but blends and enlarges those in Deuteronomy [Amo
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011); [Deu
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030), [Deu
28:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#039). The remarkable term describing
their unrepentance is taken from the same ([Amo
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#006), [Amo
4:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#008), see [Deu
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029)).

So also the image of "gall and wormwood" ([Amo
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012), from [Deu
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018)), two bitter plants, into which
they turned judgment and righteousness. There are other verbal
reminiscences of the Pentateuch, interwoven with the words of Amos,
which presuppose that it was in the memory of both the prophet and his
hearers in Israel (see [Amo 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002), [Amo
2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#010); [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002); [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001); [Amo
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016); [Amo
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008), [Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012)). Indeed, after that long slavery
of 400 years in Egypt, the traditions of the spots, hallowed by God's
intercourse with the patriarchs, probably even their relations to "Edom
their brother" [Amo 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011), must have
been lost. The book of Genesis did not embody popular existing
traditions of this sort, but must have revived them. The idolatry of
Beersheba , as well as that of Gilead, alluded to by Hosea, as also
Jeroboam's choice of Bethel itself for the calf-worship , imply on the
part of the idolaters a knowledge and belief of the history, which they
must have learned from the Pentateuch. Doubtless, it had been a part of
Jeroboam's policy to set up, opposite the exclusive claim for the temple
at Jerusalem, rival places of traditionary holiness from the mercies of
God to their forefathers, much as Muhammed availed himself of the memory
of Abraham, to found his claim for an interest in Jerusalem. But these
traditions too must have been received BY the people, not derived from
them. They were not brought with them from Egypt. The people, enslaved,
degraded, sensualized, and idolatry-loving, had no hearts to cherish the
memories of the pure religion of their great forefathers, who worshiped
the unimaged Self-existing God.

As Amos employed the language of the Pentateuch and cited the Book of
Joel, so it seems more probable, that in the burden of his first
prophecies , "I will send a fire upon ... and it shall devour the
palaces of ..." he took the well-known words of Hosea [Hos
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#014), and, by their use, gave a unity
to their prophecies, than that Hosea, who uses no language except that
of the Pentateuch, should, in the one place where he employs this form,
have limited the "burden" of Amos to the one case of Judah. Besides, in
Hosea, the words, declaring the destruction of the cities and palaces of
Judah, stand in immediate connection with Judah's wrong temper in
building them whereas in Amos they are insulated. Beside this, the
language of the two prophets does not bear upon each other, except that
both have the term "balances of deceit" ([Hos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008) ([Hos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#007) in English); [Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005)), which was originally formed in
contrast with what God had enjoined in the law, "balances of right," and
which stands first in the Proverbs of Solomon [Pro
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001); [Pro
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#023).

Of later prophets, Jeremiah renewed against Damascus the prophecy of
Amos in his own words; only, the memory of Hazael having been
obliterated perhaps in the destruction under Tiglath-Pileser, Jeremiah
calls it not after Hazael, but by its own name and that of Benhadad [Jer
49:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#027). The words of Amos had once been
fulfilled, and its people had been transported to Kir. Probably
fugitives had again repopulated it, and Jeremiah intended to point out,
that the sentence pronounced through Amos was not yet exhausted. On the
similar ground probably, when upbraiding Ammon for the similar sins and
for that for which Amos had denounced woe upon it, its endeavor to
displace Israel [Amo 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013); [Jer
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001), Jeremiah used the words of Amos,
"their king shall qo into captivity - and his princes together" [Amo
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#015); [Jer
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003). In a similar manner, Haggai
upbraids the Jews of his day for their impenitence under God's
chastisements, in words varied in no essential from those of Amos [Amo
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009); [Hag
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#019). The words of Amos, so repeated
to the Jews upon their restoration, sounded, as it were, from the
desolate heritage of Israel, "Sin no more, lest a worse thing happen
unto thee."

Other reminiscences of the words of Amos are only a part of the harmony
of Scripture , the prophets in this way too indicating their unity with
one another, that they use the words, the one of the other.

The might of Amos' teaching at the time, the state-priest Amaziah
impressed on Jeroboam. Contemptuous toward Amos himself, Amaziah
admitted the truth to Jeroboam. "The land is not able to bear all his
(Amos') words." Doubtless, as the Jews were mad against Stephen, "not"
being "able to resist the wisdom and Spirit by which he spake" [Act
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010), so God accompanied with power
His servant's words to His people. They had already seen God's words
fulfilled against the houses of Jeroboam I, of Baasha, of Ahab. That
same doom was now renewed against "the house of Jeroboam," and with it
the prophecy of the dispersion of the ten tribes [Amo
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#027); [Amo
7:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#008), [Amo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017), which Hosea contemporaneously
foretold [Hos 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006); [Hos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#017). The two prophets of Israel
confirmed one another, but also left themselves no escape. They staked
the whole reputation of their prophecy on this definite issue. We know
it to have been fulfilled on the house of Jeroboam; yet the house of
Jeroboam was firmer than any before or after it.

We know of the unaccustomed captivity of the ten tribes. Had they not
been carried captive, prophecy would have come to shame; and such in
proportion is its victory. Each step was an installment, a pledge, of
what followed. The death of Zechariah, Jeroboam's son, was the first
step in the fulfillment of the whole; then probably, in the invasion of
Pul against Menahem [Kg2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019),
followed the doom of Amaziah. God is not anxious to vindicate His word.
He does not, as to Shebna [Isa
22:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#017), or Amaziah, or the false
prophets Ahab, Zedekiah [Jer 29:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#020),
or Shemaiah [Jer 29:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#032), or Pashur [Jer
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#006), or other false prophets [Jer
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#015). At times, as in the case of
Hananiah [Jer 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#017), Scripture records
the individual fulfillment of God's judgments. Mostly, it passes by
unnoticed the execution of God's sentence. The sentence of the criminal,
unless reprieved, in itself implies the execution . The fact impressed
those who witnessed it; the record of the judgment suffices for us.

Then followed, under Tiglath-pileser, the fulfillment of the prophecy as
to Damascus [Amo 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005), and Gilead [Amo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014). Under Sargon was fulfilled the
prophecy on the ten tribes [Amo 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#027);
[Amo 7:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#008), [Amo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017); [Amo
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008). That on Judah [Amo
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#005) yet waited 133 years, and then was
fulfilled by Nebuchadnezzar. A few years later, and he executed God's
judgments foretold by Amos on their enemies, Moab, Ammon, Edom, Tyre
[Amo 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009); [Amo
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#003). [Amo
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006) : kings of Egypt, Assyria, and
the Macedonian Alexander the Great fulfilled in succession the prophecy
as to Philistia. So various were the human wills, so multitudinous the
events, which were to bring about the simple words of the
shepherd-prophet. Amos foretells the events; he does say, why the
judgments should come. Amos does not foretell when, or through whom the
judgments would come. Nevertheless, he foretells the events themselves
absolutely, and they came. Like Joel, he foretells the conversion of the
pagan and anticipates so far the prophecies of Isaiah, that God would
work this through the restoration of the house of David, when fallen. It
is a strange comment upon human greatness that the royal line was not to
be employed in the salvation of the world until it was fallen! The royal
palace had to become the hut of Nazareth before the Redeemer of the
world could be born, whose glory and kingdom were not of this world, who
came, to take nothing from us but our nature, that He might sanctify it,
our misery, that He might bear it for us. Yet flesh and blood could not
foresee it before it came, as flesh and blood could not believe it,
after He came.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 1](amo001)

</div>
