<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo007)  [Next](amo009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001)

[Amos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 8:1</span></span>

Thus hath the Lord God showed me - The sentence of Amaziah pronounced,
Amos resumes just where he left off, before Amaziah broke in upon him.
His vehement interruption is like a stone cast into the deep waters.
They close over it, and it leaves no trace. Amos had authenticated the
third vision; "Thus hath the Lord God shewed me." He resumes in the
self-same calm words. The last vision declared that the end was certain;
this, that it was at hand.

A basket of summer fruit - The fruit was the latest harvest in
Palestine. When it was gathered, the circle of husbandry was come to its
close. The sight gives an idea of completeness. The symbol, and the word
expressing it, coincide. The fruit-gathering קיץ qayits, like our
"crop," was called from "cutting." So was the word, "end," "cutting
off," in (קץ qêts). At harvest-time there is no more to be done for that
crop. Good or bad, it has reached its end, and is cut down. So the
harvest of Israel was come. The whole course of God's providences,
mercies, chastenings, visitations, instructions, warnings, in
spirations, were completed. "What could have been done more to My
vineyard, God asks [Isa 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004), that I
have not done in it?" "To the works of sin, as of holiness, there is a
beginning, progress, completion;" a "sowing of wild oats," as people
speak, and a ripening in wickedness; a maturity of people's plans, as
they deem; a maturity for destruction, in the sight of God. There was no
more to be done. heavenly influences can but injure the ripened sinner,
as dew, rain, sun, but injure the ripened fruit Israel was ripe, but for
destruction.

[Amos 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 8:3</span></span>

The songs of the temple shall be howlings - Literally, "shall howl." It
shall be, as when mirthful music is suddenly broken in upon, and,
through the sudden agony of the singer, ends in a shriek or yell of
misery. When sounds of joy are turned into wailing, all must be complete
sorrow. They are not hushed only, but are turned into their opposite.
Since Amos is speaking to, and of, Israel, "the temple" is, doubtless,
here the great idol-temple at Bethel, and "the songs" were the choral
music, with which they counterfeited the temple-music, as arranged by
David, praising (they could not make up their minds which,) Nature or
"the God of nature," but, in truth, worshiping the creature. The temple
was often strongly built and on a height, and, whether from a vague hope
of help from God, (as in the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans,) or from
some human trust, that the temple might be respected, or from confidence
in its strength, or from all together, was the last refuge of the
all-but-captive people. Their last retreat was often the scene of the
last reeling strife, the battle-cry of the assailants, the shrieks of
the defenseless, the groans of the wounded, the agonized cry of
unyielding despair. Some such scene the prophet probably had before his
mind's eye, for he adds;

There shall be "many dead bodies," literally, "Many the corpse in every
place." He sees it, not as future, but before him. The whole city, now
so thronged with life, "the oppressor's wrong, the proud man's
contumely," lies before him as one scene of death; every place thronged
with corpses; none exempt; at home, abroad, or, which he had just spoken
of, the temple; no time, no place for honorable burial. "They,"
literally, "he casts forth, hush!" Each casts forth those dear to him,
as "dung on the face of the earth" ([Jer
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#002), etc.). Grief is too strong for
words. Living and dead are hushed as the grave. "Large cities are large
solitudes," for want of mutual love; in God's retribution, all their din
and hum becomes anew a solitude.

[Amos 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 8:4</span></span>

Here ye this, ye that swallow - Or, better in the same sense, "that pant
for the needy;" as Job says, "the hireling panteth for the evening" [Job
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#002). They "panted for the poor," as
the wild beast for its prey; and "that to make the poor" or (better, as
the Hebrew text,) "the meek" , those not poor only, but who, through
poverty and affliction, are "poor in spirit" also, "to fail." The land
being divided among all the inhabitants, they, in order "to lay field to
field" [Isa 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008), had to rid themselves
of the poor. They did rid themselves of them by oppression of all sorts.

[Amos 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 8:5</span></span>

When will the new moon be gone? - They kept their festivals, though
weary and impatient for their close. They kept sabbath and festival with
their bodies, not with their minds. The Psalmist said, "When shall I
come to appear before the presencc of God?" [Psa
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002). These said, perhaps in their
hearts only which God reads to them, "when will this service be over,
that we may be our own masters again?" They loathed the rest of the
sabbath, because they had, thereon, to rest from their frauds. He
instances "the new moons" and "sabbaths," because these, recurring
weekly or monthly, were a regular hindrance to their covetousness.

The "ephah" was a measure containing 72 Roman pints or nearly 1 1/10 of
an English bushel; the shekel was a fixed weight, by which, up to the
time of the captivity [Sa2 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#012); [Kg1
20:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#039); [Jer
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#009), money was still weighed; and
that, for the price of bread also [Isa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002). They increased the price both
ways, dishonestly and in hypocrisy, paring down the quantity which they
sold, and obtaining more silver by fictitious weights; and weighing in
uneven balances. All such dealings had been expressly forbidden by God;
and that, as the condition of their remaining in the land which God had
given them. "Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and
a small. Thou shalt not have in thy house divers measures, a great and a
small. But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight; a perfect and just
measure shalt thou have, that thy days may be lengthened in the land
which the Lord thy God giveth thee" [Deu
25:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013).

Sin in wrong measures, once begun is unbroken. All sin perpetuates
itself. It is done again, because it has been done before. But sins of a
man's daily occupation are continued of necessity, beyond the simple
force of habit and the ever-increasing dropsy of covetousness. To
interrupt sin is to risk detection. But then how countless the sins,
which their poor slaves must needs commit hourly, whenever the occasion
comes! And yet, although among us human law recognizes the divine law
and annexes punishment to its breach, covetousness sets both at nought.
When human law was enforced in a city after a time of negligence,
scarcely a weight was found to be honest. Prayer went up to God on "the
sabbath," and fraud on the poor went up to God in every transaction on
the other six days. We admire the denunciations of Amos, and condemn the
makebelieve service of God. Amos denounces us, and we condemn ourselves.
Righteous dealing in weights and measures was one of the conditions of
the existence of God's former people. What must then be our national
condition before God, when, from this one sin, so many thousand,
thousand sins go up daily to plead against us to God?

[Amos 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 8:6</span></span>

That we may buy - Or, indignantly, "To buy the poor!" literally, "the
afflicted," those in "low" estate. First, by dishonesty and oppression
they gained their lands and goods. Then the poor were obliged to sell
themselves. The slight price, for which a man was sold, showed the more
contempt for "the image of God." Before, he said, "the needy" were "sold
for a pair of sandals" [Amo 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006); here,
that they were bought for them. It seems then the more likely that such
was a real price for man.

And sell the refuse - Literally, the "falling of wheat," that is, what
fell through the sieve, either the bran, or the thin, unfilled, grains
which had no meal in them. This they mixed up largely with the meal,
making a gain of that which they had once sifted out as worthless; or
else, in a time of dearth, they sold to people what was the food of
animals, and made a profit on it. Infancy and inexperience of cupidity,
which adulterated its bread only with bran, or sold to the poor only
what, although unnourishing, was wholesome! But then, with the
multiplied hard-dealing, what manifoldness of the woe!

[Amos 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 8:7</span></span>

By the excellency of Jacob - that is, by Himself who was its Glory, as
Samuel calls Him "the Strength" [Sa1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029) or the Glory of Israel. Amos had
before said, "God sware by His Holiness" and "by Himself" or "His soul."
Now, in like way, He pledges that Glory wherewith He was become the
Glory of His people. He reminds them, who was the sole Source of their
glory; not their calves, but Himself, their Creator; and that He would
not forget their deeds. "I will not forget any," literally, "all;" as
David and Paul say, "all flesh," all living men, "shall not be
justified," that is, none, no one, neither the whole nor any of its
parts. Amos brings before the mind all their actions, and then says of
all and each, the Lord will not forget them. God must cease to be God,
if He did not do what He sware to do, punish the oppressors and
defrauders of the poor.

[Amos 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 8:8</span></span>

Shall not the land tremble for this? - o: "For the greater
impressiveness, he ascribes to the insensate earth sense, indignation,
horror, trembling. For all creation feels the will of its Creator." "It
shall rise up wholly as a flood," literally, "like the river." It is the
Egyptian name for "river, which Israel brought with it out of Egypt, and
is used either for the Nile, or for one of the artificial "trenches,"
derived from it. "And it shall be cast out and drowned," literally,
"shall toss to and fro" as the sea, "and sink as the river of Egypt."
The prophet represents the land as heaving like the troubled sea. As the
Nile rose, and its currents met and drove one against the other, covered
and drowned the whole land like one vast sea, and then sank again, so
the earth should rise, lift up itself, and heave and quake, shaking off
the burden of man's oppressions, and sink again. It may be, he would
describe the heaving, the rising and falling, of an earthquake. Perhaps,
he means that as a man forgat all the moral laws of nature, so inanimate
nature should be freed from its wonted laws, and shake out its
inhabitants or overwhelm them by an earthquake, as in one grave.

[Amos 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 8:9</span></span>

I will cause the sun to go down - Darkness is heaviest and blackest in
contrast with the brightest light; sorrow is saddest, when it comes upon
fearless joy. God commonly, in His mercy, sends heralds of coming
sorrow; very few burst suddenly on man. Now, in the meridian brightness
of the day of Israel, the blackness of night should fall at once upon
him. Not only was light to be displaced by darkness, but "then," when it
was most opposite to the course of nature. Not by gradual decay, but by
a sudden unlooked-for crash, was Israel to perish. Pekah was a military
chief; he had reigned more than seventeen years over Israel in peace,
when, together with Rezin king of Damascus, he attempted to extirpate
the line of David, and to set a Syrian, one "on of Tabea" [Isa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#006), on his throne. Ahaz was weak,
with no human power to resist; his "heart was moved, and the heart of
his people, as the trees of the forest are moved with the wind" [Isa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002). Tiglath-pileser came upon Pekah
and carried off the tribes beyond Jordan [Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029). Pekah's sun set, and all was
night with no dawn. Shortly after, Pekah himself was murdered by Hoshea
[Kg2 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030), as he had himself murdered
Pekahiah. After an anarchy of nine years, Hoshea established himself on
the throne; the nine remaining years were spent in the last convulsive
efforts of an expiring monarchy, subdual to Shalmaneser, rebellious
alliance with So, king of Egypt, a three years' siege, and the lamp went
out [Kg2 17:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001).

And I will darken the earth at noon-day - To the mourner "all nature
seems to mourn." "Not the ground only," says Chrysostom in the troubles
at Antioch , "but the very substance of the air, and the orb of the
solar rays itself seems to me now in a manner to mourn and to shew a
duller light. Not that the elements change their nature, but that our
eyes, confused by a cloud of sorrow, cannot receive the light from it's
rays purely, nor are they alike impressible. This is what the prophet of
old said mourning, 'Their sun shall set to them at noon, and the day
shall be darkened.' Not that the sun was hidden, or the day disappeared,
but that tile mourners could see no light even in mid-day, for the
darkness of their grief." No eclipse of the sun, in which the sun might
seem to be shrouded in darkness at mid-day, has been calculated which
should have suggested this image to the prophet's mind.

It had been thought, however, that there might be reference to an
eclipse of the sun which took place a few years after this prophecy,
namely, Feb. 9. 784, b.c. the year of the death of Jeroboam II. This
eclipse did reach its height at Jerusalem a little before mid-day, at
11:24 a.m..

An accurate calculation, however, shows that, although total in southern
latitudes, the line of totality was, at the longitude of Jerusalem or
Samaria, about 11 degrees south Latitude, and so above 43 degrees south
of Samaria, and that it did not reach the same latitude as Samaria until
near the close of the eclipse, about 64 degrees west of Samaria in the
easternmost part of Thibet . : "The central eclipse commenced in the
southern Atlantic Ocean, passed nearly exactly over Helena , reached the
continent of Africa in Lower Guinea, traversed the interior of Africa,
and left it near Zanzibar, went through the Indian Ocean and entered
India in the Gulf of Gambay, passed between Agra and Allahabad into
Tibet and reached its end on the frontiers of China." The eclipse then
would hardly have been noticeable at Samaria, certainly very far indeed
from being an eclipse of such magnitude, as could in any degree
correspond with the expression, "I will cause the sun to go down at
noon."

Ussher suggests, if true, a different coincidence. "There was an eclipse
of the sun of about 10 digits in the Julian year 3923 (791 b.c.,) June
24, in the Feast of Pentecost; another, of about 12 digits, 20 years
afterward, 3943, 771 b.c., Nov. 8, on the Day of the Feast of
Tabernacles; and a third of more than 11 digits, on the following year
3944, May 5, on the Feast of the Passover. Consider whether that
prophecy of Amos does not relate to it, "I will cause the sun to go down
at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day, and I will turn
your feasts into mourning."

Which, as the Christian fathers have adapted in an allegorical sense to
the darkness at the time of our Lord's Passion in the Feast of the
Passover, so it may have been fulfilled, in the letter, in these three
great eclipses, which darkened the day of the three festivals in which
all the males were bound to appear before the Lord. So that as, among
the Greeks, Thales, first, by astronomical science, predicted eclipses
of the sun , so, among the Hebrews, Amos first seems to have foretold
them by inspiration of the Holy Spirit." The eclipses, pointed out by
Ussher, must have been the one total, the others very considerable .
Beforehand, one should not have expected that an eclipsc of the sun,
being itself a regular natural phaenomenon, and having no connection
with the moral government of God, should have been the subject of the
prophet's prediction.

Still it had a religious impressiveness then, above what it has now, on
account of that wide-prevailing idolatry of the sun. It exhibited the
object of their false worship, shorn of its light and passive. If Ussher
is right as to the magnitude of those eclipses in the latitude of
Jerusalem, and as to the correspondence of the days of the solar year,
June 24, Nov. 8, May 5, in those years, with the days of the lunar year
upon which the respective feasts fell, it would be a remarkable
correspondence. Still the years are somewhat arbitrarily chosen, the
second only 771 b.c., (on which the house of Jehu came to an end through
the murder of the weak and sottish Zechariah,) corresponding with any
marked event in the kingdom of Israel. On the other hand, it is the more
likely that the words, "I will cause the sun to go down at noon," are an
image of a sudden reverse, in that Micah also uses the words as an
image, "the sun shall go down upon the prophets and the day shall be
dark upon" (or, "over") "them" [Mic
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#006).

[Amos 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 8:10</span></span>

I will turn your feasts into mourning - He recurs to the sentence which
he had pronounced [Amo 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#003), before he
described the avarice and oppression which brought it down. Hosea too
had foretold, "I will cause all her mirth to cease, her feast-days, etc"
[Hos 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#011). So Jeremiah describes, "the
joy of our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into mourning" [Lam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#015). The Book of Tobit bears witness
how these sayings of Amos lived in the hearts of the captive Israelites.
The word of God seems oftentimes to fail, yet it finds those who are
His. "I remembered," he said, "that prophecy of Amos, your feasts shall
be turned into mourning" (Tobit 2:6).

The correspondence of these words with the miracle at our Blessed Lord's
Passion, in that "the earth was darkened in the clear day, at noon-day,"
was noticed by the earliest fathers , and that the more, since it took
place at the Feast of the Passover, and, in punishment for that sin,
their "feasts were turned into mourning," in the desolation of their
country and the cessation of their worship.

I will bring up sackcloth - (that is, the rough coarse haircloth, which,
being fastened with the girdle tight over the loins (see above [Joe
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008), [Joe
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013), pp. 107, 109), was wearing to
the frame) "and baldness upon every head." The mourning of the Jews was
no half-mourning, no painless change of one color of becoming dress for
another. For the time, they were dead to the world or to enjoyment. As
the clothing was coarse, uncomely, distressing, so they laid aside every
ornament, the ornament of their hair also (as English widows used, on
the same principle, to cover it). They shore it off; each sex, what was
the pride of their sex; the men, their beards; the women, their long
hair. The strong words, "baldness, is balded [Jer
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#006), shear [Mic
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016); [Jer
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029), hew off, enlarge thy baldness" ,
are used to show the completeness of this expression of sorrow. None
exempted themselves in the universal sorrow; "on every head" came up
"baldness."

And I will make it - (probably, the whole state and condition of things,
everything, as we use our "it") as the mourning of an only son As, when
God delivered Israel from Egypt, "there was not," among the Egyptians:
"a house where there was not one dead [Exo
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#030), and one universal cry arose
from end to end of the land, so now too in apostate Israel. The whole
mourning should be the one most grievous mourning of parents, over the
one child in whom they themselves seemed anew to live.

And the end thereof as a bitter day - Most griefs have a rest or pause,
or wear themselves out. "The end" of this should be like the beginning,
nay, one concentrated grief, a whole day of bitter grief summed up in
its close. It was to be no passing trouble, but one which should end in
bitterness, an unending sorrow and destruction; image of the undying
death in hell.

[Amos 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 8:11</span></span>

Not a famine for bread - He does not deny that there should be bodily
famine too; but this, grievous as it is, would be less grievous than the
famine of which he speaks, "the famine of the word of the Lord." In
distress we all go to God. Rib.: "They who now cast out and despise the
prophets, when they shall see themselves besieged by the enemy, shall be
tormented with a great hunger of hearing the word of the Lord from the
mouths of the prophets, and shall find no one to lighten their
distresses. This was most sad to the people of God; 'we see not our
tokens; there is not one prophet more; there is not one with us who
understandeth, how long!' [Psa 74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009)."
Even the profane, when they see no help, will have recourse to God.
Saul, in his extremity, "inquired of the Lord and He answered him not,
neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets" [Sa1
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#006). Jeroboam sent his wife to
inquire of the prophet Ahijah about his son's health [Kg1
14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#002). They sought for temporal
relief only, and therefore found it not.

[Amos 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 8:12</span></span>

They shall wander - Literally, "reel." The word is used of the reeling
of drunkards, of the swaying to and fro of trees in the wind, of the
quivering of the lips of one agitated, and then of the unsteady seeking
of persons bewildered, looking for what they know not where to find.
"From sea to sea," from the sea of Galilee to the Mediterranean, that
is, from east to west, "and from the north even to the sunrising," round
again to the east, from where their search had begun, where light should
be, and was not. It may be, that Amos refers to the description of the
land by Moses, adapting it to the then separate condition of Ephraim,
"your south border shall be from the extremity of the Salt Sea (Dead
Sea) eastward - and the goings out of it shall be at the sea, and for
the western border ye shall have the great sea for a border. And this
shall be your north border - and the border shall descend and shall
reach to the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward" [Num
34:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#003). Amos does not mention "the
south," because "there" alone, where they might have found, where the
true worship of God was, they did not seek. Had they sought God in
Judah, instead of seeking to aggrandize themselves by its subdual,
Tiglath-pileser would probably never have come against them. One
expedition only in the seventeen years of his reign was directed
westward , and that was at the petition of Ahaz.

The principle of God's dealings, that, in certain conditions of a sinful
people, He will withdraw His word, is instanced in Israel, not limited
to it. God says to Ezekiel, "I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof
of thy mouth, and thou shalt be dumb; and shalt not be to them a
reprover, for it is a rebellious house" [Eze
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#026); and Ezekiel says, "Destruction
shall come upon destruction, and rumor shall be upon rumor, and they
shall seek a vision from the prophet, and the law shall perish from the
priest and counsel from the ancients" [Eze
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#026). : "God turns away from them, and
checks the grace of prophecy. For since they neglected His law, He on
His side, stays the prophetic gift. "And the word was precious in those
days, there was no open vision," that is, God did not speak to them
through the prophets; He breathed not upon them the Spirit through which
they spake. He did not appear to them, but is silent and hidden. There
was silence, enmity between God and man."

[Amos 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 8:13</span></span>

In this hopelessness as to all relief, those too shall fail and sink
under their sufferings, in whom life is freshest and strongest and hope
most buoyant. Hope mitigates any sufferings. When hope is gone, the
powers of life, which it sustains, give way. "They shall faint for
thirst," literally, "shall be mantled over, covered" , as, in fact, one
fainting seems to feel as if a veil came over his brow and eyes.
"Thirst," as it is an intenser suffering than bodily hunger, includes
sufferings of body and mind. If even over those, whose life was firmest,
a veil came, and they fainted for thirst, what of the rest?

[Amos 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 8:14</span></span>

Who swear - Literally, "the swearing," they who habitually swear. He
assigns, at the end, the ground of all this misery, the forsaking of
God. God had commanded that all appeals by oath should be made to
Himself, who alone governs the world, to whom alone His creatures owe
obedience, who alone revenges. "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God and
serve Him and swear by His Name" [Deu
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013); [Deu
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020). On the other hand Joshua warned
them, "Neither make mention of the name of their gods nor cause to swear
by them nor serve them" [Jos 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#007). But
these "sware by the sin of Samaria," probably "the calf at Bethel,"
which was near Samaria and the center of their idolatry, from where
Hosea calls it "thy calf." "Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off. The
calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces" [Hos
8:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005). He calls it "the guilt of
Samaria," as the source of all their guilt, as it is said of the princes
of Judah using this same word, "they left the house of the Lord God of
their fathers, and served idols, and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem
for this their trespass" [Ch2 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#018).
"And say, thy god, O Dan! liveth," that is, as surely as thy god liveth!
by the life of thy god! as they who worshiped God said, "as the Lord
liveth!" It was a direct substitution of the creature for the Creator,
an ascribing to it the attribute of God; "as the Father hath life in
Himself" [Joh 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026). It was an appeal
to it, as the Avenger of false-swearing, as though it were the moral
Governor of the world.

The manner of Beersheba liveth! - Literally, "the way." This may be,
either the religion and worship of the idol there, as Paul says, "I
persecuted this way unto the death" ([Act
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#004), add [Act
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002); [Act
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009), [Act
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023)), from where Muhammed learned to
speak of his imposture, as "the way of God." Or it might mean the actual
"way to Beersheba," and may signify all the idolatrous places of worship
in the way there. They seem to have made the way there one long avenue
of idols, culminating in it. For Josiah, in his great destruction of
idolatry, "gathered all the priests from the cities of Judah, and
defiled the high places, where the priests sacrificed from Gebah to
Beersheba" [Kg2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008); only, this may
perhaps simply describe the whole territory of Judah from north to
south. Anyhow, Beersheba stands for the god worshiped there, as, "whoso
sware by the Temple, sware," our Lord tells us, "by it and by Him that
dwelleth therein" [Mat 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#021).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 9](amo009)

</div>
