<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1011)  [Next](co1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 12:0</span></span>

This chapter commences a new subject, the discussion of which continues
to the close of the 1 Cor. 14. The general subject is that of spiritual
endowments, or the right mode of exercising their spiritual gifts, and
the degree of honor which was due to those who had been distinguished by
God by the special influences of his Spirit. It is evident that many in
the church at Corinth had been thus favored; and it is evident that they
had greatly abused these endowments, and that those who were thus
favored had claimed a precedency of honor above those who had been less
distinguished. It is not improbable that they had in their letter to
Paul (see the note at [Co1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001)),
requested his counsel on this subject, and asked him to teach them what
measure of honor should be given to those who had been thus endowed.
This subject, as it was of importance not only for them, but for the
church at large in all future times, he proceeds to discuss in this, and
the two following chapters; and this discussion closes the second part
of the Epistle; see the Introduction. The general scope of these
chapters is this:

\(1\) He shows that all those endowments were conferred by the Holy
Spirit, and were all for the use of the church; that the church was one,
but that there was a necessity for diversified operations in that
church; and that, therefore, no one should value himself on that gift
above his brother, and no one should feel himself dishonored because he
had not been thus favored. All filled important places in the church,
just as the various members and parts of the human system were necessary
for its symmetry, action and health; and all therefore, should be
willing to occupy the place which God had assigned them, 1 Cor. 12.

\(2\) in [Co1 13:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001) he recommends
love, or charity, as of more value than all other spiritual gifts put
together, and therefore recommends that that should be especially the
object of their desire.

\(3\) in 1 Cor. 14 he gives particular rules about the proper exercise
of spiritual gifts in their public assemblies.

This chapter, therefore, is occupied in stating and illustrating the
position that all spiritual gifts are conferred by the Holy Spirit, and
that no one should so value himself on this gift as to despise those who
had not been thus endowed; and that no one who had not thus been favored
should be dejected, or regard himself as dishonored. This statement is
illustrated in the following manner:

\(1\) Paul states the importance of the subject, [Co1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001).

\(2\) he reminds them that they were formerly in a state of ignorance,
sin, and idolatry, [Co1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002).

\(3\) he states one mark of being under the influence of the Spirit of
God - that is, that it would lead them to acknowledge and honor Jesus
Christ. If the Spirit by which they were influenced led them to this, it
was proof that it was the Holy Spirit, [Co1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003). If any "pretenders" to
inspiration were in the habit of speaking disrespectfully of Jesus
Christ, or of calling him "accursed," it proved that they were not under
the influence of the Holy Spirit.

\(4\) there were "diversities" in the operations of the Spirit, but
however various were these operations, they all proceeded from the same
agent, [Co1 12:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004). All were not,
therefore, to expect precisely the same influences or operations; nor
were they to suppose that because there were various operations, that
therefore they were not influenced by the Spirit of God.

\(5\) Paul states and illustrates the truth that the church is one, 1Co.
12:12-27. As the body is one, yet has many members, so is it with the
church, [Co1 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012). The body has many
members, and no members in the body are useless, but all perform
important parts, however unimportant they may seem to be; and no one
member can say that it has no need of the others. So it is in the
church, [Co1 12:13-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013).

\(6\) this beautiful allegory, drawn from the functions of the various
parts of the human body, Paul applies now to the church, and shows [Co1
12:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028) that the same thing should be
expected in the church of Christ. It followed, therefore, that those who
were not as highly favored as others should not regard themselves as
useless, and decline their station in the church. It followed also, that
those who were in inferior stations should not envy those who had been
more highly favored; and that those who were in more elevated stations,
and who had been more signally favored, should not look down on those
beneath them with contempt. It followed also, that they should regard
themselves as one body; and love and cherish each other with constant
Christian affection.

\(7\) Paul tells them that it was not improper to desire the highest
endowments, but says that he will propose an object of desire to be
preferred to these gifts - and that is love, [Co1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031).

[1 Corinthians 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 12:1</span></span>

Now concerning - it is now time that I should speak of spiritual
endowments. He had no doubt been consulted in regard to them, and
probably various questions had been proposed, which he now proceeded to
answer.

Spiritual gifts - The word "gifts" is not in the original. The Greek
refers to "spiritual" things in general, or to anything that is of a
spiritual nature. The whole discussion, however, shows that he refers to
the various endowments, gifts, or graces that had been bestowed in
different degrees on the members of the church - including the
distinctions in graces, and in degrees of office and rank, which had
been made in the Christian church in general 1 Cor. 12, as well as the
extraordinary endowments of the gift of tongues which had been bestowed
upon many, 1 Cor. 14.

I would not have you ignorant - The subject is of so much importance
that it demands particular attention and special care; compare the note
at [Co1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001). I would not have you
ignorant in regard to the nature of those endowments; the spirit with
which they should be received; the rules to which they who are thus
favored should be subjected; and the feelings and views which should be
cherished in all the members of the church in regard to them. Nothing is
of more importance in the church than the doctrine respecting the
influences and endowments of the Holy Spirit.

[1 Corinthians 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 12:2</span></span>

Ye know ... - This verse is regarded by many as a parenthesis. But it is
not necessary to suppose that it is so, or that it does not cohere with
that which follows. The design seems to be to remind them of their
former miserable condition as idolaters, in order to make them more
sensible of their advantages as Christians, and that they might be led
more highly to appreciate their present condition. Paul often refers
Christians to their former condition, to excite in them gratitude for
the mercies that God has conferred on them in the gospel; see the note
at [Co1 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011), compare [Rom
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017); [Eph
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011); [Tit
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003).

That ye were Gentiles - Heathen; worshippers of idols. The idea is, that
they were pagans; that they had no knowledge of the true God, but were
sunk in miserable superstition and idolatry.

Carried away - Led along; that is, deluded by your passions, deluded by
your priests, deluded by your vain and splendid rites of worship. The
whole system made an appeal to the senses, and "bore along" its votaries
as if by a foreign and irresistible impulse. The word which is used
ἀπαγόμενοι apagomenoi conveys properly the idea of being carried into
bondage, or being led to punishment, and refers here doubtless to the
strong means which had been used by crafty politicians and priests in
their former state to delude and deceive them.

Unto these dumb idols - These idols which could not speak - an attribute
which is often given to them, to show the folly of worshipping them;
[Psa 115:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005); [Psa
135:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#015); [Hab
2:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018). The ancient priests and
politicians deluded the people with the notion that oracles were uttered
by the idols whom they worshipped, and thus they maintained the belief
in their divinity. The idea of Patti here seems to be:

\(1\) That their idols never could have uttered the oracles which were
ascribed to them, and consequently that they had been deluded.

\(2\) that these idols could never have endowed them with such spiritual
privileges as they now had, and consequently that their present state
was far preferable to their former condition.

Even as ye were led - Were led by the priests in the temples of the
idols. They were under strong delusions and the arts of cunning and
unprincipled people. The idea is, that they had been under a strong
infatuation, and were entirely at the control of their spiritual leaders
- a description remarkably applicable now to all forms of imposture in
the world, No system of paganism consults the freedom and independence
of the mind of man; but it is everywhere characterized as a system of
"power," and not of "thought;" and all its arrangements are made to
secure that power without an intelligent assent of the understanding and
the heart.

[1 Corinthians 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 12:3</span></span>

Wherefore I give you to understand - I make known to you. The force of
this expression is, "I give you this rule to distinguish," or by which
you may know what influences and operations are from God. The design of
the passage is, to give them some simple general guide by which they
could at once recognize the operations of the Spirit of God, and
determine whether they who claimed to be under that operation were
really so. That rule was, that all who were truly influenced by the Holy
Spirit would be disposed to acknowledge and to know Jesus Christ; and
where this disposition existed, it was of itself a clear demonstration
that it was the operation of the Spirit of God. The same rule
substantially is given by John [Jo1
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#002), by which to test the nature of
the spirit by which people profess to be influenced. "Hereby know ye the
Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh is of God," compare also the note to [Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017).

That no man - No one οἰδεὶς oideis. It may refer to a man, or to demons,
or to those who pretended to be under inspiration of any kind. And it
may refer to the Jews who may have pretended to be under the influence
of God's Spirit. and who yet anathematized and cursed the name of Jesus.
Or it may be intended simply as a general rule; meaning that "if
anyone," whoever he might be, should blaspheme the name of Jesus,
whatever were his pretensions, whether professing to be under the
influence of the Holy Spirit among the Jews, or to be inspired among the
Gentiles, it was full proof that he was an impostor. The argument is,
that the Holy Spirit in all instances would do honor to Jesus Christ,
and would prompt all who were under his influence to love and reverence
his name.

Speaking by the Spirit of God - Under the influence of inspiration.

Calleth - Says, or would say; that is, no such one would use the
language of anathema in regard to him.

Accursed - Margin, "Anathema" (ἀνάθημα anathēma); see the [Act
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#014) note; [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003) note; compare [Co1
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022); [Gal
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008). The word is one of execration,
or cursing; and means, that no one under the influence of the Holy
Spirit could curse the name of Jesus, or denounce him as execrable and
as an impostor. The effect of the influences of the Spirit would be in
all instances to inspire reverence for his name and work. It is probable
that the Jews were here principally intended, since there is a
bitterness and severity in the language which accords with all their
expressions of feeling toward Jesus of Nazareth. It is possible, also,
and indeed probable, that the priests and priestesses of the pagan gods
who pretended to be under the influence of inspiration might denounce
the name of Jesus, because they would all be opposed to the purity of
his religion.

And that no man can say ... - That is, that it cannot occur, or even
happen, that anyone will acknowledge Jesus as the Messiah who is not
influenced by the Holy Spirit. The meaning is, not that no one has
physical ability to say that Jesus is Lord unless aided by the Holy
Spirit, since all people can say this; but that no one will be disposed
heartily to say it; no one will acknowledge him as their Lord; it can
never happen that anyone will confess him as the true Messiah who has
not been brought to this state by the agency of the Holy Spirit.

Is the Lord - Is the Messiah; or shall acknowledge him as their Lord.

But by the Holy Ghost - Unless he is influenced by the Holy Spirit. This
is a very important verse, not only in regard to the particular subject
under consideration in the time of Paul, but also in its practical
bearing at present. We may learn from it:

\(1\) That it is a proof that any man is under the influence of the Holy
Spirit who is heartily disposed to honor the name and work of Jesus
Christ.

\(2\) those forms and modes of religion; those religious opinions and
practices, will be most in accordance with the designs of the Spirit of
God, which do most to honor the name and work of Jesus Christ.

\(3\) it is true that no man will ever cherish a proper regard for Jesus
Christ, nor love his name and work, unless he is influenced by the Holy
Spirit. No man loves the name and work of the Redeemer by following
simply the inclinations of his own corrupt heart. In all instances of
those who have been brought to a willingness to honor him, it has been
by the agency of the Holy Spirit.

\(4\) if any man, in any way, is disposed to disparage the work of
Christ, to speak lightly of his person or his name; or holds doctrines
that infringe on the fulness of the truth respecting his divine nature,
his purity, his atonement, it is proof that he is not under the
influence of the Spirit of God. Just in proportion as he shall disparage
that work or name, just in that proportion does he give evidence that he
is not influenced by the Divine Spirit; but by proud reason, or by
imagination, or by a heart that is not reconciled to God.

\(5\) all true religion is the production of the Holy Spirit. For
religion consists essentially in a willingness to honor, and love, and
serve the Lord Jesus Christ; and where that exists, it is produced by
the Holy Spirit.

\(6\) the influence of the Holy Spirit should be cherished. To grieve
away that Spirit is to drive all proper knowledge of the Redeemer from
the soul; to do this is to leave the heart to coldness, and darkness,
and barrenness, and spiritual death.

[1 Corinthians 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 12:4</span></span>

Now there are diversities of gifts - There are different endowments
conferred on Christians. For the meaning of the word "gifts," see the
note at [Rom 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011); compare [Rom
5:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015); [Rom
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023); [Rom
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029); [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006); [Co1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007); [Co1
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007).

But the same Spirit - Produced by the same Spirit - the Holy Spirit.
What those diversities of gifts are, the apostle enumerates in [Co1
12:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008). The design for which he
refers to these various endowments is evidently to show those whom he
addressed, that since they are all produced by the same Holy Spirit,
have all the same divine origin, and are all intended to answer some
important purpose and end in the Christian church, that, therefore, none
are to be despised; nor is one man to regard himself as authorized to
treat another with contempt. The Spirit has divided and conferred those
gifts according to his sovereign will; and his arrangements should be
regarded with submission, and the favors which he confers should be
received with thankfulness. That the Holy Spirit - the third person of
the adorable Trinity - is here intended by the word "Spirit," seems to
be manifest on the face of the passage, and has been the received
interpretation of the church until it was called in question by some
recent German commentators, at the head of whom was Eichhorn. It is not
the design of these notes to go into an examination of questions of
criticism, such as an inquiry like this would involve. Nor is it
necessary. Some of the arguments by which the common interpretation is
defended are the following:

\(1\) It is the obvious interpretation. It is that which occurs to the
great mass of readers, as the true and correct exposition.

\(2\) it accords with the usual meaning of the word Spirit. No other
intelligible sense can be given to the word here. To say, with Eichhorn,
that it means "nature," that there are the same natural endowments,
though cultivated in various measures by art and education, makes
manifest nonsense, and is contrary to the whole structure and scope of
the passage.

\(3\) it accords with all the other statements in the New Testament,
where the endowments here referred to "wisdom," "knowledge," "faith,"
"working of miracles," etc., are traced to the Holy Spirit, and are
regarded as his gift.

\(4\) the harmony, the concinnity of the passage is destroyed by
supposing that it refers to anything else than the Holy Spirit. In this
verse the agency of the Spirit is recognized, and his operations on the
mind referred to; in the next verse the agency of the Son of God (see
the note on the verse) is referred to; and in the following verse, the
agency of God - evidently the Father - is brought into view; and thus
the entire passage [Co1 12:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)
presents a connected view of the operations performed by the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit in the work of redemption. To deny that this verse
refers to the Holy Spirit is to break up the harmony of the whole
passage, and to render it in no small degree unmeaning. But if this
refers to the Holy Spirit, then it is an unanswerable argument for his
personality, and for his being on an equality with the Father and the
Son.

[1 Corinthians 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 12:5</span></span>

Of administrations - Margin, "Ministries." The word properly denotes
"ministries;" so that there are different ranks and grades in the
ministries which Christ has appointed, to wit, those specified in [Co1
12:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009), [Co1
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028).

But the same Lord - This refers evidently to the Lord Jesus, by whom
these various orders of ministers were appointed, and under whose
control they are; see the note at [Act
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024); compare [Eph
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005). The term "Lord," when it stands
by itself in the New Testament, usually refers to the Lord Jesus, the
name by which he was commonly known by the disciples; see [Joh
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025). The fact also that this stands
between the mention of the work of the Spirit [Co1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004) and the work of God [Co1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006), and the fact that to the Lord
Jesus appertained the appointment of these various grades of officers in
the church (compare [Mat 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001) ff, and
[Luk 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001) ff), is further proof that
this refers to him. The design of the verse is, to show that all these
offices had their appointment from him; and that since all were his
appointment, and all were necessary, no one should be proud of an
elevated station; no one should be depressed, or feel himself degraded,
because he had been designated to a more humble office.

[1 Corinthians 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 12:6</span></span>

Of operations - Of works; to wit, of miracles, such as God produces in
the church, in the establishment and defense of his religion. There are
different operations on the mind and heart; and different powers given
to man, or different qualifications in building up and defending his
cause. Or it may be, possibly, that Paul here refers to the works of God
mainly for mere "illustration," and by the word "operations" means the
works which God has performed in creation and providence. His works are
various. They are not all alike, though they come from the same hand.
The sun, the moon, the stars, the earth are different; the trees of the
forest, the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, the inhabitants
of the deep are different; the flowers, and shrubs, and herbs are
different from each other; yet. however much they may vary, they are
formed by the same hand. are the productions of the same God, are to be
regarded as proofs of the same wisdom and power. The same thing should
be expected in his church; and we should anticipate that the endowments
of its members would be various.

But it is the same God - The same Father; all these operations are
produced by the same God. They should not, therefore, be undervalued or
despised; nor should anyone be unduly elated, or pride himself on what
has been conferred by God alone.

All in all - All these operations are to be traced to him. His agency is
everywhere. It is as really seen in the insect's wing as in the limbs of
the mammoth; as really in the humblest violet as in the loftiest oak of
the forest. All, therefore, should regard themselves as under his
direction, and should submit to his arrangements. If people regard their
endowments as the gift of God, they will be thankful for them, and they
will not be disposed to despise or undervalue others who have been
placed in a more humble condition and rank in the church.

[1 Corinthians 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 12:7</span></span>

But the manifestation of the Spirit - The word "manifestation"
(φανέρωτις fanerōtis) means properly that which makes manifest,
conspicuous, or plain; that which illustrates, or makes any thing seen
or known. Thus, conduct manifests the state of the heart; and the
actions are a manifestation, or "showing forth" of the real feelings.
The idea here is, that there is given to those referred to, such gifts.
endowments, or graces as shall "manifest" the work and nature of the
Spirit's operations on the mind; such endowments as the Spirit makes
himself known by to people. All that he produces in the mind is a
manifestation of his character and work, in the same way as the works of
God in the visible creation are a manifestation of his perfections.

Is given to every man - To every man whose case is here under
consideration. The idea is not at all that the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to all people indiscriminately, to pagans, and infidels,
and scoffers as well as to Christians. The apostle is discoursing only
of those who are Christians, and his declaration should be confined to
them alone. Whatever may be true of other people, this statement should
be confined wholly to Christians, and means simply that the Spirit of
God gives to each Christian such graces and endowments as he pleases;
that he distributes his gifts to all, not equally, but in a manner which
he shall choose; and that the design of this is, that all Christians
should use his endowments for the common good. This passage, therefore,
is very improperly adduced to prove that the gifts and graces of the
Holy Spirit are conferred alike on all people, and that pagans, and
blasphemers, and sinners in general are under his enlightening
influences. It has no reference to any such doctrine, but should be
interpreted as referring solely to Christians, and the various
endowments which are conferred on them.

To profit withal - (πρὸς τὸ συμθέρον pros to sumtheron). Unto profit;
that is, for utility, or use; or to be an advantage to the church; for
the common good of all. This does not mean that each one must cultivate
and improve his graces and gifts, however true that may be, but that
they are to be used for the common good of the church; they are bestowed
"for utility," or "profit;" they are conferred in such measures and in
such a manner as are best adapted to be useful, and to do good. They are
bestowed not on all equally, but in such a manner as shall best subserve
the interests of piety and the church, and as shall tend harmoniously to
carry on the great interests of religion, and further the welfare of the
whole Christian body. The doctrine of this verse is, therefore:

\(1\) That the Holy Spirit bestows such endowments on all Christians as
he pleases; and,

\(2\) That the design is, in the best manner to promote the common
welfare - the peace and edification of the whole church.

It follows from this:

\(1\) That no Christian should be unduly elated, as if he were more
worthy than others, since his endowments are the simple gift of God;

\(2\) That no Christian should be depressed and disheartened, as if he
occupied an inferior or unimportant station, since his place has also
been assigned him by God;

\(3\) That all should be contented, and satisfied with their allotments
in the church, and should strive only to make the best use of their
talents and endowments; and,

\(4\) That all should employ their time and talents for the common
utility; for the furtherance of the common welfare, and the advancement
of the kingdom of Christ on earth.

[1 Corinthians 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 12:8</span></span>

For to one is given - In order to show what endowments he refers to, the
apostle here particularizes the various gifts which the Holy Spirit
imparts in the church.

By the Spirit - By the Holy Spirit; by his agency on the mind and heart.

The word of wisdom - One he has endowed with wisdom, or has made
distinguished for wise, and prudent, and comprehensive views of the
scheme of redemption, and with a faculty of clearly explaining it to the
apprehension of people. It is not certain that the apostle meant to say
that this was the most important or most elevated endowment because he
places it first in order. His design does not seem to be to observe the
order of importance and value, but to state, as it occurred to him, the
fact that these various endowments had been conferred on different
people in the church. The sense is, that one man would be prominent and
distinguished as a wise man - a prudent counsellor, instructor, and
adviser.

To another the word of knowledge - Another would be distinguished for
knowledge. He would be learned; would have a clear view of the plan of
salvation, and of the doctrines and duties of religion. The same variety
is observed in the ministry at all times. One man is eminent as a wise
man; another as a man of intelligence and knowledge; and both may be
equally useful in their place in the church.

By the same Spirit - All is to be traced to the same Spirit; all,
therefore, may be really useful and necessary; and the one should not
pride himself in his endowments above the other.

[1 Corinthians 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 12:9</span></span>

To another faith - Another shall he distinguished for simple confidence
in God; and his endowment is also given by the same Spirit. Many of the
most useful people in the church are distinguished mainly for their
simple confidence in the promises of God; and often accomplish more by
prayer and by their faith in God than others do who are distinguished
for their wisdom and learning. Humble piety and reliance in the divine
promises, and that measure of ardor, fearlessness, and zeal which result
from such confidence; that belief that all obstacles must be and will be
overcome that oppose the gospel; and that God will secure the
advancement of his cause, will often do infinitely more in the promotion
of his kingdom than the most splendid endowments of learning and talent.
Indeed, if a man were disposed to do good on the widest scale possible,
to do the utmost that he possibly could in saving people, he would best
accomplish it by seeking simple "faith" in God's aid and promises, and
then under the influence of this, engage with ardor in doing what he
could. Faith is one of the highest endowments of the Christian life; and
yet, though all may obtain it, it is one of the rarest endowments.
Perhaps by many it is despised, because it may be obtained by all;
because it is a grace in which the poor and the humble may be as much
distinguished as the man of splendid talents and profound learning.

To another the gifts of healing - See [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018). This was promised to the
disciples of the Saviour; and in the early church was conferred on many;
compare [Act 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#012), [Act
5:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015); [Act
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012). It would seem from this passage
that the gift of healing was conferred on some in a more eminent degree
than on others.

[1 Corinthians 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 12:10</span></span>

To another the working of miracles - Commentators have felt some
perplexity in distinguishing this from what is mentioned in [Co1
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009), of the gift of healing. it is
evident that the apostle there refers to the power of working miracles
in healing inveterate and violent diseases. The expression used here,
"working of miracles" (ἐνεργήματα δυναμέων energēmata dunameōn) refers
probably to the more "extraordinary" and "unusual" kinds of miracles; to
those which were regarded as in advance of the power of healing
diseases. It is possible that it may denote what the Saviour had
reference to in [Mar 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018), where he
said they should take up serpents, and if they drank any deadly thing it
should not hurt them; and possibly also to the power of raising up the
dead. That this power was possessed by the apostles is well known; and
it is possible that it was possessed by others also of the early
Christians. It is clear from all this that there was a difference even
among those who had the power of working miracles, and that this power
was conferred in a more eminent degree on some than on others. Indeed,
the "extraordinary" endowments conferred on the apostles and the early
Christians, seem to have been regulated to a remarkable degree in
accordance with the rule by which "ordinary" endowments are conferred
upon people. Though all people have understanding, memory, imagination,
bodily strength, etc., yet one has these in a more eminent degree than
others; and one is characterized for the possession of one of those
qualities more than for another. Yet all are bestowed by the same God.
So it was in regard to the extraordinary endowments conferred on the
early Christians; compare 1 Cor. 14, especially [Co1
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032).

To another prophecy; - See the note at [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006).

To another discerning of spirits - compare [Jo1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001). This must refer to some power of
searching into the secrets of the heart; of knowing what were a man's
purposes. views, and feelings. It may relate either to the power of
determining by what spirit a man spoke who pretended to be inspired,
whether he was truly inspired or whether he was an impostor; or it may
refer to the power of seeing whether a man was sincere or not in his
Christian profession That the apostles had this power, is apparent from
the case of Ananias and Sapphira, [Act
5:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001), and from the case of Elymas,
[Act 13:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009). It is evident that where
the gift of prophecy and inspiration was possessed, and where it would
confer such advantages on those who possessed it, there would be many
pretenders to it; and that it would be of vast importance to the infant
church, in order to prevent imposition, that there should be a power in
the church of detecting the imposture.

To another divers kinds of tongues - The power of speaking various
languages; see [Act 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004), [Act
2:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#007). This passage also seems to
imply that the extraordinary endowments of the Holy Spirit were not
conferred on all alike.

To another the interpretation of tongues - The power of interpreting
foreign languages; or of interpreting the language which might be used
by the "prophets" in their communications; see the note at [Co1
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#027). This was evidently a faculty
different from the power of speaking a foreign language; and yet it
might be equally useful. It would appear possible that some might have
had the power of speaking foreign languages who were not themselves
apprized of the meaning, and that interpreters were needful in order to
express the sense to the hearers. Or it may have been that in a
promiscuous assembly, or in an assembly made up of those who spoke
different languages, a part might have understood what was uttered, and
it was needful that an interpreter should explain it to the other
portion; see the notes on [Co1 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#028).

[1 Corinthians 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 12:11</span></span>

But all these - All these various endowments.

Worketh - Produces. All these are to be traced to him.

That one and the self-same Spirit - The Holy Spirit, Acts 2. They were
all, though so different in themselves, to be traced to the Holy Spirit,
just as all the natural endowments of people - their strength, memory,
judgment, etc. - though so various in themselves are to be traced to the
same God.

Dividing to every man severally - Conferring on each one as he pleases.
He confers on each one that which he sees to be best, and most wise, and
proper.

As he will - As he chooses or as in his view seems best. Dr. Doddridge
remarks, that this word does "not so much express arbitrary pleasure, as
a determination founded on "wise" counsel." It implies, however, that he
does it as a sovereign; as he sees to be right and best. He distributes
these favors as to him seems best adapted to promote the welfare of the
whole church and to advance his cause. Some of the doctrines which are
taught by this verse are the following:

\(1\) The Holy Spirit is a "person." For, he acts as a person;
distributes favors, confers endowments and special mercies "as he will."
This proves that he is, in some respects, distinguished from the Father
and the Son. It would be absurd to say of an "attribute" of God, that it
confers favors, and distributes the various endowments of speaking with
tongues, and raising the dead. And if so, then the Holy Spirit is "not"
an attribute of God.

\(2\) he is a sovereign. He gives to all as he pleases. In regard to
spiritual endowments of the highest order, he deals with people as he
does in the common endowments bestowed upon people, and as he does in
temporal blessings. He does not bestow the same blessings on all, nor
make all alike. He dispenses his favors by a rule which he has not made
known, but which, we may be assured, is in accordance with wisdom and
goodness. He wrongs no one; and he gives to all the favors which might
be connected with eternal life.

\(3\) no man should be proud of his endowments. Whatever they may be,
they are the gifts of God, bestowed by his sovereign will and mercy. But
assuredly we should not be proud of that which is the mere "gift" of
another, and which has been bestowed, not in consequence of any merit of
ours, but according to his mere sovereign will.

\(4\) no man should be depressed, or should despise his own gifts,
however humble they may be. In their own place, they may be as important
as the higher endowments of others. That God has placed him where he is,
or has given less splendid endowments than he has to others, is no fault
of his. There is no crime in it; and he should, therefore, strive to
improve his "one talent," and to make himself useful in the rank where
he is placed. And,

\(5\) No man should despise another because be is in a more bumble rank,
or is less favored than himself. God has made the difference, and we
should respect and honor his arrangements, and should show that
"respect" and "honor" by regarding with kindness, and treating as fellow
laborers with us, all who occupy a more humble rank than we do.

[1 Corinthians 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 12:12</span></span>

For as the body is one - The general sentiment which the apostle had
been illustrating and enforcing was, that all the endowments which were
possessed in the church were the work of the same Holy Spirit, and that
they ought to be appropriately cherished and prized, as being all useful
and valuable in their places. This sentiment he now illustrates 1Co.
12:12-27 by a beautiful similitude taken from the mutual dependence of
the various parts of the human body. The human body is one, and yet is
composed of various members and parts that all unite harmoniously in one
whole.

Being many - Or, although they are many; or while they are in some
respects separate, and perform distinct and different functions, yet
they all unite in one harmonious whole.

So also is Christ - The church is represented as the body of Christ [Co1
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027), meaning that it is one, and
that he sustains to it the relation of Head; compare [Eph
1:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022). As the "head" is the most
important part of the body, it may be put for the whole body; and the
name "Christ" here, the head of the church, is put for the whole body of
which he is the head; and means here the Christian society, or the
church. This figure, of a part for the whole, is one that is common in
all languages; see the note at [Rom
12:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004).

[1 Corinthians 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 12:13</span></span>

For by one Spirit - That is, by the agency or operation of the same
Spirit, the Holy Spirit, we have been united into one body. The idea
here is the same as that presented above [Co1
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007), [Co1
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011), by which all the endowments of
Christians are traced to the same Spirit. Paul here says, that that
Spirit had so endowed them as to fit them to constitute one body, or to
be united in one, and to perform the various duties which resulted from
their union in the same Christian church. The idea of its having been
done by one and the same Spirit is kept up and often presented, in order
that the endowments conferred on them might be duly appreciated.

Are we all - Every member of the church, whatever may be his rank or
talents, has received his endowments from the same Spirit.

Baptized into one body - Many suppose that there is reference here to
the ordinance of baptism by water. But the connection seems rather to
require us to understand it of the baptism of the Holy Spirit [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011); and if so, it means, that by the
agency of the Holy Spirit, they had all been suited, each to his
appropriate place, to constitute the body of Christ - the church. If,
however, it refers to the ordinance of baptism, as Bloomfield, Calvin,
Doddridge, etc. suppose, then it means, that by the very profession of
religion as made at baptism, by there being but one baptism [Eph
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005), they had all professedly become
members of one and the same body. The former interpretation, however,
seems to me best to suit the connection.

Whether we be Jews or Gentiles - There is no difference. All are on a
level. In regard to the grand point, no distinction is made, whatever
may have been our former condition of life.

Bond or free - It is evident that many who were slaves were converted to
the Christian faith. Religion, however, regarded all as on a level; and
conferred no favors on the free which it did not on the slave. It was
one of the happy lessons of Christianity, that it taught people that in
the great matters pertaining to their eternal interests they were on the
same level. This doctrine would tend to secure, more than anything else
could, the proper treatment of those who were in bondage, and of those
who were in humble ranks of life. At the same time it would not
diminish, but would increase their real respect for their masters, and
for those who were above them, if they regarded them as fellow
Christians, and destined to the same heaven; see the note at [Co1
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#022).

And have been all made to drink ... - This probably refers to their
partaking together of the cup in the Lord's Supper. The sense is, that
by their drinking of the same cup commemorating the death of Christ,
they had partaken of the same influences of the Holy Spirit, which
descend alike on all who observe that ordinance in a proper manner. They
had shown also, that they belonged to the same body, and were all united
together; and that however various might be their graces and endowments,
yet they all belonged to the same great family.

[1 Corinthians 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 12:14</span></span>

For the body ... - The body is made up of many members, which have
various offices. So it is in the church. We are to expect the same
variety there; and we are not to presume either that all will be alike,
or that any member that God has placed there will be useless.

[1 Corinthians 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 12:15</span></span>

If the foot shall say ... - The same figure and illustration which Paul
here uses occurs also in pagan writers. It occurs in the apologue which
was used by Menenius Agrippa, as related by Livy (lib. 2: cap. 32), in
which he attempted to repress a rebellion which had been excited against
the nobles and senators, as useless and cumbersome to the state.
Menenius, in order to show the folly of this, represents the different
members of the body as conspiring against the stomach, as being
inactive, and as refusing to labor, and consuming everything. The
consequence of the conspiracy which the feet, and hands, and mouth
entered into, was a universal wasting away of the whole frame for lack
of the nutriment which would have been supplied from the stomach. Thus,
he argued it would be by the conspiracy against the nobles, as being
inactive, and as consuming all things. The representation had the
desired effect, and quelled the rebellion. The same figure is used also
by Aesop. The idea here is, that as the foot and the ear could not
pretend that they were not parts of the body, and even not important,
because they were not the eye, etc.; that is, were not more honorable
parts of the body; so no Christian, however humble his endowments, could
pretend that he was useless because he was not more highly gifted and
did not occupy a more elevated rank.

[1 Corinthians 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 12:17</span></span>

If the whole body ... - The idea in this verse is, that all the parts of
the body are useful in their proper place, and that it would be as
absurd to require or expect that all the members of the church should
have the same endowments, as it would be to attempt to make the body
"all eye." If all were the same; if all had the same endowments,
important offices which are now secured by the other members would be
unknown. All, therefore, are to be satisfied with their allotment; all
are to be honored in their appropriate place.

[1 Corinthians 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 12:18</span></span>

Hath God set the members ... - God has formed the body, with its various
members, as he saw would best conduce to the harmony and usefulness of
all.

[1 Corinthians 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 12:19</span></span>

And if all were one member - If there were nothing but an eye, an ear,
or a limb, there would be no body The idea which this seems intended to
illustrate is, that if there was not variety of talent and endowment in
the church, the church could not itself exist. If, for example, there
were nothing but apostles, or prophets, or teachers; if there were none
but those who spoke with tongues or could interpret them, the church
could not exist. A variety of talents and attainments in their proper
places is as useful as are the various members of the human body.

[1 Corinthians 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 12:21</span></span>

And the eye cannot say unto the hand ... - The hand in its place is as
needful as the eye; and the feet as the head. Nay, the eye and the head
could not perform their appropriate functions, or would be in a great
measure useless but for the aid of the hands and feet. Each is useful in
its proper place. So in the church. Those that are most talented and
most richly endowed with gifts, cannot say to those less so, that there
is no need of their aid. All are useful in their place. Nay, those who
are most richly endowed could very imperfectly perform their duties
without the aid and cooperation of those of more humble attainments.

[1 Corinthians 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 12:22</span></span>

Which seem to be more feeble - Weaker than the rest; which seem less
able to bear fatigue and to encounter difficulties; which are more
easily injured, and which become more easily affected with disease. It
is possible that Paul may here refer to the brain, the lungs, the heart,
etc., as more feeble in their structure, and more liable to disease than
the hands and the feet, etc., and in reference to which disease is more
dangerous and fatal.

Are more necessary - The sense seems to be this. A man can live though
the parts and members of his body which are more strong were removed;
but not if those parts which are more feeble. A man can live if his arm
or his leg be amputated; but not if his brain, his lungs or his heart be
removed. So that, although these parts are more feeble, and more easily
injured, they are really more necessary to life, and therefore more
useful than the more vigorous portions of the frame. Perhaps the idea is
- and it is a beautiful thought - that those members of the church which
are most retiring and feeble apparently which are concealed from public
view, unnoticed and unknown - the humble. the meek, the peaceful, and
the prayerful - are often more necessary to the true welfare of the
church than those who are eminent for their talent and learning. And it
is so. The church can better spare many a man, even in the ministry, who
is learned, and eloquent, and popular, than some obscure and humble
Christian, that is to the church what the heart and the lungs are to the
life. the one is strong. vigorous, active, like the hands or the feet,
and the church often depends on them; the other is feeble, concealed,
yet vital, like the heart or the lungs. The vitality of the church could
be continued though the man of talent and learning should be removed; as
the body may live when the arm or the leg is amputated; but that
vitality could not continue if the saint of humble and retiring piety,
and of fervent prayerfulness, were removed, any more than the body can
live when there is no heart and no lungs.

[1 Corinthians 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 12:23</span></span>

We bestow more abundant honour - Margin, "Put on." The words rendered
"abundant honor" here, refer to clothing. We bestow upon them more
attention and honor then we do on the face that is deemed comely, and
that is not covered and adorned as the other parts of the body are.

More abundant comeliness - We adorn and decorate the body with frivilous
apparel. Those parts which decency requires us to conceal we not only
cover, but we endeavor as far as we can to adorn them. The face in the
mean time we leave uncovered. The idea is, that, in like manner, we
should not despise or disregard those members of the church who are of
lower rank, or who are less favored than others with spiritual
endowments.

[1 Corinthians 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 12:24</span></span>

For our comely parts - The face, etc. "Have no need." No need of
clothing or ornament.

But God hath tempered the body together - Literally, "mingled" or mixed;
that is, has made to coalesce, or strictly and closely joined. He has
formed a strict union; he has made one part dependent on another, and
necessary to the harmony and proper action of another. Every part is
useful, and all are suited to the harmonious action of the whole. God
has so arranged it, in order to produce harmony and equality in the
body, that those parts which are less comely by nature should be more
adorned and guarded by apparel.

Having given more abundant honour ... - By making it necessary that we
should labor in order to procure for it the needful clothing; thus
making it more the object of our attention and care. We thus bestow more
abundant honor upon those parts of the body which a suitable protection
from cold, and heat, and storms, and the sense of comeliness, requires
us to clothe and conceal. The "more abundant honor," therefore, refers
to the greater attention, labor, and care which we bestow on those parts
of the body.

[1 Corinthians 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 12:25</span></span>

That there should be no schism - Margin, "Division;" see note on [Co1
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#018). The sense here is, that the
body might be united, and be one harmonious whole; that there should be
no separate interests; and that all the parts should be equally
necessary, and truly dependent on each other; and that no member should
be regarded as separated from the others, or as needless to the welfare
of all. The sense to be illustrated by this is, that no member of the
church, however feeble, or illiterate, or obscure, should be despised or
regarded as unnecessary or valueless; that all are needful in their
places; and that it should not be supposed that they belonged to
different bodies, or that they could not associate together, any more
than the less honorable and comely parts of the body should be regarded
as unworthy or unfit to be united to the parts that were deemed to be
more beautiful or honorable.

Should have the same care - Should care for the same thing; should
equally regard the interests of all, as we feel an equal interest in all
the members and parts of the body, and desire the preservation, the
healthy action, and the harmonious and regular movement of the whole.
Whatever part of the body is affected with disease or pain, we feel a
deep interest in its preservation and cure. The idea is, that no member
of the church should be overlooked or despised; but that the whole
church should feel a deep interest for, and exercise a constant
solicitude over, all its members.

[1 Corinthians 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 12:26</span></span>

And whether one member suffer - One member, or part of the body.

All the members suffer with it - This, we all know, is the case with the
body. A pain in the foot, the hand, or the head excites deep solicitude.
The interest is not confined to the part affected; but we feel that we
ourselves are affected, and that our body, as a whole, demands our care.
The word "suffer" here refers to disease, or sickness. It is true also
that not only we feel an "interest" in the part that is affected, but
that disease in any one part tends to diffuse itself through, and to
affect the whole frame. If not arrested, it is conveyed by the blood
through all the members until life itself is destroyed. It is not by
mere interest, then, or sympathy, but it is by the natural connection
and the inevitable result that a diseased member tends to affect the
whole frame. There is not, indeed, in the church the same "physical"
connection and "physical" effect, but the union is really not less close
and important, nor is it the less certain that the conduct of one member
will affect all. It is implied here also, that we should feel a deep
interest in the welfare of all the members of the body of Christ. If one
is tempted or afflicted, the other members of the church should feel it,
and "bear one another's burdens, and so fulfil his law." If one is poor,
the others should aid him, and supply his needs; if one is persecuted
and opposed for righteousness' sake, the others should sympathize with
him, and make common cause with him. In all things pertaining to
religion and to their mutual welfare, they should feel that they have a
common cause, and regard it as a privilege to aid one another. Nor
should a man regard it as any more a burden and hardship to aid a poor
or afflicted brother in the church, than it should be deemed a hardship
that the head, and the heart, and the hands should sympathize when any
other member of the body is diseased.

Or one member be honoured - If applied to the body, this means, if one
member or part be regarded and treated with special care; be deemed
honorable; or be in a sound, healthy, and vigorous condition. If applied
to the church, it means, if one of its members should be favored with
extraordinary endowments; or be raised to a station of honor and
influence above his brethren.

All the members rejoice with it - That is, in the body, all the other
members partake of the benefit and honor. If one member be sound and
healthy, the benefit extends to all. If the hands, the feet, the heart,
the lungs, the brain be in a healthy condition, the advantage is felt by
all the members, and all derive advantage from it. So in the church. If
one member is favored with remarkable talent, or is raised to a station
of influence, and exerts his influence in the cause of Christ, all the
members of the church partake of the benefit. It is for the common good;
and all should rejoice in it. This consideration should repress envy at
the elevation of others, and should lead all the members of a church to
rejoice when God, by his direct agency, or by the arrangements of his
providence, confers extraordinary endowments, or gives opportunity for
extended usefulness to others.

[1 Corinthians 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 12:27</span></span>

Now ye - Ye Christians of Corinth, as a part of the whole church that
has been redeemed.

Are the body of Christ - The allusion to the human body is here kept up.
As all the members of the human body compose one body, having a common
head, so it is with all the members and parts of the Christian church.
The specific idea is, that Christ is the Head of the whole church; that
he presides over all; and that all its members sustain to each other the
relation of fellow-members in the same body, and are subject to the same
head; compare the note at [Co1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003).
The church is often called the body of Christ; [Eph
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023); [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018), [Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024).

And members in particular - You are, as individuals, members of the body
of Christ; or each individual is a member of that body.

[1 Corinthians 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 12:28</span></span>

And God hath set - That is, has appointed, constituted, ordained. He has
established these various orders or ranks in the church. The apostle,
having illustrated the main idea that God had conferred various
endowments on the members of the church, proceeds here to specify
particularly what he meant, and to refer more directly to the various
ranks which existed in the church.

Some in the church - The word "some," in this place ὅυς hous, seems to
mean rather whom, "and whom God hath placed in the church," or, they
whom God hath constituted in the church in the manner above mentioned
are, first, apostles, etc.

First, apostles - In the first rank or order; or as superior in honor
and in office. He has given them the highest authority in the church; he
has more signally endowed them and qualified them than he has others.

Secondarily, prophets - As second in regard to endowments and
importance. For the meaning of the word "prophets," see the note on [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006).

Thirdly, teachers - As occupying the third station in point of
importance and valuable endowments. On the meaning of this word, and the
nature of this office, see the note on [Rom
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007).

After that, miracles - Power. (δυνάμεις dunameis). Those who had the
power of working miracles; referred to in [Co1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010).

Then gifts of healing - The power of healing those who were sick; see
note on [Co1 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009); compare [Jam
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014).

Helps - (ἀντιλήμψεις antilēmpseis). This word occurs no where else in
the New Testament. It is derived from ἀντιλαμβάνω antilambanō, and
denotes properly, "aid, assistance, help;" and then those who render
aid, assistance, or help; helpers. Who they were is not known. They
might have been those to whom was entrusted the care of the poor, and
the sick, and strangers, widows, and orphans, etc.; that is, those who
performed the office of deacons. Or they may have been those who
attended on the apostles to aid them in their work, such as Paul refers
to in [Rom 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003). "Greet Priscilla, and
Aquilla, my "helpers" in Christ Jesus;" and in [Co1
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009)," Salute Urbane our helper in
Christ;" see note on [Rom 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003). It is
not possible, perhaps, to determine the precise meaning of the word, or
the nature of the office which they discharged; but the word means, in
general, those who in any way aided or rendered assistance in the
church, and may refer to the temporal affairs of the church, to the care
of the poor, the distribution of charity and alms, or to the instruction
of the ignorant, or to aid rendered directly to the apostles. There is
no evidence that it refers to a distinct and "permanent" office in the
church; but may refer to aid rendered by any class in any way. Probably
many persons were profitably and usefully employed in various ways as
aids in promoting the temporal or spiritual welfare of the church.

Governments - (κυβερνήσεις kubernēseis). This word is derived from
κυβεριάω kuberiaō, "to govern;" and is usually applied to the government
or "steering" of a ship. The word occurs no where else in the New
Testament, though the word κυβερνήτης kubernētēs ("governor") occurs in
[Act 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#011), rendered "master," and in
[Rev 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017), rendered "shipmaster." It
is not easy to determine what particular office or function is here
intended. Doddridge, in accordance with Amyraut, supposes that distinct
offices may not be here referred to, but that the same persons may be
denoted in these expressions as being distinguished in various ways;
that is, that the same persons were called helpers in reference to their
skill in aiding those who were in distress, and governments in regard to
their talent for doing business, and their ability in presiding in
councils for deliberation, and in directing the affairs of the church.

There is no reason to think that the terms here used referred to
permanent and established ranks and orders in the ministry and in the
church; or in permanent offices which were to continue to all times as
an essential part of its organization. It is certain that the "order" of
"apostles" has ceased, and also the "order" of "miracles," and the order
of "healings," and of "diversity of tongues." And it is certain that in
the use of these terms of office, the apostle does not affirm that they
would be permanent, and essential to the very existence of the church;
and from the passage before us, therefore, it cannot be argued that
there was to be an order of men in the church who were to be called
"helps," or "governments." The truth probably was, that the
circumstances of the primitive churches required the aid of many persons
in various capacities which might not be needful or proper in other
times and circumstances.

Whether, therefore, this is to be regarded as a permanent arrangement
that there should be "governments" in the church, or an order of men
entrusted with the sole office of governing, is to be learned not from
this passage, but from other parts of the New Testament. Lightfoot
contends that the word which is used here and translated "governments"
does not refer to the power of ruling, but to a person endued with a
deep and comprehensive mind, one who is wise and prudent; and in this
view Mesheim, Macknight, and Horsley coincide. Calvin refers it to the
elders to whom the exercise of discipline was entrusted. Grotius
understands it of the pastors [Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001), or of the elders who presided
over particular churches; [Rom 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008).
Locke supposes that they were the same as those who had the power of
discerning spirits. The simple idea, however, is that of ruling, or
exercising government; but whether this refers to a permanent office, or
to the fact that some were specially qualified by their wisdom and
prudence, and in virtue of this usually regulated or directed the
affairs of the church by giving counsel, etc., or whether they were
"selected" and appointed for this purpose for a time; or whether it
refers to the same persons who might also have exercised other
functions, and this in addition, cannot be determined from the passage
before us. All that is clear is, that there were those who administered
government in the church. But the passage does not determine the form,
or manner; nor does it prove - whatever may be true - that such an
office was to be permanent in the church.

(There can be little doubt that the κυβερνησεις kubernēseis, or
governments, refer to offices of rule and authority in the church. Two
things, therefore, are plain from this text:

1\. That in the primitive church there were rulers distinct from the
people or church members, to whom these were bound to yield obedience.

2\. That these rulers were appointed of God. "God set them in the
church." As to the question of "permanence," on which our author thinks
this passage affirms nothing: a distinction must be made between these
offices which were obviously of an extraordinary kind, and which
therefore must cease; and those of an ordinary kind, which are essential
to the edification of the church in all ages. "The universal commission
which the apostles received from their Master to make disciples of all
nations, could not be permanent as to the extent of it, because it was
their practice to ordain elders in every city, and because the course of
human affairs required, that after Christianity was established, the
teachers of it should officiate in particular places. The infallible
guidance of the Spirit was not promised in the same measure to
succeeding teachers. But being, in their case, vouched by the power of
working miracles, it directed the Christians of their day, to submit
implicitly to their injunctions and directions; and it warrants the
Christian world, in all ages, to receive with entire confidence, that
system of faith and morality which they were authorised to deliver in
the name of Christ. But as all protestants hold that this system was
completed when the canon of scripture was closed - it is admitted by
them, that a great part of the apostolical powers ceased with those to
whom Jesus first committed them.

Amongst the "ordinary" functions belonging to their office as teachers,
are to be ranked not only preaching the word, and dispensing the
sacraments, but also that rule and government over Christians as such,
which is implied in the idea of the church as a society" - Hill's
Lectures, vol. ii, p. 479. Now, though these extraordinary offices and
functions have ceased with the age of the apostles, and of miraculous
influence; it by no means follows, that the ordinary offices of teaching
and ruling have ceased also. What was plainly of a "peculiar kind," and
could not possibly be "imitated" after the withdrawment of miraculous
power, is quite distinct from that which, not depending on such power,
is suited to the condition of the church always. Proceeding on any other
principle, we should find it impossible to argue at all on what ought to
be the constitution of the church, from any hints we find in the New
Testament. What is extraordinary cannot be permanent, but what is
ordinary must be so. See the supplementary note on [Co1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004).)

Diversities of tongues - Those endowed with the power of speaking
various languages; see the note on [Co1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010).

[1 Corinthians 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 12:29</span></span>

Are all apostles? ... - These questions imply, with strong emphasis,
that it could not be, and ought not to be, that there should be perfect
equality of endowment. It was not a matter of fact that all were equal,
or that all were qualified for the offices which others sustained.
Whether the arrangement was approved of or not, it was a simple matter
of fact that some were qualified to perform offices which others were
not; that some were endowed with the abilities requisite to the
apostolic office, and others not; that some were endowed with prophetic
gifts, and others were not; that some had the gift of healing, or the
talent of speaking different languages, or of interpreting and that
others had not.

[1 Corinthians 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 12:31</span></span>

But covet earnestly - Greek "Be zealous for" Ζηλοῦτε Zēloute. This word,
however, may be either in the indicative mood (ye do covet earnestly),
or in the imperative, as in our translation. Doddridge contends that it
should be rendered in the indicative mood, for he says it seems to be a
contradiction that after the apostle had been showing that these gifts
were not at their own option, and that they ought not to emulate the
gifts of another, or aspire to superiority, to undo all again, and give
them such contrary advice. The same view is given by Locke, and so
Macknight. The Syriac renders it, "Because you are zealous of the best
gifts, I will show to you a more excellent way." But there is no valid
objection to the common translation in the imperative, and indeed the
connection seems to demand it. Grotius renders it, "Pray to God that you
may receive from him the best, that is, the most useful endowments."

The sense seems to be this, "I have proved that all endowments in the
church are produced by the Holy Spirit; and that he confers them as he
pleases. I have been showing that no one should be proud or elated on
account of extraordinary endowments; and that, on the other hand, no one
should he depressed, or sad, or discontented, because he has a more
humble rank. I have been endeavoring to repress and subdue the spirit of
discontent, jealousy, and ambition; and to produce a willingness in all
to occupy the station where God has placed you. But, I do not intend to
deny that it is proper to desire the most useful endowments; that a man
should wish to be brought under the influence of the Spirit, and
qualified for eminent usefulness. I do not mean to say that it is wrong
for a man to regard the higher gifts of the Spirit as valuable and
desirable, if they may be obtained; nor that the spirit which seeks to
excel in spiritual endowments and in usefulness, is improper.

Yet all cannot be apostles; all cannot be prophets. I would not have
you, therefore, seek such offices, and manifest a spirit of ambition. I
would seek to regulate the desire which I would not repress as improper;
and in order to that, I would show you that, instead of aspiring to
offices and extraordinary endowments which are beyond your grasp, there
is a way, more truly valuable, that is open to you all, and where all
may excel." Paul thus endeavors to give a practicable and feasible turn
to the whole subject, and further to repress the longings of ambition
and the contentions of strife, by exciting emulation to obtain that
which was accessible to them all, and "which, just in the proportion in
which it was obtained," would repress discontent, and strife, and
ambition, and produce order, and peace, and contentedness with their
endowments and their lot, the main thing which he was desirous of
producing in this chapter. This, therefore, is one of the "happy turns"
in which the writings of Paul abounds. He did not denounce their zeal as
wicked. He did not attempt at once to repress it. He did not say that it
was wrong to desire high endowments. But he showed them an endowment
which was more valuable than all the others; which was accessible to
all; and which, if possessed, would make them contented, and produce the
harmonious operation of all the parts of the church. That endowment was
love.

A more excellent way - See the next chapter. "I will show you a more
excellent way of evincing your "zeal" than by aspiring to the place of
apostles, prophets, or rulers, and that is by cultivating universal
charity or love."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 13](co1013)

</div>
