<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co1016)  [Next](co2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to 2 Corinthians

Section 1. The Design of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians

In the Introduction to the First Epistle to the Corinthians, the
situation and character of the city of Corinth, the history of the
church there, and the design which Paul had in view in writing to them
at first, have been fully stated. In order to a full understanding of
the design of this Epistle, those facts should be borne in distinct
remembrance, and the reader is referred to the statement there made as
material to a correct understanding of this Epistle. It was shown there
that an important part of Paul's design at that time was to reprove the
irregularities which existed in the church at Corinth. This he had done
with great fidelity. He had not only answered the inquiries which they
proposed to him, but he had gone with great particularity into an
examination of the gross disorders of which he had learned by some
members of the family of Chloe. A large part of the Epistle, therefore,
was the language of severe reproof. Paul felt its necessity; and he had
employed that language with unwavering fidelity to his Master.

Yet it was natural that he should feel great solicitude in regard to the
reception of that letter, and to its influence in accomplishing what he
wished. That letter had been sent from Ephesus, where Paul proposed to
remain until after the succeeding Pentecost [Co1
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008); evidently hoping by that time to
hear from them, and to learn what had been the manner of the reception
of his Epistle. He proposed then to go to Macedonia, and from that place
to go again to Corinth [Co1 16:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005);
but he was evidently desirous to learn in what manner his First Epistle
had been received, and what was its effect, before he visited them. He
sent Timothy and Erastus before him to Macedonia and Achaia [Act
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022); [Co1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010), intending that they should
visit Corinth, and commissioned Timothy to regulate the disordered
affairs in the church there. It would appear also that he sent Titus to
the church there in order to observe the effect which his Epistle would
produce, and to return and report to him, [Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013); [Co2
7:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006).

Evidently, Paul felt much solicitude on the subject; and the manner in
which they received his admonitions would do much to regulate his own
future movements. An important case of discipline; his authority as an
apostle; and the interests of religion in an important city, and in a
church which he had himself founded, were all at stake. In this state of
mind he himself left Ephesus, and went to Troas on his way to Macedonia,
where it appears he had appointed Titus to meet him, and to report to
him the manner in which his First Epistle had been received; see the
note at [Co2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013). Then his mind was
greatly agitated and distressed because he did not meet Titus as he had
expected, and in this state of mind he went forward to Macedonia. There
he had a direct interview with Titus [Co2
7:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005), and learned from him that his
First Epistle had accomplished all which he had desired, [Co2
7:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007). The act of discipline which he
had directed had been performed; the abuses had been in a great measure
corrected, and the Corinthians had been brought to a state of true
repentance for their former irregularities and disorders. The heart of
Paul was greatly comforted by this intelligence, and by the signal
success which had attended this effort to produce reform. In this state
of mind, he wrote to them this second letter.

Titus had spent some time in Corinth. He had had an opportunity of
learning the views of the parties, and of ascertaining the true
condition of the church. This Epistle is designed to meet some of the
prevailing views of the party which was opposed to him there, and to
refute some of the prevailing slanders in regard to himself. The
Epistle, therefore, is occupied to a considerable extent in refuting the
slanders which bad been heaped upon him, and in vindicating his own
character. This letter also he sent by the hands of Titus, by whom the
former had been sent, and he designed doubtless that the presence of
Titus should aid in accomplishing the objects which he had in view in
the Epistle; see [Co2 8:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#017).

Section 2. The Subjects Treated in this Epistle

It has been generally admitted that this Epistle is written without much
definite arrangement or plan. It treats on a variety of topics mainly as
they occurred to the mind of the apostle at the time, and perhaps
without having formed any definite arrangement before he commenced
writing it. Those subjects are all important, and are all treated in the
usual manner of Paul, and are all useful and interesting to the church
at large; but we shall not find in this Epistle the same systematic
arrangement which is apparent in the Epistle to the Romans, or which
occurs in the First Epistle to the Corinthians. Some of the subjects of
which it treats are the following:

\(1\) He mentions his own sufferings, and particularly his late trials
in Asia. For deliverance from these trials, he expresses his gratitude
to God; and states the design for which God called him to endure such
trials to have been, that he might be better qualified to comfort others
who might be afflicted in a similar manner. [Co2
1:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001).

\(2\) he vindicates himself from one of the accusations which his
enemies had brought against him, that he was unstable and fickle-minded.
He had promised to visit them; and he had not yet fulfilled his promise.
They took occasion, therefore, to say that he was unstable, and that he
was afraid to visit them. He shows to them, in reply, the true reason
why he had not come to them, and that his real object; in not doing it,
had been "to spare" them, [Co2
1:13-24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#013).

\(3\) the case of the unhappy individual who had been guilty of incest,
had deeply affected his mind. In the First Epistle, he had treated of
this case at large, and had directed that discipline should be
exercised. He had felt deep solicitude in regard to the manner in which
his commands on that subject should be received, and had judged it best
not to visit them until he should be informed of the manner in which
they had complied with his directions. Since they had obeyed him, and
had inflicted discipline on him, he now exhorts them to forgive the
unhappy man, and to receive him again to their fellowship, [Co2
2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001).

\(4\) he mentions the deep solicitude which he had on this subject, and
his disappointment when he came to Troas and did not meet with Titus as
he had expected, and had not been informed as he hoped to have been of
the manner in which his former Epistle had been received, [Co2
2:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012). In view of the manner in
which they had received his former Epistle, and of the success of his
efforts, which he learned when he reached Macedonia, he gives thanks to
God that all his efforts to promote the welfare of the church had been
successful, [Co2 2:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014).

\(5\) Paul vindicates his character, and his claims to be regarded as an
apostle. he assures them that he does not need letters of commendation
to them, since they were fully acquainted with his character, [Co2
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001). This subject leads him into an
examination of the nature of the ministry and its importance, which he
illustrates by showing the comparative obscurity of the Mosaic
ministrations, and the greater dignity, and permanency of the gospel,
[Co2 3:7-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007).

\(6\) in 2 Cor. 4; 5 he states the principles by which he was actuated
in the ministry. He and the other apostles were greatly afflicted, and
were subjected to great and special trials, but they had also great and
unusual consolations. They were sustained with the hope of heaven, and
with the assurance that there was a world of glory. They acted in view
of that world. and had gone forth in view of it to entreat people to be
reconciled to God.

\(7\) having referred in 2 Cor. 5 to the nature and objects of the
Christian ministry, he expatiates with great beauty on the temper with
which he and his brethren, in the midst of great trials and afflictions,
executed this important work; [Co2
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001).

\(8\) having in this manner pursued a course of remark that was
calculated to conciliate their regard, and to show his affection for
them, he exhorts them [Co2 6:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011), to
avoid those connections which would injure their piety, and which were
inconsistent with the gospel which they professed to love. The
connections to which he particularly referred were, improper marriages
and ruinous alliances with idolaters, to which they were particularly
exposed.

\(9\) in 2 Cor. 7 he again makes a transition to Titus, and to the joy
which he had brought him in the intelligence which he gave of the manner
in which the commands of Paul in the First Epistle had been received,
and of its happy effect on the minds of the Corinthians.

\(10\) in 2 Cor. 8-9 Paul refers to, and discusses the subject on which
his heart was so much set - the collection for the poor and afflicted
Christians in Judea. He had commenced the collection in Macedonia, and
had boasted to them that the Corinthians would aid largely in that
benevolent work, and he now sent Titus to complete it in Corinth.

\(11\) in 2 Cor. 10 he enters upon a vindication of himself, and of his
apostolic authority against the accusation of his enemies; and pursues
the subject through 2 Cor. 11 by a comparison of himself with others,
and in 2 Cor. 12 by an argument directly in favour of his apostolic
authority from the favours which God had bestowed on him, and the
evidence which he had given of his having been commissioned by God. This
subject he pursues also in various illustrations to the end of the
Epistle.

The objects of this Epistle, therefore, and subjects discussed, are
various. They are, to show his deep interest in their welfare - to
express his gratitude that his former letter had been so well received,
and had so effectually accomplished what he wished to accomplish - to
carry forward the work of reformation among them which had been so
auspiciously commenced - to vindicate his authority as an apostle from
the objections which he had learned through Titus they had continued to
make - to secure the collection for the poor saints in Judea, on which
his heart had been so much set - and to assure them of his intention to
come and visit them according to his repeated promises. The Epistle is
substantially of the same character as the first. It was written to a
church where great dissensions and other evils prevailed; it was
designed to promote a reformation; and is a model of the manner m which
evils are to be corrected in a church. In connection with the First
Epistle. it shows the manner in which offenders in the church are to be
dealt with, and the spirit and design with which the work of discipline
should be entered on and pursued. Though these were local evils, yet
great principles are involved here, of use to the church in all ages;
and to these Epistles the church must refer at all times, as an
illustration of the proper manner of administering discipline, and of
silencing the calumnies of enemies.

Section 3. The Time and Place in which the Epistle Was Written

It is manifest that this Epistle was written from Macedonia (see [Co2
8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001); [Co2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002)), and was sent by Titus to the
church at Corinth. If so, it was written probably about a year after the
former Epistle. Paul was on his way to Corinth, and was expecting to go
there soon. He had left Ephesus, where he was when he wrote the First
Epistle, and had gone to Troas, and from thence to Macedonia, where he
had met with Titus, and had from him learned what was the effect of his
First Epistle. In the overflowing of his heart with gratitude for the
success of that letter, and with a desire to carry forward the work of
reformation in the church, and completely to remove all the objections
which had been made to his apostolic authority, and to prepare for his
own welcome reception when he went there, he wrote this letter - a
letter which we cannot doubt was as kindly received as the former, and
which Like that accomplished the objects which he had in view.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 1](co2001)

</div>
