<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu011)  [Next](deu013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 12:1</span></span>

Moses now passes on to apply Deut. 12-26 the leading principles of the
Decalogue to the ecclesiastical, civil, and social life of the people.
Particulars will be noticed which are unique to the Law as given in
Deuteronomy; and even in laws repeated from the earlier books various
new circumstances and details are introduced. This is only natural. The
Sinaitic legislation was nearly 40 years old and had been given under
conditions of time, place, and circumstance different and distant from
those now present. Yet the Sinaitic system, far from being set aside or
in any way abrogated, is on the contrary throughout presupposed and
assumed. Its existence and authority are taken as the starting-point for
what is here prescribed, and an accurate acquaintance with it on the
part of the people is taken for granted.

[Deuteronomy 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 12:3</span></span>

Their groves - Render their idols of wood: and see the [Deu
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005) note.

[Deuteronomy 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 12:4</span></span>

i\. e., "The idolaters set up their altars and images on any high hill,
and under every green tree at their pleasure, but ye shall not do so;
the Lord Himself shall determine the spot for your worship, and there
only shall ye seek Him." The religion of the Canaanites was human; its
modes of worship were of man's devising. It fixed its holy places on the
hills in the vain thought of being nearer heaven, or in deep groves
where the silence and gloom might overawe the worshipper. But such
superstitious appliances were not worthy of the true religion. God had
revealed Himself to people in it, and manifested among them His
immediate presence and power. He would Himself assign the sanctuary and
the ritual of His own service.

[Deuteronomy 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 12:5</span></span>

"To put his name there" means to manifest to men His divine presence.
The Targumists rightly refer to the Shechinah; but the expression
comprehends all the various modes in which God vouchsafed to reveal
Himself and His attributes to men.

The purpose of the command of the text is to secure the unity, and
through unity the purity of the worship of God. That there should be one
national center for the religion of the people was obviously essential
to the great ends of the whole dispensation. Corruption began as soon as
the precepts of the text were relaxed or neglected: Compare the case of
Gideon, [Jdg 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#027); of Micah, Judg. 18;
of Jeroboam, [Kg1 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#026) ff.

The words "the place which the Lord shall choose to put His Name there"
suggest Jerusalem and Solomon's temple to our minds. But though spoken
as they were by a prophet, and interpreted as they are by the Psalms (e.
g. [Psa 78:67-69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)), they have a proper
application to the temple, yet they must not be referred exclusively to
it. The text does not import that God would always from the first choose
one and the same locality "to put His Name there," but that there would
always be a locality so chosen by Him; and that there the people must
bring their sacrifices, and not offer them at their pleasure or
convenience elsewhere. Neither does the text forbid the offering of
sacrifices to God at other places than the one chosen by Him "to put His
Name there" on proper occasions and by proper authority (compare [Deu
27:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005); [Jdg
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#024); [Jdg
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#016); [Kg1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#004); [Kg1
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031)). The text simply prohibits
sacrifices at any other locality than that which should be appointed or
permitted by God for the purpose.

[Deuteronomy 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 12:6</span></span>

Some have objected that this command cannot possibly have been ever
carried out, at all events until in later (lays the territory which
owned obedience to it was narrowed to the little kingdom of Judah. But
in these and in other precepts Moses doubtless takes much for granted.
He is here, as elsewhere, regulating and defining more precisely
institutions which had long been in existence, as to many details of
which custom superseded the necessity of specific enactment. No doubt
the people well understood what Maimonides expressly tells us in
reference to the matter, namely, that where immediate payment could not
be made, the debt to God was to be reserved until the next great Feast,
and then duly discharged. The thing especially to be observed was that
no kind of sacrifice was to be offered except at the sacred spot fixed
by God for its acceptance.

[Deuteronomy 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 12:7</span></span>

An injunction that the feasts which accompanied certain offerings (not
specified) were to be also held in the same place.

[Deuteronomy 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 12:8</span></span>

Moses points out that heretofore they had not observed the prescribed
order in their worship, because during their migratory life in the
wilderness it had been impossible to do so. During their wanderings
there were doubtless times when the tabernacle was not set up for days
together, and when the daily sacrifice [Num
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#003), together with many other
ordinances, were necessarily omitted (compare [Jos
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#005)). This consideration must be
carefully borne in mind throughout Deuteronomy. It illustrates the
necessity for a repetition of very much of the Sinaitic legislation, and
suggests the reason why some parts are so urgently reiterated and
impressed, while others are left unnoticed. Moses now warns the people
that as they were about to quit their unsettled mode of life, God's
purpose of choosing for Himself a place to set His Name there would be
executed, and the whole of the sacred ritual would consequently become
obligatory. The "rest and safety" of Canaan is significantly laid down
[Deu 12:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#010) as the indispensable
condition and basis for an entire fulfillment of the Law: the perfection
of righteousness coinciding thus with the cessation of wanderings,
dangers, and toils.

[Deuteronomy 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 12:15</span></span>

While a stringent injunction is laid down that the old rule (compare
[Lev 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#003), etc.) must be adhered to as
regards animals slain in sacrifice, yet permission is now given to
slaughter at home what was necessary for the table. The ceremonial
distinctions did not apply in such cases, anymore than to "the roebuck"
(or gazelle) "and hart," animals allowed for food but not for sacrifice.

[Deuteronomy 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 12:21</span></span>

If the place ... - Rather, "Because, or since, the place will be too far
from thee." The permission given in [Deu
12:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015) is repeated, and the reason
of it assigned.

[Deuteronomy 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 12:30</span></span>

This caution is based upon the notion generally entertained in the
ancient pagan world, that each country had its own tutelary deities whom
it would be perilous to neglect; compare [Kg1
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023); [Kg2
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#026). Israel was to shun such
superstitions as unworthy of the elect people of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 13](deu013)

</div>
