<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](pro031)  [Next](ecc001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Ecclesiastes

I. This book is placed, in the most ancient Jewish and Christian lists,
between the other two books (Proverbs and the Song of Songs) attributed
to Solomon, and the constant tradition of the Jewish and Christian
congregations has handed down Solomon as the author without question.

Some modern critics have indeed alleged that Solomon could not have
written it: (a) because the language is such as no Jew in his age could
have used; (b) because the language differs from that of Proverbs and
the Song of Songs; and (c) because the historical allusions in the book
do not agree with the period and the circumstances of Solomon.

\(a\) In answer to this, it would appear that every word quoted from
Ecclesiastes as impossible to be used before the captivity has been
shown either:

\(1\) to be used in books written, as is generally believed, before the
captivity; or

\(2\) to be formed from words, and by a grammatical process, in use
before the captivity; or

\(3\) to be represented in such books by a derivative; or

\(4\) to be undoubtedly common to other Semitic dialects besides
Chaldee, and therefore, presumably, to Hebrew before the captivity,
although not found in extant writings of earlier date than Ecclesiastes.

The allegation, therefore, that the language of this book shows distinct
traces of the Chaldean invasion, of the Babylonian captivity, or of any
later event which affected the Hebrew tongue, may be considered
sufficiently answered.

\(b\) The dissimilarity in style and diction between this book and
Proverbs or the Song of Songs is admitted; but it has been accounted for
to some extent, first, by the difference of subject. Abstract ideas may
be expressed up to a certain point by words which originally denoted
something else: but philosophic thought such as distinguishes this book
from the other two, gradually forms its own terminology. Next, it is
argued, that there was an interval of many years between the composition
of the two former books and of this; and that in that time there was a
natural change in the temperament, views, and style of the writer; a
change which may be traced partly to Solomon's familiarity with foreign
women sprung from various Semitic races, partly also to his extensive
negotiations and personal contact with the representatives of other
nations, some of whom were not of Semitic origin [Kg1
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#022).

Lastly, to balance the differences, it is to be noted that there are
some characteristic resemblances between these books. It is reasonable
to regard these as an indication of a common origin.

\(c\) It is alleged that the particular mention of Jerusalem [Ecc
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001), [Ecc
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#012) as the seat of Solomon's reign,
implies that the book was written at a time when there was more than one
seat of kingly authority in Israel, i. e. after the separation of the
ten tribes and the erection of another capital, Samaria. The answer is
that there is an obvious fitness in the specific mention of Jerusalem
previous to the account of Solomon's labors in Eccl. 1; 2, for it was
the scene of his special work for many years, and the place which he had
made the chief monument of his grandeur.

It is alleged that the expression, "I was king" [Ecc
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#012), implies that, at the time when
these words were written, Solomon was no longer king, and that,
consequently, the passage must have been written by someone who was
impersonating him after his death. But, in Hebrew, the preterite is used
with strict grammatical propriety in describing a past. It does not
prevent critics, after taking all the facts into account, from
considering the whole of these books as the work of the same author.
which extends into the present. Solomon is as a speaker who views the
action or state expressed by the verb as then first about coming to
pass, in progress, or perhaps occurring at the instant. The phrase
therefore, would be both grammatically correct, if used by Solomon
before the close of his reign, and a natural expression of his feelings
in his old age.

It is argued that such a state of violence, popular oppression, and
despotic rule, as that which is instanced in [Ecc
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001) did not exist in Palestine in the
peaceful reign of Solomon. This allegation has no foundation in fact.
The significant statements of historians (e. g. [Kg1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#004) and [Ch2
2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#017); [Ch2
8:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#007)) and the numerous unmistakeable
allusions in the Book of Proverbs (e. g. [Pro
1:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010); [Pro
6:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016); [Pro
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026); [Pro
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#020); [Pro
22:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#022); [Pro
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#021); [Pro
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#005); [Pro
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#002), [Pro
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#016)) agree with the descriptions in
Ecclesiastes in showing that the kingdom of Israel, even in its most
prosperous days, afforded grievous instances of the common evils of
Asiatic despotism.

It is stated that such passages as [Ecc
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007), [Ecc
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014) show a knowledge of revealed
truth beyond what was given prior to the captivity. But if the exact
words of Ecclesiastes are compared with the obscure intimations given by
Moses on the one hand, and with the later utterances of Daniel on the
other, this book appears to hold a middle place. It tallies very closely
with some of the Psalms which were probably written about the age of
Solomon. After all, does not the argument (mentioned above) proceed on
an assumption that we are more competent than we really are to find out
the ways of the Author of Revelation? Are we qualified to decide
positively that so much, as is recorded on those subjects in
Ecclesiastes came out of its proper season if it was given to Solomon?

On the whole, therefore, it seems the most reasonable course to accept
as a simple statement of fact the words with which Ecclesiastes begins;
and, in accordance with the voice of the church from the beginning, to
regard solomon as the author of this book.

II\. What was the object of the writer in composing this book?

The method of Greek philosophy and its principles - Epicurean, Stoic,
and Cynic - have been attributed to the author of Ecclesiastes; but on
no better ground than might be found in the writings of any thoughtful
and sensitive man who has felt, contemplated, and described the
perplexities of human life.

The author was evidently a man of profound faith in God, of large and
varied personal experience, of acute observation of people and things,
and of deep sensibility. He was probably first moved to write by a mind
that was painfully full of the disappointing nature of all things viewed
apart from God. Next, he was moved by a deep sympathy with fellow human
beings who were touched by the same natural feelings as himself, and
suffering like him, though each in their various ways; and thirdly, he
was moved by the evident desire to lead other men, and especially young
men, out of the temptations which he had felt, and out of the
perplexities which once entangled and staggered him. Whether his heart
was chilled by old age or by the cold shadow of some former eclipse of
faith can only be conjectured; but there is in Ecclesiastes an absence
of that fervor of zeal for the glory of God which glows in other books,
and which we are justified in regarding as a feature of Solomon's
character in his early days. His immediate object would seem then to be
to relieve his mind by pouring out the results of his own life, to
comfort those who bore the same burden of humanity, and to lift up those
who were naturally feeble or depressed by circumstances and to lead them
in the way of God's commandments.

As regards a plan, the writer of the book evidently regarded it as
complete in itself; the first part of the book being contemplative or
doctrinal, and the latter part being practical.

First, there is the writer's statement of his subject, and his detailed
account of his personal experience of the influence of vanity pervading
human proceedings Eccl. 1-2. Then, there is the announcement of an
external law to which also human affairs are subject, i. e. the will of
God, Whose plan, incomprehensible in its extent, is found by all to be
more or less in conflict with man's will Eccl. 3-4, the result of such
conflict being disappointment and perplexity to man. Then there is the
commencement Eccl. 5 of personal practical advice, followed by a mixture
of reflections, maxims, and exhortations, in which the vanity of riches,
the practical superiority of wisdom and patience, and the supreme power
of God, are the prominent topics set forth in various ways Eccl. 6-8.
The writer's reflections are found in Eccl. 9. His maxims are brought to
an end in Eccl. 10. And, in Eccl. 11-12 we have a concluding exhortation
to such conduct and sentiments as are most likely to alleviate the
vanity of this life, namely, to charity, industry, patience and the
reverence of God.

If the book was composed, as seems probable, toward the end of Solomon's
reign, its direct tendency is obvious. In an age when "silver were like
stones in Jerusalem" (i. e. common), no lesson was more necessary, and
none would tell with deeper effect, than those powerful and touching
declarations of the vanity of wealth and grandeur which are perhaps the
most conspicuous feature in this book. Further, if the book appealed
then, as it has ever since appealed, to an inner circle of more
thoughtful readers, they especially, who in those days discerned the
signs of the approaching dismemberment of the kingdom and the diminution
of the glory of Jerusalem, would find their comfort in its lessons of
patient endurance and resignation to the sovereign will of God. Whenever
the church has been threatened with approaching calamity this book has
always shown its consolatory effect upon devout believers. It served,
before Christ came, to lighten for Jews the darkness of those "crooked"
ways of God which have exercised the Christian penetration of Pascal and
Butler. To the desolation of religious doubt, Ecclesiastes brings a
special message of consolation and direction: for it shows that a cry of
perplexity finds a place even in the sacred books; and it indicates a
nearer approach to the living God in reverent worship [Ecc
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001), in active service [Ecc
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#006), in humble acknowledgment of His
power [Ecc 3:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#010), in reliance on His
final justice [Ecc 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#008); [Ecc
12:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#013), as the means by which that
cry has been, and may again be, hushed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 1](ecc001)

</div>
