<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est000)  [Next](est002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

[Esther 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 1:1</span></span>

Ahasuerus - . Xerxes, the son of Darius Hystaspis. His empire is rightly
described as from India even unto Ethiopia. The satrapies of Darius
Hystaspis reached 29 in number, and the nations under Xerxes were about
60. The 127 "provinces" include probably sub-satrapies and other smaller
divisions of the great governments.

[Esther 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 1:3</span></span>

In the third year - In this year, 483 B.C., Xerxes assembled the
governors of provinces at Susa, in connection with his contemplated
expedition against Greece.

The nobles - literally, "the first men." The Hebrew word used is one
adopted from the Persian.

[Esther 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 1:5</span></span>

Feasts on this extensive scale were not unusual in the East. Cyrus is
said on one occasion to have feasted "all the Persians." Even
ordinarily, the later Persian monarchs entertained 15,000 persons at
their table.

[Esther 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 1:6</span></span>

Rather, "where was an awning of fine white cotton and violet." White and
blue (or violet) were the royal colors in Persia. Such awnings as are
here described were very suitable to the pillared halls and porches of a
Persian summer-palace, and especially to the situation of that of Susa.

The beds - Rather, "couches" or "sofas," on which the guests reclined at
meals.

A pavement ... - See the margin. It is generally agreed that the four
substances named are stones; but to identify the stones, or even their
colors, is difficult.

[Esther 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 1:8</span></span>

According to the law - An exception to the ordinary practice of
compulsory drinking had been made on this occasion by the king's order.

[Esther 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 1:9</span></span>

Vashti - If Ahasuerus is Xerxes, Vashti would be Amestris, whom the
Greeks regarded as the only legitimate wife of that monarch, and who was
certainly married to him before he ascended the throne. The name may be
explained either as a corruption of Amestris, or as a title, vahishta,
(Sanskrit: vasishtha, the superlative of vasu, "sweet"); and it may be
supposed that the disgrace recorded ([Est
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#019), see the note) was only
temporary; Amestris in the later part of Xerxes' reign recovering her
former dignity.

[Esther 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 1:11</span></span>

To bring Vashti the queen - This command, though contrary to Persian
customs, is not out of harmony with the character of Xerxes; and is
evidently related as something strange and unusual. Otherwise, the queen
would not have refused to come.

[Esther 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 1:13</span></span>

Wise men ... - Not "astrologers," who were unknown in Persia; but rather
men of practical wisdom, who knew the facts and customs of former times.

For so was the king's manner - Some render it: "for so was the king's
business laid before all that knew law ..."

[Esther 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 1:14</span></span>

In Marsena we may perhaps recognize the famous Mardonius, and in
Admatha, Xerxes' uncle, Artabanus.

The seven princes - There were seven families of the first rank in
Persia, from which alone the king could take his wives. Their chiefs
were entitled to have free access to the monarch's person. See the
margin reference note.

[Esther 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">est 1:18</span></span>

Translate it: "Likewise shall the princesses of Persia and Media, which
have heard of the deed of the queen, say this day unto all the king's
princes."

[Esther 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">est 1:19</span></span>

That it be not altered - Compare the margin reference. This was the
theory. Practically, the monarch, if he chose, could always dispense
with the law. It was therefore quite within his power to restore Vashti
to her queenly dignity notwithstanding the present decree, if he so
pleased.

[Esther 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">est 1:22</span></span>

He sent letters - The Persian system of posts incidentally noticed in
the present book [Est 3:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#012); [Est
8:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009), is in entire harmony with the
accounts of Herodotus and Xenophon.

Into every province according to the writing thereof - The practice of
the Persians to address proclamations to the subject-nations in their
own speech, and not merely in the language of the conqueror, is
illustrated by the bilingual and trilingual inscriptions of the
Achaemenian monarchs, from Cyrus to Artaxerxes Ochus, each inscription
being of the nature of a proclamation.

The decree was not unnecessary. The undue influence of women in
domestic, and even in public, matters is a feature of the ancient
Persian monarchy. Atossa completely ruled Darius. Xerxes himself was, in
his later years, shamefully subject to Amestris. The example of the
court would naturally infect the people. The decree therefore would be a
protest, even if ineffectual, against a real and growing evil.

And that it should be published ... - Render it: "and speak the language
of his own people;" in the sense that the wife's language, if different
from her husband's, should in no case be allowed to prevail in the
household.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 2](est002)

</div>
