<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo015)  [Next](exo017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)

[Exodus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 16:1</span></span>

The the wilderness of Sin - The desert tract, called Debbet er Ramleh,
extend nearly across the peninsula from the Wady Nasb in a
south-easterly direction, between the limestone district of Et Tih and
the granite of Sinai. The journey from the station at Elim, or even from
that on the Red Sea, could be performed in a day: at that time the route
was kept in good condition by the Egyptians.

[Exodus 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 16:2</span></span>

Murmured - The want of food was first felt after six weeks from the time
of the departure from Egypt, see [Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001) : we have no notice previously of
any deficiency of bread.

[Exodus 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 16:3</span></span>

By the hand of the Lord - This evidently refers to the plagues,
especially the last, in Egypt: the death which befell the Egyptians
appeared to the people preferable to the sufferings of famine.

Flesh pots, and ... bread - These expressions prove that the servile
labors to which they had been subjected did not involve privations: they
were fed abundantly, either by the officials of Pharaoh, or more
probably by the produce of their own fertile district.

[Exodus 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 16:4</span></span>

That I may prove them - The trial consisted in the restriction to the
supply of their daily wants.

[Exodus 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 16:5</span></span>

It shall be twice as much - They should collect and prepare a double
quantity.

[Exodus 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 16:7</span></span>

The glory of the Lord - the visible appearance described in [Exo
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010).

[Exodus 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 16:10</span></span>

Appeared in the cloud - Or, "was seen in a cloud." The definite article
would imply that the cloud was the same which is often mentioned in
connection with the tabernacle. The people saw the cloud here spoken of
beyond the camp.

[Exodus 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 16:13</span></span>

Quails - This bird migrates in immense numbers in spring from the south:
it is nowhere more common than in the neighborhood of the Red Sea. In
this passage we read of a single flight so dense that it covered the
encampment. The miracle consisted in the precise time of the arrival and
its coincidence with the announcement.

[Exodus 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 16:15</span></span>

It is manna - "Man" or "man-hut," i. e. white manna, was the name under
which the substance was known to the Egyptians, and therefore to the
Israelites. The manna of the Peninsula of Sinai is the sweet juice of
the Tarfa, a species of tamarisk. It exudes from the trunk and branches
in hot weather, and forms small round white grains. In cold weather it
preserves its consistency, in hot weather it melts rapidly. It is either
gathered from the twigs of tamarisk, or from the fallen leaves
underneath the tree. The color is a greyish yellow. It begins to exude
in May, and lasts about six weeks. According to Ehrenberg, it is
produced by the puncture of an insect. It is abundant in rainy seasons,
many years it ceases altogether. The whole quantity now produced in a
single year does not exceed 600 or 700 pounds. It is found in the
district between the Wady Gharandel, i. e. Elim, and Sinai, in the Wady
Sheikh, and in some other parts of the Peninsula. When therefore the
Israelites saw the "small round thing," they said at once "this is
manna," but with an exclamation of surprise at finding it, not under the
tamarisk tree, but on the open plain, in such immense quantities, under
circumstances so unlike what they could have expected: in fact they did
not know what it really was, only what it resembled.

[Exodus 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 16:16</span></span>

An omer - i. e. the tenth part of an Ephah, see [Exo
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#036). The exact quantity cannot be
determined, since the measures varied at different times. Josephus makes
the omer equal to six half-pints. The ephah was an Egyptian measure,
supposed to be about a bushel or one-third of a hin. The word omer, in
this sense, occurs in no other passage. It was probably not used at a
later period, belonging, like many other words, to the time of Moses. It
is found in Old Egyptian. See [Lev
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#036).

[Exodus 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 16:17</span></span>

Some more, some less - It is evidently implied that the people were in
part at least disobedient and failed in this first trial.

[Exodus 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 16:18</span></span>

Had nothing over - Whatever quantity each person had gathered, when he
measured it in his tent, he found that he had just as many omers as he
needed for the consumption of his family.

[Exodus 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 16:20</span></span>

It bred worms - This result was supernatural: no such tendency to rapid
decomposition is recorded of common manna.

[Exodus 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 16:21</span></span>

It melted - This refers to the manna which was not gathered.

[Exodus 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 16:22</span></span>

Twice as much bread - See [Exo 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#005).

From this passage and from [Exo 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#005)
it is inferred that the seventh day was previously known to the people
as a day separate from all others, and if so, it must have been observed
as an ancient and primeval institution.

[Exodus 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 16:23</span></span>

Tomorrow ... - Or, Tomorrow is a rest, a Sabbath holy to Yahweh: i. e.
tomorrow must be a day of rest, observed strictly as a Sabbath, or
festal rest, holy to Jehovah.

Bake ... - These directions show that the manna thus given differed
essentially from the natural product. Here and in [Num
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#008) it is treated in a way which
shows that it had the property of grain, could be ground in a mortar,
baked and boiled. Ordinary manna is used as honey, it cannot be ground,
and it melts when exposed to a moderate heat, forming a substance like
barley sugar, called "manna tabulata." In Persia it is boiled with water
and brought to the consistency of honey. The Arabs also boil the leaves
to which it adheres, and the manna thus dissolved floats on the water as
a glutinous or oily substance. It is obvious that these accounts are
inapplicable to the manna from heaven, which had the characteristics and
nutritive properties of bread.

[Exodus 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 16:25</span></span>

Eat that today - The practical observance of the Sabbath was thus
formally instituted before the giving of the law. The people were to
abstain from the ordinary work of every day life: they were not to
collect food, nor, as it would seem, even to prepare it as on other
days.

[Exodus 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 16:27</span></span>

There went out some of the people - This was an act of willful
disobedience. It is remarkable, being the first violation of the express
command, that it was not visited by a signal chastisement: the rest and
peace of the "holy Sabbath" were not disturbed by a manifestation of
wrath.

[Exodus 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 16:28</span></span>

How long - The reference to [Exo 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004)
is obvious. The prohibition involved a trial of faith, in which as usual
the people were found wanting. Every miracle formed some part, so to
speak, of an educational process.

[Exodus 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 16:29</span></span>

Abide ye every man in his place - The expression in Hebrew is unique and
seems almost to enjoin a position of complete repose: "in his place" is
literally under himself, as the Oriental sits with his legs drawn up
under him. The prohibition must however be understood with reference to
its immediate object; they were not to go forth from their place in
order to gather manna, which was on other days without the camp. The
spirit of the law is sacred rest. The Lord gave them this Sabbath, as a
blessing and privilege. It was "made for man." [Mar
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#027).

[Exodus 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 16:31</span></span>

manna - It was not indeed the common manna, as they then seem to have
believed, but the properties which are noted in this passage are common
to it and the natural product: in size, form and color it resembled the
seed of the white coriander, a small round grain of a whitish or
yellowish grey.

[Exodus 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 16:33</span></span>

A pot - The word here used occurs in no other passage. It corresponds in
form and use to the Egyptian for a casket or vase in which oblations
were presented.

[Exodus 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 16:34</span></span>

The Testimony - See the marginal references.

[Exodus 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 16:35</span></span>

Did eat manna forty years - This does not necessarily imply that the
Israelites were fed exclusively on manna, or that the supply was
continuous during forty years: but that whenever it might be needed,
owing to the total or partial failure of other food, it was given until
they entered the promised land. They had numerous flocks and herds,
which were not slaughtered (see [Num
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#022)), but which gave them milk,
cheese and of course a limited supply of flesh: nor is there any reason
to suppose that during a considerable part of that time they may not
have cultivated some spots of fertile ground in the wilderness. We may
assume, as in most cases of miracle, that the supernatural supply was
commensurate with their actual necessity. The manna was not withheld in
fact until the Israelites had passed the Jordan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 17](exo017)

</div>
