<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo013)  [Next](exo015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001)

[Exodus 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 14:2</span></span>

That they turn - i. e. away from the wilderness, and go southwards, to
the west of the Bitter Lakes, which completely separated them from the
desert.

Pi-hahiroth - The place is generally identified with Ajrud, a fortress
with a very large well of good water, situated at the foot of an
elevation commanding the plain which extends to Suez, at a distance of
four leagues. The journey from Etham might occupy two, or even three
days.

Migdol - A tower, or fort, the "Maktal" of Egyptian monuments; it is
probably to be identified with Bir Suweis, about two miles from Suez.

Baal-zephon - The name under which the Phoenicians, who had a settlement
in Lower Egypt at a very ancient period, worshipped their chief Deity.
There can be no doubt it was near Kolsum, or Suez. From the text it is
clear that the encampment of the Israelites extended over the plain from
Pi-hahiroth: their headquarters being between Bir Suweis and the sea
opposite to Baal-Zephon. At Ajrud the road branches off in two
directions, one leading to the wilderness by a tract, now dry, but in
the time of Moses probably impassable (see next note); the other leading
to Suez, which was doubtless followed by the Israelites.

[Exodus 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 14:3</span></span>

They are entangled ... - The original intention of Moses was to go
toward Palestine by the wilderness: when that purpose was changed by
God's direction and they moved southwards, Pharaoh, on receiving
information, was of course aware that they were completely shut in,
since the waters of the Red Sea then extended to the Bitter Lakes. It is
known that the Red Sea at some remote period extended considerably
further toward the north than it does at present. In the time of Moses
the water north of Kolsum joined the Bitter Lakes, though at present the
constant accumulation of sand has covered the intervening space to the
extent of 8000 to 10,000 yards.

[Exodus 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 14:5</span></span>

The people fled - This was a natural inference from the change of
direction, which indicated a determination to escape from Egypt. Up to
the time when that information reached Pharaoh both he and his people
understood that the Israelites would return after keeping a festival in
the district adjoining Etham. From Etham the intelligence would be
forwarded by the commander of the garrison to Rameses in less than a
day, and the cavalry, a highly-disciplined force, would be ready for
immediate departure.

[Exodus 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 14:7</span></span>

Six hundred chosen chariots - The Egyptian army comprised large numbers
of chariots, each drawn by two horses, with two men, one bearing the
shield and driving, the other fully armed. The horses were thoroughbred,
renowned for strength and spirit. Chariots are first represented on the
monuments of the 18th dynasty. By "all the chariots of Egypt" we are to
understand all that were stationed in Lower Egypt, most of them probably
at Rameses and other frontier garrisons near the headquarters of
Pharaoh.

Captains - The word שׁלישׁ shâlı̂ysh, literally "third or thirtieth," may
represent an Egyptian title. The king had about him a council of thirty,
each of whom bore a title, Mapu, a "thirty man." The word occurs
frequently in the Books of Kings. David seems to have organized the
Shalishim as a distinct corps (see [Sa2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008) Hebrew), retaining the old name,
and adopting the Egyptian system.

[Exodus 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 14:9</span></span>

And his horsemen - See [Exo 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005).

[Exodus 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 14:11</span></span>

No graves in Egypt - This bitter taunt was probably suggested by the
vast extent of cemeteries in Egypt, which might not improperly be called
the land of tombs.

[Exodus 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 14:12</span></span>

Let us alone - This is a gross exaggeration, yet not without a semblance
of truth: for although the Israelites welcomed the message of Moses at
first, they gave way completely at the first serious trial. See the
reference in the margin. The whole passage foreshadows the conduct of
the people in the wilderness.

[Exodus 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 14:13</span></span>

For the Egyptians whom ... - The true sense is, ye shall never see the
Egyptians in the same way, under the same circumstances.

[Exodus 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 14:15</span></span>

Wherefore criest thou unto me? - Moses does not speak of his
intercession, and we only know of it from this answer to his prayer.

[Exodus 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 14:19</span></span>

The angel of God - Compare the margin reference, and see [Exo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002).

[Exodus 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 14:21</span></span>

A strong east wind - The agency by which the object effected was natural
(compare [Exo 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008) note): and the
conditions of the narrative are satisfied by the hypothesis, that the
passage took place near Suez.

The waters were divided - i. e. there was a complete separation between
the water of the gulf and the water to the north of Kolsum.

[Exodus 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 14:22</span></span>

Were a wall unto them - Compare [Nah
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008). The waters served the purpose of
an intrenchment and wall; the people could not be attacked on either
flank during the transit; to the north was the water covering the whole
district; to the south was the Red Sea.

[Exodus 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 14:24</span></span>

In the morning watch - At sunrise, a little before 6 a.m.in April.

Troubled - By a sudden panic.

[Exodus 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 14:26</span></span>

That the waters may come - A sudden cessation of the wind, possibly
coinciding with a spring tide (it was full moon) would immediately
convert the low flat sand-banks first into a quicksand, and then into a
mass of waters, in a time far less than would suffice for the escape of
a single chariot, or horseman loaded with heavy corslet.

[Exodus 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 14:27</span></span>

Overthrew the Egyptians - Better as in the margin, The Lord shook them
off, hurled them from their chariots into the sea.

[Exodus 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 14:28</span></span>

Not so much as one of them - Escape would be impossible [Exo
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#026). Pharaoh's destruction,
independent of the distinct statement of the Psalmist, [Psa
136:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#015), was in fact inevitable. The
station of the king was in the vanguard: on every monument the Pharaoh
is represented as the leader of the army. The death of the Pharaoh, and
the entire loss of the chariotry and cavalry accounts for the
undisturbed retreat of the Israelites through a district then subject to
Egypt and easily accessible to their forces. If, as appears probable,
Tothmosis II was the Pharaoh, the first recorded expedition into the
Peninsula took place 17 years after his death; and 22 years elapsed
before any measures were taken to recover the lost ascendancy of Egypt
in Syria. So complete, so marvelous was the deliverance: thus the
Israelites were "baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea" [Co1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002). When they left Baal-Zephon they
were separated finally from the idolatry of Egypt: when they passed the
Red Sea their independence of its power was sealed; their life as a
nation then began, a life inseparable henceforth from belief in Yahweh
and His servant Moses, only to be merged in the higher life revealed by
His Son.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 15](exo015)

</div>
