<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo016)  [Next](exo018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

[Exodus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 17:1</span></span>

According to their journeys - The Israelites rested at two stations
before they reached Rephidim, namely, Dophkah and Alush [Num
33:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#012). Dophkah was in the Wady Sih,
a day's journey from the Wady Nasb. The wilderness of Sin [Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001) properly speaking ends here, the
sandstone ceases, and is replaced by the porphyry and granite which
belong to the central formation of the Sinaitic group. Alush may have
been near the entrance to the Wady Sheikh.

Rephidim - (Variously placed at Feiran at the base of Mount Serbal, or
at the pass of El Watiyeh.)

[Exodus 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 17:2</span></span>

Tempt the Lord - It is a general characteristic of the Israelites that
the miracles, which met each need as it arose, failed to produce a habit
of faith: but the severity of the trial, the faintness and anguish of
thirst in the burning desert, must not be overlooked in appreciating
their conduct.

[Exodus 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 17:6</span></span>

The rock in Horeb - (a rock situated, according to Arab tradition, in
Wady Feiran. Horeb was a name given to the whole desert of Sinai and
subsequently attached to the mountain. Palmer).

It is questioned whether the water thus supplied ceased with the
immediate occasion; see [Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004), the
general meaning of which appears to be that their wants were ever
supplied from Him, of whom the rock was but a symbol, and who
accompanied them in all their wanderings.

[Exodus 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 17:7</span></span>

Massah ...Meribah - See the margin. On the importance of this lesson see
our Lord's words, [Mat 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007).

[Exodus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 17:8</span></span>

Then came Amalek - The attack occurred about two months after the
Exodus, toward the end of May or early in June, when the Bedouins leave
the lower plains in order to find pasture for their flocks on the cooler
heights. The approach of the Israelites to Sinai would of course attract
notice, and no cause of warfare is more common than a dispute for the
right of pasturage. The Amalekites were at that time the most powerful
race in the Peninsula; here they took their position as the chief of the
pagans. They were also the first among the pagans who attacked God's
people, and as such were marked out for punishment (see the marginal
references).

[Exodus 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 17:9</span></span>

Joshua - This is the first mention of the great follower and successor
of Moses. He died at the age of 110, some 65 years after this
transaction. His original name was Hosea, but Moses calls him by the
full name, which was first given about forty years afterward, as that by
which he was to be known to succeeding generations. From this it may
perhaps be inferred that this portion of Exodus was written, or revised,
toward the end of the sojourn in the wilderness.

The rod of God - See [Exo 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#020). The
hill is supposed to be the height now called Feria an the north side of
the plain Er Rahah; (or, Jebel Tahuneh over Feiran. Palmer).

[Exodus 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 17:10</span></span>

Hur - Again mentioned with Aaron, in [Exo
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014). He was grandfather of Bezaleel,
the great sculptor and artificer of the tabernacle, [Exo
31:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#002), and belonged to the tribe of
Judah. (See [Ch1 2:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#018).)

[Exodus 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 17:11</span></span>

The act represents the efficacy of intercessory prayer - offered
doubtless by Moses - a point of great moment to the Israelites at that
time and to the Church in all ages.

[Exodus 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 17:12</span></span>

Until the going down of the sun - The length of this first great battle
indicates the strength and obstinacy of the assailants. It was no mere
raid of Bedouins, but a deliberate attack of the Amalekites, who had
been probably thoroughly trained in warfare by their struggles with
Egypt.

[Exodus 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 17:13</span></span>

With the edge of the sword - This expression always denotes a great
slaughter of the enemy.

[Exodus 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 17:14</span></span>

In a book - in the book, i. e. the book which contained the history of
God's dealings with His people. Moses was further instructed to impress
the command especially on the mind of Joshua, as the leader to whom the
first step toward its accomplishment would be entrusted on the conquest
of Canaan. The work was not actually completed until the reign of
Hezekiah, [Ch1 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#043).

[Exodus 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 17:15</span></span>

Jehovah-nissi - See the margin, "Jehovah my banner." As a proper name
the Hebrew word is rightly preserved. The meaning is evidently that the
name of Yahweh is the true banner under which victory is certain; so to
speak, the motto or inscription on the banners of the host. Inscriptions
on the royal standard were well known. Each of the Pharaohs on his
accession adopted one in addition to his official name.

[Exodus 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 17:16</span></span>

Because the Lord hath sworn - This rendering is incorrect. Our
translators regard the expression as a solemn asseveration by the throne
of God. However, to this the objections are insuperable; it has no
parallel in Scriptural usage: God swears by Himself, not by His Throne.
As the Hebrew text now stands the meaning is more satisfactorily given
in the margin.

An alteration, slight in form, but considerable in meaning, has been
proposed with much confidence, namely, נס nês, "standard" for כסא
kı̂ssê', "throne"; thus connecting the name of the altar with the
sentence. Conjectural emendations are not to be adopted without
necessity, and the obvious a priori probability of such a reading makes
it improbable that one so far more difficult should have been
substituted for it. One of the surest canons of criticism militates
against its reception. As it stands, the text was undoubtedly that which
was alone known to the Targumists, the Samaritan, the Syriac, the Latin
and the Arabic translators. The Septuagint appears to have had a
different reading: ἐν χειρὶ κρυφαίᾳ πολεμεῖ en cheiri kruphē polemeō.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 18](exo018)

</div>
