<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo006)  [Next](exo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

[Exodus 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 7:1</span></span>

With this chapter begins the series of miracles performed in Egypt. They
are progressive. The first miracle is performed to accredit the mission
of the brothers; it is simply credential, and unaccompanied by any
infliction. Then come signs which show that the powers of nature are
subject to the will of Yahweh, each plague being attended with grave
consequences to the Egyptians, yet not inflicting severe loss or
suffering; then in rapid succession come ruinous and devastating
plagues, murrain, boils, hail and lightning, locusts, darkness, and
lastly, the death of the firstborn. Each of the inflictions has a
demonstrable connection with Egyptian customs and phenomena; each is
directly aimed at some Egyptian superstition; all are marvelous, not,
for the most part, as reversing, but as developing forces inherent in
nature, and directing them to a special end. The effects correspond with
these characteristics; the first miracles are neglected; the following
plagues first alarm, and then for a season, subdue, the king, who does
not give way until his firstborn is struck. Even that blow leaves him
capable of a last effort, which completes his ruin, and the deliverance
of the Israelites.

I have made thee a god - Or "appointed thee." See the margin reference.
Moses will stand in this special relation to Pharaoh, that God will
address him by a prophet, i. e. by one appointed to speak in His name.
The passage is an important one as illustrating the primary and
essential characteristic of a prophet, he is the declarer of God's will
and purpose.

[Exodus 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 7:3</span></span>

Wonders - A word used only of portents performed to prove a divine
interposition; they were the credentials of God's messengers.

[Exodus 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 7:9</span></span>

Thy rod - Apparently the rod before described [Exo
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#002), which Moses on this occasion
gives to Aaron as his representative.

A serpent - A word different from that in [Exo
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#003). Here a more general term, תנין
tannı̂yn, is employed, which in other passages includes all sea or river
monsters, and is more specially applied to the crocodile as a symbol of
Egypt. It occurs in the Egyptian ritual, nearly in the same form,
"Tanem," as a synonym of the monster serpent which represents the
principle of antagonism to light and life.

[Exodus 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 7:11</span></span>

Three names for the magicians of Egypt are given in this verse. The
"wise men" are men who know occult arts. The "sorcerers" are they who
"mutter magic formulae," especially when driving away crocodiles,
snakes, asps, etc. It was natural that Pharaoh should have sent for such
persons. The "magicians" are the "bearers of sacred words," scribes and
interpreters of hieroglyphic writings. Books containing magic formulae
belonged exclusively to the king; no one was permitted to consult them
but the priests and wise men, who formed a council or college, and were
called in by the Pharaoh on all occasions of difficulty.

The names of the two principal magicians, Jannes and Jambres, who
"withstood Moses," are preserved by Paul, [Ti2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008). Both names are Egyptian.

Enchantments - The original expression implies a deceptive appearance,
an illusion, a juggler's trick, not an actual putting forth of magic
power. Pharaoh may or may not have believed in a real transformation;
but in either case he would naturally consider that if the portent
performed by Aaron differed from that of the magicians, it was a
difference of degree only, implying merely superiority in a common art.
The miracle which followed [Exo 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012)
was sufficient to convince him had he been open to conviction. It was a
miracle which showed the truth and power of Yahweh in contrast with that
of others.

[Exodus 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 7:13</span></span>

And he hardened - Or Pharaoh's heart was hardened. See [Exo
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021).

[Exodus 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 7:15</span></span>

He goeth out unto the water - The Nile was worshipped under various
names and symbols; at Memphis especially, as Hapi, i. e. Apis, the
sacred bull, or living representation of Osiris, of whom the river was
regarded as the embodiment or manifestation. If, as is probable, the
king went to offer his devotions, the miracle would have special force
and suitableness. It was also the season of the yearly overflowing,
about the middle of June; and the daily rise of the water was accurately
recorded, under the personal superintendence of the king. In early
inscriptions the Nilometer is the symbol of stability and providential
care.

[Exodus 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 7:17</span></span>

Turned to blood - This miracle would bear a certain resemblance to
natural phenomena, and therefore be one which Pharaoh might see with
amazement and dismay, yet without complete conviction. It is well known
that before the rise the water of the Nile is green and unfit to drink.
About the 25th of June it becomes clear, and then yellow, and gradually
reddish like ochre; an effect due to the presence of microscopic
cryptogams and infusoria. The supernatural character of the visitation
was tested by the suddenness of the change, by its immediate connection
with the words and act of Moses, and by its effects. It killed the fish,
and made the water unfit for use, neither of which results follows the
annual discoloration.

[Exodus 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 7:18</span></span>

Shall lothe - The water of the Nile has always been regarded by the
Egyptians as a blessing unique to their land. It is the only pure and
wholesome water in their country, since the water in wells and cisterns
is unwholesome, while rain water seldom falls, and fountains are
extremely rare.

[Exodus 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 7:19</span></span>

The "streams" mean the natural branches of the Nile in Lower Egypt. The
word "rivers" should rather be "canals"; they were of great extent,
running parallel to the Nile, and communicating with it by sluices,
which were opened at the rise, and closed at the subsidence of the
inundation. The word rendered "ponds" refers either to natural
fountains, or more probably to cisterns or tanks found in every town and
village. The "pools", literally "gathering of waters," were the
reservoirs, always large and some of enormous extent, containing
sufficient water to irrigate the country in the dry season.

In vessels of wood - The Nile water is kept in vessels and is purified
for use by filtering, and by certain ingredients such as the paste of
almonds.

[Exodus 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 7:21</span></span>

The fish ... - The Egyptians subsisted to a great extent on the fish of
the Nile, though salt-water fish were regarded as impure. A mortality
among the fish was a plague that was much dreaded.

[Exodus 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 7:25</span></span>

Seven days - This marks the duration of the plague. The natural
discoloration of the Nile water lasts generally much longer, about 20
days.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 8](exo008)

</div>
