<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen039)  [Next](gen041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)

\- Joseph in Prison

An uncomplaining patience and an unhesitating hopefulness keep the
breast of Joseph in calm tranquillity. There is a God above, and that
God is with him. His soul swerves not from this feeling. Meanwhile, new
and distinguished prisoners are introduced into his place of
confinement.

[Gen 40:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)

The chief butler and chief baker, high officials in Pharaoh's court,
come under the displeasure of their sovereign. "In the house of the
captain of the guards." It appears that this officer's establishment
contained the keep in which Joseph and these criminals were confined.
"Charged Joseph with them." As Joseph was his slave, and these were
state prisoners, he appointed him to wait upon them. It is probable that
Joseph's character had been somewhat re-established with him during his
residence in the prison.

[Gen 40:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#005)

These prisoners dream, "each according to the interpretation of his
dream," the imagery of which was suited to indicate his future state.
They were sad - anxious to know the meaning of these impressive dreams.
"Why are your forces bad today?" Joseph keeps up his character of frank
composure. "Do not interpretations belong to God?" In his past history
he had learned that dreams themselves come from God. And when he adds,
"Tell them now to me," he intimates that God would enable him to
interpret their dreams. Here again he uses the general name of God,
which was common to him with the pagan.

[Gen 40:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#009)

The chief butler now recites his dream. "Pressed them into Pharaoh's
cup." The imagery of the dream is not intended to intimate that Pharaoh
drank only the fresh juice of the grape. It only expresses by a natural
figure the source of wine, and possibly the duty of the chief butler to
understand and superintend the whole process of its formation. Egypt was
not only a corn, but a vine country. The interpretation of this dream
was very obvious and natural; yet not without a divine intimation could
it be known that the "three branches were three days." Joseph, in the
quiet confidence that his interpretation would prove correct, begs the
chief butler to remember him and endeavor to procure his release.
"Stolen, stolen was I." He assures him that he was not a criminal, and
that his enslavement was an act of wrongful violence - a robbery by the
strong hand. "From the land of the Hebrews;" a very remarkable
expression, as it strongly favors the presumption that the Hebrews
inhabited the country before Kenaan took possession of it. "I have not
done aught." Joseph pleads innocence, and claims liberation, not as an
unmerited favor, but as a right. "The pit." The pit without water seems
to have been the primitive place of confinement for culprits.

[Gen 40:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016)

The chief baker is encouraged by this interpretation to tell his dream.
"I also." He anticipates a favorable answer, from the remarkable
likeness of the dreams. "On my head." It appears from the monuments of
Egypt that it was the custom for men to carry articles on their heads.
"All manner of baked meats" were also characteristic of a corn country.
"Lift up thy head from upon thee." This part of the interpretation
proves its divine origin. And hang thee - thy body, after being
beheaded. This was a constant warning to all beholders.

[Gen 40:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020)

The interpretations prove correct. "The birthday of Pharaoh." It is
natural and proper for men to celebrate with thanksgiving the day of
their birth, as life is a pure and positive blessing. The benign Creator
gives only a happy and precious form of existence to those whom he
endows with the capacity of estimating its value. A birthday feast
cannot be without a chief butler and a chief baker, and hence, the fate
of these criminals must be promptly decided. "Lifted up the head;" a
phrase of double meaning. The chief butler remembers not Joseph. This is
a case of frequent occurrence in this nether world. But there is One
above who does not forget him. He will deliver him at the proper time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 41](gen041)

</div>
