<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen001)  [Next](gen003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)

[Genesis 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 2:1</span></span>

\- The Seventh Day

1\. צבא tsābā' "a host in marching order," a company of persons or
things in the order of their nature and the progressive discharge of
their functions. Hence, it is applied to the starry host [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019), to the angelic host [Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019), to the host of Israel [Exo
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041), and to the ministering Levites
[Num 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#023). κόσμος kosmos.

2\. חשׁביעי chashebı̂y‛ı̂y. Here השׁשׁי hashshı̂y is read by the Samaritan
Pentateuch, the Septuagint, the Syriac, and Josephus. The Masoretic
reading, however, is preferable, as the sixth day was completed in the
preceding paragraph: to finish a work on the seventh day is, in Hebrew
phrase, not to do any part of it on that day, but to cease from it as a
thing already finished; and "resting," in the subsequent part of the
verse, is distinct from "finishing," being the positive of which the
latter is the negative.

שׁבת shābat "rest." ישׁב yāshab "sit."

3\. קדשׁ qādı̂sh "be separate, clean, holy, set apart for a sacred use."

In this section we have the institution of the day of rest, the Sabbath
שׁבת shabāt, on the cessation of God from his creative activity.

[Gen 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)

And all the host of them. - All the array of luminaries, plants, and
animals by which the darkness, waste, and solitude of sky and land were
removed, has now been called into unhindered action or new existence.
The whole is now finished; that is, perfectly suited at length for the
convenience of man, the high-born inhabitant of this fair scene. Since
the absolute beginning of things the earth may have undergone many
changes of climate and surface before it was adapted for the residence
of man. But it has received the finishing touch in these last six days.
These days accordingly are to man the only period of creation, since the
beginning of time, of special or personal interest. The preceding
interval of progressive development and periodical creation is, in
regard to him, condensed into a point of time. The creative work of the
six days is accordingly called the "making," or fitting up for man of
"the skies and the land and the sea, and all that in them is" ([Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010) ([Exo
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#011))).

[Gen 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002)

Then finished. - To finish a work, in Hebrew conception, is to cease
from it, to have done with it. "On the seventh day." The seventh day is
distinguished from all the preceding days by being itself the subject of
the narrative. In the absence of any work on this day, the Eternal is
occupied with the day itself, and does four things in reference to it.
First, he ceased from his work which he had made. Secondly, he rested.
By this was indicated that his undertaking was accomplished. When
nothing more remains to be done, the purposing agent rests contented.
The resting of God arises not from weariness, but from the completion of
his task. He is refreshed, not by the recruiting of his strength, but by
the satisfaction of having before him a finished good [Exo
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#017).

[Gen 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003)

Thirdly, he blessed the seventh day. Blessing results in the bestowment
of some good on the object blessed. The only good that can be bestowed
on a portion of time is to dedicate it to a noble use, a special and
pleasing enjoyment. Accordingly, in the forth place, he hallowed it or
set it apart to a holy rest. This consecration is the blessing conferred
on the seventh day. It is devoted to the rest that followed, when God's
work was done, to the satisfaction and delight arising from the
consciousness of having achieved his end, and from the contemplation of
the good he has realized. Our joy on such occasions is expressed by
mutual visitation, congratulation, and hospitality. None of these
outward demonstrations is mentioned here, and would be, so far as the
Supreme Being is concerned, altogether out of place. But our celebration
of the Sabbath naturally includes the holy convocation or solemn meeting
together in joyful mood [Lev 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#003), the
singing of songs of thanksgiving in commemoration of our existence and
our salvation ([Exo 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#011) ([Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010); [Deu
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015)), the opening of our mouths to
God in prayer, and the opening of God's mouth to us in the reading and
preaching of the Word. The sacred rest which characterizes the day
precludes the labor and bustle of hospitable entertainment. But the Lord
at set times spreads for us his table laden with the touching emblems of
that spiritual fare which gives eternal life.

The solemn act of blessing and hallowing is the institution of a
perpetual order of seventh-day rest: in the same manner as the blessing
of the animals denoted a perpetuity of self-multiplication, and the
blessing of man indicated further a perpetuity of dominion over the
earth and its products. The present record is a sufficient proof that
the original institution was never forgotten by man. If it had ceased to
be observed by mankind, the intervening event of the fall would have
been sufficient to account for its discontinuance. It is not, indeed,
the manner of Scripture, especially in a record that often deals with
centuries of time, to note the ordinary recurrence of a seventh-day
rest, or any other periodical festival, even though it may have taken
firm hold among the hereditary customs of social life. Yet incidental
traces of the keeping of the Sabbath are found in the record of the
deluge, when the sacred writer has occasion to notice short intervals of
time. The measurement of time by weeks then appears [Gen
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#010), [Gen
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#012). The same division of time again
comes up in the history of Jacob [Gen
29:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#027). This unit of measure is
traceable to nothing but the institution of the seventh-day rest.

This institution is a new evidence that we have arrived at the stage of
rational creatures. The number of days employed in the work of creation
shows that we are come to the times of man. The distinction of times
would have no meaning to the irrational world. But apart from this
consideration, the seventh-day rest is not an ordinance of nature. It
makes no mark in the succession of physical things. It has no palpable
effect on the merely animal world. The sun rises, the moon and the stars
pursue their course; the plants grow, the flowers blow, the fruit
ripens; the brute animal seeks its food and provides for its young on
this as on other days. The Sabbath, therefore, is founded, not in
nature, but in history. Its periodical return is marked by the
numeration of seven days. It appeals not to instinct, but to memory, to
intelligence. A reason is assigned for its observance; and this itself
is a step above mere sense, an indication that the era of man has begun.
The reason is thus expressed: "Because in it he had rested from all his
work." This reason is found in the procedure of God; and God himself, as
well as all his ways, man alone is competent in any measure to
apprehend.

It is consonant with our ideas of the wisdom and righteousness of God to
believe that the seventh-day rest is adjusted to the physical nature of
man and of the animals which he domesticates as beasts of labor. But
this is subordinate to its original end, the commemoration of the
completion of God's creative work by a sacred rest, which has a direct
bearing, as we learn from the record of its institution, on metaphysical
and moral distinctions.

The rest here, it is to be remembered, is God's rest. The refreshment is
God's refreshment, which arises rather from the joy of achievement than
from the relief of fatigue. Yet the work in which God was engaged was
the creation of man and the previous adaptation of the world to be his
home. Man's rest, therefore, on this day is not only an act of communion
with God in the satisfaction of resting after his work was done, but, at
the same time, a thankful commemoration of that auspicious event in
which the Almighty gave a noble origin and a happy existence to the
human race. It is this which, even apart from its divine institution, at
once raises the Sabbath above all human commemorative festivals, and
imparts to it, to its joys and to its modes of expressing them, a height
of sacredness and a force of obligation which cannot belong to any mere
human arrangement.

In order to enter upon the observance of this day with intelligence,
therefore, it was necessary that the human pair should have been
acquainted with the events recorded in the preceding chapter. They must
have been informed of the original creation of all things, and therefore
of the eternal existence of the Creator. Further, they must have been
instructed in the order and purpose of the six days' creation, by which
the land and sky were prepared for the residence of man. They must in
consequence have learned that they themselves were created in the image
of God, and intended to have dominion over all the animal world. This
information would fill their pure and infantile minds with thoughts of
wonder, gratitude, and complacential delight, and prepare them for
entering upon the celebration of the seventh-day rest with the
understanding and the heart. It is scarcely needful to add that this was
the first full day of the newly-created pair in their terrestrial home.
This would add a new historical interest to this day above all others.
We cannot say how much time it would take to make the parents of our
race aware of the meaning of all these wondrous events. But there can be
no reasonable doubt that he who made them in his image could convey into
their minds such simple and elementary conceptions of the origin of
themselves and the creatures around them as would enable them to keep
even the first Sabbath with propriety. And these conceptions would rise
into more enlarged, distinct, and adequate notions of the reality of
things along with the general development of their mental faculties.
This implies, we perceive, an oral revelation to the very first man. But
it is premature to pursue this matter any further at present.

The recital of the resting of God on this day is not closed with the
usual formula, "and evening was, and morning was, day seventh." The
reason of this is obvious. In the former days the occupation of the
Eternal Being was definitely concluded in the period of the one day. On
the seventh day, however, the rest of the Creator was only commenced,
has thence continued to the present hour, and will not be fully
completed till the human race has run out its course. When the last man
has been born and has arrived at the crisis of his destiny, then may we
expect a new creation, another putting forth of the divine energy, to
prepare the skies above and the earth beneath for a new stage of man's
history, in which he will appear as a race no longer in process of
development, but completed in number, confirmed in moral character,
transformed in physical constitution, and so adapted for a new scene of
existence. Meanwhile, the interval between the creation now recorded and
that prognosticated in subsequent revelations from heaven [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017); [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013); [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001) is the long Sabbath of the
Almighty, so far as this world is concerned, in which he serenely
contemplates from the throne of his providence the strange workings and
strivings of that intellectual and moral race he has called into being,
the ebbings and flowings of ethical and physical good in their checkered
history, and the final destiny to which each individual in the
unfettered exercise of his moral freedom is incessantly advancing.

Hence, we gather some important lessons concerning the primeval design
of the Sabbath. It was intended, not for God himself, whose Sabbath does
not end until the consummation of all things, but for man, whose origin
it commemorates and whose end it foreshadows [Mar
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#027). It not obscurely hints that work
is to be the main business of man in the present stage of his existence.
This work may be either an exhilerating exercise of those mental and
corporeal faculties with which he is endowed, or a toilsome labor, a
constant struggle for the means of life, according to the use he may
make of his inborn liberty.

But between the sixfold periods of work is interposed the day of rest, a
free breathing time for man, in which he may recall his origin from and
meditate on his relationship to God. It lifts him out of the routine of
mechanical or even intellectual labor into the sphere of conscious
leisure and occasional participation with his Maker in his perpetual
rest. It is also a type of something higher. It whispers into his soul
an audible presentiment of a time when his probationary career will be
over, his faculties will be matured by the experience and the education
of time, and he will be transformed and translated to a higher stage of
being, where he will hold uninterrupted fellowship with his Creator in
the perpetual leisure and liberty of the children of God. This paragraph
completes the first of the eleven documents into which Genesis is
separable, and the first grand stage in the narrative of the ways of God
with man. It is the keystone of the arch in the history of that primeval
creation to which we belong. The document which it closes is
distinguished from those that succeed in several important respects:

First, it is a diary; while the others are usually arranged in
generations or life-periods.

Secondly, it is a complete drama, consisting of seven acts with a
prologue. These seven stages contain two triads of action, which match
each other in all respects, and a seventh constituting a sort of
epilogue or completion of the whole.

Though the Scripture takes no notice of any significance or sacredness
inherent in particular numbers, yet we cannot avoid associating them
with the objects to which they are prominently applied. The number one
is especially applicable to the unity of God. Two, the number of
repetition, is expressive of emphasis or confirmation, as the two
witnesses. Three marks the three persons or hypostases in God. Four
notes the four quarters of the world, and therefore reminds us of the
physical system of things, or the cosmos. Five is the haIf of ten, the
whole, and the basis of our decimal numeration. Seven, being composed of
twice three and one, is especially suited for sacred uses; being the sum
of three and four, it points to the communion of God with man. It is,
therefore, the number of sacred fellowship. Twelve is the product of
three and four, and points to the reconciliation of God and man: it is
therefore the number of the church. Twenty-two and eleven, being the
whole and the half of the Hebrew alphabet, have somewhat the same
relation as ten and five. Twenty-four points to the New Testament, or
completed church.

The other documents do not exhibit the sevenfold structure, though they
display the same general laws of composition. They are arranged
according to a plan of their own, and are all remarkable for their
simplicity, order, and perspicuity.

Thirdly, the matter of the first differs from that of the others. The
first is a record of creation; the others of development. This is
sufficient to account for the diversity of style and plan. Each piece is
admirably adapted to the topic of which it treats.

Fourthly, the first document is distinguished from the second by the use
of the term אלהים ‛Elohiym only for the Supreme Being. This name is here
appropriate, as the Everlasting One here steps forth from the
inscrutable secrecy of his immutable perfection to crown the latest
stage of our planet's history with a new creation adapted to its present
conditions. Before all creation he was the Everduring, the Unchangeable,
and therefore the blessed and only Potentate, dwelling with himself in
the unapproachable light of his own essential glory [Ti1
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015). From that ineffable source of
all being came forth the free fiat of creation. After that transcendent
event, He who was from everlasting to everlasting may receive new names
expressive of the various relations in which he stands to the universe
of created being. But before this relation was established these names
could have no existence or significance.

Neither this last nor any of the former distinctions affords any
argument for diversity of authorship. They arise naturally out of the
diversity of matter, and are such as may proceed from an intelligent
author judiciously adapting his style and plan to the variety of his
topics. At the same time, identity of authorship is not essential to the
historical validity or the divine authority of the elementary parts that
are incorporated by Moses into the book of Genesis. It is only
unnecessary to multiply authorship without a cause.

[Genesis 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 2:4</span></span>

\- Part II. The development

\- Section II - The Man

\- X. The Field

4\. תולדות tôledôt "generations, products, developments." That which
comes from any source, as the child from the parent, the record of which
is history.

יהוה yehovâh. This word occurs about six thousand times in Scripture. It
is obvious from its use that it is, so to speak, the proper name of God.
It never has the article. It is never changed for construction with
another noun. It is never accompanied with a suffix. It is never applied
to any but the true God. This sacred exclusiveness of application,
indeed, led the Jews to read always in place of it אדוני 'adônāy, or, if
this preceded it, אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym, to intimate which the vowel points of
one of these terms were subscribed to it. The root of this name is חוה
chāvâh, an older variety of היה hāyâh, which, as we have seen, has three
meanings, - "be" in the sense of coming into existence, "be" in that of
becoming, and "be" in that of merely existing. The first of these
meanings has no application to God, who had no beginning of existence.

The last applies to God, but affords no distinctive characteristic, as
it belongs equally to all objects that have existence. The second is
proper to God in the sense, not of acquiring any new attribute, but of
becoming active from a state of repose. But he becomes active to the eye
of man only by causing some new effect to be, which makes its appearance
in the world of sensible things. He becomes, then, only by causing to be
or to become. Hence, he that becomes, when applied to the Creator, is
really he that causes to be. This name, therefore, involves the active
or causative force of the root from which it springs, and designates God
in relation with the system of things he has called into being, and
especially with man, the only intelligent observer of him or of his
works in this nether world. It distinguishes him as the Author of being,
and therefore the Creator, the worker of miracles, the performer of
promise, the keeper of covenant. Beginning with the י (y) of
personality, it points out God as the person whose habitual character it
has become to cause his purpose to take place. Hence, אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym
designates God as the Everlasting, the Almighty, in his unchangeable
essence, as he is before as well as after creation. יהוה .noitaer yehvâh
distinguishes him as the personal Self-existent, and Author of all
existing things, who gives expression and effect to his purpose,
manifests himself thereby as existing, and maintains a spiritual
intercourse with his intelligent creatures.

The vowel marks usually placed under the consonants of this word are
said to belong to אדוני 'adonāy; and its real pronunciation, which is
supposed to be lost, is conjectured to have been יהוה yehovâh. This
conjecture is supported by the analogy of the supposed antique third
singular masculine imperfect of the verb הוה hāvâh, and by the Greek
forms ΙΑΩ IAW and ΙΑΒΕ IABE which are found in certain authors (Diod.
Sic. i. 19; Macrob. Saturn i. 18; Theodoret, Quaest. xv. ad Exod.). It
is true, indeed, when it has a prefix all its vowels coincide with those
of אדדי 'adonāy. But otherwise the vowel under the first letter is
different, and the qamets at the end is as usual in proper names ending
in the Hebrew letter ה (h) as in others. יהוה yehovâh also finds an
anology in the word ירחם yerochām. In the forms ΙΑΩ IAW and ΙΑΒΕ IABE
the Greek vowels doubtless represent the Hebrew consonants, and not any
vowel points. The Hebrew letter ה (h) is often represented by the Greek
letter α (a). From יהוה yaheovâh we may obtain רהוּ yehû at the end of
compounds, and therefore, expect יהוּ yehû at the beginning. But the
form at the beginning is יהו yehô or יו yô, which indicates the
pronunciation יהוה yehovâh as current with the punctuators. All this
countenances the suggestion that the casual agreement of the two nouns
Yahweh and Adonai in the principal vowels was the circumstance that
facilitated the Jewish endeavor to avoid uttering the proper name of God
except on the most solemn occasions. יהוה yehovâh, moreover, rests on
precarious grounds. The Hebrew analogy would give יהוה yı̂hveh not יהוה
yehovâh for the verbal form. The middle vowel cholem (o) may indicate
the intensive or active force of the root, but we lay no stress on the
mode of pronunciation, since it cannot be positively ascertained.

5\. שׂדה śādeh "plain, country, field," for pasture or tillage, in
opposition to גן gan, "garden, park."

7\. נשׂמה neśāmâh "breath," applied to God and man only.

We meet with no division again in the text till we come to [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015), when the first minor break in
the narrative occurs. This is noted by the intervening space being less
than the remainder of the line. The narrative is therefore so far
regarded as continuous.

We are now entering upon a new plan of narrative, and have therefore to
notice particularly that law of Hebrew composition by which one line of
events is carried on without interruption to its natural resting-point;
after which the writer returns to take up a collateral train of
incidents, that are equally requisite for the elucidation of his main
purpose, though their insertion in the order of time would have marred
the symmetry and perspicuity of the previous narrative. The relation now
about to be given is posterior, as a whole, to that already given as a
whole; but the first incident now to be recorded is some time prior to
the last of the preceding document.

Hitherto we have adhered closely to the form of the original in our
rendering, and so have made use of some inversions which are foreign to
our prose style. Hereafter we shall deviate as little as possible from
the King James Version.

The document upon which we are now entering extends from [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004) to Gen. 4. In the second and third
chapters the author uses the combination אלהים יהוה yehovâh 'ĕlohı̂ym
"the Lord God," to designate the Supreme Being; in the fourth he drops
אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym "God," and employs יהוה yehovâh "the Lord," alone. So
far, then, as the divine appellation is concerned, the fourth chapter is
as clearly separable from the second and third as the first document is
from the present. If diversity of the divine name were a proof of
diversity of authorship, we should here have two documents due to
different authors, each of them different also from the author of the
first document. The second and third chapters, though agreeing in the
designation of God, are clearly distinguishable in style.

The general subject of this document is the history of man to the close
of the line of Cain and the birth of Enosh. This falls into three
clearly marked sections - the origin, the fall, and the family of Adam.
The difference of style and phraseology in its several parts will be
found to correspond with the diversity in the topics of which it treats.
It reverts to an earlier point of time than that at which we had arrived
in the former document, and proceeds upon a new plan, exactly adapted to
the new occasion.

The present section treats of the process of nature which was
simultaneous with the latter part of the supernatural process described
in the preceding document. Its opening paragraph refers to the field.

[Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)

This verse is the title of the present section. It states the subject of
which it treats - "the generations of the skies and the land." The
generations are the posterity or the progress of events relating to the
posterity of the party to whom the term is applied [Gen
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001); [Gen
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009); [Gen
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001); [Gen
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010); [Gen
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002). The development of events is
here presented under the figure of the descendants of a parental pair;
the skies and the land being the metaphorical progenitors of those
events, which are brought about by their conjunct operation.

It then notes the date at which the new narrative commences. "In their
being created." This is the first or general date; namely, after the
primary creation and during the course of the secondary. As the latter
occupied six days, some of the processes of nature began before these
days had elapsed. Next, therefore, is the more special date - "in the
day of Yahweh God's making land and skies." Now, on looking back at the
preceding narrative, we observe that the skies were adjusted and named
on the second day, and the land on the third. Both, therefore, were
completed on the third day, which accordingly is the opening date of the
second branch of the narrative.

The uniqueness of the present section, therefore, is, that it combines
the creative with the preservative agency of God. Creation and progress
here go hand in hand for a season. The narrative here, then, overlaps
half the time of the former, and at the end of the chapter has not
advanced beyond its termination.

אלהים יהוה yehovâh 'ĕlohı̂ym "the Lord God." This phrase is here for the
first time introduced. אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym, as we have seen, is the generic
term denoting God as the Everlasting, and therefore the Almighty, as he
was before all worlds, and still continues to be, now that he is the
sole object of supreme reverence to all intelligent creatures. Yahweh is
the proper name of God to man, self-existent himself, the author of
existence to all persons and things, and manifesting his existence to
those whom he has made capable of such knowledge.

Hence, the latter name is appropriate to the present stage of our
narrative. God has become active in a way worthy of himself, and at the
same time unique to his nature. He has put forth his creative power in
calling the universe into existence. He has now reconstituted the skies
and the land, clothed the latter with a new vegetation, and peopled it
with a new animal kingdom. Especially has he called into being an
inhabitant of this earth made in his own image, and therefore capable of
understanding his works and holding conversation with himself. To man he
has now come to be in certain acts by which he has discovered himself
and his power. And to man he has accordingly become known by a name
which signalizes that new creative process of which man forms a
prominent part. Yahweh - he who causes the successive events of time to
come to pass in the sight and in the interest of man - is a name the
special significance of which will come out on future occasions in the
history of the ways of God with man.

The union of these two divine names, then, indicates him who was before
all things, and by whom now all things consist. It also implies that he
who is now distinguished by the new name Jehovah (יהוה yehovâh) is the
same who was before called 'Elohiym. The combination of the names is
specially suitable in a passage which records a concurrence of creation
and development. The apposition of the two names is continued by the
historian through this and the following chapter. The abstract and
aboriginal name then gives way to the concrete and the historical.

The skies and the land at the beginning of the verse are given in order
of their importance in nature, the skies being first as grander and
higher than the land; at the end, in the order of their importance in
the narrative, the land being before the skies, as the future scene of
the events to be recorded.

This superscription, we see, presupposes the former document, as it
alludes to the creation in general, and to the things made on the second
and third days in particular, without directly narrating these events.
This mode of referring to them implies that they were well known at the
time of the narrator, either by personal observation or by testimony.
Personal observation is out of the question in the present case. By the
testimony of God, therefore, they were already known, and the preceding
record is that testimony. The narrator of the second passage, therefore,
even if not the same as that of the former, had to a moral certainty the
first before his mind when composing the second.

[Gen 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005)

This verse corresponds to the second verse of the preceding narrative.
It describes the field or arable land in the absence of certain
conditions necessary to the progress of vegetation. Plant and herb here
comprise the whole vegetable world. Plants and herbs of the field are
those which are to be found in the open land. A different statement is
made concerning each.

Not a plant of the field was yet in the land. - Here it is to be
remembered that the narrative has reverted to the third day of the
preceding creation. At first sight, then, it might be supposed that the
vegetable species were not created at the hour of that day to which the
narrative refers. But it is not stated that young trees were not in
existence, but merely that plants of the field were not yet in the land.
Of the herbs it is only said that they had not yet sent forth a bud or
blade. And the actual existence of both trees and herbs is implied in
what follows. The reasons for the state of things above described are
the lack of rain to water the soil, and of man to cultivate it. These
would only suffice for growth if the vegetable seeds, at least, were
already in existence. Now, the plants were made before the seeds [Gen
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011), and therefore the first
full-grown and seed-bearing sets of each kind were already created.
Hence, we infer that the state of things described in the text was this:
The original trees were confined to a center of vegetation, from which
it was intended that they should spread in the course of nature. At the
present juncture, then, there was not a tree of the field, a tree of
propagation, in the land; and even the created trees had not sent down a
single root of growth into the land. And if they had dropped a seed, it
was only on the land, and not in the land, as it had not yet struck
root.

And not an herb of the field yet grew. - The herbage seems to have been
more widely diffused than the trees. Hence, it is not said that they
were not in the land, as it is said of field trees. But at the present
moment not an herb had exhibited any signs of growth or sent forth a
single blade beyond the immediate product of creative power.

Rain upon the land - and man to till it, were the two needs that
retarded vegetation. These two means of promoting vegetable growth
differed in their importance and in their mode of application. Moisture
is absolutely necessary, and where it is supplied in abundance the
shifting wind will in the course of time waft the seed. The browsing
herds will aid in the same process of diffusion. Man comes in merely as
an auxiliary to nature in preparing the soil and depositing the seeds
and plants to the best advantage for rapid growth and abundant
fruitfulness. The narrative, as usual, notes only the chief things. Rain
is the only source of vegetable sap; man is the only intentional
cultivator.

[Gen 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#006)

As in the former narrative, so here, the remaining part of the chapter
is employed in recording the removal of the two hinderances to
vegetation. The first of these is removed by the institution of the
natural process by which rain is produced. The atmosphere had been
adjusted so far as to admit of some light. But even on the third day a
dense mass of clouds still shut out the heavenly bodies from view. But
on the creation of plants the Lord God caused it to rain on the land.
This is described in the verse before us. "A mist went up from the
land." It had been ascending from the steaming, reeking land ever since
the waters retired into the hollows. The briny moisture which could not
promote vegetation is dried up. And now he causes the accumulated masses
of cloud to burst forth and dissolve themselves in copious showers.
Thus, "the mist watered the whole face of the soil." The face of the sky
is thereby cleared, and on the following day the sun shone forth in all
his cloudless splendor and fostering warmth.

On the fourth day, then, a second process of nature commenced. The bud
began to swell, the tender blade to peep forth and assume its tint of
green, the gentle breeze to agitate the full-sized plants, the first
seeds to be shaken off and wafted to their resting-place, the first root
to strike into the ground, and the first shoot to rise towards the sky.

This enables us to determine with some degree of probability the Season
of the year when the creation took place. If we look to the ripe fruit
on the first trees we presume that the season is autumn. The scattering
of the seeds, the falling of the rains, and the need of a cultivator
intimated in the text, point to the same period. In a genial climate the
process of vegetation has its beginnings at the falling of the early
rains. Man would be naturally led to gather the abundant fruit which
fell from the trees, and thus, even unwittingly provide a store for the
unbearing period of the year. It is probable, moreover, that he was
formed in a region where vegetation was little interrupted by the
coldest season of the year. This would be most favorable to the
preservation of life in his state of primeval inexperience.

These presumptions are in harmony with the numeration of the months at
the deluge [Gen 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011), and with the
outgoing and the turn of the year at autumn [Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016); [Exo
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#022).

[Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)

The second obstacle to the favorable progress of the vegetable kingdom
is now removed. "And the Lord God formed the man of dust from the soil."
This account of the origin of man differs from the former on account of
the different end the author has in view. There his creation as an
integral whole is recorded with special reference to his higher nature
by which he was suited to hold communion with his Maker, and exercise
dominion over the inferior creation. Here his constitution is described
with marked regard to his adaptation to be the cultivator of the soil.
He is a compound of matter and mind. His material part is dust from the
soil, out of which he is formed as the potter moulds the vessel out of
the clay. He is אדם 'ādām "Adam," the man of the soil, ארמה 'ădāmâh
"adamah." His mission in this respect is to draw out the capabilities of
the soil to support by its produce the myriads of his race.

His mental part is from another source. "And breathed into his nostrils
the breath of life." The word נשׁמה neshāmâh is invariably applied to
God or man, never to any irrational creature. The "breath of life" is
special to this passage. It expresses the spiritual and principal
element in man, which is not formed, but breathed by the Creator into
the physical form of man. This rational part is that in which he bears
the image of God, and is suited to be his vicegerent on earth. As the
earth was prepared to be the dwelling, so was the body to be the organ
of that breath of life which is his essence, himself.

And the man became a living soul. - This term "living soul" is also
applied to the water and land animals [Gen
1:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020), [Gen
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024). As by his body he is allied to
earth and by his soul to heaven, so by the vital union of these he is
associated with the whole animal kingdom, of which he is the constituted
sovereign. This passage, therefore, aptly describes him as he is suited
to dwell and rule on this earth. The height of his glory is yet to come
out in his relation to the future and to God.

The line of narrative here reaches a point of repose. The second lack of
the teeming soil is here supplied. The man to till the ground is
presented in that form which exhibits his fitness for this appropriate
and needful task. We are therefore at liberty to go back for another
train of events which is essential to the progress of our narrative.

[Genesis 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 2:8</span></span>

\- XI. The Garden

8\. גן gan "garden, park," παράδεισος paradeisos, "an enclosed piece of
ground." עדן ‛ēden "Eden, delight." קדם qedem "fore-place, east;
foretime."

11\. פישׁון pı̂yshôn Pishon; related: "flow over, spread, leap." חוילה
chăvı̂ylâh Chavilah. חול chôl "sand." חבל chebel "region."

12\. בדלם bedolam, ἄνθραξ anthrax, "carbuncle," (Septuagint) Βδέλλιον
bdellion, a gum of eastern countries, Arabia, India, Media (Josephus,
etc.). The pearl (Kimchi). שׁהם sohām πράσινος prasinos, "leeklike,"
perhaps the beryl (Septuagint), ὄνυξ onux, "onyx, sardonyx," a precious
stone of the color of the nail (Jerome).

13\. גיחון gı̂ychôn Gichon; related: "break forth." כוּשׁ kûsh Kush; r.
"heap, gather?"

14\. חדקל דגלא dı̂glā' chı̂ddeqel Dijlah, "Tigris." חדק chād, "be sharp.
rapidus," פרת perat Frat, Euphrates. The "sweet or broad stream." Old
Persian, "frata," Sanskrit, "prathu," πλατύς platus.

This paragraph describes the planting of the garden of Eden, and
determines its situation. It goes back, therefore, as we conceive, to
the third day, and runs parallel with the preceding passage.

[Gen 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008)

And the Lord God planted a garden in Eden to the east. - It is evident
that the order of thought is here observed. For the formation of man
with special allusion to his animal nature immediately suggests the
means by which his physical needs are to be supplied. The order of time
is an open question so far as the mere conjunction of the sentences is
concerned. It can only be determined by other considerations.

Here, then, the writer either relates a new creation of trees for the
occasion, or reverts to the occurrences of the third day. But though in
the previous verses he declares the field to be without timber, yet in
the account of the third day the creation of trees is recorded. Now, it
is unnecessary, and therefore unreasonable, to assume two creations of
trees at so short an interval of time. In the former paragraph the
author advanced to the sixth day, in order to lay before his readers
without any interruption the means by which the two conditions of
vegetative progress were satisfied. This brings man into view, and his
appearance gives occasion to speak of the means by which his needs were
supplied.

For this purpose, the author drops the thread of events following the
creation of man, and reverts to the third day. He describes more
particularly what was then done. A center of vegetation was chosen for
the trees, from which they were to be propagated by seed over the land.
This central spot is called a garden or park. It is situated in a region
which is distinguished by its name as a land of delight. It is said, as
we understand, to be in the eastern quarter of Eden. For the word מקדם
mı̂qedem "on the east" is most simply explained by referring to some
point indicated in the text. There are two points to which it may here
refer - the place where the man was created, and the country in which
the garden was placed. But the man was not created at this time, and,
moreover, the place of his creation is not indicated; and hence, we must
refer to the country in which the garden was placed.

And put there the man whom he had formed. - The writer has still the
formation of man in thought, and therefore proceeds to state that he was
thereupon placed in the garden which had been prepared for his
reception, before going on to give a description of the garden. This
verse, therefore, forms a transition from the field and its cultivator
to the garden and its inhabitants.

Without the previous document concerning the creation, however, it could
not have been certainly known that a new line of narrative was taken up
in this verse. Neither could we have discovered what was the precise
time of the creation of the trees. Hence, this verse furnishes a new
proof that the present document was composed, not as an independent
production, but as a continuation of the former.

[Gen 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009)

Having located the newly-formed man of whom he had spoken in the
preceding paragraph, the author now returns to detail the planting and
the watering of the garden. "And the Lord God made to grow out of the
soil every tree likely for sight and good for food." We look on while
the ornamental trees rise to gratify the sight, and the fruit trees
present their mellow fare to the craving appetite. But pre-eminent among
all we contemplate with curious wonder the tree of life in the midst of
the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. These will
come under consideration at a future stage of our narrative.

[Gen 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010)

Here is a river the source of which is in Eden. It passes into the
garden and waters it. "And thence it was parted and became four heads."
This statement means either that the single stream was divided into four
branches, or that there was a division of the river system of the
district into four principal streams, whose sources were all to be found
in it, though one only passed through the garden. In the latter case the
word נהר nâhār may be understood in its primary sense of a flowing of
water in general. This flowing in all the parts of Eden resulted in four
particular flowings or streams, which do not require to have been ever
united. The subsequent land changes in this district during an interval
of five or six thousand years prevent us from determining more precisely
the meaning of the text.

[Gen 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#011), [Gen
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#012)

The Pishon waters in its subsequent course the land of Havilah. This
country is noted for the best gold, and for two other products,
concerning which interpreters differ. Bedolach is, according to the
Septuagint, the carbuncle or crystal; according to others, the pearl, or
a particular kind of gum. The last is the more probable, if we regard
the various Greek and Latin forms of the word: Βδέλλα bdella, Βδέλλιον
bdellion, Josephus Ant. iii. 1, 6; οἱ δὲ μάδελκον hoi de madelkon, οἱ δὲ
Βολχὸν καλοῦσι hoi de bolchon kalousi, Dioscor. i. 71; alii brochon
appellant, alii malacham, alii maldacon, Pliny H. N. 12, 9. Pliny
describes it as black, while the manna, which is compared with it [Num
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#007), is white; but עין ‛ayı̂n the
point of resemblance may refer not to color, but to transparence or some
other visible quality. This transparent, aromatic gum is found in
Arabia, Babylonia, Bactriana, Media, and India. Shoham is variously
conjectured to be the beryl, onyx, sardonyx, or emerald. The first,
according to Pliny, is found in India and about Pontus. As the name
Pishon means the gushing or spouting current, it may have been applied
to many a stream by the migratory tribes. The Halys perhaps contains the
same root with Havilah; namely, הול hvl (Rawlinson's Her. i., p. 126);
and it rises in Armenia (Herod. i. 72). The Chalybes in Pontus, perhaps,
contain the same root. The Pishon may have been the Halys or some other
stream flowing into the Black Sea.

[Gen 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#013), [Gen
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#014)

Gihon, the second river, flows by the land of Kush. It is possible that
the name Kush remains in Caucasus and in the Caspian. The Gihon is the
stream that breaks or bursts forth; a quality common to many rivers. The
name is preserved in the Jyhoon, flowing into the sea of Aral. Here it
probably designates the leading stream flowing out of Armenia into the
Caspian, or in that direction. Hiddekel, the third, goes in front, or on
the east of Asshur. The original Asshur embraced northern Mesopotamia,
as well as the slopes of the mountain range on the other side of the
Tigris. Perath, the fourth, is the well-known Frat or Euphrates.

In endeavoring to determine the situation of Eden, it is evident we can
only proceed on probable grounds. The deluge, and even the distance of
time, warrant us in presuming great land changes to have taken place
since this geographical description applied to the country. Let us see,
however, to what result the simple reading of the text will lead us. A
river is said to flow out of Eden into the garden. This river is not
named, and may, in a primary sense of the term, denote the running water
of the district in general. This is then said to be parted into four
heads - the upper courses of four great rivers. One of these rivers is
known to this day as the Frat or Euphrates. A second is with almost
equal unanimity allowed to be the Dijlah or Tigris. The sources of these
lie not far asunder, in the mountains of Armenia, and in the
neighborhood of the lakes Van and Urumiah. Somewhere in this region must
have been the celebrated but unnamed stream. The Hiddekel flowed east of
Asshur; the primitive portion of which seems therefore to have been in
Mesopotamia. The Gihon may have flowed into the Caspian, on the banks of
which was the original Kush. The Pishon may have turned towards the
Euxine, and compassed the primitive Havilah, lying to the south and east
of that sea.

It may be said that the Kush and Havilah of later times belong to
different localities. This, however, is no solid objection, on two
grounds:

First. Geography affords numerous examples of the transferrence of names
from one place to another along the line of migration. Thus, Galatia in
Asia Minor would be inexplicable or misleading, did not history inform
us that tribes from Gallia had settled there and given their name to the
province. We may therefore expect names to travel with the tribes that
bear them or love them, until they come to their final settlements.
Hence, Kush may have been among the Caucasian glens and on the Caspian
shores. In the progress of his development, whether northward or
southward, he may have left his mark in Kossaea and Kissia, while he
sent his colonies into southern Arabia Aethiopia and probably India.

Second. Countries agreeing in name may be totally unconnected either in
time or place. Thus, in the table of nations we meet with two persons
called Havilah [Gen 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007), [Gen
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#029); the one a Kushite, who settled
probably in the south of Arabia, the other a Joctanite, who occupied a
more northerly locality in the same peninsula. A primitive Havilah,
different from both, may have given his name to the region southeast of
the Euxine.

The rivers Pishon and Gihon may have been greatly altered or even
effaced by the deluge and other causes. Names similar to these may be
found in various places. They cannot prove much more than resemblance in
language, and that may be sometimes very remote. There is one other
Gihon mentioned in Scripture [Kg1
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#033), and several like names occur in
profane history. At first sight it seems to be stated that the one
stream branched into four. If so, this community of origin has
disappeared among the other changes of the country. But in the original
text the words "and thence" come before the verb "parted." This verb has
no subject expressed, and may have its subject implied in itself. The
meaning of the sentence will then be, "and thence," after the garden had
been watered by the river, "it," the river, or the water system of the
country, "was parted into four heads." We cannot tell, and it is not
material, which of these interpretations correctly represents the
original fact.

According to the above view, the land and garden of Eden lay in Armenia,
around the lakes Van and Urumiah, or the district where these lakes now
are. The country here is to this day a land of delight, and very well
suited in many respects to be the cradle of the human race. There is
only one other locality that has any claim to probability from an
examination of Scripture. It is the alluvial ground where the Euphrates
and Tigris unite their currents, and then again separate into two
branches, by which their waters are discharged into the Persian Gulf.
The neck in which they are united is the river that waters the garden.
The rivers, before they unite, and the branches, after they separate;
are the four rivers. The claim of this position to acceptance rests on
the greater contiguity to Kissia or Susiana, a country of the Kushites,
on the one side and on the other to Havilah, a district of Arabia, as
well as its proximity to Babel, where the confusion of tongues took
place. These claims do not constrain our assent. Susiana is nearer the
Tigris itself than the present eastern branch after the separation.
Havilah is not very near the western branch. If Babel be near, Armenia,
where the ark rested, is very far away. Against this position is the
forced meaning it puts on the text by its mode of accounting for the
four rivers. The garden river in the text rises in Eden, and the whole
four have their upper currents in that land. All is different in the
case here supposed. Again, the land of Shinar is a great wheat country,
and abounds in the date palm. But it is not otherwise distinguished for
trees. It is a land of the simoon, the mirage, and the drought, and its
summer heat is oppressive and enfeebling. It cannot therefore claim to
be a land of delight (Eden), either in point of climate or variety of
produce. It is not, consequently, so well suited as the northern
position, either to the description in the text or the requirements of
primeval man.

It is evident that this geographical description must have been written
long after the document in which it is found might have been composed.
Mankind must have multiplied to some extent, have spread themselves
along these rivers, and become familiar with the countries here
designated. All this might have taken place in the lifetime of Adam, and
so have been put on record, or handed down by tradition from an
eye-witness. But it is remarkable that the three names of countries
reappear as proper names among the descendants of Noah after the flood.

Hence, arises a question of great interest concerning the composition of
the document in which they are originally found. If these names be
primeval, the document in its extant form may have been composed in the
time of Adam, and therefore before the deluge. In this case Moses has
merely authenticated it and handed it down in its proper place in the
divine record. And the sons of Noah, from some unexplained association,
have adopted the three names and perpetuated them as family names. If,
on the other hand, these countries are named after the descendants of
Noah, the geographical description of the garden must have been composed
after these men had settled in the countries to which they have given
their names. At the same time, these territorial designations apply to a
time earlier than Moses; hence, the whole document may have been
composed in the time of Noah, who survived the deluge three hundred and
fifty years, and may have witnessed the settlement and the designation
of these countries. And, lastly, if not put together in its present form
by any previous writer, then the document is directly from the pen of
Moses, who composed it out of pre-existent memorials. And as the
previous document was solely due to inspiration, we shall in this case
be led to ascribe the whole of Genesis to Moses as the immediate human
composer.

It must be admitted that any of these ways of accounting for the
existing form of this document is within the bounds of possibility. But
the question is, Which is the most probable? We are in a fair position
for discussing this question in a dispassionate manner, and without any
anxiety, inasmuch as on any of the three suppositions Moses, who lived
long after the latest event expressed or implied, is the acknowledged
voucher for the document before us. It becomes us to speak with great
moderation and caution on a point of so remote antiquity. To demonstrate
this may be one of the best results of this inquiry.

I. The following are some of the grounds for the theory that the names
of countries in the document are original and antediluvian:

First, it was impossible to present to the postdiluvians in later terms
the exact features and conditions of Eden, because many of these were
obliterated. The four rivers no longer sprang from one. Two of the
rivers remained, indeed, but the others had been so materially altered
as to be no longer clearly distinguishable. The Euxine and the Caspian
may now cover their former channels. In circumstances like these later
names would not answer.

Second, though the name Asshur represents a country nearly suitable to
the original conditions, Havilah and Kush cannot easily have their
postdiluvian meanings in the present passage. The presumption that they
have has led interpreters into vain and endless conjectures. Supposing
Kush to be Aethiopia, many have concluded the Gihon to be the Nile,
which in that case must have had the same fountain-head, or at least
risen in the same region with the Euphrates. Others, supposing it to be
a district of the Tigris, near the Persian Gulf, imagine the Gihon to be
one of the mouths of the united Euphrates and Tigris, and thus, give a
distorted sense to the statement that the four streams issued from one.
This supposition, moreover, rests on the precarious hypothesis that the
two rivers had always a common neck. The supposition that Havilah was in
Arabia or on the Indian Ocean is liable to the same objections. Hence,
the presumption that these names are postdiluvian embarrasses the
meaning of the passage.

Third, if these names be primeval, the present document in its integrity
may have been composed in the time of Adam; and this accounts in the
most satisfactory manner for the preservation of these traditions of the
primitive age.

Fourth, the existence of antediluvian documents containing these
original names would explain in the simplest manner the difference in
the localities signified by them before and after the deluge. This
difference has tended to invalidate the authenticity of the book in the
eyes of some; whereas the existence of antiquated names in a document,
though failing to convey to us much historical information, is
calculated to impress us with a sense of its antiquity and authenticity.
And this is of more importance than a little geographical knowledge in a
work whose paramount object is to teach moral and religious truth.

Fifth, it is the habit of the sacred writers not to neglect the old
names of former writers, but to append to them or conjoin with them the
later or better known equivalents, when they wish to present a knowledge
of the place and its former history. Thus, "Bela, this is Zoar" [Gen
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#002), [Gen
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#008); "Kiriath-Arba, this is Hebron"
[Gen 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#002); "Ephrath, this is
Bethlehem" [Gen 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019).

Sixth, these names would be orignally personal; and hence, we can see a
sufficient reason why the sons of Noah renewed them in their families,
as they were naturally disposed to perpetuate the memory of their
distinguished ancestors.

II\. The second hypothesis, that the present form of the document
originated in the time of Noah, after the flood, is supported by the
following considerations:

First, it accounts for the three names of countries in the easiest
manner. The three descendants of Noah had by this time given their names
to these countries. The supposition of a double origin or application of
these names is not necessary.

Second, it accounts for the change in the localities bearing these
names. The migrations and dispersions of tribes carried the names to new
and various districts in the time intervening between Noah and Moses.

Third, it represents with sufficient exactness the locality of the
garden. The deluge may not have greatly altered the general features of
the countries. It may not be intended to represent the four rivers as
derived from any common head stream; it may only be meant that the water
system of the country gathered into four principal rivers. The names of
all these are primeval. Two of them have descended to our days, because
a permanent body of natives remained on their banks. The other two names
have changed with the change of the inhabitants.

Fourth, it allows for primeval documents, if such existed of so early a
date. The surviving document was prepared from such preexisting
writings, or from oral traditions of early days, as yet unalloyed with
error in the God-fearing family of Noah.

Fifth, it is favored by the absence of explanatory proper names, which
we might have expected if there had been any change known at the time of
composition.

III\. The hypothesis that Moses was not merely the authenticator, but
the composer of this as well as the preceding and subsequent documents
of Genesis, has some very strong grounds.

First, it explains the local names with the same simplicity as in the
preceding case (1).

Second, it allows for primeval and successive documents equally well
(4), the rivers Pishon and Gihon and the primary Havilah and Kush being
still in the memory of man, though they disappeared from the records of
later times.

Third, it notifies with fidelity to the attentive reader the changes in
the geographical designations of the past.

Fourth, it accounts for the occurrence of comparatively late names of
localities in an account of primeval times.

Fifth, it explains the extreme brevity of these ancient notices. If
documents had been composed from time to time and inserted in their
original state in the book of God, it must have been a very voluminous
and unmanageable record at a very early period.

These presumptions might now be summed up and compared, and the balance
of probability struck, as is usually done. But we feel bound not to do
so. First. We have not all the possibilities before us, neither is it in
the power of human imagination to enumerate them, and therefore we have
not the whole data for a calculation of probabilities. Second. We have
enough to do with facts, without elevating probabilities into the rank
of facts, and thereby hopelessly embarrassing the whole premises of our
deductive knowledge. Philosophy, and in particular the philosophy of
criticism, has suffered long from this cause. Its very first principles
have been overlaid with foregone conclusions, and its array of seeming
facts has been impaired and enfeebled by the presence of many a sturdy
probability or improbability in the solemn guise of a mock fact. Third.
The supposed fact of a set of documents composed by successive authors,
duly labelled and handed down to Moses to be merely collected into the
book of Genesis, if it was lurking in any mind, stands detected as only
a probability or improbability at best. The second document implies
facts, which are possibly not recorded until the fifth. Fourth. And,
lastly, there is no impossibility or improbability in Moses being not
the compiler but the immediate author of the whole of Genesis, though it
be morally certain that he had oral or written memoranda of the past
before his mind.

[Genesis 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 2:15</span></span>

\- XII. The Command

15\. נוּח nûach "rest, dwell." עבד ‛ābad "work, till, serve." שׁמר
shāmar "keep, guard."

We have here the education of man summed up in a single sentence. Let us
endeavor to unfold the great lessons that are here taught.

[Gen 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015)

The Lord God took the man. - The same omnipotent hand that made him
still held him. "And put him into the garden." The original word is
"caused him to rest," or dwell in the garden as an abode of peace and
recreation. "To dress it and to keep it." The plants of nature, left to
their own course, may degenerate and become wild through the poverty of
the soil on which they alight, or the gradual exhaustion of a once rich
soil. The hand of rational man, therefore, has its appropriate sphere in
preparing and enriching the soil, and in distributing the seeds and
training the shoots in the way most favorable for the full development
of the plant, and especially of its seed or fruits. This "dressing" was
needed even in the garden. The "keeping" of it may refer to the guarding
of it by enclosure from the depredations of the cattle, the wild beasts,
or even the smaller animals. It includes also the faithful preservation
of it as a trust committed to man by his bounteous Maker. There was now
a man to till the soil. The second need of the world of plants was now
supplied. Gardening was the first occupation of primeval man.

[Gen 2:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#016)

And the Lord God commanded the man, saying. - This is a pregnant
sentence. It involves the first principles of our intellectual and moral
philosophy.

I. The command here given in words brings into activity the intellectual
nature of man. First, the power of understanding language is called
forth. The command here addressed to him by his Maker is totally
different from the blessings addressed to the animals in the preceding
chapter. It was not necessary that these blessings should be understood
in order to be carried into effect, inasmuch as He who pronounced them
gave the instincts and powers requisite to their accomplishment. But
this command addressed to man in words must be understood in order to be
obeyed. The capacity for understanding language, then, was originally
lodged in the constitution of man, and only required to be called out by
the articulate voice of God. Still there is something wonderful here,
something beyond the present grasp and promptitude of human
apprehension. If we except the blessing, which may not have been heard,
or may not have been uttered before this command, these words were
absolutely the first that were heard by man.

The significance of the sentences they formed must have been at the same
time conveyed to man by immediate divine teaching. How the lesson was
taught in an instant of time we cannot explain, though we have a distant
resemblance of it in an infant learning to understand its mother-tongue.
This process, indeed, goes over a space of two years; but still there is
an instant in which the first conception of a sign is formed, the first
word is apprehended, the first sentence is understood. In that instant
the knowledge of language is virtually attained. With man, created at
once in his full though undeveloped powers, and still unaffected by any
moral taint, this instant came with the first words spoken to his ear
and to his soul by his Maker's impressive voice, and the first lesson of
language was at once thoroughly taught and learned. Man is now master of
the theory of speech; the conception of a sign has been conveyed into
his mind. This is the passive lesson of elocution: the practice, the
active lesson, will speedily follow.

Not only the secondary part, however, but at the same time the primary
and fundamental part of man's intellectual nature is here developed. The
understanding of the sign necessarily implies the knowledge of the thing
signified. The objective is represented here by the "trees of the
garden." The subjective comes before his mind in the pronoun "thou." The
physical constitution of man appears in the process of "eating." The
moral part of his nature comes out in the significance of the words
"mayest" and "shalt not." The distinction of merit in actions and things
is expressed in the epithets "good and evil." The notion of reward is
conveyed in the terms "life" and "death." And, lastly, the presence and
authority of "the Lord God" is implied in the very nature of a command.
Here is at least the opening of a wide field of observation for the
nascent powers of the mind. He, indeed, must bear the image of God in
perceptive powers, who shall scan with heedful eye the loftiest as well
as the lowest in these varied scenes of reality. But as with the sign,
so with the thing signified, a glance of intelligence instantaneously
begins the converse of the susceptible mind with the world of reality
around, and the enlargement of the sphere of human knowledge is merely a
matter of time without end. How rapidly the process of apprehension
would go on in the opening dawn of man's intellectual activity, how many
flashes of intelligence would be compressed into a few moments of his
first consciousness, we cannot tell. But we can readily believe that he
would soon be able to form a just yet an infantile conception of the
varied themes which are presented to his mind in this brief command.

Thus, the susceptible part of man's intellect is evoked. The conceptive
part will speedily follow, and display itself in the many inventions
that will be sought out and applied to the objects which are placed at
his disposal.

II\. First. Next, the moral part of man's nature is here called into
play. Mark God's mode of teaching. He issues a command. This is required
in order to bring forth into consciousness the hitherto latent
sensibility to moral obligation which was laid in the original
constitution of man's being. A command implies a superior, whose right
it is to command, and an inferior, whose duty it is to obey. The only
ultimate and absolute ground of supremacy is creating, and of
inferiority, being created. The Creator is the only proper and entire
owner; and, within legitimate bounds, the owner has the right to do what
he will with his own. The laying on of this command, therefore, brings
man to the recognition of his dependence for being and for the character
of that being on his Maker. From the knowledge of the fundamental
relation of the creature to the Creator springs an immediate sense of
the obligation he is under to render implicit obedience to the Author of
his being. This is, therefore, man's first lesson in morals. It calls up
in his breast the sense of duty, of right, of responsibility. These
feelings could not have been elicited unless the moral susceptibility
had been laid in the soul, and only waited for the first command to
awaken it into consciousness. This lesson, however, is only the
incidental effect of the command, and not the primary ground of its
imposition.

Second. The special mandate here given is not arbitrary in its form, as
is sometimes hastily supposed, but absolutely essential to the legal
adjustment of things in this new stage of creation. Antecedent to the
behest of the Creator, the only indefeasible right to all the creatures
lay in himself. These creatures may be related to one another. In the
great system of things, through the wonderful wisdom of the grand
Designer, the use of some may be needful to the well-being, the
development, and perpetuation of others. Nevertheless, no one has a
shadow of right in the original nature of things to the use of any
other. And when a moral agent comes upon the stage of being, in order to
mark out the sphere of his legitimate action, an explicit declaration of
the rights over other creatures granted and reserved must be made. The
very issue of the command proclaims man's original right of property to
be, not inherent, but derived.

As might be expected in these circumstances, the command has two
clauses, - a permissive and a prohibitive. "Of every tree of the garden
thou mayst freely eat." This displays in conspicuous terms the benignity
of the Creator. "But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou
shalt not eat." This signalizes the absolute right of the Creator over
all the trees, and over man himself. One tree only is withheld, which,
whatever were its qualities, was at all events not necessary to the
well-being of man. All the others that were likely for sight and good
for food, including the tree of life, are made over to him by free
grant. In this original provision for the vested rights of man in
creation, we cannot but acknowledge with gratitude and humility the
generous and considerate bounty of the Creator. This is not more
conspicuous in the bestowment of all the other trees than in the
withholding of the one, the participation of which was fraught with evil
to mankind.

Third. The prohibitory part of this enactment is not a matter of
indifference, as is sometimes imagined, but indispensable to the nature
of a command, and, in particular, of a permissive act or declaration of
granted rights. Every command has a negative part, expressed or implied,
without which it would be no command at all. The command, "Go work today
in my vineyard," implies thou shalt not do anything else; otherwise the
son who works not obeys as well as the son who works. The present
address of God to Adam, without the exceptive clause, would be a mere
license, and not a command. But with the exceptive clause it is a
command, and tantamount in meaning to the following positive injunction:
Thou mayest eat of these trees only. An edict of license with a
restrictive clause is the mildest form of command that could have been
imposed for the trial of human obedience. Some may have thought that it
would have been better for man if there had been no tree of the
knowledge of good and evil.

But second thoughts will correct this rash and wrong conclusion. First.
This tree may have had other purposes to serve in the economy of things
of which we are not aware; and, if so, it could not have been absent
without detriment to the general good. Second. But without any
supposition at all, the tree was fraught with no evil whatever to man in
itself. It was in the first instance the instrument of great good, of
the most precious kind, to him. It served the purpose of calling up into
view out of the depths of his nature the notion of moral obligation,
with all the kindred notions of the inherent authority of the Creator
and the innate subordination of himself, the creature, of the aboriginal
right of the Creator alone in all the creatures, and the utter absence
of any right in himself to any other creature whatsoever. The command
concerning this tree thus set his moral convictions agoing, and awakened
in him the new and pleasing consciousness that he was a moral being, and
not a mere clod of the valley or brute of the field.

This is the first thing this tree did for man; and we shall find it
would have done a still better thing for him if he had only made a
proper use of it. Third. The absence of this tree would not at all have
secured Adam from the possibility or the consequence of disobedience.
Any grant to him whatsoever must have been made "with the reserve,"
implicit or explicit, of the rights of all others. "The thing reserved"
must in equity have been made known to him. In the present course of
things it must have come in his way, and his trial would have been
inevitable, and therefore his fall possible. Now, the forbidden tree is
merely the thing reserved. Besides, even if man had been introduced into
a sphere of existence where no reserved tree or other thing could ever
have come within the range of his observation, and so no outward act of
disobedience could have been perpetrated, still, as a being of moral
susceptibility, he must come to the acknowledgment, express or implied,
of the rights of the heavenly crown, before a mutual good understanding
could have been established between him and his Maker. Thus, we perceive
that even in the impossible Utopia of metaphysical abstraction there is
a virtual forbidden tree which forms the test of a man's moral relation
to his Creator. Now, if the reserve be necessary, and therefore the test
of obedience inevitable, to a moral being, it only remains to inquire
whether the test employed be suitable and seasonable.

Fourth. What is here made the matter of reserve, and so the test of
obedience, is so far from being trivial or out of place, as has been
imagined, that it is the proper and the only object immediately
available for these purposes. The immediate need of man is food. The
kind of food primarily designed for him is the fruit of trees. Grain,
the secondary kind of vegetable diet, is the product of the farm rather
than of the garden, and therefore does not now come into use. As the law
must be laid down before man proceeds to an act of appropriation, the
matter of reserve and consequent test of obedience is the fruit of a
tree. Only by this can man at present learn the lessons of morality. To
devise any other means, not arising from the actual state of things in
which man was placed, would have been arbitrary and unreasonable. The
immediate sphere of obedience lies in the circumstances in which he
actually stands. These afforded no occasion for any other command than
what is given. Adam had no father, or mother, or neighbor, male or
female, and therefore the second table of the law could not apply. But
he had a relation to his Maker, and legislation on this could not be
postponed. The command assumes the kindest, most intelligible, and
convenient form for the infantile mind of primeval man.

Fifth. We are now prepared to understand why this tree is called the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil. The prohibition of this tree
brings man to the knowledge of good and evil. The products of creative
power were all very good [Gen 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031).
Even this tree itself is good, and productive of unspeakable good in the
first instance to man. The discernment of merit comes up in his mind by
this tree. Obedience to the command of God not to partake of this tree
is a moral good. Disobedience to God by partaking of it is a moral evil.
When we have formed an idea of a quality, we have at the same time an
idea of its contrary. By the command concerning this tree man became
possessed of the conceptions of good and evil, and so, theoretically,
acquainted with their nature. This was that first lesson in morals of
which we have spoken. It is quite evident that this knowledge could not
be any physical effect of the tree, seeing its fruit was forbidden. It
is obvious also that evil is as yet known in this fair world only as the
negative of good. Hence, the tree is the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, because by the command concerning it man comes to this
knowledge.

Sixth. "In the day of thy eating thereof, die surely shalt thou." The
divine command is accompanied with its awful sanction - death. The man
could not at this time have any practical knowledge of the physical
dissolution called death. We must, therefore, suppose either that God
made him preternaturally acquainted with it, or that he conveyed to him
the knowledge of it simply as the negation of life. The latter
hypothesis is to be preferred, for several reasons. First, it is the
more economical mode of instruction. Such knowledge may be imparted to
man without anticipating experience. He was already conscious of life as
a pure blessing. He was therefore capable of forming an idea of its
loss. And death in the physical sense of the cessation of animal life
and the disorganization of the body, he would come to understand in due
time by experience. Secondly, death in reference to man is regarded in
Scripture much more as the privation of life in the sense of a state of
favor with God and consequent happiness than as the mere cessation of
animal life [Gen 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013); [Exo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006); [Mat
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032). Thirdly, the presence and
privilege of the tree of life would enable man to see how easily he
could be deprived of life, especially when he began to drink in its
life-sustaining juices and feel the flow of vitality rushing through his
veins and refreshing his whole physical nature. Take away this tree, and
with all the other resources of nature he cannot but eventually droop
and die. Fourthly, the man would thus regard his exclusion from the tree
of life as the earnest of the sentence which would come to its fullness,
when the animal frame would at length sink down under the wear and tear
of life like the beasts that perish. Then would ensue to the dead but
perpetually existing soul of man the total privation of all the sweets
of life, and the experience of all the ills of penal death.

III\. Man has here evidently become acquainted with his Maker. On the
hearing and understanding of this sentence, at least, if not before, he
has arrived at the knowledge of God, as existing, thinking, speaking,
permitting, commanding, and thereby exercising all the prerogatives of
that absolute authority over people and things which creation alone can
give. If we were to draw all this out into distinct propositions, we
should find that man was here furnished with a whole system of theology,
ethics, and metaphysics, in a brief sentence. It may be said, indeed,
that we need not suppose all this conveyed in the sentence before us.
But, at all events, all this is implied in the few words here recorded
to have been addressed to Adam, and there was not much time between his
creation and his location in the garden for conveying any preliminary
information. We may suppose the substance of the narrative contained in
[Gen 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002), to have been communicated
to him in due time. But it could not be all conveyed yet, as we are only
in the sixth day, and the record in question reaches to the end of the
seventh. It was not, therefore, composed until after that day had
elapsed.

It is to be noticed here that God reserves to himself the administration
of the divine law. This was absolutely necessary at the present stage of
affairs, as man was but an individual subject, and not yet spread out
into a multitude of people. Civil government was not formally
constituted till after the deluge.

We can hardly overestimate the benefit, in the rapid development of his
mind, which Adam thus derived from the presence and converse of his
Maker. If no voice had struck his car, no articulate sentence had
reached his intellect, no authoritative command had penetrated his
conscience, no perception of the Eternal Spirit had been presented to
his apprehension, he might have been long in the mute, rude, and
imperfectly developed state which has sometimes been ascribed to
primeval man. But if contact with a highly-accomplished master and a
highly-polished state of society makes all the difference between the
savage and the civilized, what instantaneous expansion and elevation of
the primitive mind, while yet in its virgin purity and unimpaired power,
must have resulted from free converse with the all-perfect mind of the
Creator himself! To the clear eye of native genius a starting idea is a
whole science. By the insinuation of a few fundamental and germinant
notions into his mind, Adam shot up at once into the full height and
compass of a master spirit prepared to scan creation and adore the
Creator.

[Genesis 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 2:18</span></span>

\- XIII. The Naming of the Animals

Here man's intellectual faculties proceed from the passive and receptive
to the active and communicative stage. This advance is made in the
review and designation of the various species of animals that frequent
the land and skies.

A new and final need of man is stated in [Gen
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018). The Creator himself, in whose
image he was made, had revealed himself to him in language. This, among
many other effects, awakened the social affection. This affection was
the index of social capacity. The first step towards communication
between kindred spirits was accomplished when Adam heard and understood
spoken language. Beyond all this God knew what was in the man whom he
had formed. And he expresses this in the words, "It is not good for the
man to be alone." He is formed to be social, to hold converse, not only
with his superior, but also with his equal. As yet he is but a unit, an
individual. He needs a mate, with whom he may take sweet counsel. And
the benevolent Creator resolves to supply this want. "I will make him a
helpmeet for him" - one who may not only reciprocate his feelings, but
take an intelligent and appropriate part in his active pursuits.

[Genesis 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 2:19</span></span>

Here, as in several previous instances [Gen
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005); [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004), [Gen
2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008), the narrative reverts to the
earlier part of the sixth day. This is, therefore, another example of
the connection according to thought overruling that according to time.
The order of time, however, is restored, when we take in a sufficient
portion of the narrative. We refer, therefore, to the fifth verse, which
is the regulative sentence of the present passage. The second clause in
the verse, however, which in the present case completes the thought in
the mind of the writer, brings up the narrative to a point subsequent to
that closing the preceding verse. The first two clauses, therefore, are
to be combined into one; and when this is done, the order of time is
observed.

Man has already become acquainted with his Maker. He has opened his eyes
upon the trees of the garden, and learned to distinguish at least two of
them by name. He is now to be introduced to the animal kingdom, with
which he is connected by his physical nature, and of which he is the
constituted lord. Not many hours or minutes before have they been called
into existence. They are not yet, therefore, multiplied or scattered
over the earth, and so do not require to be gathered for the purpose.
The end of this introduction is said to be to see what he would call
them. To name is to distinguish the nature of anything and do denote the
thing by a sound bearing some analogy to its nature. To name is also the
prerogative of the owner, superior, or head. Doubtless the animals
instinctively distinguished man as their lord paramount, so far as his
person and eye came within their actual observation. God had given man
his first lesson in speech, when he caused him to hear and understand
the spoken command. He now places him in a condition to put forth his
naming power, and thereby go through the second lesson.

With the infant, the acquisition of language must be a gradual process,
inasmuch as the vast multitude of words which constitute its vocabulary
has to be heard one by one and noted in the memory. The infant is thus
the passive recipient of a fully formed and long-established medium of
converse. The first man, on the other hand, having received the
conception of language, became himself the free and active inventor of
the greatest part of its words. He accordingly discerns the kinds of
animals, and gives each its appropriate name. The highly-excited powers
of imagination and analogy break forth into utterance, even before he
has anyone to hear and understand his words but the Creator himself.

This indicates to us a twofold use of language. First, it serves to
register things and events in the apprehension and the memory. Man has a
singular power of conferring with himself. This he carries on by means
of language, in some form or other. He bears some resemblance to his
Maker even in the complexity of his spiritual nature. He is at once
speaker and hearer, and yet at the same time he is consciously one.
Secondly, it is a medium of intelligent communication between spirits
who cannot read another's thoughts by immediate intuition. The first of
these uses seems to have preceded the second in the case of Adam, who
was the former of the first language. The reflecting reader can tell
what varied powers of reason are involved in the use of language, and to
what an extent the mind of man was developed, when he proceeded to name
the several classes of birds and beasts. He was evidently suited for the
highest enjoyments of social contact.

Among the trees in the garden God took the initiative, named the two
that were conspicuous and essential to man's well being, and uttered the
primeval command. Adam has now made acquaintance with the animal world,
and, profiting by the lesson of the garden, proceeds himself to exercise
the naming power. The names he gives are thenceforth the permanent
designations of the different species of living creatures that appeared
before him. These names being derived from some prominent quality, were
suited to be specific, or common to the class, and not special to the
individual.

[Genesis 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 2:20</span></span>

We find, however, there was another end served by this review of the
animals. "There was not found a helpmeet for the man" - an equal, a
companion, a sharer of his thoughts, his observations, his joys, his
purposes, his enterprises. It was now evident, from actual survey, that
none of these animals, not even the serpent, was possessed of reason, of
moral and intellectual ideas, of the faculties of abstracting and
naming, of the capacities of rational fellowship or worship. They might
be ministers to his purposes, but not helpers meet for him. On the other
hand, God was the source of his being and the object of his reverence,
but not on a par with himself in needs and resources. It was therefore
apparent that man in respect of an equal was alone, and yet needed an
associate. Thus, in this passage the existence of the desire is made out
and asserted; in keeping with the mode of composition uniformly pursued
by the sacred writer [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002); [Gen
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005).

[Genesis 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 2:21</span></span>

\- XIV. The Woman

21\. תרדמה tardēmâh, "deep sleep," ἔκστασις ekstasis, Septuagint. צלע
tsēlā‛, "rib, side, wing of a building."

23\. פעם pa‛am, "beat, stroke, tread, anvil." אישׁ 'ı̂ysh, "man," vir.
אשׁה 'āshah, "be firm, as a foundation;" ישׁה yāshah, "be firm as a
substance;" אנש 'ānash, "be strong;" אושׁ 'ûsh, "to give help: hence,
the strong, the brave, the defender, the nourisher." אשׂה 'ı̂śâh,
"woman," feminine of the above; "wife."

The second creative step in the constitution of man as the natural head
of a race is now described. This supplies the defect that was drawn
forth into consciousness in the preceding passage. Man here passes out
of solitude into society, out of unity into multiplicity.

Here we find ourselves still in the sixth day. This passage throws a new
light on [Gen 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027). It is there stated
that man was first created in the image of God, and then that he was
created male and female. From the present passage we learn that these
two acts of creation were distinct in point of time. First, we see man
was really one in his origin, and contained in this unity the perfection
of manhood. It does not appear, however, that man was so constituted by
nature as to throw off another of the same kind by his inherent power.
In fact, if he had, the other should have been, not a female, but
another human being in every respect like himself; and he would thus
have resembled those plants that are capable of being propagated by a
bud. Besides, he would have been endowed with a power different from his
actual posterity; and thus the head would not have corresponded with the
members of the race.

The narrative, however, is opposed to this view of man's nature. For the
change, by which the woman comes into existence, is directly ascribed to
the original Maker. A part of the man is taken for the purpose, which
can be spared without interfering with the integrity of his nature. It
manifestly does not constitute a woman by the mere act of separation, as
we are told that the Lord God built it into a woman. It is needless,
therefore, to speculate whether the part taken were literally a rib, or
some other side piece designedly put there by the provident Creator, for
the purpose of becoming the rudiment of a full-grown woman. It is
expressly called, not A rib, but one of his ribs; and this evidently
implies that he had other similar parts. This binds us, we conceive, to
the literal rib of bone and flesh. And thus, in accordance with the
account in the foregoing chapter, we have, first, the single man
created, the full representative and potential fountain of the race, and
then, out of this one, in the way now described, we have the male and
the female created.

The original unity of man constitutes the strict unity of the race. The
construction of the rib into a woman establishes the individuality of
man's person before, as well as after, the removal of the rib. The
selection of a rib to form into a woman constitutes her, in an eminent
sense, a helpmeet for him, in company with him, on a footing of equality
with him. At the same time, the after building of the part into a woman
determines the distinct personality and individuality of the woman.
Thus, we perceive that the entire race, even the very first mother of
it, has its essential unit and representative in the first man.

The Almighty has called intelligent beings into existence in two ways.
The angels he seems to have created as individuals [Mar
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#025), constituting an order of beings
the unity of which lies in the common Creator. Man he created as the
parent of a race about to spring from a single head, and having its
unity in that head. A single angel then stands by himself, and for
himself; and all his actions belong only to himself, except so far as
example, persuasion, or leadership may have involved others in them. But
the single man, who is at the same time head of a race, is in quite a
different position. He stands for the race, which is virtually contained
in him; and his actions belong not only to him as an individual, but, in
a certain sense, to the whole race, of which he is at present the sum.
An angel counts only for the unit of his order. The first man counts for
the whole race as long as he is alone. The one angel is responsible only
for himself. The first man is not only an individual, but, as long as he
is alone, the sum total of a race; and is therefore so long responsible,
not only for himself, but for the race, as the head of which he acts.
This deep question of race will meet us again at a future stage of man's
history.

Since the All-wise Being never does anything without reason, it becomes
an interesting question, why the creation of woman was deferred to this
precise juncture in human history. First, man's original unity is the
counterpart of the unity of God. He was to be made in the image of God,
and after his likeness. If the male and the female had been created at
once, an essential feature of the divine likeness would have been
missing. But, as in the absolute One there is no duality, whether in sex
or in any other respect, so is there none in the original form and
constitution of man. Hence, we learn the absurdity of those who import
into their notions of the deity the distinction of sex, and all the
alliances which are involved in a race of gods. Secondly, the natural
unity of the first pair, and of the race descended from them, is
established by the primary creation of an individual, from whom is
derived, by a second creative process, the first woman.

The race of man is thus a perfect unity, flowing from a single center of
human life. Thirdly, two remarkable events occur in the experience of
man before the formation of the woman, - his installment in the garden
as its owner, keeper, and dresser; and his review of the animals, as
their rational superior, to whom they yield an instinctive homage. By
the former he is prepared to provide for the sustenance and comfort of
his wife; by the latter, he becomes aware of his power to protect her.
Still further, by the interview with his Maker in the garden he came to
understand language; and by the inspection of the animals to employ it
himself. Speech implies the exercise of the susceptive and conceptive
powers of the understanding. Thus, Adam was qualified to hold
intelligent converse with a being like himself. He was competent to be
the instructor of his wife in words and things. Again, he had met with
his superior in his Creator, his inferiors in the animals; and he was
now to meet his equal in the woman. And, lastly, by the divine command
his moral sense had been brought into play, the theory of moral
obligation had been revealed to his mind, and he was therefore prepared
to deal with a moral being like himself, to understand and respect the
rights of another, to do unto another as he would have another do to
him. It was especially necessary that the sense of right should grow up
in his breast, to keep in due check that might in which he excelled,
before the weaker and gentler sex was called into being, and intrusted
to his charge. These are some of the obvious reasons for delaying the
formation of the woman to the present crisis.

[Genesis 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 2:23</span></span>

Whether the primeval man was conscious of the change in himself, and of
the work of the Supreme Being while it was going on, or received
supernatural information of the event when he awoke, does not appear.
But he is perfectly aware of the nature of her who now for the first
time appears before his eyes. This is evinced in his speech on beholding
her: "This, now" - in contrast with the whole animal creation just
before presented to his view, in which he had failed to find a helpmeet
for him - "is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh;" whence we
perceive that the rib included both bone and flesh. "To this"
counterpart of myself "shall be called woman;" the word in the original
being a feminine form of "man," to which we have no exact equivalent,
though the word "woman" (womb-man, or wife-man), proves our word "man"
to have been originally of the common gender. "Because out of a man was
she taken;" being taken out of a man, she is human; and being a perfect
individual, she is a female man.

[Genesis 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 2:24</span></span>

These might be the words of the first man [Gen
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024). As he thoroughly understood the
relation between himself and the woman, there is no new difficulty in
conceiving him to become acquainted at the same time with the
relationship of son to father and mother, which was in fact only another
form of that in which the newly-formed woman stood to himself. The
latter is really more intimateand permanent than the former, and
naturally therefore takes its place, especially as the practical of the
filial tie, - that of being trained to maturity, - is already
accomplished, when the conjugal one begins.

But it seems more probable that this sentence is the reflection of the
inspired author on the special mode in which the female was formed from
the male. Such remarks of the writer are frequently introduced by the
word "therefore" (על־כן kēn-‛al). It is designed to inculcate on the
race that was to spring from them the inviolable sanctity of the
conjugal relation. In the primeval wedlock one man was joined to one
woman only for life. Hence, in the marriage relation the animal is
subordinate to the rational. The communication of ideas; the cherishing
of the true, the right, the good; the cultivation of the social
affections; the spontaneous outflow of mutual good offices; the thousand
nameless little thoughts, looks, words, and deeds that cheer the brow
and warm the heart; the common care of children, servants, and
dependents; the constant and heartfelt worship of the Father of all,
constitute the main ends and joys of the married state.

After the exclamation of the man on contemplating the woman, as bone of
his bones and flesh of his flesh, and therefore physically,
intellectually, and morally qualified to be his mate, we may suppose
immediately to follow the blessing of man, and the general endowment of
himself and the animals with the fruits of the soil as recorded in the
preceding chapter [Gen 1:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028). The
endowment of man embraces every tree in which is the fruit of a tree
yielding seed. This general grant was of course understood by man to
exclude the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which was excepted,
if not by its specific nature, yet by the previous command given to man.
This command we find was given before the formation of the woman, and
therefore sometime before the events recorded in the second and third
clauses of [Gen 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027). Hence, it
preceded the blessing and the endowment. It was not special, however, to
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil to be intended for other
purposes than the food of man, as there are very many other trees that
afford no proper nutriment to man. The endowment, therefore, refers to
such trees as were at the same time nutritive and not expressly and
previously forbidden.

This chapter is occupied with the "generations, issues or products of
the skies and the land," or, in other words, of the things created in
the six days. It is the meet preface to the more specific history of
man, as it records his constitution, his provision, his moral and
intellectual cultivation, and his social perfection. It brings us up to
the close of the sixth day. As the Creator pronounced a sentence of
approbation on all that he had made at the end of that day, we have
reason to believe that no moral derangement had yet taken place in man's
nature.

[Genesis 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 2:25</span></span>

This is corroborated by the statement contained in [Gen
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025). "They were both naked, and were
not ashamed." Of nakedness in our sense of the term they had as yet no
conception. On the contrary, they were conscious of being sufficiently
clothed in a physical sense by nature's covering, the skin - and, in a
spiritual point of view, they were clad as in a panoply of steel with
the consciousness of innocence, or, indeed, the unconsciousness of evil
existing anywhere, and the simple ignorance of its nature, except so far
as the command of God had awakened in them some speculative conception
of it. Hence, they were not ashamed. For shame implies a sense of guilt,
which they did not have, and an exposedness to the searching eye of a
condemning judge, from which they were equally free. With the sentence
terminates all we know of primeval innocence. May we surmise from it
that the first pair spent at least the Sabbath, if not some days, or
weeks, or years, in a state of integrity?

From what has been said, it is evident that this sentence was written
after the fall; for it speaks in language which was not intelligible
till after that event had occurred. Contemplated in this point of view,
it is the most melancholy sentence in the book of God. For it is
evidently placed here to foreshadow the dark event to be recorded in the
next chapter.

Two hallowed institutions have descended to us from the days of primeval
innocence, - the wedding and the Sabbath. The former indicates communion
of the purest and most perfect kind between equals of the same class.
The latter implies communion of the highest and holiest kind between the
Creator and the intelligent creature. The two combined import communion
with each other in communion with God.

Wedded union is the sum and type of every social tie. It gives rise and
scope to all the nameless joys of home. It is the native field for the
cultivation of all the social virtues. It provides for the due framing
and checking of the overgrowth of interest in self, and for the gentle
training and fostering of a growing interest in others. It unfolds the
graces and charms of mutual love, and imparts to the susceptible heart
all the peace and joy, all the light and fire, all the frankness and
life of conscious and constant purity and good-will. Friendship,
brotherly-kindness, and love are still hopeful and sacred names among
mankind.

Sabbath-keeping lifts the wedded pair, the brethren, the friends, the
one-minded, up to communion with God. The joy of achievement is a
feeling common to God and man. The commemoration of the auspicious
beginning of a holy and happy existence will live in man while memory
lasts. The anticipation also of joyful repose after the end of a work
well done will gild the future while hope survives. Thus, the idea of
the Sabbath spans the whole of man's existence. History and prophecy
commingle in its peaceful meditations, and both are linked with God. God
IS: he is the Author of all being, and the Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. This is the noble lesson of the Sabbath. Each
seventh day is well spent in attending to the realization of these great
thoughts.

Hence, it appears that the social principle lies at the root of a
spiritual nature. In the very essence of the spiritual monad is the
faculty of self-consciousness. Here is the curious mystery of a soul
standing beside itself, cognizing itself, and taking note of its various
faculties and acts, and yet perfectly conscious of its unity and
identity. And the process does not stop here. We catch ourselves at
times debating with ourselves, urging the pros and cons of a case in
hand, enjoying the sallies or sorry for the poverty of our wit, nay,
solemnly sitting in judgment on ourselves, and pronouncing a sentence of
approval or disapproval on the merit or demerit of our actions. Thus,
throughout the whole range of our moral and intellectual nature, memory
for the past and fancy for the future furnish us with another self, with
whom we hold familiar converse. Here there is the social principle
living and moving in the very center of our being. Let the soul only
look out through the senses and descry another like itself, and social
converse between kindred spirits must begin. The Sabbath and the wedding
touch the inner springs of the soul, and bring, the social principle
into exercise in the two great spheres of our relation to our Maker and
to one another.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 3](gen003)

</div>
