<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen037)  [Next](gen039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)

\- The Family of Judah

1\. עדלם ‛ǎdûllâm, 'Adullam, "righteousness." חירה chı̂yrâh Chirah,
"nobility?"

2\. שׁוּע shûa‛, Shua', "luck, riches, cry."

3\. ער ‛êr, 'Er, "watching."

4\. אונן 'ônân, Onan, "strong."

5\. שׁלה shēlâh, Shelah, "request? rest." כזיב kezı̂yb Kezib,
"falsehood."

6\. תמר tāmār, Tamar, "palm."

12\. תמנה tı̂mnâh, Timnah, "counted or assigned."

14\. עינים 'êynayı̂m, 'Enaim, "two fountains."

29\. פרץ perets, Perets, "breach."

This strange narrative is an episode in the history of Joseph; but an
integral part of the "generations" of Jacob. It is loosely dated with
the phrase "at that time." This does not indicate a sequel to the
preceding record, the proper phrase for which is "after these things"
(האלה חדברים אחר 'achar hadebārı̂ym hâ'ēleh [Gen
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)). It implies rather a train of
events that commenced at least in the past, some time before the closing
incident of the previous narrative [Gen
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#022). But the sale of Joseph, which
alone is recorded in the last chapter, only occupied some few weeks or
months of a year. Hence, the circumstances contained in this memoir of
Judah's family must have taken their rise before that event. The date
"at that time," is rendered indefinite also by being attached to the
phrase, "And it came to pass," which covers at least all the events in
the first eleven verses of the chapter.

All this is in accordance with the customary mode of arranging parallel
lines of events in Hebrew narrative. We shall see reason afterward for
placing the birth of Er at as early a date as possible in the life of
Judah [Gen 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#012). Now Judah, we
conceive, was born when his father was eighty-seven, and Joseph when he
was ninety-one, and hence, there is a difference about four years in
their ages. We suppose Er to have been born in Judah's fourteenth year,
when Joseph and Dinah were in their tenth, and therefore, about three
years before the rape of Dinah, and shortly after Jacob arrived at the
town of Shekem. The dishonor of Dinah, and the cruel treatment of
Joseph, being of essential moment in the process of things, had to be
recorded in the main line of events. The commencement of Judah's family,
having no particular influence on the current of the history, is fitly
reserved until the whole of the circumstances could be brought together
into a connected narrative. And the private history of Judah's line is
given, while that of the others is omitted, simply because from him the
promised seed is descended. As soon as Jacob is settled in the promised
land, the contact with Hebron and its neighborhood seems to have
commenced. A clear proof of this is the presence of Deborah, Rebekah's
nurse, in Jacob's family [Gen 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008).
The great thoroughfare from Damascus to Egypt runs through Shekem and
Hebron, and we know that when Jacob was residing at Hebron, his sons fed
their flocks at Shekem and Dothan, and the youthful Joseph was sent to
inquire after their welfare.

[Gen 38:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)

Judah marries and has three sons. "Went down from brethren." This seems
to have been an act of willful indiscretion in Judah. His separation
from his brethren, however, extends only to the matter of his new
connection. In regard to property and employment there seems to have
been no long or entire separation until they went down into Egypt. He
went down from the high grounds about Shekem to the lowlands in which
Adullam was situated [Jos 15:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#033). "A
certain Adullamite." He may have become acquainted with this Hirah, when
visiting his grandfather, or in some of the caravans which were
constantly passing Shekem, or even in the ordinary wanderings of the
pastoral life. Adullam was in the Shephelah or lowland of Judah
bordering on Philistia proper. "A certain Kenaanite." This connection
with Shua's daughter was contrary to the will of God and the example of
his fathers. Onan was born, we conceive, in Judah's fifteenth year, and
Shelah in his sixteenth.

At Kezib. - This appears the same as Akzib, which is associated with
Keilah and Mareshah [Jos 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044), and
therefore, lay in the south of the lowland of Judah. This note of place
indicates a change of residence since her other children were born. In
the year after this birth the dishonor of Dinah takes place. "Took a
wife for Er." Judah chose a wife for himself at an early age, and now he
chooses for his first-born at the same age. "Was evil in the eyes of the
Lord." The God of covenant is obliged to cut off Er for his wickedness
in the prime of life. We are not made acquainted with his crime; but it
could scarcely be more vile and unnatural than that for which his
brother Onan is also visited with death. "And be a husband to her." The
original word means to act as a husband to the widow of a deceased
brother who has left no issue. Onan seems to have been prompted to
commit his crime by the low motive of turning the whole inheritance to
his own house. At the time of Er's death Judah must have been in his
twenty-seventh year; Joseph was consequently in his twenty-third, and
Jacob had for ten years past had his headquarters at Hebron. Hence, the
contact with Timnah, Adullam, and Enaim was easy.

[Gen 38:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012)

Judah now comes into criminal, and, though unknown to him, incestuous
sexual intercourse with Tamar. "And many were the days," a year or
somewhat more. "To Timnah." This town is about twenty miles northwest of
Hebron. There is another, however, in the hills about seven miles south
of Hebron. "Put on a veil;" to conceal her face from Judah, or any other
beholder. "The qate of Enaim." This is supposed to be the same as Enam
[Jos 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#034). "And thy lace." This is
the cord by which the signet was suspended round his neck. "Courtesan."
The original word קדשׁה qedêshâh means one consecrated to the worship of
Ashtoreth, in which chastity is sacrificed.

[Gen 38:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024)

Tamar bears Perez and Zerah to Judah. After three months her pregnancy
was manifest. "Let her be burnt." It is manifest Judah had the power to
execute this punishment. The life of the widow of his son was in his
hands. Stoning was the mode of punishment by the law of Moses [Deu
22:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#020); burning, only in aggravated
cases [Lev 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#014); [Lev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009). He is a severe judge in a case
where he is equally criminal. "She hath been more righteous than I.
Tamar was less culpable in this matter than Judah. For he was moved by
lust to commit fornication, and was the indirect occasion of Tamar's
conduct by withholding Selah. But Tamar, though wronged, was not free
from blame in her mode of righting herself. The youthful indiscretion of
Judah in forming an intermarriage with a Canaanitish family, without the
concurrence of his brothers or his father, has been fruitful of crime.
If this immorality goes on, the chosen family will be speedily absorbed
in the surrounding paganism. Hence, we begin to see the necessity of an
immediate removal to another land, where they may be kept more distinct
from the native superstition. By the disclosure of Tamar Judah is
brought to acknowledgment of his fault, and, we may infer, to
repentance. His abstaining from all further sexual intercourse with her
may be accepted as a proof of this. "A scarlet thread." The right of
primogeniture here manifests its importance. "Perez" - a breach. Slight
incidents become the foundation of names, and are often the hinges on
which great events turn. The minutest circumstances connected with the
progenitors of the promised seed have a lasting interest.

Judah was at the close of his twenty-ninth year when Perez and Zerah
were born. The dates in his family history may be arranged as
underneath, on the supposition that the first child was born when the
father was in his fourteenth year. This hypothesis is fairly allowable
when we take into consideration not only other cases, but the early
willfulness of Judah, and the example he gave to his children. The
command also to be fruitful and multiply [Gen
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011), which was given especially to
Jacob, may have had a tendency to encourage early marriages. It is
certain that the Jewish rabbis considered a man to have transgressed a
divine precept who passed the age of twenty without being married. They
also fixed the marriageable age for males at thirteen years and a day.
King Ahaz was the father of Hezekiah when he was not more than twelve
[Kg2 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002); [Kg2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002); and King Josiah the father of
Jehoiakim, when fourteen years of age [Kg2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001); [Kg2
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#036).

Judah 13 years 6 months when Er was born.

Judah 14 years 4 12 months when Onan was born.

Judah 15 years 3 months when Shelah was born.

Judah 28 years 9 months when Perez was born.

Judah 42 years 3 months when Hezron was born to Perez.

Judah 43 years 2 months when Hamul was born.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 39](gen039)

</div>
