<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen026)  [Next](gen028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001)

\- Isaac Blessing His Sons

The life of Isaac falls into three periods. During the first
seventy-five years he is contemporary with his father. For sixty-one
years more his son Jacob remains under the paternal roof. The remaining
forty-four years are passed in the retirement of old age. The chapter
before us narrates the last solemn acts of the middle period of his
life.

[Gen 27:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001)

Isaac was old. - Joseph was in his thirtieth year when he stood before
Pharaoh, and therefore thirty-nine when Jacob came down to Egypt at the
age of one hundred and thirty. When Joseph was born, therefore, Jacob
was ninety-one, and he had sojourned fourteen years in Padan-aram.
Hence, Jacob's flight to Laban took place when he was seventy-seven, and
therefore in the one hundred and thirty-sixth year of Isaac. "His eyes
were dim." Weakness and even loss of sight is more frequent in Palestine
than with us. "His older son." Isaac had not yet come to the conclusion
that Jacob was heir of the promise. The communication from the Lord to
Rebekah concerning her yet unborn sons in the form in which it is handed
down to us merely determines that the older shall serve the younger.
This fact Isaac seems to have thought might not imply the transferrence
of the birthright; and if he was aware of the transaction between Esau
and Jacob, he may not have regarded it as valid. Hence, he makes
arrangements for bestowing the paternal benediction on Esau, his older
son, whom he also loves. "I am old." At the age of one hundred and
thirty-six, and with failing sight, he felt that life was uncertain. In
the calmness of determination he directs Esau to prepare savory meat,
such as he loved, that he may have his vigor renewed and his spirits
revived for the solemn business of bestowing that blessing, which he
held to be fraught with more than ordinary benefits.

[Gen 27:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#005)

Rebekah forms a plan for diverting the blessing from Esau to Jacob. She
was within hearing when the infirm Isaac gave his orders, and
communicates the news to Jacob. Rebekah has no scruples about
primogeniture. Her feelings prompt her to take measures, without waiting
to consider whether they are justifiable or not, for securing to Jacob
that blessing which she has settled in her own mind to be destined for
him. She thinks it necessary to interfere that this end may not fail of
being accomplished. Jacob views the matter more coolly, and starts a
difficulty. He may be found out to be a deceiver, and bring his father's
curse upon him. Rebekah, anticipating no such issue; undertakes to bear
the curse that she conceived would never come. Only let him obey.

Verse 14-29

The plan is successful. Jacob now, without further objection, obeys his
mother. She clothes him in Esau's raiment, and puts the skins of the
kids on his hands and his neck. The camel-goat affords a hair which
bears a great resemblance to that of natural growth, and is used as a
substitute for it. Now begins the strange interview between the father
and the son. "Who art thou, my son?" The voice of Jacob was somewhat
constrained. He goes, however, deliberately through the process of
deceiving his father. "Arise, now, sit and eat." Isaac was reclining on
his couch, in the feebleness of advancing years. Sitting was the posture
convenient for eating. "The Lord thy God prospered me." This is the bold
reply to Isaac's expression of surprise at the haste with which the
dainty fare had been prepared. The bewildered father now puts Jacob to a
severer test. He feels him, but discerns him not. The ear notes a
difference, but the hand feels the hairy skin resembling Esau's; the
eyes give no testimony. After this the result is summarily stated in a
single sentence, though the particulars are yet to be given. "Art thou
my very son Esau?" A lurking doubt puts the definite question, and
receives a decisive answer. Isaac then calls for the repast and
partakes.

[Gen 27:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#026)

He gives the kiss of paternal affection, and pronounces the benediction.
It contains, first, a fertile soil. "Of the dew of heaven." An abundant
measure of this was especially precious in a country where the rain is
confined to two seasons of the year. "Of the fatness of the earth;" a
proportion of this to match and render available the dew of heaven.
"Corn and wine," the substantial products, implying all the rest.
Second, a numerous and powerful offspring. "Let peoples serve thee" -
pre-eminence among the nations. "Be lord of thy brethren" - pre-eminence
among his kindred. Isaac does not seem to have grasped the full meaning
of the prediction, "The older shall serve the younger." Third,
Prosperity, temporal and spiritual. He that curseth thee be cursed, and
he that blesseth thee be blessed. This is the only part of the blessing
that directly comprises spiritual things; and even this of a special
form. It is to be recollected that it was Isaac's intention to bless
Esau, and he may have felt that Esau, after all, was not to be the
progenitor of the holy seed. Hence, the form of expression is vague
enough to apply to temporal things, and yet sufficiently comprehensive
to embrace the infliction of the ban of sin, and the diffusion of the
blessing of salvation by means of the holy seed.

[Gen 27:30-41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#030)

Esau's blessing. Esau comes in, but it is too late. "Who then?" The
whole illusion is dispelled from the mind of Isaac. "Yea, blessed he
shall be." Jacob had no doubt perpetrated a fraud, at the instigation of
his mother; and if Esau had been worthy in other respects, and above all
if the blessing had been designed for him, its bestowment on another
would have been either prevented or regarded as null and void. But Isaac
now felt that, whatever was the misconduct of Jacob in interfering, and
especially in employing unworthy means to accomplish his end, he himself
was culpable in allowing carnal considerations to draw his preference to
Esau, who was otherwise unworthy. He knew too that the paternal
benediction flowed not from the bias of the parent, but from the Spirit
of God guiding his will, and therefore when so pronounced could not be
revoked. Hence, he was now convinced that it was the design of
Providence that the spiritual blessing should fall on the line of Jacob.
The grief of Esau is distressing to witness, especially as he had been
comparatively blameless in this particular instance. But still it is to
be remembered that his heart had not been open to the paramount
importance of spiritual things. Isaac now perceives that Jacob has
gained the blessing by deceit. Esau marks the propriety of his name, the
wrestler who trips up the heel, and pleads pathetically for at least
some blessing. His father enumerates what he has done for Jacob, and
asks what more he can do for Esau; who then exclaims, "Hast thou but one
blessing?"

[Gen 27:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039)

At length, in reply to the weeping suppliant, he bestows upon him a
characteristic blessing. "Away from the fatness." The preposition (מי
mı̂y) is the same as in the blessing of Jacob. But there, after a verb of
giving, it had a partitive sense; here, after a noun of place, it
denotes distance or separation; for example, [Pro
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#003) The pastoral life has been
distasteful to Esau, and so it shall be with his race. The land of Edom
was accordingly a comparative wilderness ([Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)). "On thy sword." By preying upon
others. "And thy brother shalt thou serve." Edom was long independent;
but at length Saul was victorious over them [Sa1
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047), and David conquered them [Sa2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014). Then followed a long struggle,
until John Hyrcanus, 129 b.c., compelled them to be circumcised and
incorporated into Judaism. "Break his yoke." The history of Edom was a
perpetual struggle against the supremacy of Israel. Conquered by Saul,
subdued by David, repressed by Solomon, restrained after a revolt by
Amaziah, they recovered their independence in the time of Ahab. They
were incorporated into the Jewish state, and furnished it with the
dynasty of princes beginning with Antipater. Esau was now exasperated
against his brother, and could only compose his mind by resolving to
slay him during the days of mourning after his father's death.

[Gen 27:42-46](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#042)

Rebekah hearing this, advises Jacob to flee to Laban her brother, and
await the abatement of his brother's anger. "That which thou hast done
to him." Rebekah seems not to have been aware that she herself was the
cause of much of the evil and of the misery that flowed from it. All the
parties to this transaction are pursued by a retributive chastisement.
Rebekah, especially, parts with her favorite son to meet him only after
an absence of twenty years, if ever in this life. She is moreover
grievously vexed with the connection which Esau formed with the
daughters of Heth. She dreads a similar matrimonial alliance on the part
of Jacob.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 28](gen028)

</div>
