<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen033)  [Next](gen035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)

\- Dinah's Dishonor

This chapter records the rape of Dinah and the revenge of her brothers.

[Gen 34:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)

Dinah went out to see the daughters of the land. The Jewish doctors of a
later period fix the marriageable age of a female at twelve years and a
day. It is probable that Dinah was in her thirteenth year when she went
out to visit the daughters of the land. Six or seven years, therefore,
must have been spent by Jacob between Sukkoth, where he abode some time,
and the neighborhood of Shekerm, where he had purchased a piece of
ground. If we suppose Dinah to have been born in the same year with
Joseph, who was in his seventeenth year at the time of his being sold as
a bondslave [Gen 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002), the events of
this chapter must have occurred in the interval between the completion
of her twelfth and that of her sixteenth year. "Shekem." This name is
hereditary in the family, and had taken hold in the locality before the
time of Abraham. The Hivite was a descendant of Kenaan. We find this
tribe now occupying the district where the Kenaanite was in possession
at a former period [Gen 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006). "Spake
to the heart of the damsel." After having robbed her of her honor, he
promises to recognize her as his wife, provided he can gain the consent
of her relatives. "Shekem spake unto his father Hamor." He is in earnest
about this matter. "Jacob held his peace." He was a stranger in the
land, and surrounded by a flourishing tribe, who were evidently
unscrupulous in their conduct.

[Gen 34:6-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#006)

A conference takes place between the parties. Hamer and Jacob, the
parents on both sides, are the principals in the negotiation. The sons
of Jacob, being brothers of the injured damsel, are present, according
to custom. "Wrought fully in Israel;" a standing phrase from this time
forward for any deed that was contrary to the sanctity which ought to
characterize God's holy people. Israel is used here to designate the
descendants of Israel, the special people. Hamer makes his proposal.
"Shekem, my son." These words are a nominative pendent, for which "his
soul" is substituted. He proposes a political alliance or amalgamation
of the two tribes, to be sealed and actually effected by intermarriage.
He offers to make them joint-possessors of the soil, and of the rights
of dwelling, trading, and acquiring property. Shekem now speaks with
becoming deference and earnestness.

He offers any amount of dowry, or bridal presents, and of gift to the
mother and brothers of the bride. It must be acknowledged that the
father and the son were disposed to make whatever amends they could for
the grievous offence that had been committed. The sons of Jacob answer
with deceit. They are burning with resentment of the wrong that "ought
not to have been done," and that cannot now be fully repaired. Yet they
are in presence of a superior force, and therefore, resort to deceit.
"And spake." This goes along with the previous verb "answered," and is
meant to have the same qualification "with deceit." The last clause of
the verse then assigns the cause of this deceitful dealing. Their
speech, for the matter of it, is reasonable. They cannot intermarry with
the uncircumcised. Only on condition that every male be circumcised will
they consent. On these terms they promise to "become one people" with
them. Otherwise they take their daughter, and depart. Our daughter. They
here speak as a family or race, and therefore, call Dinah their
daughter, though her brothers are the speakers.

[Gen 34:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#018)

Hamor and Shekem accept the terms, and immediately proceed to carry them
into effect. It is testified of Shekem, that he delayed not to do the
thing, and that he was more honorable than all his house. They bring the
matter before their fellow-citizens, and urge them to adopt the rite of
circumcision, on the ground that the men are peaceable, well-conducted,
and they and their cattle and goods would be a valuable addition to the
common wealth of their tribe. Hence, it appears that the population was
still thin, that the neighboring territory was sufficient for a much
larger number than its present occupants, and that a tribe found a real
benefit in an accession to his numbers. The people were persuaded to
comply with the terms proposed. There is nothing said here of the
religious import of the rite, or of any diversity of worship that may
have existed between the two parties. But it is not improbable that the
Shekemites were prepared for mutual toleration, or even for the adoption
of the religion of Israel in its external forms, though not perhaps to
the exclusion of their own hereditary customs. It is also possible that
the formal acknowledgment of the one true God was not yet extinct.
Circumcision has been in use among the Egyptians, Colchians (Herodotus
ii. 104), and other eastern nations; but when and how introduced we are
not informed. The present narrative points out one way in which it may
have spread from nation to nation.

[Gen 34:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025)

Simon and Levi, at the head no doubt of all their father's men, now fall
upon the Shekemites, when feverish with the circumcision, and put them
to the sword. Simon and Levi were the sons of Leah, and therefore, full
brothers of Dinah. If Dinah was of the same year as Joseph, they would
be respectively seven and six years older than she was. If she was in
her thirteenth year, they would therefore, be respectively in their
twentieth and nineteenth years, and therefore, suited by age and passion
for such an enterprise. All the sons of Jacob joined in the sacking of
the city. They seized all their cattle and goods, and made captives of
their wives and little ones. Jacob is greatly distressed by this
outrage, which is equally contrary to his policy and his humanity. He
sets before his sons, in this expostulation, the danger attendant upon
such a proceeding. The "Kenaanite and the Perizzite," whom Abraham found
in the land on his return from Egypt [Gen
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#007). "I am a few men" - men of number
that might easily be counted. I here denotes the family or tribe with
all its dependents. When expanded, therefore, it is, "I and my house."
Simon and Levi have their reply. It justifies the retribution which has
fallen on the Shekemites for this and all their other crimes. But it
does not justify the executioners for taking the law into their own
hands, or proceeding by fraud and indiscriminate slaughter. The
employment of circumcision, too, which was the sign of the covenant of
grace, as a means of deception, was a heinous aggravation of their
offence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 35](gen035)

</div>
