<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen047)  [Next](gen049) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001)

\- Joseph Visits His Sick Father

The right of primogeniture has been forfeited by Reuben. The double
portion in the inheritance is now transferred to Joseph. He is the
first-born of her who was intended by Jacob to be his first and only
wife. He has also been the means of saving all his father's house, even
after he had been sold into slavery by his brethren. He has therefore,
undeniable claims to this part of the first-born's rights.

[Gen 48:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001)

After these things. - After the arrangements concerning the funeral,
recorded in the chapter. "Menasseh and Ephraim." They seem to have
accompanied their father from respectful affection to their aged
relative. "Israel strengthened himself" - summoned his remaining powers
for the interview, which was now to him an effort. "God Almighty
appeared unto me at Luz." From the terms of the blessing received it is
evident that Jacob here refers to the last appearance of God to him at
Bethel [Gen 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011). "And now thy sons."
After referring to the promise of a numerous offspring, and of a
territory which they are to inherit, he assigns to each of the two sons
of Joseph, who were born in Egypt, a place among his own sons, and a
separate share in the promised land. In this way two shares fall to
Joseph. "And thy issue." We are not informed whether Joseph had any
other sons. But all such are to be reckoned in the two tribes of which
Ephraim and Menasseh are the heads. These young men are now at least
twenty and nineteen years of age, as they were born before the famine
commenced. Any subsequent issue that Joseph might have, would be counted
among the generations of their children. "Rachel died upon me" - as a
heavy affliction falling upon me. The presence of Joseph naturally leads
the father's thoughts to Rachel, the beloved mother of his beloved son,
whose memory he honors in giving a double portion to her oldest son.

[Gen 48:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#008)

He now observes and proceeds to bless the two sons of Joseph. "Who are
these?" The sight and the observant faculties of the patriarch were now
failing. "Bring them now unto me, and I will bless them." Jacob is
seated on the couch, and the young men approach him. He kisses and folds
his arms around them. The comforts of his old age come up before his
mind. He had not expected to see Joseph again in the flesh, and now God
had showed him his seed. After these expressions of parental fondness,
Joseph drew them back from between his knees, that he might present them
in the way that was distinctive of their age. He then bowed with his
face to the earth, in reverential acknowledgment of the act of worship
about to be performed. Joseph expected the blessing to be regulated by
the age of his sons, and is therefore, careful to present them so that
the right hand of his dim-sighted parent may, without any effort, rest
on the head of his first-born. But the venerable patriarch, guided by
the Spirit of him who doth according to his own will, designedly lays
his right hand on the head of the younger, and thereby attributes to him
the greater blessing.

The imposition of the hand is a primitive custom which here for the
first time comes into notice. It is the natural mode of marking out the
object of the benediction, signifying its conveyance to the individual,
and implying that it is laid upon him as the destiny of his life. It may
be done by either hand; but when each is laid on a different object, as
in the present case, it may denote that the higher blessing is conveyed
by the right hand. The laying on of both hands on one person may express
the fulness of the blessing conveyed, or the fullness of the desire with
which it is conveyed.

[Gen 48:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#015)

And he blessed Joseph. - In blessing his seed he blesses himself. In
exalting his two sons into the rank and right of his brothers, he
bestows upon them the double portion of the first-born. In the terms of
the blessing Jacob first signalizes the threefold function which the
Lord discharges in effecting the salvation of a sinner. "The God before
whom walked my fathers," is the Author of salvation, the Judge who
dispenses justice and mercy, the Father, before whom the adopted and
regenerate child walks. From him salvation comes, to him the saved
returns, to walk before him and be perfect. "The God, who fed me from my
being unto this day," is the Creator and Upholder of life, the Quickener
and Sanctifier, the potential Agent, who works both to will and to do in
the soul. "The Angel that redeemed me from all evil," is the
all-sufficient Friend, who wards off evil by himself satisfying the
demands of justice and resisting the devices of malice. There is a
beautiful propriety of feeling in Jacob ascribing to his fathers the
walking before God, while he thankfully acknowledges the grace of the
Quickener and Justifier to himself. The Angel is explicitly applied to
the Supreme Being in this ministerial function. The God is the emphatic
description of the true, living God, as contradistinguished from all
false gods. "Bless the lads." The word bless is in the singular number.
For Jacob's threefold periphrasis is intended to describe the one God
who wills, works, and wards. "And let my name be put upon them." Let
them be counted among my immediate sons, and let them be related to
Abraham and Isaac, as my other sons are. This is the only thing that is
special in the blessing. "Let them grow into a multitude." The word grow
in the original refers to the spawning or extraordinary increase of the
finny tribe. The after history of Ephraim and Menasseh will be found to
correspond with this special prediction.

[Gen 48:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#017)

Joseph presumes that his father has gone astray through dulness of
perception, and endeavors to rectify his mistake. He finds, however,
that on the other hand a supernatural vision is now conferred on his
parent, who is fully conscious of what he is about, and therefore,
abides by his own act. Ephraim is to be greater than Menasseh. Joshua,
the successor of Moses, was of the tribe of Ephraim, as Kaleb his
companion was of Judah. Ephraim came to designate the northern kingdom
of the ten tribes, as Judah denoted the southern kingdom containing the
remaining tribes; and each name was occasionally used to denote all
Israel, with a special reference to the prominent part. "His seed shall
be the fullness of the nations." This denotes not only the number but
the completeness of his race, and accords with the future pre-eminence
of his tribe. In thee, in Joseph, who is still identified with his
offspring.

At the point of death Jacob expresses his assurance of the return of his
posterity to the land of promise, and bestows on Joseph one share or
piece of ground above his brethren, which, says he, I took out of the
hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow. This share is, in the
original, שׁכם shekem, Shekem, a shoulder or tract of land. This region
included "the parcel of the field where he had spread his tent" [Gen
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019). It refers to the whole
territory of Shekem, which was conquered by his sword and his bow,
inasmuch as the city itself was sacked, and its inhabitants put to the
sword by his sons at the head of his armed retainers, though without his
approval Gen. 34. Though he withdrew immediately after to Bethel Gen.
35, yet he neither fled nor relinquished possession of this conquest, as
we find his sons feeding his flocks there when he himself was residing
at Hebron [Gen 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#013). The incidental
conquest of such a tract was no more at variance with the subsequent
acquisition of the whole country than the purchase of a field by Abraham
or a parcel of ground by Jacob himself. In accordance with this gift
Joseph's bones were deposited in Shekem, after the conquest of the whole
land by returning Israel. The territory of Shekem was probably not equal
in extent to that of Ephraim, but was included within its bounds.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 49](gen049)

</div>
