<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen021)  [Next](gen023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)

\- Abraham Was Tested

2\. מריה morı̂yâh, "Moriah"; Samaritan: מוראה môr'âh; "Septuagint," ὑψηλή
hupsēlē, Onkelos, "worship." Some take the word to be a simple
derivative, as the Septuagint and Onkelos, meaning "vision, high,
worship." It might mean "rebellious." Others regard it as a compound of
יה yâh, "Jah, a name of God," and מראה mı̂r'eh, "shown," מורה môreh,
"teacher," or מורא môrā', "fear."

14\. יראה yı̂r'ēh, "Jireh, will provide."

16, נאם ne'um, ῥῆμα rēma, "dictum, oracle; related: speak low."

21\. בוּז bûz, "Buz, scoffing." קמוּאל qemû'ēl, "Qemuel, gathered of
God."

22\. חזו chăzô, "Chazo, vision." פלדשׁ pı̂ldâsh, "Pildash, steelman?
wanderer?" ידלף yı̂dlâp, "Jidlaph; related: trickle, weep." בתוּאל
betû'ēl, "Bethuel, dwelling of God."

23\. רבקה rı̂bqâh, "Ribqah, noose."

24\. ראוּמה re'ûmâh, "Reumah, exalted." טבה ṭebach, "Tebach, slaughter."
גחם gacham, "Gacham, brand." תחשׁ tachash, "Tachash, badger or seal."
&lt;מעכה ma‛ăkâh, "Ma'akah; related: press, crush."

The grand crisis, the crowning event in the history of Abraham, now
takes place. Every needful preparation has been made for it. He has been
called to a high and singular destiny. With expectant acquiescence he
has obeyed the call. By the delay in the fulfillment of the promise, he
has been taught to believe in the Lord on his simple word. Hence, as one
born again, he has been taken into covenant with God. He has been
commanded to walk in holiness, and circumcised in token of his
possessing the faith which purifieth the heart. He has become the
intercessor and the prophet. And he has at length become the parent of
the child of promise. He has now something of unspeakable worth, by
which his spiritual character may be thoroughly tested. Since the hour
in which he believed in the Lord, the features of his resemblance to God
have been shining more and more through the darkness of his fallen
nature - freedom of resolve, holiness of walk, interposing benevolence,
and paternal affection. The last prepares the way for the highest point
of moral likeness.

Verse 1-19

God tests Abraham's unreserved obedience to his will. "The God." The
true, eternal, and only God, not any tempter to evil, such as the
serpent or his own thoughts. "Tempted Abraham." To tempt is originally
to try, prove, put to the test. It belongs to the dignity of a moral
being to be put to a moral probation. Such assaying of the will and
conscience is worthy both of God the assayer, and of man the assayed.
"Thine only one." The only one born of Sarah, and heir of the promise.
"Whom thou lovest." An only child gathers round it all the affections of
the parent's heart. "The land of Moriah." This term, though applied in
[Ch2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001) to the mount on which the
temple of Solomon was built, is here the name of a country, containing,
it may be, a range of mountains or other notable place to which it was
especially appropriated. Its formation and meaning are very doubtful,
and there is nothing in the context to lend us any aid in its
explanation. It was evidently known to Abraham before he set out on his
present journey. It is not to be identified with Moreh in [Gen
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006), as the two names occur in the
same document, and, being different in form, they naturally denote
different things. Moreh is probably the name of a man. Moriah probably
refers to some event that had occurred in the land, or some
characteristic of its inhabitants. If a derivative, like בריה porı̂yâh,
"fruitful," it may mean the land of the rebellious, a name not
inapposite to any district inhabited by the Kenaanites, who were
disposed to rebellion themselves [Gen
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#004), or met with rebellion from the
previous inhabitants. If a compound of the divine name, Jah, whatever be
the other element, it affords an interesting trace of the manifestation
and worship of the true God under the name of Jab at some antecedent
period. The land of Moriah comprehended within its range the population
to which Melkizedec ministered as priest.

And offer him for a burnt-offering. - Abraham must have felt the outward
inconsistency between the sacrifice of his son, and the promise that in
him should his seed be called. But in the triumph of faith he accounted
that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead. On no other
principle can the prompt, mute, unquestioning obedience of Abraham be
explained. Human sacrifice may have been not unknown; but this in no way
met the special difficulty of the promise. The existence of such a
custom might seem to have smoothed away the difficulty of a parent
offering the sacrifice of a son. But the moral difficulty of human
sacrifice is not so removed. The only solution of this, is what the ease
itself actually presents; namely, the divine command. It is evident that
the absolute Creator has by right entire control over his creatures. He
is no doubt bound by his eternal rectitude to do no wrong to his moral
creatures. But the creature in the present case has forfeited the life
that was given, by sin. And, moreover, we cannot deny that the Almighty
may, for a fit moral purpose, direct the sacrifice of a holy being, who
should eventually receive a due recompense for such a degree of
voluntary obedience. This takes away the moral difficulty, either as to
God who commands, or Abraham who obeys. Without the divine command, it
is needless to say that it was not lawful for Abraham to slay his son.

Upon one of the hills of which I will tell thee. - This form of
expression dearly shows that Moriah was not at that time the name of the
particular hill on which the sacrifice was to be offered. It was the
general designation of the country in which was the range of hills on
one of which the solemn transaction was to take place. "And Abraham rose
up early in the morning." There is no hesitation or lingering in the
patriarch. If this has to be done, let it be done at once.

[Gen 22:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#004)

The story is now told with exquisite simplicity. "On the third day."
From Beer-sheba to the Shalem of Melkizedec, near which this hill is
supposed to have been, is about forty-five miles. If they proceeded
fifteen miles on the first broken day, twenty on the second, and ten on
the third, they would come within sight of the place early on the third
day. "Lifted up his eyes." It is scarcely necessary to remind the reader
of the Bible that this phrase does not imply that the place was above
his point of view. Lot lifted up his eyes and beheld all the vale of
Jordan [Gen 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010), which was
considerably below the position of the observer. "And return unto you."
The intimation that he and the lad would return, may seem to have rested
on a dim presentiment that God would restore Isaac to him even if
sacrificed. But it is more in keeping with the earnestness of the whole
transaction to regard it as a mere concealment of his purpose from his
servants. "And he bound Isaac his son." There is a wonderful pathos in
the words his son, his father, introduced in the sacred style in this
and similar narratives. Isaac, when the trying moment came, seems to
have made no resistance to his father's will. The binding was merely a
sacrificial custom. He must have concluded that his father was in all
this obeying the will of God, though he gave him only a distant hint
that it was so. Abraham is thoroughly in earnest in the whole procedure.

[Gen 22:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011)

At this critical moment the angel of the Lord interposes to prevent the
actual sacrifice. "Lay not thy hand upon the lad." Here we have the
evidence of a voice from heaven that God does not accept of human
victims. Man is morally unclean, and therefore unfit for a sacrifice. He
is, moreover, not in any sense a victim, but a doomed culprit, for whom
the victim has to be provided. And for a typical sacrifice that cannot
take away, but only shadow forth, the efficacious sacrifice, man is
neither fit nor necessary. The lamb without blemish, that has no penal
or protracted suffering, is sufficient for a symbol of the real
atonement. The intention, therefore, in this case was enough, and that
was now seen to be real. "Now I know that thou fearest God." This was
known to God antecedent to the event that demonstrated it. But the
original "I have known" denotes an eventual knowing, a discovering by
actual experiment; and this observable probation of Abraham was
necessary for the judicial eye of God, who is to govern the world, and
for the conscience of man, who is to be instructed by practice as well
as principle. "Thou hast not withheld thy son from me." This voluntary
surrender of all that was dear to him, of all that he could in any sense
call his own, forms the keystone of Abraham's spiritual experience. He
is henceforth a tried man.

[Gen 22:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#013)

A ram behind. - For "behind" we have "one" in the Samaritan, the
Septuagint, Onkelos, and some MSS. But neither a "single ram" nor a
"certain ram" adds anything suitable to the sense. We therefore retain
the received reading. The voice from heaven was heard from behind
Abraham, who, on turning back and lifting up his eyes, saw the ram. This
Abraham took and offered as a substitute for Isaac. Both in the
intention and in the act he rises to a higher resemblance to God. He
withholds not his only son in intent, and yet in fact he offers a
substitute for his son. "Jehovah-jireh", the Lord will provide, is a
deeply significant name. He who provided the ram caught in the thicket
will provide the really atoning victim of which the ram was the type. In
this event we can imagine Abraham seeing the day of that pre-eminent
seed who should in the fullness of time actually take away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. "In the mount of the Lord he will be seen." This
proverb remained as a monument of this transaction in the time of the
sacred writer. The mount of the Lord here means the very height of the
trial into which he brings his saints. There he will certainly appear in
due time for their deliverance.

[Gen 22:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#015)

Abraham has arrived at the moral elevation of self-denial and
resignation to the will of God, and that in its highest form. The angel
of the Lord now confirms all his special promises to him with an oath,
in their amplest terms. An oath with God is a solemn pledging of himself
in all the unchangeableness of his faithfulness and truth, to the
fulfillment of his promise. The multitude of his seed has a double
parallel in the stars of heaven and the sands of the ocean. They are to
possess the gate of their enemies; that is, to be masters and rulers of
their cities and territories. The great promise, "and blessed in thy
seed shall be all the nations of the earth," was first given absolutely
without reference to his character. Now it is confirmed to him as the
man of proof, who is not only accepted as righteous, but proved to be
actually righteous after the inward man; "because thou hast obeyed my
voice" [Gen 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005). The reflexive form
of the verb signifying to bless is here employed, not to denote
emphasis, but to intimate that the nations, in being blessed of God, are
made willing to be so, and therefore bless themselves in Abraham's seed.
In hearing this transcendent blessing repeated on this momentous
occasion, Abraham truly saw the day of the seed of the woman, the seed
of Abraham, the Son of man. We contemplate him now with wonder as the
man of God, manifested by the self-denying obedience of a regenerate
nature, intrusted with the dignity of the patriarchate over a holy seed,
and competent to the worthy discharge of all its spiritual functions.

With the nineteenth verse of this chapter may be said to close the main
revelation of the third Bible given to mankind, to which the remainder
of this book is only a needful appendix. It includes the two former
Bibles or revelations - that of Adam and that of Noah; and it adds the
special revelation of Abraham. The two former applied directly to the
whole race; the latter directly to Abraham and his seed as the medium of
an ultimate blessing to the whole race. The former revealed the mercy of
God offered to all, which was the truth immediately necessary to be
known; the latter reveals more definitely the seed through whom the
blessings of mercy are to be conveyed to all, and delineates the leading
stage in the spiritual life of a man of God. In the person of Abraham is
unfolded that spiritual process by which the soul is drawn to God. He
hears the call of God and comes to the decisive act of trusting in the
revealed God of mercy and truth; on the ground of which act he is
accounted as righteous. He then rises to the successive acts of walking
with God, covenanting with him, communing and interceding with him, and
at length withholding nothing that he has or holds dear from him. In all
this we discern certain primary and essential characteristics of the man
who is saved through acceptance of the mercy of God proclaimed to him in
a primeval gospel. Faith in God Gen. 15, repentance toward him Gen. 16,
and fellowship with him Gen. 18, are the three great turning-points of
the soul's returning life. They are built upon the effectual call of God
Gen. 12, and culminate in unreserved resignation to him Gen. 22. With
wonderful facility has the sacred record descended in this pattern of
spiritual biography from the rational and accountable race to the
individual and immortal soul, and traced the footsteps of its path to
God.

The seed that was threatened to bruise the serpent's head is here the
seed that is promised to bless all the families of the earth. The
threefold individuality in the essence of the one eternal Spirit, is
adumbrated in the three men who visited the patriarch, and their
personal and practical interest in the salvation of man is manifested,
though the part appropriated to each in the work of grace be not yet
apparent.

Meanwhile, contemporaneous with Abraham are to be seen men (Melkizedec,
Abimelek) who live under the covenant of Noah, which was not abrogated
by that of Abraham, but only helped forward by the specialities of the
latter over the legal and moral difficulties in the way to its final and
full accomplishment. That covenant, which was simply the expansion and
continuation of the Adamic covenant, is still in force, and contains
within its bosom the Abrahamic covenant in its culminating grandeur, as
the soul that gives life and motion to its otherwise inanimate body.

[Gen 22:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#020)

This family notice is inserted as a piece of contemporaneous history, to
explain and prepare the way for the marriage of Isaac. "Milkah, she
also," in allusion to Sarah, who has borne Isaac. So far as we know,
they may have been sisters, but they were at all events sisters-in-law.
The only new persons belonging to our histoy are Bethuel and Rebekah.
Uz, Aram, and Kesed are interesting, as they show that we are in the
region of the Shemites, among whom these are ancestral names [Gen
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#023); [Gen
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028). Buz may have been the ancestor
of Elihu [Jer 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#023); [Job
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#002). Maakah may have given rise to
the tribes and land of Maakah [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014); [Sa2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006). The other names do not again
occur. "And his concubine." A concubine was a secondary wife, whose
position was not considered disreputable in the East. Nahor, like
Ishmael, had twelve sons, - eight by his wife, and four by his
concubine.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 23](gen023)

</div>
