<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen012)  [Next](gen014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001)

[Genesis 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 13:1</span></span>

\- Abram and Lot Separate

7\. פרזי perı̂zı̂y, Perizzi, "descendant of Paraz." פרז pārāz, "leader,"
or inhabitant of the plain or open country.

10\. ככר kı̂kar, "circle, border, vale, cake, talent;" related: "bow,
bend, go round, dance." ירדן yardēn, Jardan, "descending." Usually with
the article in prose. צער tso‛ar, Tso'ar, "smallness."

18\. ממרא mamrē', Mamre, "fat, strong, ruler." חברון chebrôn, Chebron,
"conjunction, confederacy."

Lot has been hitherto kept in association with Abram by the ties of
kinmanship. But it becomes gradually manifest that he has an independent
interest, and is no longer disposed to follow the fortunes of the chosen
of God. In the natural course of things, this under-feeling comes to the
surface. Their serfs come into collision; and as Abram makes no claim of
authority over Lot, he offers him the choice of a dwelling-place in the
land. This issues in a peaceable separation, in which Abram appears to
great advantage. The chosen of the Lord is now in the course of
providence isolated from all associations of kindred. He stands alone,
in a strange land. He again obeys the summons to survey the land
promised to him and his seed in perpetuity.

[Gen 13:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001)

Went up out of Mizraim. - Egypt is a low-lying valley, out of which the
traveler ascends into Arabia Petraea and the hill-country of Kenaan.
Abram returns, a wiser and a better man. When called to leave his native
land, he had immediately obeyed. Such obedience evinced the existence of
the new power of godliness in his breast. But he gets beyond the land of
promise into a land of carnality, and out of the way of truth into a way
of deceit. Such a course betrays the struggle between moral good and
evil which has begun within him. This discovery humbles and vexes him.
Self-condemnation and repentance are at work within him. We do not know
that all these feelings rise into consciousness, but we have no doubt
that their result, in a subdued, sobered, chastened spirit, is here, and
will soon manifest itself.

And Lot with him. - Lot accompanied him into Egypt, because he comes
with him out of it. The south is so called in respect, not to Egypt, but
to the land of promise. It acquired this title before the times of the
patriarch, among the Hebrew-speaking tribes inhabiting it. The great
riches of Abram consist in cattle and the precious metals. The former is
the chief form of wealth in the East. Abram's flocks are mentioned in
preparation for the following occurrence. He advances north to the place
between Bethel and Ai, and perhaps still further, according to [Gen
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#004), to the place of Shekem, where he
built the first altar in the land. He now calls on the name of the Lord.
The process of contrition in a new heart, has come to its right issue in
confession and supplication. The sense of acceptance with God, which he
had before experienced in these places of meeting with God, he has now
recovered. The spirit of adoption, therefore, speaks within him.

[Gen 13:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#005)

The collision. Lot now also abounded in the wealth of the East. The two
opulent sheiks (elders, heads of houses) cannot dwell together anymore.
Their serfs come to strife. The carnal temper comes out among their
dependents. Such disputes were unavoidable in the circumstances. Neither
party had any title to the land. Landed property was not yet clearly
defined or secured by law. The land therefore was in common - wherever
anybody availed himself of the best spot for grazing that he could find
unoccupied. We can easily understand what facilities and temptations
this would offer for the strong to overbear the weak. We meet with many
incidental notices of such oppression [Gen
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#025); [Gen
26:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#015); [Exo
2:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016). The folly and impropriety of
quarreling among kinsmen about pasture grounds on the present occasion
is enhanced by the circumstance that Abram and Lot are mere strangers
among the Kenaanites and the Perizzites, the settled occupants of the
country.

Custom had no doubt already given the possessor a prior claim. Abram and
Lot were there merely on sufferance, because the country was thinly
populated, and many fertile spots were still unoccupied. The Perizzite
is generally associated with, and invariably distinguished from, the
Kenaanite [Gen 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#020); [Gen
34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030); [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008), [Exo
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#017). This tribe is not found among
the descendants of Kenaan in the table of nations. They stand side by
side with them, and seem therefore not to be a subject, but an
independent race. They may have been a Shemite clan, roaming over the
land before the arrival of the Hamites. They seem to have been by name
and custom rather wanderers or nomads than dwellers in the plain or in
the villages. They dwelt in the mountains of Judah and Ephraim [Jdg
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004); [Jos
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#015). They are noticed even so late
as in the time of Ezra [Ezr 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001). The
presence of two powerful tribes, independent of each other, was
favorable to the quiet and peaceful residence of Abram and Lot, but not
certainly to their living at feud with each other.

[Gen 13:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#008)

The strife among the underlings does not alienate their masters. Abram
appeals to the obligations of brotherhood. He proposes to obviate any
further difference by yielding to Lot the choice of all the land. The
heavenly principle of forbearance evidently holds the supremacy in
Abram's breast. He walks in the moral atmosphere of the sermon on the
mount [Mat 5:28-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028).

[Gen 13:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010)

Lot accepts the offer of his noble-hearted kinsman. He cannot do
otherwise, as he is the companion, while his uncle is the principal. He
willingly concedes to Abram his present position, and, after a lingering
attendance on his kinsman, retires to take the ground of
self-dependence. Outward and earthly motives prevail with him in the
selection of his new abode. He is charmed by the well-watered lowlands
bordering on the Jordan and its affluents. He is here less liable to a
periodical famine, and he roams with his serfs and herds in the
direction of Sodom. This town and Amorah (Gomorrah), were still
flourishing at the time of Lot's arrival. The country in which they
stood was of extraordinary beauty and fertility. The River Jordan, one
of the sources of which is at Panium, after flowing through the waters
of Merom, or the lake Semechonitis (Huleh), falls into the Sea of
Galilee or Kinnereth, which is six hundred and fifty-three feet below
the level of the Mediterranean, and thence descends into the basin of
the Salt Sea, which is now thirteen hundred and sixteen feet beneath the
same level, by a winding course of about two hundred miles, over
twenty-seven threatening rapids.

This river may well be called the Descender. We do not know on what part
of the border of Jordan Lot looked down from the heights about Shekem or
Ai, as the country underwent a great change at a later period. But its
appearance was then so attractive as to bear comparison with the garden
of the Lord and the land of Egypt. The garden of Eden still dwelt in the
recollections of men. The fertility of Egypt had been recently witnessed
by the two kinsmen. It was a valley fertilized by the overflowing of the
Nile, as this valley was by the Jordan and its tributary streams. "As
thou goest unto Zoar." The origin of this name is given in [Gen
19:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#020). It lay probably to the south
of the Salt Sea, in the wady Kerak. "And Lot journeyed east" מקדם
mı̂qedem. From the hill-country of Shekem or Ai the Jordan lay to the
east.

[Gen 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#012)

The men of Sodom were wicked. - The higher blessing of good society,
then, was missing in the choice of Lot. It is probable he was a single
man when he parted from Abram, and therefore that he married a woman of
Sodom. He has in that case fallen into the snare of matching, or, at all
events, mingling with the ungodly. This was the damning sin of the
antediluvians [Gen 6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001). "Sinners
before the Lord exceedingly." Their country was as the garden of the
Lord. But the beauty of the landscape and the superabundance of the
luxuries it afforded, did not abate the sinful disposition of the
inhabitants. Their moral corruption only broke forth into greater
vileness of lust, and more daring defiance of heaven. They sinned
"exceedingly and before the Lord." Lot had fallen into the very vortex
of vice and blasphemy.

[Gen 13:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#014)

The man chosen of God now stands alone. He has evinced an humble and
self-renouncing spirit. This presents a suitable occasion for the Lord
to draw near and speak to His servant. His works are re-assuring. The
Lord was not yet done with showing him the land. He therefore calls upon
him to look northward and southward and eastward and westward. He then
promises again to give all the land which he saw, as far as his eye
could reach, to him and to his seed forever. Abram is here regarded as
the head of a chosen seed, and hence, the bestowment of this fair
territory on the race is an actual grant of it to the head of the race.
The term "forever," for a perpetual possession, means as long as the
order of things to which it belongs lasts. The holder of a promise has
his duties to perform, and the neglect of these really cancels the
obligation to perpetuate the covenant. This is a plain point of equity
between parties to a covenant, and regulates all that depends on the
personal acts of the covenanter. Thirdly, He announces that He will make
his seed "as the dust of the earth." This multitude of seed, even when
we take the ordinary sense which the form of expression bears in popular
use, far transcends the productive powers of the promised land in its
utmost extent. Yet to Abram, who was accustomed to the petty tribes that
then roved over the pastures of Mesopotamia and Palestine, this
disproportion would not be apparent. A people who should fill the land
of Canaan, would seem to him innumerable. But we see that the promise
begins already to enlarge itself beyond the bounds of the natural seed
of Abram. He is again enjoined to walk over his inheritance, and
contemplate it in all its length and breadth, with the reiterated
assurance that it will be his.

[Gen 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#018)

Abram obeys the voice of heaven. He moves his tent from the northern
station, where he had parted with Lot, and encamps by the oaks of Mamre,
an Amorite sheik. He loves the open country, as he is a stranger, and
deals in flocks and herds. The oaks, otherwise rendered by Onkelos and
the Vulgate "plains of Mamre," are said to be in Hebron, a place and
town about twenty miles south of Jerusalem, on the way to Beersheba. It
is a town of great antiquity, having been built seven years before Zoan
(Tanis) in Egypt [Num 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022). It was
sometimes called Mamre in Abram's time, from his confederate of that
name. It was also named Kiriath Arba, the city of Arba, a great man
among the Anakim [Jos 15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013). But
upon being taken by Kaleb it recovered the name of Hebron. It is now
el-Khulil (the friend, that is, of God; a designation of Abram). The
variety of name indicates variety of masters; first, a Shemite it may
be, then the Amorites, then the Hittites Gen. 23, then the Anakim, then
Judah, and lastly the Muslims.

A third altar is here built by Abram. His wandering course requires a
varying place of worship. It is the Omnipresent One whom he adores. The
previous visits of the Lord had completed the restoration of his inward
peace, security, and liberty of access to God, which had been disturbed
by his descent to Egypt, and the temptation that had overcome him there.
He feels himself again at peace with God, and his fortitude is renewed.
He grows in spiritual knowledge and practice under the great Teacher.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 14](gen014)

</div>
