<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen020)  [Next](gen022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001)

\- The Birth of Isaac

7\. מלל mı̂lēl "speak," an ancient and therefore solemn and poetical
word.

14\. חמת chêmet "bottle," akin to חמה chāmâh, "surround, enclose," and
הוּם chûm "black. באר שׁבע beêr-sheba‛, Beer-sheba', "well of seven."

22\. פיכל pı̂ykol, Pikhol, "mouth or spokesman of all."

23\. נין nı̂yn "offspring, kin;" related: "sprout, flourish." נכד neked
"progeny," perhaps "acquaintance," cognate with נגד ngd, "be before"
(the eyes) and נקד nqd, "mark."

33\. אשׁל 'êshel "grove;" ἄρουρα aroura, Septuagint.; אילבה 'ı̂ylābâh, "a
tree," Onkelos.

This chapter records the birth of Isaac with other concomitant
circumstances. This is the beginning of the fulfillment of the second
part of the covenant with Abraham - that concerning the seed. This
precedes, we observe, his possession of even a foot-breadth of the soil,
and is long antecedent to the entrance of his descendants as conquerors
into the land of promise.

[Gen 21:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001)

Isaac is born according to promise, and grows to be weaned. "The Lord
had visited Sarah." It is possible that this event may have occurred
before the patriarchal pair arrived in Gerar. To visit, is to draw near
to a person for the purpose of either chastising or conferring a favor.
The Lord had been faithful to his gracious promise to Sarah. "He did as
he had spoken." The object of the visit was accomplished. In due time
she bears a son, whom Abraham, in accordance with the divine command,
calls Isaac, and circumcises on the eighth day. Abraham was now a
hundred years old, and therefore Isaac was born thirty years after the
call. Sarah expressed her grateful wonder in two somewhat poetic
strains. The first, consisting of two sentences, turns on the word
laugh. This is no longer the laugh of delight mingled with doubt, but
that of wonder and joy at the power of the Lord overcoming the impotence
of the aged mother. The second strain of three sentences turns upon the
object of this admiring joy. The event that nobody ever expected to hear
announced to Abraham, has nevertheless taken place; "for I have borne
him a son in his old age." The time of weaning, the second step of the
child to individual existence, at length arrives, and the household of
Abraham make merry, as was wont, on the festive occasion. The infant was
usually weaned in the second or third year [Sa1
1:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#022); [Ch2
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#016). The child seems to have
remained for the first five years under the special care of the mother
[Lev 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#006). The son then came under the
management of the father.

[Gen 21:9-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#009)

The dismissal of Hagar and Ishmael. "The son of Hagar ... laughing." The
birth of Isaac has made a great change in the position of Ishmael, now
at the age of at least fifteen years. He was not now, as formerly, the
chief object of attention, and some bitterness of feeling may have
arisen on this account. His laugh was therefore the laugh of derision.
Rightly was the child of promise named Isaac, the one at whom all laugh
with various feelings of incredulity, wonder, gladness, and scorn. Sarah
cannot brook the insolence of Ishmael, and demands his dismissal. This
was painful to Abraham. Nevertheless, God enjoins it as reasonable, on
the ground that in Isaac was his seed to be called. This means not only
that Isaac was to be called his seed, but in Isaac as the progenitor was
included the seed of Abraham in the highest and utmost sense of the
phrase. From him the holy seed was to spring that was to be the agent in
eventually bringing the whole race again under the covenant of Noah, in
that higher form which it assumes in the New Testament. Abraham is
comforted in this separation with a renewal of the promise concerning
Ishmael [Gen 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020).

He proceeds with all singleness of heart and denial of self to dismiss
the mother and the son. This separation from the family of Abraham was,
no doubt, distressing to the feelings of the parties concerned. But it
involved no material hardship to those who departed, and conferred
certain real advantages. Hagar obtained her freedom. Ishmael, though
called a lad, was at an age when it is not unusual in the East to marry
and provide for oneself. And their departure did not imply their
exclusion from the privileges of communion with God, as they might still
be under the covenant with Abraham, since Ishmael had been circumcised,
and, at all events, were under the broader covenant of Noah. It was only
their own voluntary rejection of God and his mercy, whether before or
after their departure, that could cut them off from the promise of
eternal life. It seems likely that Hagar and Ishmael had so behaved as
to deserve their dismissal from the sacred home. "A bottle of water."

This was probably a kid-skin bottle, as Hagar could not have carried a
goat-skin. Its contents were precious in the wilderness, but soon
exhausted. "And the lad." He took the lad and gave him to Hagar. The
bread and water-skin were on her shoulder; the lad she held by the hand.
"In the wilderness of Beer-sheba." It is possible that the departure of
Hagar occurred after the league with Abimelek and the naming of
Beer-sheba, though coming in here naturally as the sequel of the birth
and weaning of Isaac. The wilderness in Scripture is simply the land not
profitable for cultivation, though fit for pasture to a greater or less
extent. The wilderness of Beer-sheba is that part of the wilderness
which was adjacent to Beer-sheba, where probably at this time Abraham
was residing. "Laid the lad." Ishmael was now, no doubt, thoroughly
humbled as well as wearied, and therefore passive under his mother's
guidance. She led him to a sheltering bush, and caused him to lie down
in its shade, resigning herself to despair. The artless description here
is deeply affecting.

[Gen 21:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#017)

The fortunes of Ishmael. God cares for the wanderers. He hears the voice
of the lad, whose sufferings from thirst are greater than those of the
mother. An angel is sent, who addresses Hagar in the simple words of
encouragement and direction. "Hold thy hand upon him." Lay thy hand
firmly upon him. The former promise [Gen
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010) is renewed to her. God also
opened her eyes that she saw a well of water, from which the bottle is
replenished, and she and the lad are recruited for their further
journey. It is unnecessary to determine how far this opening of the eyes
was miraculous. It may refer to the cheering of her mind and the
sharpening of her attention. In Scripture the natural and supernatural
are not always set over against each other as with us. All events are
alike ascribed to an ever-watchful Providence, whether they flow from
the ordinary laws of nature or some higher law of the divine will. "God
was with the lad." Ishmael may have been cured of his childish spleen.
It is possible also his father did not forget him, but sent him a stock
of cattle with which to begin the pastoral life on his account. "He
became an archer." He grew an archer, or multiplied into a tribe of
archers. Paran [Gen 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006) lay south of
Palestine, and therefore on the way to Egypt, out of which his mother
took him a wife. The Ishmaelites, therefore, both root and branch, were
descended on the mother's side from the Egyptians.

[Gen 21:22-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#022)

According to the common law of Hebrew narrative, this event took place
before some of the circumstances recorded in the previous passage;
probably not long after the birth of Isaac. Abimelek, accompanied by
Phikol, his commander-in-chief, proposes to form a league with Abraham.
The reason assigned for this is that God was with him in all that he
did. Various circumstances concurred to produce this conviction in
Abimelek. The never-to-be-forgotten appearance of God to himself in a
dream interposing on behalf of Abraham, the birth of Isaac, and the
consequent certainty of his having an heir, and the growing retinue and
affluence of one who, some ten years before, could lead out a trained
band of three hundred and eighteen men-at-arms, were amply sufficient to
prove that God was the source of his strength. Such a man is formidable
as a foe, but serviceable as an ally. It is the part of sound policy,
therefore, to approach him and endeavor to prevail upon him to swear by
God not to deal falsely with him or his. "Kin and kith." We have adopted
these words to represent the conversational alliterative phrase of the
original. They correspond tolerably well with the σπέρμα sperma and
ὄνομα onoma, "seed" and "name," of the Septuagint. Abraham frankly
consents to this oath. This is evidently a personal covenant, referring
to existing circumstances. A similar confederacy had been already formed
with Aner, Eshkol, and Mamre. Abraham was disposed to such alliances, as
they contributed to peaceful neighborhood. He was not in a condition to
make a national covenant, though it is a fact that the Philistines were
scarcely ever wholly subjugated by his descendants.

[Gen 21:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#025)

Abraham takes occasion to remonstrate with Abimelek about a well which
his people had seized. Wells were extremely valuable in Palestine, on
account of the long absence of rain between the latter or vernal rain
ending in March, and the early or autumnal rain beginning in November.
The digging of a well was therefore a matter of the greatest moment, and
often gave a certain title to the adjacent fields. Hence, the many
disputes about wells, as the neighboring Emirs or chieftains were
jealous of rights so acquired, and often sought to enter by the strong
hand on the labors of patient industry. Hence, Abraham lays more stress
on a public attestation that he has dug, and is therefore the owner of
this well, than on all the rest of the treaty. Seven is the number of
sanctity, and therefore of obligation. This number is accordingly
figured in some part of the form of confederation; in the present case,
in the seven ewe-lambs which Abraham tenders, and Abimelek, in token of
consent, accepts at his hand. The name of the well is remarkable as an
instance of the various meanings attached to nearly the same sound. Even
in Hebrew it means the well of seven, or the well of the oath, as the
roots of seven, and of the verb meaning to swear, have the same radical
letters. Bir es-Seba means "the well of seven or of the lion."

[Gen 21:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#032)

Returned unto the land of the Philistines. - Beer-sheba was on the
borders of the land of the Philistines. Going therefore to Gerar, they
returned into that land. In the transactions with Hagar and with
Abimelek, the name God is employed, because the relation of the Supreme
Being with these parties is more general or less intimate than with the
heir of promise. The same name, however, is used in reference to Abraham
and Sarah, who stand in a twofold relation to him as the Eternal
Potentate, and the Author of being and blessing. Hence, the chapter
begins and ends with Yahweh, the proper name of God in communion with
man. "Eshel is a field under tillage" in the Septuagint, and a tree in
Onkelos. It is therefore well translated a grove in the King James
Version, though it is rendered "the tamarisk" by many. The planting of a
grove implies that Abraham now felt he had a resting-place in the land,
in consequence of his treaty with Abimelek. He calls upon the name of
the Lord with the significant surname of the God of perpetuity, the
eternal, unchangeable God. This marks him as the "sure and able"
performer of his promise, as the everlasting vindicator of the faith of
treaties, and as the infallible source of the believer's rest and peace.
Accordingly, Abraham sojourned in the land of the Philistines many days.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 22](gen022)

</div>
