<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen015)  [Next](gen017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001)

\- The Birth of Ishmael

1\. הנר hāgār, Hagar, "flight." Hejrah, the flight of Muhammed.

7\. מלאך mal'ak "messenger, angel." A deputy commissioned to discharge a
certain duty for the principal whom he represents. As the most usual
task is that of bearing messages, commands, or tidings, he is commonly
called a "messenger" ἄγγελος angelos). The word is therefore a term of
office, and does not further distinguish the office-bearer than as an
intelligent being. Hence, a מלאך mal'ak may be a man deputed by a man
[Gen 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#003); [Job
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#014), or by God [Hag
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013); [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001), or a superhuman being delegated
in this case only by God. The English term "angel" is now especially
appropriated to the latter class of messengers.

1st. The nature of angels is spiritual [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014). This characteristic ranges over
the whole chain of spiritual being from man up to God himself. The
extreme links, however, are excluded: man, because he is a special class
of intelligent creatures; and God, because he is supreme. Other classes
of spiritual beings may be excluded - as the cherubim, the seraphim -
because they have not the same office, though the word "angelic" is
sometimes used by us as synonymous with heavenly or spiritual. They were
all of course originally good; but some of them have fallen from
holiness, and become evil spirits or devils [Mat
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031), [Mat
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041); [Jde
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006); [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007). The latter are circumscribed in
their sphere of action, as if confined within the walls of their prison,
in consequence of their fallen state and malignant disposition Gen. 3;
[Job 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#002); [Pe1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004); [Rev
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#002). Being spiritual, they are not
only moral, but intelligent. They also excel in strength [Psa
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020). The holy angels have the full
range of action for which their qualities are adapted. They can assume a
real form, expressive of their present functions, and affecting the
senses of sight, hearing, and touch, or the roots of those senses in the
soul. They may even perform innocent functions of a human body, such as
eating [Gen 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#008); [Gen
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#003). Being spirits, they can resolve
the material food into its original elements in a way which we need not
attempt to conceive or describe. But this case of eating stands
altogether alone. Angels have no distinction of sex [Mat
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030). They do not grow old or die.
They are not a race, and have not a body in the ordinary sense of the
term.

2d. Their office is expressed by their name. In common with other
intelligent creatures, they take part in the worship of God [Rev
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#011); but their special office is to
execute the commands of God in the natural world [Psa
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020), and especially to minister to
the heirs of salvation [Heb 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014); [Mat
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010); [Luk
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010); [Luk
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022). It is not needful here to enter
into the uniquenesses of their ministry.

3d. The angel of Jehovah. This phrase is especially employed to denote
the Lord himself in that form in which he condescends to make himself
manifest to man; for the Lord God says of this angel, "Beware of him,
and obey his voice; provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
transgressions; for my name is in his inmost" [Exo
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021); that is, my nature is in his
essence. Accordingly, he who is called the angel of the Lord in one
place is otherwise denominated the Lord or God in the immediate context
([Gen 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007), [Gen
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013); [Gen
22:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011); [Gen
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#011), [Gen
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#013); [Gen
48:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#015); [Exo
3:2-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002); [Exo
23:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020); with [Exo
33:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#014)). It is remarkable, at the
same time, that the Lord is spoken of in these cases as a distinct
person from the angel of the Lord, who is also called the Lord. The
phraseology intimates to us a certain inherent plurality within the
essence of the one only God, of which we have had previous indications
[Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026); [Gen
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022). The phrase "angel of the Lord,"
however, indicates a more distant manifestation to man than the term
Lord itself. It brings the medium of communication into greater
prominence. It seems to denote some person of the Godhead in angelic
form. שׁוּר shûr, Shur, "wall." A city or place probably near the head
of the gulf of Suez. The desert of Shur is now Jofar.

11\. ישׁמעאל yı̂shmā‛ē'l, Jishmael, "the Mighty will hear."

13\. ראי אל 'êl rŏ'ı̂y, "God of vision or seeing."

14\. ראי לחי באר be'ēr-lachay-ro'ı̂y, Beer-lachai-roi, "well of vision to
the living." ברד bered, Bered, "hail." The site is not known.

Sarah has been barren probably much more than twenty years. She appears
to have at length reluctantly arrived at the conclusion that she would
never be a mother. Nature and history prompted the union of one man to
one wife in marriage, and it might have been presumed that God would
honor his own institution. But the history of the creation of man was
forgotten or unheeded, and the custom of the East prompted Sarai to
resort to the expedient of giving her maid to her husband for a second
wife, that she might have children by her.

[Gen 16:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001)

A Mizrite handmaid. - Hagar was probably obtained, ten years before,
during their sojourn in Egypt. "The Lord hath restrained me." It was
natural to the ancient mind to recognize the power and will of God in
all things. "I shall be builded by her," אבנה 'ı̂bāneh, built as the
foundation of a house, by the addition of sons or daughters (בנים bānı̂ym
or בנית bānôt). She thought she had or wished to have a share in the
promise, if not by herself personally, yet through her maid. The faith
of Sarah had not yet come fully to the birth. Abram yields to the
suggestion of his wife, and complies with the custom of the country. Ten
years had elapsed since they had entered the land they were to inherit.
Impatience at the long delay leads to an invention of their own for
obtaining an heir. The contempt of her maid was unjustifiable. But it
was the natural consequence of Sarai's own improper and imprudent step,
in giving her to her husband as a concubine. Unwilling, however, to see
in herself the occasion of her maid's insolence, she transfers the blame
to her husband, who empowers or reminds her of her power still to deal
with her as it pleased her. Hagar, unable to bear the yoke of
humiliation, flees from her mistress.

[Gen 16:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007)

The angel of the Lord either represents the Lord, or presents the Lord
in angelic form. The Lord manifests himself to Hagar seemingly on
account of her relationship to Abram, but in the more distant form of
angelic visitation. She herself appears to be a believer in God. The
spring of water is a place of refreshment on her journey. She is on the
way to Shur, which was before Mizraim as thou goest rewards Asshur [Gen
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018), and therefore fleeing to Egypt,
her native land. The angel of the Lord interrogates her, and requires
her to return to her mistress, and humble herself under her hands.

[Gen 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010)

I will multiply. - This language is proper only to the Lord Himself,
because it claims a divine prerogative. The Lord is, therefore, in this
angel. He promises to Hagar a numerous offspring. "Ishmael." "El," the
Mighty, will hear; but "Jehovah," the Lord (Yahweh), heard her
humiliation. Yahweh, therefore, is the same God as El. He describes
Ishmael and his progeny in him as resembling the wild ass. This animal
is a fit symbol of the wild, free, untamable Bedouin of the desert. He
is to live in contention, and yet to dwell independently, among all his
brethren. His brethren are the descendants of Heber, the Joctanites,
composing the thirteen original tribes of the Arabs, and the Palgites to
whom the descendants of Abram belonged. The Ishmaelites constituted the
second element of the great Arab nation, and shared in their nomadic
character and independence. The character here given of them is true
even to the present day.

[Gen 16:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013)

God of my vision - (El-roi). Here we have the same divine name as in
Ishmael. "Have I even still seen" - continued to live and see the sun
after having seen God? Beer-lahai-roi, the well of vision (of God) to
the living. To see God and live was an issue contrary to expectation
[Exo 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020). The well is between Kadesh
and Bered. The site of the latter has not been ascertained. R. Jonathan
gives חוּצא chelûtsā' the Ἔλουσα elousa of Ptolemy, now el-Khulasa,
about twelve miles south of Beersheba. Rowland finds the well at Moyle
or Muweilah, still further south in the same direction. The birth of
Ishmael is in the sixteenth year after Abram's call, and the eleventh
after his arrival in Kenaan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 17](gen017)

</div>
