<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen006)  [Next](gen008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

[Genesis 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 7:1</span></span>

\- The Ark Was Entered

2\. טהור ṭâhôr "clean, fit for food or sacrifice."

4\. יקוּם yeqûm "standing thing; what grows up, whether animal or
plant." Compare קמה qāmâh "stalk, or standing corn."

[Gen 7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

Here is found the command to enter the ark. The general direction in the
preceding chapter was given many years ago, before the ark was
commenced. Now, when it is completed, a more specific command is issued.
"For thee have I seen righteous before me." Noah has accepted the mercy
of God, is therefore set right in point of law, and walks aright in
point of practice. The Lord recognizes this indication of an adopted and
renewed son. "In this age" he and his were the solitary family so
characterized.

[Gen 7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#002)

Of all clean cattle. - Here the distinction of clean and unclean animals
meets us without any previous notice. How it became known to Noah we are
not informed. From the former direction it appears that the animals were
to enter by pairs. Now it is further arranged that there are to be seven
pairs of the clean cattle and fowl, and only one pair of the unclean.

[Gen 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004)

Seven days after the issue of the command the rain is to commence, and
continue for forty days and nights without ceasing. "Every standing
thing" means every plant and animal on the land.

[Gen 7:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#005)

The execution of the command is recorded and fully particularized with
the additional circumstance of the age of Noah. "The son of six hundred
years," in his six hundredth year. "Went they unto Noah." They seem to
have come under the influence of a special instinct, so that Noah did
not require to gather them. Seven days were employed in receiving them,
and storing provisions for them.

[Genesis 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 7:10</span></span>

\- XXV. The Flood

The date is here given, at which the flood commenced and the entrance
into the ark was completed. "In seven days." On the seventh day from the
command. "In the second month." The primeval year commenced about the
autumnal equinox; we may say, on the nearest new moon. The rains began
about a month or six weeks after the equinox, and, consequently, not far
from the seventeenth of the second month. "All the fountains of the
great deep, and the windows of the skies." It appears that the deluge
was produced by a gradual commotion of nature on a grand scale. The
gathering clouds were dissolved into incessant showers. But this was not
sufficient of itself to effect the overwhelming desolation that
followed. The beautiful figure of the windows of the skies being opened
is preceded by the equally striking one of the fountains of the great
deep being broken up. This was the chief source of the flood. A change
in the level of the land was accomplished. That which had emerged from
the waters on the third day of the last creation was now again
submerged. The waters of the great deep now broke their bounds, flowed
in on the sunken surface, and drowned the world of man, with all its
inhabitants. The accompanying heavy rain of forty days and nights was,
in reality, only a subsidiary instrument in the deluging of the land. We
may imagine the sinking of the land to have been so gradual as to occupy
the whole of these forty days of rain. There is an awful magnificence in
this constant uplifting of the billows over the yielding land.

[Gen 7:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#013)

There is a simple grandeur in the threefold description of the entrance
of Noah and his retinue into the ark, first in the command, next in the
actual process during the seven days, and, lastly, in the completed act
on the seventh day. "Every living thing after its kind" is here
unaccompanied with the epithet רעה rā‛âh, evil, or the qualifying term
of the land or of the field, and therefore may, we conceive, be taken in
the extent of [Gen 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#020); [Gen
7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#002), [Gen
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#006). At all events the whole of the
wild animals did not need to be included in the ark, as their range was
greater than that of antediluvian man or of the flood. "And the Lord
shut him in." This is a fitting close to the scene. The whole work was
manifestly the Lord's doing, from first to last. The personal name of
God is appropriately introduced here. For the Everlasting now shows
himself to be the causer or effecter of the covenant blessing promised
to Noah. In what way the Lord shut him in is an idle question,
altogether unworthy of the grandeur of the occasion. We can tell nothing
more than what is written. We are certain that it would be accomplished
in a manner worthy of him.

[Genesis 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 7:17</span></span>

The prevalence of the waters. The forty days are now completed. And at
the end of this period the ark had been afloat for a long time. It was
drifted on the waters in the direction in which they were flowing, and
toward what was formerly the higher ground.

[Gen 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#019)

Upon the land. - The land is to be understood of the portion of the
earth's surface known to man. This, with an unknown margin beyond it,
was covered with the waters. But this is all that Scripture warrants us
to assert. Concerning the distant parts of Europe, the continents of
Africa, America, or Australia, we can say nothing. "All the high hills
were covered." Not a hill was above water within the horizon of the
spectator or of man. There were ten generations from Adam to Noah
inclusive. We cannot tell what the rate of increase was. But, supposing
each couple to have ten children, and therefore the common ratio to be
five, the whole number of births would be about five million, and the
population in the time of Noah less than four million. It is probable
that they did not scatter further than the necessities and conveniences
of life demanded. In a fertile region, an area equal to that of the
British Isles would be amply sufficient for four million men, women, and
children.

Let us suppose, then, a circle of five hundred miles in diameter
inhabited by man. Let this occupy the central region of a concentric
circle of eight hundred miles in diameter. With a center a little
southwest of Mosul, this larger circle would reach fifty miles into the
Mediterranean, the Euxine, and the Caspian, and would probably have
touched the Persian Gulf at the time of the deluge. If this region were
covered with water, it is obvious that no land or mountain would be
visible to a spectator within the inner circle of five hundred miles in
diameter. "Fifteen cubits upward." This was half the depth of the ark.
It may have taken this draught of water to float it. If so, its
grounding on a hill under water would indicate the depth of water on its
summit. The gradual rise of the waters was accomplished by the
depression of the land, aided, possibly, by a simultaneous elevation of
the bed of the ocean. The water, by the mere necessity of finding its
level, overflowed the former dry land. The extent of this oscillation of
the solid crust of the earth is paralleled by the changes of level which
geology indicates, the last of which took place at the time of the six
days' creation. It is possible that most of the land that was then
raised was now again temporarily submerged in the returning waters;
while distant continents may have all along existed, which never came
within the ken of antediluvian man. The sobriety and historical veracity
of the narrative are strikingly exhibited in the moderate height to
which the waters are said to have risen above the ancient hills.

[Gen 7:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021)

There expired all flesh. - The resulting death of all by drowning is
here recounted. "All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of
live died." This statement refers solely to man, whose higher life is
exclusively expressed by the phrase חיים נשׁמת nı̂shmat chayı̂ym, "breath
of life" [Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007). It affirms the
death of the whole of mankind. The sum total of animal and vegetable
life, with the exception of those in the ark, is here declared to be
extinguished.

[Gen 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#024)

Fifty and a hundred days. - These, and the forty days of rain, make one
hundred and ninety days: about six lunar months and thirteen days. If to
this we add the month and seventeen days before the commencement of the
rain, we have eight months completed, and are therefore brought to the
first day of the ninth month. The waters may be said to prevail as long
as the ark had its full draught of water. It is probable they were still
rising during the first half of the hundred and fifty days, and then
gradually sinking during the other half.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 8](gen008)

</div>
