<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen032)  [Next](gen034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001)

\- Jacob and Esau Meet

17\. סכת sûkkôth, Sukkoth, "booths," consisting of poles forming a roof
covered with branches, leaves, or grass.

19\. חמור chămôr Chamor, "ass, red, heap." קשׂיטה qeśı̂yṭâh Qesitah,
weighed or measured. Ἀμνὸς Amnos, Septuagint and Onkelos

Jacob has a friendly interview with Esau, and re-+enters Kenaan.

[Gen 33:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001)

Jacob, upon seeing Esau approach with his four hundred men, advances
with circumspection and lowly obeisance. He divided his family, arranged
them according to their preciousness in his eyes, and walks himself in
front. In drawing near, he bows seven times, in token of complete
submission to his older brother. Esau, the wild hunter, is completely
softened, and manifests the warmest affection, which is reciprocated by
Jacob. The puncta extraordinaria over וישׁקהוּ vayı̂shēqēhû, "and kissed
him," seemingly intimating a doubt of the reading or of the sincerity of
Esau, are wholly unwarranted. Esau then observes the women and children,
and inquires who they are. Jacob replies that God had granted,
graciously bestowed on him, these children. They approach in succession,
and do obeisance. Esau now inquires of the caravan or horde he had
already met. He had heard the announcement of the servants; but he
awaited the confirmation of the master. "To find grace in the eyes of my
lord." Jacob values highly the good-will of his brother. The acceptance
of this present is the security for that good-will, and for all the
safety and protection which it involved. Esau at first declines the
gift, but on being urged by Jacob accepts it, and thereby relieves Jacob
of all his anxiety. His brother is now his friend indeed. "Therefore,
have I seen thy face," that I might give thee this token of my
affection. "As if I had seen the face of God." The unexpected kindness
with which his brother had received him was a type and proof of the
kindness of the All-provident, by whom it had been added to all his
other mercies. My blessing; my gift which embodies my good wishes. I
have all; not only enough, but all that I can wish.

[Gen 33:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#012)

They now part for the present. "I will qo with thee;" as an escort or
vanguard. Jacob explains that this would be inconvenient for both
parties, as his tender children and suckling cattle could not keep pace
with Esau's men, who were used to the road. "At the pace of the cattle;"
as fast as the business (מלאכה melā'kâh) of traveling with cattle will
permit. Unto Selr. Jacob is travelling to the land of Kenaan, and to the
residence of his father. But, on arriving there, it will be his first
duty to return the fraternal visit of Esau. The very circumstance that
he sent messengers to apprise his brother of his arrival, implies that
he was prepared to cultivate friendly relations with him. Jacob also
declines the offer of some of the men that Esau had with him. He had,
doubtless, enough of hands to manage his remaining flock, and he now
relied more than ever on the protection of that God who had ever proved
himself a faithful and effectual guardian.

[Gen 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017)

"Sukkoth" was south of the Jabbok, and east of the Jordan, as we learn
from [Jdg 8:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#004). From the same passage
it appears to have been nearer the Jordan than Penuel, which was at the
ford of Jahbok. Sukkoth cannot therefore, be identified with Sakut,
which Robinson finds on the other side of the Jordan, about ten miles
north of the mouth of the Jabbok. "And built him a house." This
indicates a permanent residence. Booths, or folds, composed of upright
stakes wattled together, and sheltered with leafy branches. The closed
space in the text is properly introduced here, to indicate the pause in
the narrative, while Jacob sojourned in this place. Dinah, who is not
noticed on the journey, was now not more than six years of age. Six or
seven years more, therefore, must have elapsed before the melancholy
events of the next chapter took place. In the interval, Jacob may have
visited his father, and even returned the visit of Esau.

[Gen 33:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)

Jacob at length crosses the Jordan, and enters again the land of Kenaan.
"In peace." The original word (שׁלם shālēm "safe, in peace") is rendered
Shalem, the name of the town at which Jacob arrived, by the Septuagint.
The rendering safe, or in peace, is here adopted, because (1) the word
is to be taken as a common noun or adjective, unless there be a clear
necessity for a proper name; (2) "the place" was called Shekem in the
time of Abraham [Gen 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006), and the
"town" is so designated in the thirty-fifth chapter [Gen
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004); and (3) the statement that Jacob
arrived in safety accounts for the additional clauses, "which is in the
land of Kenaan," and "when he went from Padan-aram," and is in
accordance with the promise [Gen 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#021)
that he would return in peace. If, however, the Salim found by Robinson
to the west of Nablous be the present town, it must be called the city
of Shekem, because it belonged to the Shekem mentioned in the following
verse and chapter. "Pitched before the city."

Jacob did not enter into the city, because his flocks and herds could
not find accommodation there, and he did not want to come into close
contact with the inhabitants. "He bought a parcel of the field." He is
anxious to have a place he may call his own, where he may have a
permanent resting-place. "For a hundred kesitahs." The kesitah may have
been a piece of silver or gold, of a certain weight, equal in value to a
lamb (see Gesenius). "El-Elohe-Israel." Jacob consecrates his ground by
the erection of an altar. He calls it the altar of the Mighty One, the
God of Israel, in which he signalizes the omnipotence of him who had
brought him in safety to the land of promise through many perils, the
new name by which he himself had been lately designated, and the blessed
communion which now existed between the Almighty and himself. This was
the very spot where Abraham, about one hundred and eighty-five years
ago, built the first altar he erected in the promised land [Gen
12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006). It is now consecrated anew to
the God of promise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 34](gen034)

</div>
