<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen013)  [Next](gen015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)

\- Abram Rescues Lot

1\. אמרפל 'amrāpel, Amraphel; related: unknown. אלריוך 'aryôk, Ariok,
"leonine?" related: ארי 'arı̂y, "a lion:" a name re-appearing in the time
of Daniel [Dan 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014). אלסר 'elāsār
Ellasar (related: unknown) is identified with Larsa or Larancha, the
Λάρισσα Larissa or Λαράχων Larachōn of the Greeks, now Senkereh, a town
of lower Babylonia, between Mugheir (Ur) and Warka (Erek) on the left
bank of the Frat. כדרלעמר kedārlā‛omer, Kedorla'omer, was compared by
Col. Rawlinson with Kudur-mapula or mabuk, whose name is found on the
bricks of Chaldaea, and whose title is Apda martu, ravager of the west.
He translates it "servant of Lagamer," one of the national divinities of
Susiana. It is also compared with Kedar el-Ahmar, "Kedar the Red," a
hero in Arabian story. תדעל tı̂d‛āl, Tid'al, "terror." גוים gôyı̂m, Goim,
"nations."

2\. ברע bera‛, Bera', "gift?" ברשׁע bı̂rsha, Birsha', "long and thick?"
Arabic שׁנאב shı̂n'āb, Shinab, "coolness?" אדמה 'admâh, Admah, "red soil"
שׁמאבר shem'ēber, Shemeber, "high-soaring?" צביים; tsebôyı̂ym, Tseboim,
"gazelles." בלע bela‛, Bela', "devouring."

3\. שׂדים śı̂dı̂ym, Siddim, "plains, fields."

5\. רפאים repā'ı̂ym, Rephaim, "the still, the shades, the giants." קרנים
עשׁתרת (ashterot-qarnayı̂m, 'Ashteroth-Qurnaim, "ewes of the two horns";
according to Gesenius, "stars of the two horns." The first word may be
singular, "ewe," or "star." The latter meaning is gained by connecting
the word with the Persian sitareh and the Greek ἀστήρ astēr, "star."
Ashteroth is the moon or the planet Venus, whence Astarte. זוּזים
zûzı̂ym, Zuzim; related: "glance, gush." הם hām, Ham, "rush, sound,
crowd." אימים 'eymı̂ym, Emim, "terrible." שׁיח־קריתים shāvēh-qı̂ryātāyı̂m,
Shaveh, "plain"; Qiriathaim, "two cities;" related: "meet."

6\. חרי chorı̂y, Chori, troglodyte; verb: "bore;" noun: "cave." שׁעיר
sē‛ı̂yr, Se'ir, "rough, shaggy." פארן איל 'eyl-pā'rān, El, "tree, oak,
terebinth, palm"; Paran, "bushy, or cavernous."

7\. משׁפט עין ‛eyn-mı̂shpāṭ, 'En-mishpat, "well of judgment." קדשׁ
qādēsh, Qadesh, "consecrated." עמלקי ‛ǎmālēkı̂y, 'Amaleki, "a people that
licks up." תמר חצצן chatstson-tāmār, Chatsatson-tamar, "cuttiny of the
palm."

13\. עברי ‛ı̂brı̂y 'Ibri, a descendant of Eber. אשׁכל 'eshkol, Eshkol,
"cluster of grapes." ענר ‛ǎner, 'Aner; related: unknown.

14\. דן dan, Dan, "ruler, judge."

15\. חיבה chôbâh, Chobah, "hidden." דמושׂק dameśeq, Dammeseq. a
quadraliteral; related: "hasty, active, alert."

18\. מלכיצדק malkı̂y-tsedeq, Malkitsedeq, "king of righteousness." שׁלם
shālēm, Shalem. "peace." אל 'êl, El, "lasting, strong; strength."

20\. מגן mı̂gēn, "give, deliver;" related: "mag, may."

The community of feeling and of faith was not yet wholly broken up
between Abram and Lot, or between them and the nations out of whom Abram
had been called. An interesting glimpse is at the same time presented of
the daring and doing of fierce ambition in those early times. A
confederacy of potentates enter upon an extensive raid or foray, in
which Lot is taken captive. This rouses the clannish or family affection
of Abram, who pursues, overtakes, and defeats the retreating enemy, and
recovers his friend, as well as all the prisoners, and property that had
been taken. On his return he receives refreshment and blessing from a
native prince who is priest to the most high God.

[Gen 14:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)

The raid is minutely described in [Gen
14:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001). The dominant confederacy
consists of four kings. Many generations back the first world power,
consisting of four cities, was established by Nimrod in the land of
Shinar [Gen 10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008). This has now
given way to a world-confederacy, consisting of four kings. From the
vicinity of the places in which they reigned it is evident that they
were petty princes of domains varying from a town and its suburbs to a
comparatively extensive territory. The first, Amraphel, is king of
Shinar. He is therefore the successor of Nimrod, and the sovereign of
the most ancient kingdoms, and on these grounds occupies the first place
in the list. But this kingdom is no longer the sole or even the supreme
power. Amraphel is probably the descendant of Nimrod, and a Kushite. The
second, Ariok, is king of Ellasar. If this town be the same as Larsa,
lying between the Frat and the Shat el-Hie, the land of Shinar has been
divided between two sovereigns, and no longer belongs entirely to the
successor of Nimrod. Lower Shinar includes also Ur of the Kasdim; and
hence, Ariok probably represents that race.

The third, Kedorlaomer, is king of Elam, or Elymais, a country east of
the lower Tigris, and separated by it from Shinar. He is probably a
Shemite, as the country over which he ruled received its name from a son
of Shem [Gen 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022). He is the lord
paramount of the others, and commander-in-chief of the united forces.
Hence, the Hamite seems to have already succumbed to the Shemite. The
fourth, Tidel, is designated "king of Goim." Goim means nations; and it
is doubtful whether it denotes here a special nation or a congeries of
tribes. The Gentiles, especially so called, seem to have been
Japhethites [Gen 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005). It is obvious
that four nationalities are here leagued together, corresponding
probably to the Kiprat arbat, four nations or tongues mentioned by
Rawlinson (Anc. Mon. I. p. 69). But Kedorlaomer, king of Elam, is
clearly not a Kushite. The only question seems to be whether he is a
Shemite or a Japhethite, or Arian, in which race the Shemite was
ultimately absorbed. If the former alternative be adopted, we may have
two Shemite languages among the four. If the latter be accepted,
Kedorlaomer is an Arian; Tidal, a Turanian; Amraphel, a Hamite; and
Ariok, a Shemite. In either case the Kushite has become subordinate, and
a Japhethite or a Shemite has attained the predominance.

[Gen 14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#002)

They made war. - Shinar was the central region from which the different
branches of the human family dispersed after the confusion of tongues.
It is possible that the mother country claimed some supremacy over the
colonies. Shinar was also a great center of commerce, and the cities of
the dale of Siddim formed another, of secondary importance. Intercourse
between the two countries was therefore frequent. Abram himself had come
from Ur Kasdim. The spirit of despotism had descended from Nimrod to the
present potentates of the East, and prompted them to aim at universal
empire. The five kings are the petty sovereigns, each of a single town
and its neighborhood. The area in which these towns lay was very
circumscribed. With the exception of the territory of Bela it was
afterward submerged and formed part of the basin of the Salt Sea. Hence,
Siddim is said to be the Salt Sea. The dale is the deep valley or glen
in which these kings dwelt on the banks of the Jordan, or the salt lake
into which it flowed. Of the five cities, Sodom was the chief in power,
luxury, and wickedness; whence it is mentioned first. Bela is also
called Zoar, "the little," and, hence, is placed last; even the name of
its king is not given. "All these joined together." They formed a league
in self-defense, and marched out to meet the enemy in the dale of
Siddim.

[Gen 14:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#004)

The narrative here reverts to the previous circumstances which gave
occasion to the present raid. "Twelve years had they served
Kedorlaomer." These years date probably from the commencement of his
reign. They may have been previously dependent on the dominant power in
Shinar, and connected with it by national descent. If Kedorlaomer had
wrested the supremacy from the king of Shinar, and so was regarded as an
alien by the princes of Siddim, their coolness might gradually ripen
into disaffection. In the thirteenth year they rebelled, and in the
fourteenth Kedorlaomer came to quell the revolt. This military
expedition embraced far loftier objects than the mere subjugation of the
Pentapolis in the dale of Siddim. In passing from Shinar the invaders
must have marched in a northwesterly direction along the Frat, touching
upon Tadmor and Damascus. We are not informed whether they held any sway
or made any conquest in these intervening regions. But they overran the
country that stretches along the whole cast side of the Jordan, and the
parts south and west of the Salt Sea.

The Rephaim lay in Peraea. Some of them also were once found on the west
side of the Jordan [Gen 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#020), where
they gave name to the valley of Rephaim (Wady el-Werd), southwest of
Jerusalem, on the way to Bethlehem [Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008), occupied part of Mount Ephraim
[Jos 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#015), and lingered for a long
time among the Philistines ([Sa2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#016), ff.). They were a tall or
gigantic race. They were not Kenaanites, but seem to have entered the
country before them. They were conquered in Peraea by the Amorites, a
branch of the Kenaanite family; and by the descendants of Lot, the
Ammonites and Moabites. A remnant of them only lingered in the country
when the Israelites arrived [Deu 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#020);
[Deu 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011), [Deu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013). They may have been Shemites or
Japhethites. The site of Ashteroth Carnaim has not been ascertained.
Ritter finds it in Tell Ash'areh. Porter suggests 'Afineh, eight miles
from Busrah, as the Samaritan version has 'Aphinit for 'Ashtaroth.

The Zuzim dwelt between the Jabbok and the Arnon. They are supposed to
be the same as the Zamzummin, who were dispossessed by the Ammonites. If
so, they were a branch of the Rephaim [Deu
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#020). Their town, Ham, is of unknown
site.

The Emim were also accounted Rephaim. They lay on the east of the Salt
Sea, and were afterward conquered by the Moabites, who gave them this
name [Deu 2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#010). Of Shaveh
Kiriathaim, the plain of the two cities, the name probably remains in
el-Kureiyat, a site near Jebel Attarus in Moab.

The Horites were perhaps a Shemite tribe, the aboriginal inhabitants of
Mount Seir, where they dwelt in caves; such as are still to be seen in
Petra and other places around. They were afterward absorbed into the
Edomites. Mount Seir stretches between the Salt Sea and the Elanitic
Gulf. El-Paran, terebinth of Paran, is perhaps the same as Elath, at the
head of the gulf of Aelana or Akaba. Paran lay west of Mount Seir and
south of Palestine, and stretched into the peninsula of Sinai, where the
name may yet be preserved in Wady Feiran. El-Paran would thus be by the
wilderness of that name, now et-Tih.

[Gen 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007)

This was the extreme point of their march southward. They now turned
back by another route. Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, lay between Mount Hor
and the Salt Sea, at a site now called Ain el-Welbch. "The field of the
Amalekite" was some part of the country lying between Palestine and
Egypt, which was afterward occupied by the Amalekites. Instead of
"field," the Septuagint has ἄρχοντας archontas, "rulers" of Amalek; but
this reading is not supported. The tribe is descended from Amalek, thc
son of Eliphaz and grandson of Esau [Gen
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#012). Traces of them are found as far
north as Ephraim [Jdg 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014); [Jdg
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#015). Balaam calls Amalek the
beginning of the nations [Num 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020);
but this cannot be understood absolutely, as the name does not even
occur in the table of nations. It is therefore well explained to mean
that Amalek was the first that attacked Israel on coming out of Egypt.
The invading host advance still further, to Hazazon-tamar, cutting of
the palm, which is En-gedi (well of the kid, [Ch2
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#002)), situated on the western shore
of the Salt Sea, and now called Ain Jidy. This was a settlement of the
Amorites.

[Gen 14:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#008)

We have now arrived again at the point we had reached in [Gen
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#003). The five kings came out and
joined battle with the four in the dale of Siddim. This dale abounded in
pits of mineral pitch, or asphalt. The kings of Sodom and Amorah fled
toward these pits, and seem to have fallen into them and perished. The
others betook themselves to the mountain - probably the heights on the
cast of the dale.

[Gen 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#011)

The provisions and other movable property of the vanquished are carried
away from Sodom and Amorah. For רפשׁ rekush, "goods," the Septuagint has
here and in the 21st verse τὴν ἵππσν tēn hippon, "the cavalry." This
implies the reading רכב rekeb, which is not supported by other
authorities, nor suitable to the context. Among the prisoners is Lot,
the son of Abram's brother. This designation prepares us for what is to
follow. It is added that he was "dwelling in Sodom," to explain why he
was among the captives. "They went away." The invaders were now laden
with booty. Their first concern was to transfer this to their native
country, and deposit it in a place of safety. It was not prudent to
delay while they were encumbered with so much valuable property. The
terms on which the conquered tribes were to "serve" them could be
settled by negotiation. If these terms were not accepted, they would be
quite ready for another predatory incursion.

This great foray is only incidentally introduced into our narrative, on
account of the capture of Lot. It was not the first visit probably of
these marauders to the same lands. It is interesting to the historian,
as a sample of the mode in which conquest was made. It opens up to the
view one of the ancient scenes of human activity. It teaches us that the
wave of war often flowed over the lands of the ancient world, and left
more or less lasting marks of its disturbing power. Tribes were not
unfrequently moved from place to place, intermingled with one another,
and enslaved by other tribes. The actual state of things in the land of
Abram's pilgrimage is suddenly presented to us under a new light. The
Rephaim, including the Zuzim and the Emim, occupy the east of the
Jordan, and had once a place on the west. The Perizzites also dwell side
by side with the Kenaanites in the western district. The Horites are
found in Mount Seir. As none of these were Kenaan's descendants, we have
the undeniable traces of a Shemitic population before and along with the
Kenaanites. The language of Heber, therefore, was in the country before
the latter arrived.

[Gen 14:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)

Abram rescues Lot. הפליט hapālı̂yṭ "the fugitive" party, as "the
Kenaanite" for the whole nation. The escaped party inform Abram when one
of their number does so. "The Hebrew." This designation is given to
Abram plainly for the purpose of connecting him with Lot. The Septuagint
translates the word by περα της peratees, one who passes. This has been
explained by transfluvialis, one who has come across the river; namely,
the Frat. This no doubt applies to Lot as well as Abram; but it also
applies to every other tribe in the country, inasmuch as all had
originally migrated across the Euphrates. Besides, the word is nowhere
else used in this sense, but always as a patronymic. And, moreover,
Abram is here distinguished as the Hebrew, just as his confederate Mamre
is distinguished as the Amorite. The object of these designations is to
mark, not only their relation to each other, but also their connection
with those who were carried off as prisoners of war. The term "Hebrew"
does not come into the narrative by hap-hazard. "The sons of Heber" are
distinctly mentioned in the table of nations among the descendants of
Shem. Its introduction here intimates that there were other descendants
of Heber besides Abram already in the land. They could not but be a
widespread race. One branch of them, the Joctanites, were the first
stock of Arabia's inhabitants, and the Palgites may have been the
earliest settlers in the adjacent Palestine. How many of the
non-Kenaanites belong to them we cannot tell; but we learn from the
statement now before us that the Hebrew was at this time a known
patronymic. The way between Mesopotamia and Palestine has been often
trodden.

Abram was dwelling by the oaks of Mamre, near Hebron, therefore not far
from the scene of war. He was also in league with Mamre and his brothers
Eshkol and Aner. This league was, it is evident from the result, for
mutual defense.

[Gen 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)

His brother. - This is a customary extension of the term, whether we
regard Lot as his brother's son, or at the same time his brother-in-law.
"His trained men." Abram had now a company of three hundred and eighteen
trained men, born in his own house; which implies a following of more
than one thousand men, women, and children. His flocks and herds must
have corresponded in extent to such an establishment. "Unto Dan." This
name is found in the Hebrew, Samaritan, Septuagint, and Onkelos. It
might naturally be supposed that the sacred reviser of the text had
inserted it here, had we not grounds for a contrary supposition. The
custom of the reviser was to add the other name without altering the
original; of which we have several examples in this very chapter [Gen
14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#002), [Gen
14:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007), [Gen
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017). We are, therefore, led to
regard Dan as in use at the time of Abram. Held at that remote period
perhaps by some Hebrew, it fell at length into the hands of the
Sidonians Judg. 18, who named it Laish (lion) and Leshem (ligure).

Names of places in that eastern land vary, from a slight resemblance in
sound (paronomasia), a resemblance in sense (synonyms), a change of
masters, or some other cause. Laish and Leshem are significant names,
partly alike in sound, and applied to the same town. They took the place
of Dan when the town changed masters. The recollection of its ancient
name and story may have attracted the Danites to the place, who burned
Laish and built a new city which they again called Dan. This town was
situated at the source of the lesser Jordan, with which some have
connected its name. Its site is now occupied by Tell el-Kady, the hill
of "the judge." This is a case of resemblance in sense between varying
names. Others, however, distinguish the present Dan from the Laish Dan,
and identify it with Danjaan or jaar, "Dan in the wood" [Sa2
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#006). The former is not on the road to
Damascus, while the latter was north of Gilead, and may have been near
the route either by the south of the sea of Kinnereth, or of the waters
of Merom. This is possible, and deserves consideration. But there may
have been a third way to Damascus, passing Tell el-Kady; this place
itself is on the east side of the main stream of the Jordan, and the
expression רען דנה dānâh ya'an is confessedly obscure.

[Gen 14:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015)

Abram and his confederates found the enemy secure and at their ease, not
expecting pursuit. They attack them on two quarters; Abram, probably, on
the one, and his allies on the other; by night, defeat and pursue them
unto Hobah. "On the left hand of Damascus." Hobah was on the north of
Damascus. An Eastern, in fixing the points of the heavens, faces the
rising sun, in which position the east is before him, the west behind,
the south at the right hand, and the north at the left. Hobah is
referred by the Jews to Jobar, a place northeast of Damascus. J. L.
Porter suggests a place due north, called Burzeh, where there is a
Muslim wely or saint's tomb, called Makam Ibrahim, the sanctuary of
Abraham (Handbook, p. 492). This route, by the north of Damascus,
illustrates the necessity of advancing far north to get round the desert
intervening between Shinar and the cities of the plain.

Damascus, Dimishk, esh-Sham, is a very ancient city of Aram. The choice
of the site was probably determined by the Abana (Barada) and Pharpar
(Awaj), flowing, the one from Anti-Libanus, and the other from Mount
Hermon, and fertilizing a circuit of thirty miles. Within this area
arose a city which, amidst all the changes of dynasty that have come
over it, has maintained its prosperity to the present day, when it has
one hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants. It was originally occupied
by the descendants of Aram, and may have been built, as Josephus informs
us, by Uz his son.

Abram, with his allies, succeeded in defeating the enemy and recovering
the property, with the prisoners, male and female, that had been carried
away, and, among the rest, Lot, the object of his generous and gallant
adventure.

Verse 7-24

Abram's reception on his return. "The king of Sodom." This is either
Bera, if he survived the defeat, or, if not, his successor. "The dale of
Shaveh, which is the King's dale." The word עמק ‛ēmeq is rendered here
uniformly by the familiar term "dale." The dale of Shaveh is here
explained by the "King's dale." This phrase occurs at a period long
subsequent as the name of the valley in which Absalom reared his pillar
[Sa2 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018). There is nothing to hinder
the identity of the place, which must, according to the latter passage,
have been not far from Jerusalem. Josephus makes the distance two
stadia, which accords with the situation of Absalom's tomb, though the
building now so-called, in the valley of Jehoshaphat, seems to be of
later origin. The identity of the King's dale with the valley cast of
Jerusalem, through which the Kedron flows, corresponds very well with
the present passage.

[Gen 14:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)

An incident of the deepest interest here takes us by surprise. The
connecting link in the narrative is obviously the place where the king
of Sodom meets with Abram. The King's dale is plainly adjacent to the
royal residence of Melkizedec, who therefore comes forth to greet and
entertain the returning victor. This prince is the king of Shalem. This
is apparently an ancient name of Jerusalem, which is so designated in
[Psa 76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008). The other Shalem, which lay
in the vicinity of Shekem ([Gen 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018),
if this be a proper name) is far away from the King's dale and the town
of Sodom. Jerusalem is convenient to these localities, and contains the
element Shalem in its composition, as the name signifies the foundation
of peace (Shalom).

The king of Shalem, by name king of righteousness, and by office king of
peace, "brought forth bread and wine." These are the standing elements
of a simple repast for the refreshment of the body. In after times they
were by divine appointment placed on the table of the presence in the
tabernacle [Exo 25:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#029). They were
the accompaniments of the Paschal lamb [Mat
26:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026), and they were adopted by the
Messiah as the sacred symbols of that heavenly fare, of which, if a man
partake, he shall live forever [Joh
6:48-58](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#048). The Author of revelation has
made all nature intrinsically good and pure. He has realized therein a
harmony of the laws of intelligence and design; everything meets and
matches all that comes into contact with it; and all together form a
cosmos, a system of things, a unity of types and antitypes. His word
cannot but correspond to His work. Bread and wine are common things,
familiar to the eye, the touch, and the taste of men. The Great Teacher
takes them up out of the hands of man as emblems of grace, mercy, and
peace, through an accepted ransom, of the lowliest as well as the
loftiest boon of an everlasting salvation, and they have never lost
their significance or appropriateness.

And he was priest to the most high God. - From this we are assured that
the bread and wine refreshed not only the body, but the soul of Abram.
In close connection with the preceding sentence, it seems to intimate
that the bringing forth of bread and wine was a priestly act, and,
accordingly, the crowning part of a sacred feast. The כהן kohen, or
priest, who is here mentioned for the first time in Scripture, was one
who acted in sacred things on the part of others. He was a mediator
between God and man, representing God holding out the hand of mercy, and
man reaching forth the hand of faith. The necessity of such an orifice
grew out of the distance between God and man produced by sin. The
business of the priest was to offer sacrifice and to intercede; in the
former making amends to the law, in the latter appealing to the mercy of
God. We do not learn by express statement what was the mode of
intervention on the part of Melkizedec. But we know that sacrifice was
as early as Habel, and that calling on the name of the Lord was
commenced in the time of Enosh. These were early forms of approach to
God. The offices of king and priest were combined in Melkizedec - a
condition of things often exemplified in after times.

The most high God. - Here we meet with a new name of God, El, the
Lasting, the Mighty, cognate with Elohim, and previously occurring in
the compound proper names Mebujael, Mahalalel, and Bethel. We have also
an epithet of God, "Elion the most high," now appearing for the first
time. Hence, we perceive that the unity, the omnipotence, and the
absolute pre-eminence of God were still living in the memory and
conscience of a section at least of the inhabitants of this land. Still
more, the worship of God was not a mere domestic custom, in which the
father or head of the family officiated, but a public ordinance
conducted by a stated functionary. And, lastly, the mode of worship was
of such a nature as to represent the doctrine and acknowledge the
necessity of an atonement, since it was performed by means of a priest.

[Gen 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)

And he blessed him. - Here it comes out clearly that Melkizedec acts not
only in a civil but in a sacred capacity. He blesses Abram. In the form
of benediction employed we have two parts: the former of which is
strictly a blessing or asking of good things for the person in question.
"Blessed be Abram." It is the part of the father to bless the child, of
the patriarch or superior to bless the subject or inferior, and of the
priest to bless the people [Heb 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007).
Here, accordingly, Melkizedec assumes and Abram concedes to him the
superiority. The Most High God is here further designated as the Founder
of heaven and earth, the great Architect or Builder, and, therefore,
Possessor of all things. There is here no indistinct allusion to the
creation of "heaven and earth," mentioned in the opening of the Book of
God. This is a manifest identification of the God of Melkizedec with the
one Creator and Upholder of all things. We have here no mere local or
national deity, with limited power and province, but the sole and
supreme God of the universe and of man.

[Gen 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#020)

The second part of this benedictory prayer is a thanksgiving to the
common God of Melkizedec and Abram for the victory which had been
vouchsafed to the latter. "Thy foes." Here Abram is personally
addressed. Melkizedec as a priest first appeals to God on behalf of
Abram, and then addresses Abram on behalf of God. Thus, he performs the
part of a mediator.

And he gave him a tithe of all. - This is a very significant act. In
presenting the tenth of all the spoils of victory, Abram makes a
practical acknowledgment of the absolute and exclusive supremacy of the
God whom Melkizedec worshipped, and of the authority and validity of the
priesthood which he exercised. We have here all the indications of a
stated order of sacred rites, in which a costly service, with a fixed
official, is maintained at the public expense, according to a definite
rate of contribution. The gift in the present case is the tenth of the
spoils of war. This act of Abram, though recorded last, may have taken
place at the commencement of the interview. At all events, it renders it
extremely probable that a sacrifice had been offered to God, through the
intervention of Melkizedec, before he brought forth the bread and wine
of the accepted feast.

It is obvious that here we stand on broader ground than the special
promise made to Abram. Melkizedec was not a partner in the call of
Abram, and yet the latter acknowledges him as a priest of the Most High
God. Hence, we must fall back on the covenant made with Noah - the
representative of the whole race after the deluge - as the broad basis
of authority on which Melkizedec acted. That covenant, then, was not a
dead letter. It still lived in the heart and will of a part of the
nations. Its hallowing and exalting truths had produced at least one
center of pure and spiritual worship on the earth. Even Abram, the
called of God, acknowledges its constituted head. And the Most High God,
Founder and Upholder of heaven and earth, thereby guarantees its
validity for all who in every place call on his name in sincerity and
truth. And his special call to Abram is given with a view to the final
removal of all obstacles to the acceptance and application of this his
everlasting covenant. We are thankful for this glimpse into the
comprehensive grandeur of the divine purpose concerning man, which is
for some time forward cast into the shade, until it begins to break
forth again in the anticipations of the prophets, and at length shines
forth with imperishable splendor in the revelations of the New
Testament.

The genealogy of Melkizedec seems designedly veiled in impenetrable
obscurity. To lift this veil entirely is therefore hopeless. Yet we may
venture to hint the possibility that here we have another Shemite
chieftain in the land of Kenaan. The indefinite statement of Josephus,
that he was a potentate of the Kenaanites, is no proof to the contrary,
even if it were of much value. The address of Ezekiel to Jerusalem: "Thy
origin and thy birth are of the land of Kenaan; thy father was an
Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite" [Eze
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003), may refer to the period
immediately before the entrance of Israel into the land. At and after
that time the Amorite and the Jebusite seem to have been in possession
of the city [Jos 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#005); [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021). But in the time of Abram, more
than four hundred years before, it may have been different. We have
discovered other tribes in this land that were not of the race of
Kenaan. It is not likely that Kenaan would furnish a priest of the most
high God. It is evident that Melkizedec was not in the confederacy of
the Pentapolis with the king of Sodom. He comes out separately and
suddenly to meet Abram, who was one of "the children of Heber," of whom
Shem was the father.

And he is the acknowledged head of the worshippers of the most high God,
who is "the Lord, the God of Shem." But be this as it may, it is only a
secondary question here. The matter of primary importance, as has been
already noted, is the existence of a community of pure worshippers of
the true God in the land of Kenaan, antecedent to Abram. If this
community be descendants of Kenaan, it only renders the discovery the
more striking and impressive. The knowledge of the true God, the
confession of the one everlasting supreme Creator of heaven and earth,
the existence of a stated form of worship by means of a priest and a
ritual attested by Abram the elect of God, in a community belonging to
the Gentiles, form at once a remarkable vindication of the justice and
mercy of God in having made known to all mankind the mode of acceptable
approach to himself, and a singular evidence that such a revelation had
been made to Noah, from whom alone it could have descended to the whole
race, and consequently to this particular branch of it.

We have reason to believe that this was not the sole line in which this
precious tradition was still preserved in comparative purity and power.
Job and his companions belong to one other known line in which the
knowledge of the one God was still vital. The fundamental principles of
divine truth planted in the human breast by this and antecedent
revelations were never afterward wholly eradicated; and from the
hereditary germs of a primitive theology, cherished by contact with the
Sidonians and other Phoenicians, were Homer, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle,
and other sages of the East and West, enabled to rise to the exalted
conceptions which they occasionally formed of the unity, purity,
spirituality, and supremacy of the Divine Being. The idea of God,
conveyed into a soul of any power and freedom, is wonderfully prolific.
It bursts the bonds of the animal nature, and expands and elevates the
rational to some shadowy semblance of its primeval glory. Where it has
become altogether extinct, the human has sunk down under the debasing
bondage of the brutal. During the four centuries that elapsed from the
arrival of Abram to the conquest of the country by his descendants, this
interesting relic of a pure Gentile worship seems to have disappeared.
But the traces of such a purifying and elevating knowledge of God were
not even then effaced from the memories, the customs, and the phrases of
the people.

[Gen 14:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021)

The king of Sodom concedes to Abram, according to custom, the spoils of
conquest as his right, and claims for himself only his subjects who had
been rescued from the foe. Abram however declines any personal advantage
from the enterprise, or material recompense for his services. To this he
was led partly by the present disposition of his mind, in which the
spiritual prevailed over the carnal, and partly by the character of the
one with whom he had to deal; since the Sodomites were notorious for
their wickedness. On other occasions he accepted unmerited gifts [Gen
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#016); [Gen
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014), [Gen
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016). On the present occasion, he, no
doubt, felt himself amply rewarded by the recovery of his own kinsman,
and the blessing of Melkizedec. Disinterestedness has had another
victory in Abram. And, accordingly, the minister of God meets him on the
field of a common humanity, and pronounces on him a blessing. The
unselfish, unsectarian heart of the heir of special promise, bows in
acknowledgment of the representative of the universal and anterior
covenant of God with Noah.

[Gen 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022)

I have lifted up my hand. - This is a serious matter with Abram. Either
before, or then and there, he made an oath or solemn asseveration before
God, with uplifted hand, that he would not touch the property of Sodom.
He must have felt that there was danger of moral contamination in coming
into any political relationship with the cities of the vale. "The Lord,
the Most High God, the Founder of heaven and earth." In this conjunction
of names Abram solemnly and expressly identifies the God of himself and
of Melkizedec in the presence of the king of Sodom. The Most High God of
Melkizedec is the God of the first chapter of Genesis, and the Yahweh of
Adam, Noah, and Abram.

[Gen 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#024)

While Abram refrains from accepting any part of the spoils beyond what
had been consumed in supplying the necessities of his followers in the
expedition, he expressly excepts the portion to which his confederates,
Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, became entitled by their share in the recovery
of the property. This is sufficient to prove that the transaction
regarding the spoil was not an offer of generosity on the part of the
king of Sodom, but an act of disinterestedness on the part of Abram.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 15](gen015)

</div>
