<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen042)  [Next](gen044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001)

\- Joseph and His Eleven Brethren

11\. דבשׁ debash, "honey," from the bee, or sirup from the juice of the
grape. בטנים bôṭen, "pistachio nuts." שׁקד shâqêd, "almond tree;"
related: "awake." The tree is also called לוּז lûz. Some refer the
former to the fruit, the latter to the tree.

The eleven brothers are now to bow down before Joseph.

[Gen 43:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001)

The famine was severe. The pressure began to be felt more and more. The
twelve households had at length consumed all the corn they had
purchased, and the famine still pressed heavily upon them. Jacob directs
them to return. "And Judah said." Reuben had offended, and could not
come forward. Simon and Levi had also grieved their father by the
treacherous slaughter of the Shekemites. Judah therefore, speaks. "Is
your father yet alive?" "Have ye a brother?" These questions do not come
out in the previous narrative, on account of its brevity. But how
pointed they are, and how true to Joseph's yearnings! They explain how
it was that these particulars came out in the replies of the brothers to
Joseph. For the charge of being spies did not call for them in
exculpation. Judah now uses all the arguments the case would admit of,
to persuade his father to allow Benjamin to go with them. He closes with
the emphatic sentence, If I bring him not unto thee, and set him before
thee, then let me have sinned against thee all my days; that is, let me
bear the blame, and of course the penalty of having sinned against thee
in so tender a point. Both Judah and his father knew that this was a
matter that touched the interest of the former very deeply. Reuben was
bearing the blame of a grievous sin, and had no hope of the birthright.
Simon and Levi were also bearing blame, and, besides, had not the
natural right, which belonged only to Reuben. Judah came next, and a
failure in securing the safe return of Benjamin might set him also
aside. He undertakes to run this risk.

[Gen 43:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011)

Jacob at length reluctantly sends Benjamin with them. He employs all
means, as is usual with him, of securing a favorable result. "The best
of the land" - the sung or celebrated products of the land. "A little
honey." Palestine abounded with bee honey. A sirup obtained by boiling
down the juice of the grape was also called by the same name, and formed
an article of commerce. "Nuts." These are supposed to be pistachio nuts,
from the pistacia vera, a tree resembling the terebinth, a native of
Anatolia, Syria, and Palestine. "Almonds." The almond tree buds or
flowers earlier in the spring than other trees. It is a native of
Palestine, Syria, and Persia. For the other products see [Gen
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025). "Other silver;" not double
silver, but a second sum for the new purchase. "God Almighty" - the
Great Spirit, who can dispose the hearts of men as he pleases. Jacob
looks up to heaven for a blessing, while he uses the means. "If I am
bereaved, I am bereaved." This is the expression of acquiescence in
whatever may be the will of Providence. "Double silver," - what was
returned and what was to pay for a second supply of corn.

[Gen 43:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#016)

The invitation into Joseph's house fills the brothers with alarm. "Saw
with them Benjamin." This was an unspeakable relief to Joseph, who was
afraid that his full brother, also the favorite of his father, might
have incurred the envy and persecution of the brothers. "Brought the men
to Joseph's house." This he eventually did, but not until after the
conference between him and them took place. The men were afraid of a
plot to rob them of their liberty and property.

[Gen 43:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#019)

They are encouraged by the steward of Joseph's house to lay aside their
fears, and prepare their present. "Spake to him at the door of the
house." This was, of course, before they entered. "When we came to the
inn." The relater is prone to lump matters in the narration, for the
sake of brevity. They began to "open their bags" at the first
lodging-place, and finished the process at the last when they got home.
Other silver. This explains the phrase "second silver" in [Gen
43:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#012). "Peace be to you." Be at rest.
All is well. Your God. The steward of Joseph expresses himself as one
who fears and trusts God, the God of the Hebrews, who had displayed his
omniscience and omnipotence in Egypt. "He brought out unto them Simon."
While they still linger at the entrance, the considerate steward
bethought himself of bringing out Simon to them, which reassured their
hearts, and induced them to enter willingly. He now succeeds therefore,
in bringing them in, and then bestows upon them the usual attentions of
Eastern hospitality. They now "make ready their present."

[Gen 43:26-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#026)

They are now entertained by Joseph. They brought the present, and made a
lowly obeisance before him. "They bent the head." See [Gen
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#026). "God be gracious unto thee, my
son." His kind treatment of Benjamin, on whose presence he had so much
insisted, was calculated to reassure the brothers. The latter was born
in his thirteenth year, and therefore, he was entitled to assume the
paternal style in regard to him. Joseph still appeals with a natural and
unconstrained reverence to his own God. "And Joseph hastened away." The
little touch of tenderness he had involuntarily thrown into his address
to Benjamin, is too much for his feelings, which yearn toward his
brother, and he is obliged to retreat to his chamber to conceal his
tears and compose his countenance. "They set for him by himself." As the
governor, or as connected by affinity with the priestly caste, Joseph
does not eat with the other Egyptians. The Egyptians cannot eat with the
Hebrews. "That is an abomination to the Mizrites." For the Hebrews
partook of the flesh of kine, both male and female.

But Herodotus informs us (ii. 41), that "male kine, if clean, are used
by the Egyptians, but the females they are not allowed to sacrifice,
since they are sacred to Isis." And he adds that "a native of Egypt will
not kiss a Greek, use his knife, his spit, or his cauldron, or taste the
flesh cut with a Greek knife." They considered all foreigners unclean,
and therefore, refused to eat with them (see Rawlinson's Herodotus on p.
q.). They sat in his presence; arranged according to the order of their
birth, to their great amazement. Egypt was to them a land of wonders,
and Egypt's sultan a man of wonder. "Benjamin's mess." The honored guest
was distinguished by a larger or daintier portion of the fare ([Sa1
9:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#023); Homer, ii. 7,321). A double
portion was assigned to the Spartan kings. The fivefold division was
prominent in Egyptian affairs [Gen
41:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#034); [Gen
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#022); [Gen
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#002), [Gen
47:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#024), [Gen
47:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#026). "And were merry." They drank
freely, so as to be exhilarated, because their cares were dissipated by
the kindness they were receiving, the presence of Simon, and the
attention paid to Benjamin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 44](gen044)

</div>
