<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](hab001)  [Next](hab003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)

[Habakkuk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hab 2:1</span></span>

I will stand - , i. e. I would stand now, as a servant awaiting his
master,

Upon my watch - or, keep ([Isa 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#008).
משׁמר in the same sense [Jer 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#012)),
and "set me (plant myself firmly) upon the tower" (literally, fenced
place, but also one straitened and narrowly hemmed in), "and will watch"
(it is a title of the prophets , as spying by God's enabling, things
beyond human ken); I will spy out, to see a long way off, to see with
the inward eye, what He will say unto me (literally, Jerome: in me);
first revealing Himself in the prophets "within to the inner man;" then,
through them. And what I shall answer when I am reproved , or, upon my
complaint literally upon my reproof or arguing; which might mean, either
that others argued against him, or that he had argued, pleaded in the
name of others, and now listened to hear what God would answer in him
(See [Num 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006), and at [Zac
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#019)), and so he, as taught by God
should answer to his own plea. But he had so pleaded with God,
repeatedly, why is this? He has given no hint, that any complained of or
reproved him.

Theodotion: "By an image from those who, in war and siege, have the ward
of the wall distributed to them, he says, I will stand upon my watch."
Cyril: "It was the custom of the saints, when they wished to learn the
things of God, and to receive the knowledge of things to come through
His voice in their mind and heart, to raise it on high above
distractions and anxieties and all worldly care, holding and keeping it
unoccupied and peaceful, rising as to an eminence to look around and
contemplate what the God of all knowledge should make clear to them. For
He hateth the earth-bound and abject mind, and seeks hearts which can
soar aloft, raised above earthly things and temporal desires." The
prophet takes his stand, apart from people and the thoughts and cares of
this world, on his lonely watch, as Moses on the rock, keeping himself
and kept by God, and planted firm, so that nothing should move him,
fenced around thought straitened in , as in a besieged camp committed to
his ward, looking out from his lofty place what answer God would give as
to times long distant, and what answer He should give first to himself,
and to those to whom his office lay, God's people.

[Habakkuk 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hab 2:2</span></span>

The answer is, that it is indeed for a long time yet. Write the vision,
that it may remain for those who come after and not be forgotten, and
make it plain upon the tables, whereon he was accustomed to write ; and
that, in large lasting characters, that he may run that readeth it, that
it may be plain to any, however occupied or in haste. So Isaiah too was
commanded to write the four words, "haste-prey-speed-spoil."

[Habakkuk 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hab 2:3</span></span>

For the vision is yet for an (the) appointed time - o Not for the
present, but to develop itself in the course of time, down to a season
which God only knows; as it is subsequently repeated ([Dan
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#027), for it is for the appointed
time, [Dan 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035)), "for the end is yet
for the appointed time [Dan 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019); for
it is for the appointed time of the end;" and is explained [Dan
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001), [Dan
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014), "for the vision is yet for the
days [Dan 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026); for it is for many
days [Eze 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#027); the house of Israel
say, The vision that he seeth, is for many days and he prophesieth of
the times far off;" yet it should haste toward the end, toward its
fulfillment, so that, if it is not at once fulfilled, it should be
surely waited for. Theodotion: "It shall certainly be; not in vain hath
it been shewn, but as certainly to be. For whatever hath been shown to
come and to be, will come and be."

But at the end it shall speak - o (or it breatheth, hasteth to the end),
not simply "to its own fulfillment," but to that time of the end which
should close the period assigned to it, during which it should
continually be putting itself forth, it should come true in part or in
shadow, gleams of it should here and then part the clouds, which, until
the end, should surround and envelop it.

Being God's truth, he speaks of it as an animate living thing, not a
dead letter, but running, hasting on its course, and accomplishing on
its way that for which it was sent. The will and purpose of God hasteth
on, though to man it seemeth to tarry; it can neither be hurried on, nor
doth it linger; before "the appointed time" it cometh not; yet it
hasteth toward it, and "will not be behindhand" when the time comes. It
does not lie, either by failing to come, or failing, when come, of any
jot or tittle. "Though it tarry or linger" , continually appearing,
giving signs of itself, yet continually delaying its coming, "wait for
it; because it will surely come, it will not be behindhand" , when the
time comes, [Rev 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007), "He cometh
quickly" also, as He saith; because, from Dion.: "though the delay of
His coming and of the fulfillment of the vision seem long, yet, in
comparison with eternity, it is very short. In His first coming, He
taught why God permitteth these things; in the second coming, He shall
teach by experience, how good it it is for the good to bear the
persecution of the evil; whence Peter also has to say [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009), "The Lord is not slack concerning
His promise, as some men count slackness." The words seem to belong, in
the first instance, to the vision itself; but the vision had no other
existence or fulfillment than in Him who was the Object of it, and who,
in it, was foreshadowed to the mind. The coming of the vision was no
other than His coming.

The waiting, to which he exhorts, expresses the religious act, so often
spoken of [Psa 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020); [Isa
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017); [Isa
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018); [Isa
64:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#003); [Zep
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008); [Dan
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#012); [Psa
106:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#013), of waiting for God, or His
counsel, or His promised time. The sense then is wholly the same, when
Paul uses the words of the coming of our Lord Himself, [Heb
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037), "Yet a little while, and He
that shall come, will come and will not tarry." Paul, as well as
Habakkuk, is speaking of our Lord's second coming; Paul, of His Coming
in Person, Habakkuk, of the effects of that Coming ; but both alike of
the redressing of all the evil and wrong in the world's history, and the
reward of the faithful oppressed. At His first coming He said, [Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031), "Now is the judgment of this
world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out." He came to "put
down the mighty from their seat, and to exalt the humble and meek [Luk
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052);" but much more in the second
coming, when "He shall come to judge the world with righteousness and
the people with His truth" [Psa
46:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001) :13, and to "reward every man
according to his works" [Mat 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027). At
all times He seemeth continually to linger, to give signs of His coming,
yet He cometh not; when the appointed season shall come, He shall be
found not to be later than His word. Yea, all time shall shrink up into
a little moment in the presence of a never-ending ever-present eternity.

Cyril: "Having named no one expressly, he says, wait for him, wait for
him although delaying, and halt not in thy hope, but let it be rooted
and firm, even if the interval be extended. For the God of all seemeth
to suggest to the mind of the prophet, that He who was foretold would
surely come, yet to enjoin on him to wait for Him on account of the
interval. He who believeth My word shall possess life, for this is the
reward of these who honor God, and a good reward of His benevolence. He
who admitteth faith and love to dwell in his heart hath as a requital,
unaging life and forgiveness of sins and sanctification by the Spirit."
Alb.: "He shall live; for, God is not the God of the dead but of the
living [Mat 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032), "Whoso liveth and
believeth in Me, shall never die" [Joh
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#026).

It will not lie - God vouchsafes to speak of Himself, as we should be
ashamed to speak of one whom we love, teaching us that all doubts
question His truth [Num 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019) "God is
not a man, that He should lie: hath He said and shall He not do it?"
"The strength of Israel shall neither lie nor repent" [Sa1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029). "God that cannot lie promised
before the world began" [Tit 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002)
Therefore, it follows, "wait for Him," as Jacob says, [Gen
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#018), "I have waited for Thy
salvation, O Lord."

[Habakkuk 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hab 2:4</span></span>

Behold, his soul which is lifted up - literally, swollen

Is not upright in him - The construction is probably that of a condition
expressed absolutely. Lo, swollen is it, not upright is his soul in him.
We should say, "His soul, if it be swollen , puffed up, is not upright
in him." The source of all sin was and is pride. It is especially the
sin of all oppressors, of the Chaldee, of antichrists, and shall be of
the antichrist. It is the parent of all heresy, and of all corruption
and rejection of the gospel. It stands therefore as the type of all
opposed to it. Of it he says, it is in its very inmost core ("in him")
lacking in uprightness. It can have no good in it, because it denies
God, and God denies it His grace. And having nothing upright in it,
being corrupt in its very inmost being, it cannot stand or abide. God
gives it no power to stand. The words stand in contrast with the
following, the one speaking of the cause of death, the other of life.
The soul, being swollen with pride, shuts out faith, and with it the
Presence of God. It is all crooked in its very inner self or being. Paul
gives the result, [Heb 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039), "if any
man draw back, my soul hath no pleasure in him." The prophet's words
describe the proud man who stunts aloof from God, in himself; Paul, as
he is in the Eyes of God. As that which is swollen in nature cannot be
straight, it is clean contrary that the soul should be swollen with
pride and yet upright. Its moral life being destroyed in its very inmost
heart, it must perish.

Alb.: "Plato saith, that properly is straight, which being applied to
what is straight, touches and is touched everywhere. But God is upright,
whom the upright soul touches and is touched everywhere; but what is not
upright is bent away from God, [Psa
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001). "God is good unto Israel, the
upright in heart;" [Sol 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004), "The
upright love thee;" [Isa 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#007), "The
way of the just is uprightness, Thou, most Upright, doth weigh the path
of the just."

But the just shall live by his faith - The accents emphasize the words ,
"The just, by his faith he shall live." They do not point to an union of
the words, "the just by his faith." Isaiah says that Christ should
"justify" many by the knowledge of Himself," but the expression, "just
by his faith," does not occur either in the Old or New Testament. In
fact, to speak of one really righteous as being "righteous by his faith"
would imply that people could be righteous in some other way. "Without
faith," Paul says at the commencement of his Old Testament pictures of
giant faith, [Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006), "it is
impossible to please God." Faith, in the creature which does not yet see
God, has one and the same principle, a trustful relying belief in its
Creator. This was the characteristic of Abraham their father, unshaken,
unswerving, belief in God who called him, whether in leaving his own
land and going whither he knew not, for an end which he was never to
see; or in believing the promise of the son through whom theft Seed was
to be, in whom all the nations of the world should be blessed; or in the
crowning act of offering that son to God, knowing that he should receive
him back, even from the dead.

In all, it was one and the same principle. According to [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006), "His belief was counted to him
for righteousness," though the immediate instance of that faith was not
directly spiritual. In this was the good and bad of Israel. [Exo
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#031) : "the people believed." [Exo
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031) : "they believed the Lord and
His servant Moses." [Psa 106:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#012) :
"then believed they His word, they sang His praise." This contrariwise
was their blame [Deu 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#032) : "In this
ye did not believe the Lord." [Deu
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#023) : "ye rebelled against the
commandment of the Lord your God, and believed Him not, nor hearkened to
His voice." [Psa 106:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#021), [Psa
106:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#024) : "they forgat God their
Saviour; they despised the pleasant land, they believed not His word."
And God asks, [Num 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011), "How long
will it be, ere this people belove Me, for all the signs which I have
shown among them?" [Psa 78:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021) :
"anger came upon Israel, because they believed not in God, and in His
salvation trusted not."

[Psa 78:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#032) : "for all this they sinned
still, and believed not His wondrous works." Even of Moses and Aaron God
assigns this as the ground, why they should not bring His people into
the land which He gave them, [Num
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#020), "Because ye believed Me not, to
sanctify Me in the eyes of the children of Israel" (at Meribah). This
was the watchword of Jehoshaphat's victory, [Ch2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#020), "Believe in the Lord your God
and ye shall be established; believe His prophets, so shall ye prosper."
This continued to be one central saying of Isaiah. It was his own
commission to his people; [Isa 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009),
"Go and say to this people; hear ye on, and understand not; see ye on
and perceive not." In sight of the rejection of faith, he spake
prominently of the loss upon unbelief; [Isa
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009), "If ye will not believe, surely
ye shall not be established;" and, [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), "Who hath believed our report?"
he premises as the attitude of his people toward him, the Center of all
faith - Jesus. Yet still, as to the blessings of faith, having spoken of
Him, [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016), "Thus saith the Lord
God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a
precious cornerstone," he subjoins, "he that believeth in Him shall not
make haste."

So it had been the keynote of Habakkuk to his people, "Ye will not
believe when it is declared unto you." Here he is told to declare
contrariwise the blessing on belief. "The just shall live by his faith."
The faith, then, of which Habakkuk speaks, is faith, in itself, but a
real, true confiding faith. It is the one relation of the creature to
the Creator, unshaken trust. The faith may vary in character, according
as God reveals more or less of Himself, but itself is one, a loving
trust in Him, just as He reveals Himself. Lap. (in [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)): "By this faith in God, each
righteous person begins to live piously, righteously, holily, peacefully
and divinely, and advanceth therein, since in every tribulation and
misery, by this faith and hope in God he sustains, strengthens, and
increases this life of the soul. He says then, "the just lives by
faith," i. e., the unbelieving and unrighteous displeases God, and
consequently will not live by the true, right, peaceful and happy life
of grace, present righteousness, and future glory because God is
displeased with him, and He places his hopes and fears, not in God, but
in human beings and man's help and in created things. But the righteous
who believeth in God shall live a right, sweet, quiet, happy, holy,
untroubled life, because, fixed by faith and hope in God who is the true
Life, and in God's promises, he is dear to God, and the object of His
care.

"This sentence, 'the just shall live by faith,' is universal, belonging
at once to Jews and Christians, to sinners who are first being
justified, as also to those who are already justified. For the spiritual
life of each of these begins, is maintained and grows through faith.
When then it is said, 'the just shall live by his faith,' this word,
his, marks the cause, which both begins and preserves life. The just,
believing and hoping in God, begins to live spiritually, to have a soul
right within him, whereby he pleases God; and again, advancing and
making progress in this his faith and hope in God, therewith advances
and makes progress in the spiritual life, in rightness and righteousness
of soul, in the grace and friendship of God, so as more and more to
please God."

Most even of the Jewish interpreters have seen this to be the literal
meaning of the words. It stands in contrast with, illustrates and is
illustrated by the first words, "his soul is swollen, is not upright in
him." Pride and independence of God are the center of the want of
rightness; a steadfast cleaving to God, whereby "the heart" (as
Abraham's) "was stayed on God," is the center and cause of the life of
the righteous. But since this stayedness of faith is in everything the
source of the life of the righteous, then the pride, which issues in
want of rightness of the inmost soul, must be a state of death. Pride
estranges the soul from God, makes it self-sufficing, that it should not
need God, so that he who is proud cannot come to God, to be by Him made
righteous. So contrariwise, since by his faith doth the righteous live,
this must be equally true whether he be just made righteous from
unrighteous, or whether that righteousness is growing, maturing, being
perfected in him.

This life begins in grace, lives on in glory. It is begun, in that God
freely justifies the ungodly, accounting and making him righteous for
and through the blood of Christ; it is continued in faith which worketh
by love; it is perfected, when faith and hope are swallowed up in love,
beholding God. In the Epistles to the Romans [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017) and the Galatians [Gal
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011) Paul applies these words to the
first beginning of life, when they who had before been dead in sin,
began to live by faith in Christ Jesus who gave them life and made them
righteous. And in this sense he is called "just," although before he
comes to the faith he is unjust and unrighteous, being unjustified. For
Paul uses the word not of what he was before the faith, but what be is,
when he lives by faith. Before, not having faith, he had neither
righteousness nor life; having faith, he at once has both; he is at once
"just" and "lives by his faith." These are inseparable. The faith by
which he lives, is a living faith, [Gal
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006), "faith which worketh by love." In
the Epistle to the Hebrews, [Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038), Paul is speaking of their
endurance in the faith, once received, whose faith is not shaken by the
trial of their patience. They who look on beyond things present, and fix
their minds steadfastly on the Coming of Christ, will not suffer
shipwreck of their faith, through any troubles of this time. Faith is
the foundation of all good, the beginning of the spiritual building,
whereby it rests on The Foundation, Christ. "Without faith it is
impossible to please God," and so the proud cannot please Him. Through
it, is union with Christ and thereby a divine life in the soul, even a
life, [Gal 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020), "through faith in the
Son of God," holy, peaceful, self-posessed [Luk
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019), enduring to the end, being
"kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be
revealed in the last time" [Pe1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005).

[Habakkuk 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hab 2:5</span></span>

This general rule the prophet goes on to apply in words which belong in
part to all oppressors and in the first instance to the Chaldaean, in
part yet more fully to the end and to antichrist. "Yea also, because he
transgresseth by wine" (or better, "Yea, how much more, since wine is a
deceiver , as Solomon says, [Pro 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#001),
"Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, and whosoever erreth thereby
shall not be wise;" and [Pro 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#032),
"In the end it biteth like a serpent and pierceth like an adder;" and
Hosea [Hos 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#011), "Whoredom and wine
and new wine take away the heart." As wine at first gladdens, then
deprives of all reason, and lays a man open to any deceit, so also
pride. And whereas all pride deceives, how much more , when people are
either heated and excited by the abuse of God's natural gifts, or
drunken with prosperity and hurried away, as conquerors are, to all
excess of cruelty or lust to fulfill their own will, and neglect the
laws of God and man.

Literal drunkenness was a sin of the Babylonians under the Persian rule,
so that even a pagan says of Babylon, "Nothing can be more corrupt than
the manners of that city, and more provided with all to rouse and entice
immoderate pleasures;" and "the Babylonians give themselves wholly to
wine, and the things which follow upon drunkenness." It was when flushed
with wine, that Belshazzar, with his princes his wives and his
concubines, desecrated the sacred vessels, insulted God in honor of his
idols, and in the night of his excess "was slain." Pride blinded,
deceived, destroyed him. It was the general drunkenness of the
inhabitants, at that same feast, which enabled Cyrus, with a handful of
men, to penetrate, by means of its river, the city which, with its
provisions for many years and its impregnable walls, mocked at his
siege. He calculated beforehand on its feast and the consequent
dissolution of its inhabitants; but for this, in the language of the
pagan historian, he would have been caught "as in a trap," his soldiery
drowned.

He is a proud man, neither keepeth at home. - It is difficult to limit
the force of the rare Hebrew word rendered "keep at home;" for one may
cease to dwell or abide at home either with his will or without it; and,
as in the case of invaders, the one may he the result of the other. He
who would take away the home of others becomes, by God's Providence,
himself homeless. The context implies that the primary meaning is the
restlessness of ambition; which abides not at home, for his whole
pleasure is to go forth to destroy. Yet there sounds, as it were, an
undertone, "he would not abide in his home and he shall not." We could
scarcely avoid the further thought, could we translate by a word which
does not determine the sense, "he will not home," "he will not continue
at home." The words have seemed to different minds to mean either; as
they may . Such fullness of meaning is the contrary of the ambiguity of
pagan oracles; they are not alternative meanings, which might be
justified in either case, but cumlative, the one on the other. The
ambitious part with present rest for future loss. Nebuchadnezzar lost
his kingdom and his reason through pride, received them back when he
humbled himself; Belshazzar, being proud and impenitent, lost both his
kingdom and life.

Who enlargeth his desire - literally, his soul. The soul becomes like
what it loves. The ambitious man is, as we say, "all ambition;" the
greedy man, "all appetite;" the cruel man, "all savagery;" the
vain-glorious, "all vain glory." The ruling passion absorbs the whole
being. It is his end, the one object of his thoughts, hopes, fears. So,
as we speak of "largeness of heart," which can embrace in its affections
all varieties of human interests, whatever affects man, and "largeness
of mind" uncramped by narrowing prejudices, the prophet speaks of this
"ambitious man widening his soul," or, as we should speak, "appetite,"
so that the whole world is not too large for him to long to grasp or to
devour. So the Psalmist prays not to be delivered into the murderous
desire of his enemies ([Psa 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#012);
Compare [Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003) ([Psa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002) in English); Ezek. 26:27)
(literally their soul,) and Isaiah, with a metaphor almost too bold for
our language [Isa 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#014), "Hell hath
enlarged her soul, and opened her mouth beyond measure." It devours, as
it were, first in its cravings, then in act.

As hell - which is insatiable [Pro
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015). He saith, "enlargeth"; for as
hell and the grave are year by year fuller, yet there is no end, the
desire "enlargeth" and becometh wider, the more is given to it to
satisfy it.

And (he) is (himself) as death - o, sparing none. Our poetry would speak
of a destroyer as being "like the angel of death;" his presence, as the
presence of death itself. Where he is, there is death. He is as terrible
and as destroying as the death which follows him.

And cannot be satisfied - Even human proverbs say (Juv. Sat. xiv. 139):
"The love of money groweth as much as the money itself groweth." "The
avaricious is ever needy." [Ecc 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010) :
"he that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver." For these
fleeting things cannot satisfy the undying soul. It must hunger still;
for it has not found what will allay its cravings .

But gathereth - literally, "And hath gathered" - He describes it, for
the rapidity with which he completes what he longs for, as though it
were already done.

Unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all people - One is still the
subject of the prophecy, rising up at successive times, fulfilling it
and passing away, Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander, Attila, Timur, Genghizchan,
Hunneric, scourges of God, all deceived by pride, all sweeping the
earth, all in their ambition and wickedness the unknowing agents and
images of the evil One, who seeks to bring the whole world under his
rule. But shall it prosper?

[Habakkuk 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hab 2:6</span></span>

Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting
proverb against him? - Nebuchadnezzar gathered, [Dan
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#004), "all people, nations, and
languages, to worship the golden image which he had set up." The second
Babylon, pagan Rome, sought to blot out the very Christian Name; but
mightier were the three children than the King of Babylon; mightier,
virgins, martyrs, and children than Nero or Decius. These shall rejoice
over Babylon, that, [Rev 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020), "God
hath avenged them on her."

Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his! - Truly wealth
ill-gotten by fraud or oppression, "is not his," who winneth it, before
he had it, nor when he hath it, but a woe. It is not his; the woe is
his. "Woe unto him." He shall have no joy in what he gaineth, and what
he hath he shall lose.

How long? - What is the measure of thine impiety and greediness and
cruelty? Yet if these are like hell, without measure, there remains
another "How long?" How long will the forbearance of God endure thee,
which thou art daily exhausting?

This is then the end of all. The conqueror sweeps to him "all nations"
and gathereth to him "all peoples." To what end? As one vast choir in
one terrible varied chant of all those thousand thousand voices, to sing
a dirge over him of the judgments of God which his ill-doings to them
should bring upon him, a fivefold Woe, woe, woe, woe, woe! Woe for its
rapacity! Woe for its covetousness! Woe for its oppression! Woe for its
insolence to the conquered! Woe to it in its rebellion against God! It
is a more measured rhythm than any besides in Holy Scripture; each of
the fivefold woes comprised in three verses, four of them closing with
the ground, because, for. The opening words carry the mind back to the
fuller picture of Isaiah. But Isaiah sees Babylon as already overthrown;
Habakkuk pronounces the words upon it, not by name, but as certainly to
come, upon it and every like enemy of God's kingdom. With each such
fall, unto the end of all things, the glory of God is increased and made
known. Having, for their own ends, been unconscious and even unwilling
promoters of God's end, they, when they had accomplished it, are
themselves flung away. The pride of human ambition, when successful,
boasts "woe to the conquered." Since "whom the Lord loveth He
chasteneth," the ungodly saying of the pagan is reversed, and it stands,
"Man sympathizes with the conquering side, God with the conquered." It
is a terrible thought that people should have been the instruments of
God, that they should, through ambition or other ends short of God, have
promoted His ends which they thought not of, and then should be "weighed
in the balance and found wanting," and themselves be flung away.

Cyr: "Gentiles also departed from their worship under Satan, and having
deserted him who aforetime called them, ran unto Christ. For Satan
gathered what was not his; but Christ received what was His. For, as
God, He is Lord of all."

And to him that ladeth himself with thick clay - It is the character of
these proverbs to say much in few words, sometimes in one, and more than
appears. So the word translated "thick-clay," as if it were two words,
in another way means in an intensive sense, "a strong deep pledge." At
best gold and silver are, as they have been called, red and white earth.
Bern. Serm. 4. in Adv: "What are gold and silver but red and white
earth, which the error of man alone maketh, or accounteth precious? What
are gems, but stones of the earth? What silk, but webs of worms?" These
he "maketh heavy upon" or "against himself" (so the words strictly
mean). "For He weigheth himself down with thick clay, who, by avarice
multiplying earthly things, hems himself in by the oppressiveness of his
own sin, imprisons and, as it were, buries the soul, and heaps up sin as
he heaps up wealth." With toil they gather what is not worthless only,
but is a burden upon the soul, weighing it down that it should not rise
Heavenwards, but should be bowed down to Hell. And so in that other
sense while, as a hard usurer, he heaps up the pledges of these whom he
oppresses and impoverishes, and seems to increase his wealth, he does in
truth "increase against himself a strong pledge," whereby not others are
debtors to him, but he is a debtor to Almighty God who careth for the
oppressed [Jer 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011) "He that
gathereth riches had not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days and at his end shall be a fool."

[Habakkuk 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hab 2:7</span></span>

Shall not they rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that
shall vex thee? - The destruction of the wicked is ever sudden at last.
Such was the flood [Luk 17:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026), the
destruction of Sodom, of Pharaoh, of the enemies of God's people through
the Judges, of Sennacherib, Nineveh, Babylon by the Medes and Persians.
Such shall the end be [Mat 24:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043);
[Mat 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013); [Luk
17:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026); [Luk
21:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034); [Th1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003); [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010); [Rev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015). As he by his oppressions had
pierced others (it is the word used of the oppression of usury), so
should it be done to him. "The Medes and Persians who were before
subject to the Babylonian empire, and whose kings were subject to
Nebuchudnezzar and his successors, rose up and awaked, i. e., stirred
themselves up in the days of Belshazzar to rebel against the successors
of Nebuchadnezzar which sat on his throne, like a man who awaketh from
sleep." The words "awake," "arise," are used also of the resurrection,
when the worm of the wicked gnaweth and dieth not (See [Isa
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011); [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)).

And thou shall be for booties unto them? - The common phrase is modified
to explain the manifoldness of the plunder which he should yield. So
Jeremiah [Jer 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#010), "Chaldaea shall
be a spoil; all that spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the Lord." See
Cyr: "We may hear Him who saith [Mat
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029), 'How can one enter into a
strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong
man? and then he will spoil his house.' For, as soon as He was born of
the holy Virgin, He began to 'spoil his goods.' For the Magi came from
the East - and worshiped Him and honored Him with gifts and became a
first-fruits of the Church of the Gentiles. And being vessels of Satan,
and the most honored of all his members, they hastened to Christ."

[Habakkuk 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hab 2:8</span></span>

Because (or For). The prophet assigns the reason of the woes he had just
pronounced. "Thou (emphatic), thou hast spoiled many nations, all the
resonant of the people shall spoil thee." So Isaiah [Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001), "When thou shalt cease to spoil,
thou shalt be spoiled; when thou shalt make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee." Boundless as
his conquests were, each remaining people, tribe, or family shall be his
foe. Theodotion: "Having subdued very many, thou shalt be destroyed by
few, and they who long endured thy tyranny, arising as from sleep, shall
compass thy destruction; and thou shalt pay the penalty of thy countless
slaughters and thy great ungodliness and thy lawless violence to cities
which thou modest desolate of inhabitants." Nothing was too great or too
little to escape this violence.

All the remnant - Theodotion: "As thou, invading, didst take away the
things of others, in like way shall what appertaineth to thee be taken
away by those who are left for vengeance." Jeremiah foretold of Elam "in
the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah" [Jer
49:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034) (in expansion of the prophecy
in the reign of Jehoiakim) ; "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I
will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might. And upon Elam I
will bring the four winds from the four quarters of the heavens, and
will scatter them toward all these winds, and there shall be no nation
where the outcasts of Elam shall not come. For I will cause Elam to be
dismayed before her enemies; but it shall come to pass in the latter
days, that I will bring again the captivity of Elam, saith the Lord."
Elam is also counted by Ezekiel Ezek. 32:17-32 among those who, together
with Pharaoh, should be brought down to the grave, with Asshur, Meshech,
Tabal, Edom and all the Zidonians, by the king of Babylon. They were
then all which remained, [Jer 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009)) of
the nations which he had conquered, who should be gathered against his
house.

"Because of men's blood and of the violence of" i. e., "to the land, as
the violence of," i. e., "to , Lebanon," and "men's blood" is their
blood which was shed. "To land, city, and all dwellers therein." Land or
earth, city, are left purposely undefined, so that while that in which
the offence culminated should be, by the singular, specially suggested,
the violence to Judah and Jerusalem, the cruelty condemned should not be
limited, to these. The violence was dealt out to the whole land or
earth, and in it, to cities, and in each, one by one, to all its
inhabitants. Babylon is called [Jer
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#023), "the hammer of the whole earth
[Jer 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007); a golden cup in the Lord's
hand, that made all the earth drunken; Jer. 25 a destroying mountain,
which destroyeth the whole earth; the whole earth is at rest and is
quiet" [Isa 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#007), after Babylon,
"which made it to tremble" [Isa 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#016),
is overthrown.

So Satan had by violence and deceit subdued the whole earth, yet Christ
made him a spoil to those whom he had spoiled, and the strong man was
bound and his goods Spoiled and himself trampled underfoot. Yet here as
throughout the prophets, it is a "remnant" only which is saved Cyril:
"Satan too was spoiled by the remnant of the people, i. e., by those
justified by Christ and sanctified in the Spirit. For the remnant of
Israel was saved."

[Habakkuk 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hab 2:9</span></span>

Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house - (or, with
accents, "that coveteth covetousness or unjust gain, an evil to his
house.") What man coveteth seems gain, but is evil "to his house" after
him, destroying both himself and his whole family or race with him .
"That he may set his nest on high," as an eagle, to which he had likened
the Chaldee ([Hab 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008). Compare [Jer
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#016)). A pagan called "strongholds,
the nests of tyrants." The nest was placed "on high" which means also
"heaven," as it is said, [Oba 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004),
"though thou set thy nest among the stars;" and the tower of Babel was
to "reach unto heaven" [Gen 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004); and
the antichrist, whose symbol the King of Babylon is, [Isa
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013) says, "I will exalt my throne
above the stars of God." Babylon lying in a large plain, on the sides of
the Euphrates, the image of its eagle's-nest on high must be taken, not
from any natural eminence, but wholly from the works of man.

Its walls, and its hanging gardens were among "the seven wonders of the
world." Eye-witnesses speak of its walls, encompassing at least 100
square miles , "and as large as the land-graviat of Hesse Homberg;"
those walls, 335, or 330 feet high, and 85 feet broad ; a fortified
palace, nearly 7 miles in circumference; gardens, 400 Greek feet square,
supporting at an artificial height arch upon arch, of "at least 75
feet," forest trees; a temple to its god, said to have been at least 600
feet high.

If we, creatures of a day, had no one above us, Nebuchadnezzars boast
had been true [Dan 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#030), "Is not this
great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom by the
might of my power and for the honor of my majesty?" He had built an
eagle's nest, which no human arm could reach, encircled by walls which
laughed its invaders to scorn, which, at that time, no skill could scale
or shatter or mine. Even as one sees in a picture the vast mounds which
still remain , one can hardly imagine that they were, brick upon brick,
wholly the work of man.

To be delivered from the hand (grasp) of evil - that it should not be
able to reach him. Evil is spoken of as a living power , which would
seize him, whose grasp he would defy. It was indeed a living power,
since it was the will of Almighty God, whose servant and instrument
Cyrus was, to chasten Babylon, when its sins were full. Such was the
counsel, what the result? The evil covetousness which he worked, brought
upon him the evil, from which, in that nest built by the hard toil of
his captives, he thought to deliver himself.

[Habakkuk 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hab 2:10</span></span>

Thou hast consulted shame to thy house, the cutting off many people, and
sinning against thy soul - The wicked, whether out of passion or with
his whole mind and deliberate choice and will, takes that counsel, which
certainly brings shame to himself and his house, according to the law of
God, whereby, according to [Exo 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005),
He "visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate Him," i. e., until by
righteousness and restitution the curse is cut off. [Pro
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#027) : "he that is greedy of gain
troubleth his own house." So Jeremiah says [Jer
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#019) : "Thus saith the Lord, Is it Me
they are vexing? Is it not themselves, for the confusion of their
faces?" i. e., with that end and object. Holy Scripture overlooks the
means, and places us at the end of all. Whatever the wicked had in view,
to satisfy ambition, avarice, passion, love of pleasure, or the rest of
man's immediate ends, all he was doing was leading on to a further end -
shame and death. He was bringing about, not only these short-lived, but
the lasting ends beyond, and these far more than the others, since that
is the real end of a thing which abides, in which it at last ends. He
consulted to cut off many people and was thereby (though he did not know
it) by one and the same act, "guilty of and forfeiting his OWN soul"
[Pro 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036). The contemporaneousness of
the act is expressed by the participle; the pronoun is omitted as in
[Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)).

[Habakkuk 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hab 2:11</span></span>

For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it - All things have a voice, in that they are . God's
works speak that, for which He made them [Psa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001) : "The heavens declare the glory
of God." [Psa 65:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#013) : "the valleys are
clad with corn, they laugh, yea, they sing;" their very look speaks
gladness. Cyril: "For the creation itself proclaims the glory of the
Maker, in that it is admired as well made. Wherefore there are voices in
things, although there are not words." Man's works speak of that in him,
out of which and for which he made them. Works of mercy go up for a
memorial before God, and plead there; great works, performed amid wrong
and cruelty and for man's ambition and pride, have a voice too, and cry
out to God, calling down His vengeance on the oppressor. Here the stones
of the wall, whereby the building is raised, and the beam, the tye-beam,
out of the timber-work wherewith it is finished, and which, as it were,
crowns the work, join, as in a chorus, answering one another, and in a
deep solemn wailing, before God and the whole world, together chant
"Woe, Woe." Did not the blood and groans of men cry out to God,
speechless things have a voice to appeal to Him (See [Luk
19:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040)). Against Belshazzar the wall
had, to the letter, words to speak.

Each three verses forming one stanza, as it were, of the dirge, the
following words are probably not directly connected with the former, as
if the woe, which follows, were, so to speak, the chant of these
inanimate witnesses against the Chaldaeans; yet they stand connected
with it. The dirge began with woe on the wrongful accumulation of wealth
from the conquered and oppressed people: it continues with the selfish
use of the wealth so won.

[Habakkuk 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hab 2:12</span></span>

Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and establisheth a city by
iniquity! - Nebuchadnezzar "encircled the inner city with three walls
and the outer city also with three, all of burnt brick. And having
fortified the city with wondrous works, and adorned the gates like
temples, he built another palace near the palace of his fathers,
surpassing it in height and its great magnificence." He seemed to
strengthen the city, and to establish it by outward defenses. But it was
built through cruelty to conquered nations, and especially God's people,
and by oppression, against His holy Will. So there was an inward
rottenness and decay in what seemed strong and majestic, and which
imposed on the outward eye; it would not stand, but fell. Babylon, which
had stood since the flood, being enlarged contrary to the eternal laws
of God, fell in the reign of his son. Such is all empire and greatness,
raised on the neglect of God's laws, by unlawful conquests, and by the
toil and sweat and hard service of the poor. Its aggrandizement and
seeming strength is its fall. Daniel's exhortation to Nebuchadnezzar
[Dan 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027), "Redeem thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy on the poor,"
implies that oppressiveness had been one of his chief sins.

[Habakkuk 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hab 2:13</span></span>

Behold, is it not of the Lord of hosts that (the) people (nations) shall
labor - o

In (for) the very fire - literally, to suffice the fire? By God's
appointment, the end of all their labor is for the fire, what may
suffice it to consume. This is the whole result of their labor; and so
it is as if they had toiled for this; they built ceiled palaces and
gorgeous buildings, only for the fire to consume them.

And the peoples shall weary themselves for very vanity - They wearied
themselves, and what was their reward? What had they to suffice and fill
them? "Emptiness." This is "from the Lord of hosts," whom all the armies
of heaven obey and all creatures stand at His command against the
ungodly, and in whose Hand are all the hosts of earth, and so the
oppressor's also, to turn as He wills.

Near upon the first stage of the fulfillment, Jeremiah reinforces the
words with the name of Babylon; [Jer
51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058) : "Thus saith the Lord of hosts!
The broad walls of Babylon, shall be utterly destroyed, and her high
gates shall be burned with fire; and the people shall labor in vain (for
vanity), and the folk in (for) the fire, and they shall be weary."

[Habakkuk 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hab 2:14</span></span>

For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord - Habakkuk modifies in a degree the words of Isaiah which he
embodies, marking that the destruction of Babylon was a stage only
toward the coming of those good things which God taught His people to
long for, not their very coming. All the world should be then full of
the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, not, as yet, wholly of Himself
Jerome: "When Babylon shall be overthrown, then shall the power of the
might of the Lord be known unto all. So shall the whole earth be filled
with the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the bottom of the sea.
This as to the letter. But it is plain, that the Devil also and
antichrist, and the perverse teaching of heretics, built a city in
blood; i. e, their own Church, with the destruction of those whom they
deceive ... But when they fail in the fire (either this fire which is
felt, or consumed in the fire of the devil their prince, or burned up
with the fire whereof the Lord says, 'I came to send a fire upon the
earth,' and so brought back from their former course, and doing
penitence), the whole earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord,
when, at the preaching of the apostles, their 'sound shall go out into
all the world,' as waters covering the sea, i. e., all the saltness and
bitterness of the world which Satan had rained down and the earth had
drunk, the waters of the Lord shall cover, and cause the place of their
ancient bitterness not to appear."

Rup.: "'For the Spirit of the Lord filled the earth,' and when He filled
it, 'the earth was filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord,'
so that unlearned and ignorant men became wise and eloquent, and earthly
became heavenly, yea, they who were earth became heaven, knowing the
glory of the Lord, declaring the glory of God, not any how, but as
waters cover the sea. Great as must be waters, which would cover the
sea, or compared to which the sea were nothing, far greater is the
miracle, when the abundance of heavenly wisdom, given to the simple,
surpassed the sea, i. e., the wisdom of all mankind." This verse being
already a received image of the spread of the gospel [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009), it would of itself be understood
to include this also; but more generally, it declares how upon all the
judgments of God, a larger knowledge of Him would follow Cyril: "All
things are full of Christ, who is the Glory of the Father; wherefore
also He said [Joh 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004), I have
glorified Thee on earth, I have finished the work which Thou gavest me
to do."

[Habakkuk 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hab 2:15</span></span>

From cruelty the prophet goes on to denounce the woe on insolence. "Woe
unto him that giveth his neighbor" (to whom he owes love) drink
(literally, that maketh him drink); that puttest thy bottle to him, and
makest him drunken also , that thou mayest look (gaze with devilish
pleasure) on their nakedness." This may either be of actual insults (as
in the history of Noah), in keeping certainly with the character of the
later Babylonians, the last wantonness of unbridled power, making vile
sport of those like himself (his neighbor), or it may be drunkenness
through misery [Isa 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009) wherein they
are bared of all their glory and brought to the lowest shame. The woe
also falls on all, who in any way intoxicate others with flattering
words or reigned affection, mixing poison under things pleasant, to
bring them to shame.

[Habakkuk 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">hab 2:16</span></span>

Thou art filled with shame for glory - Oppressors think to make
themselves great by bringing others down, to fill themselves with
riches, by spoiling others. They loved shame [Hos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#008), because they loved that, which
brought shame; they were filled with shame, in that they sated
themselves with shamefulness, which was their shame within, before, in
the just judgment of God, shame came on them from without [Phi
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019). "Their glory was in their
shame." They shall be filled, yea, he says, they are already filled;
they would satisfy, gorge themselves, with all their hearts' desires;
they are "filled to the full," but with shame instead of glory which
they sought, or which they already had. "From" and "for" a state of
"glory," they were filled with contempt.

Drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered - thy shame like
those whom thou puttest to shame, only the greater in being
uncircumcised. "The cup of the Lord's Right Hand shall be turned (round)
unto thee (or against thee)." It had gone round the circuit of the
nations whom God had employed him to chasten, and now, the circle
completed, it should be brought round to himself, "With what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured unto you again" [Mat
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002). So Jeremiah says, [Jer
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#026), "And the king of Shesbach shall
drink after them;" and of Edom, [Lam
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021), "To thee also shall the cup be
brought round." Thou, a man, madest man to drink of the cup of thine
anger: the cup shall be brought round to thee, but not by man; to thee
it shall be given by "the Right Hand of the Lord," which thou canst not
escape; it shall be "the cup of the wine of the fierceness of the wrath
of Almighty God" [Rev 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019); as Asaph
had said, [Psa 76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008), "There is a cup
in the Lord's hand; it is full of mixture, and He poureth out therefrom;
but the dregs thereof all the ungodly of the earth shall suck them out,
shall drink them."

And shameful spewing shall be on thy glory - Jerome: "With the shame of
thy spewing shalt thou bring up all thou hast swallowed down, and from
the height of glory shalt thou be brought to the utmost ills." The shame
of the ungodly cometh forth from himself; the shame he put others to is
doubled upon himself; and the very means which he had used to fill
himself with glory and greatness, cover the glory which by nature he
had, with the deeper disgrace, so that he should be a loathsome and
revolting sight to all. Man veils foul deeds under fair words; God, in
His word, unveils the foulness.

[Habakkuk 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">hab 2:17</span></span>

For the violence of Lebanon - i. e., done to Lebanon, whether the land
of Israel of which it was the entrance and the beauty (See [Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024), and, as a symbol, [Jer
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#006), [Jer
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#023); [Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003); but it is used as a symbol of
Sennacherib's army, [Isa 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#034), and
the king of Asshur is not indeed spoken of under the name as a symbol
(in [Eze 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#003),) but is compared to
it), or the temple (See the note at [Zac
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001)), both of which Nebuchadnezzar
laid waste; or, more widely, it may be a symbol of all the majesty of
the world and its empires, which he subdues, as Isaiah uses it, when
speaking of the judgment on the world, [Isa
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013), "It shall cover thee, and the
spoil (i. e., spoiling, destruction) of beasts (the inhabitants of
Lebanon) which made them afraid," or more simply, "the wasting of wild
beasts shall crush , [Pro 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#014); [Pro
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#003); [Pro
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#014); [Pro
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#007)) them (selves)," i. e., as it is
in irrational nature, that "the frequency of the incursions of very
mischievous animals becomes the cause that people assemble against them
and kill them, so their (the Chaldaeans') frequent injustice is the
cause that they haste to be avenged on thee" .

Having become beasts, they shared their history. They spoiled, scared,
laid waste, were destroyed. "Whoso seeketh to hurt another, hurteth
himself." The Chaldaeans laid waste Judea, scared and wasted its
inhabitants; the end of its plunder should be, not to adorn, but to
cover them, overwhelm them as in ruins, so that they should not lift up
their heads again. Violence returns upon the head of him who did it;
they seem to raise a lofty fabric, but are buried under it. He sums up
their past experience, what God had warned them beforehand, what they
had found.

[Habakkuk 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">hab 2:18</span></span>

What profiteth - (Hath profited) הועיל מה. Samuel warned them, "Serve
the Lord with all your heart, and turn ye not aside; for (it would be)
after vanities which will not profit nor deliver for they are vain:" and
Jeremiah tells their past; "their prophets prophesied by Baal; and after
things יועילי לא which profit not, have they gone." Elsewhere the idol
is spoken of as a thing "which will not profit" (future) "My people hath
changed its glory יועיל בלא for that which profiteth not," [Jer
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008), [Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011). So Isaiah, "Who hath formed a
god, הועיל לבלתי not to profit." [Isa
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009).10. "The makers of a graven image
are all of them vanity, and their desirable things יועילו בל will not
profit."

The graven image, that the maker therefore hath graven it? - What did
Baal and Ashtaroth profit you? What availed it ever but to draw down the
wrath of God? Even so neither shall it profit the Chaldaean. As their
idols availed them not, so neither need they fear them. Sennacherib and
Nebuchadnezzar were propagandists of their own belief and would destroy,
if they could, all other worship, false or true : Nebuchadnezzar is
thought to have set up his own image Dan. 3. Antichrist will set himself
up as God [Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004); [Rev
13:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015). We may take warning at least
by our own sins. If we had no profit at all from them, neither will the
like profit others. the Jews did, in the main, learn this in their
captivity.

The molten image and teacher of lies - It is all one whether by "teacher
of lies" we understand the idol , or its priest . For its priest gave it
its voice, as its maker created its form. It could only seem to teach
through the idol-priest. Isaiah used the title "teacher of lies," of the
false prophet [Isa 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014). It is all
one. Zechariah combines them [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002); "The teraphim have spoken
vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have had false dreams."

That the maker of his work trusteth therein - This was the special folly
of idolatry. The thing made must needs he inferior to its maker. It was
one of the corruptions of idolatry that the maker of his own work should
trust in what was wholly his own creation, what, not God, but himself
created, what had nothing but what it had from himself . He uses the
very words which express the relation of man to God, "the Framer" and
"the thing framed." [Isa 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#016), "O
your perverseness! Shall the framer be accounted as clay, theft the
thing made should say of its Maker, He made me not, and the thing framed
say of its Framer, He hath no hands?" The idol-maker is "the creator of
his creature," of his god whom he worships. Again the idol-maker makes
"dumb idols" (literally, "dumb nothings") in themselves nothings, and
having no power out of themselves; and what is uttered in their name,
are but lies. And what else are man's idols of wealth, honor, fame,
which he makes to himself, the creatures of his own hands or mind, their
greatness existing chiefly in his own imagination before which he bows
down himself, who is the image of God?

[Habakkuk 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">hab 2:19</span></span>

But then the greater is the "Woe" to him who deceiveth by them. The
prophet passes away from the idols as "nothings" and pronounces "woe" on
those who deceive by them. He . first expostulates with them on their
folly, and would awaken them. "What hath it profited?" (As in [Psa
115:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005); [Co1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002)) Then on the obstinate he
denounces "woe." "Woe unto him that saith to the wood, Awake; to the
dumb stone, Arise." Self-made blindness alone could, in the light of
truth, so speak; but yet more lies in the emphatic word, "It." The
personal pronoun stands emphatically in Hebrew; He shall teach, lo, He
(this same of whom he speaks) this is It which shall teach: It, and not
the living God. And yet this same It (the word is again emphatic) he
points, as with the finger, to it, "behold, It is laid over with, held
fast by , gold and silver," so that no voice could escape, if it had
any. "And there is no breath at all in the midst of it" (Compare [Jer
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014) repeated [Jer
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#017)), literally "All breath, all
which is breath, there is none within it;" he first suggests the
thought, breath of every sort, and then energetically denies it all ; no
life of any sort, of man, or bird, or beast, or creeping thing [Isa
41:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#023); [Jer
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#005); none, good or bad; from God or
from Satan; none whereby it can do good or do evil; for which it should
be loved or feared. Evil spirits may have made use of idols: they could
not give them life, nor dwell in them.

The words addressed to it are the language of the soul in the seeming
absence or silence of God ([Psa 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007);
[Psa 35:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#023); [Psa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024); [Psa
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006); [Isa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009); Delitszch), but mockery as
spoken to the senseless stone, as Ehijah had mocked the Baal-priests,
"peradventure he sleepeth and must be awaked" [Kg1
18:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026).

[Habakkuk 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">hab 2:20</span></span>

And now having declared the nothingness of all which is not God, the
power of man or his gods, he answers again his own question, by
summoning all before the presence of the majesty of God.

But the Lord - He had, in condemning them, pictured the tumult of the
world, the oppressions, the violence, bloodsheddings, covetousness,
insolence, self-aggrandizement of the then world-empire, and had
denounced woe upon it; we see man framing his idols, praying to the
lifeless stones; and God, of whom none thought, where was He? These were
people's ways. "But the Lord," he joins it on, as the complement and
corrective of all this confusion.

The Lord is in His holy temple - awaiting, in His long-suffering, to
judge. "The temple of God" is where God enshrines Himself, or allows
Himself to be seen and adored. "God is wholly everywhere, the whole of
Him no where." There is no contrast between His temple on earth, and His
temple in heaven. He is not more locally present in heaven than in
earth. It were as anthropomorphic but less pious to think of God, as
confined, localized, in heaven as on earth; because it would be simply
removing God away from man. Solomon knew, when he built the temple, that
"the heaven and heaven of heavens could not contain [Kg1
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027) God." The "holy temple," which
could be destroyed [Psa 79:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001), toward
which people were to pray [Psa 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007);
[Psa 138:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#002); [Jon
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004), was the visible temple [Kg1
8:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#029), [Kg1
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#035), [Kg1
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#038), [Kg1
8:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#042), [Kg1
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#044), [Kg1
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#048), where were the symbols of God's
Presence, and of the stoning Sacrifice; but lest His presence should be
localized, Solomon's repeated prayer is [Kg1
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#030), [Kg1
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#039), [Kg1
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#043), [Kg1
8:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#049), "hear Thou in heaven Thy
dwelling place" [Kg1 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#032), [Kg1
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#034), [Kg1
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#036), [Kg1
8:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#045); "hear Thou in heaven." There is
then no difference, as though in earlier books the "holy temple" meant
that at Jerusalem, in the later, "the heavens?" In the confession at the
offering of the "third year's tithes," the prayer is, [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015), "look down from Thy holy
habitation, from heaven;" and David says, "the Lord is in His holy
temple, the Lord's throne is in heaven" [Psa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004); and, [Psa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006), [Psa
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009) : "He heard my voice out of His
temple - He bowed the heavens also and came down;" and, [Psa
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009), "In His temple doth everyone
say, Glory." The simple words are identical though not in the same order
as those, in which David, in the same contrast with the oppression of
man, ushers in the judgment and final retribution to good and bad, by
declaring the unseen presence of God upon His Throne in heaven,
beholding and testing the sons of men.

In His Presence, all the mysteries of our being are solved.

The Lord is in His holy Temple - not, as the idols in temples made with
hands, but revealing Himself in the visible temple (Jerome), "dwelling
in the Son, by Nature and Union, as He saith [Joh
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010), "The Father who dwelleth in Me
doeth the works;" in each one of the bodies and souls of the saints by
His Spirit [Co1 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019), in the Blessed,
in glory; in the Heavens, by the more evident appearance of His Majesty
and the workings of His Power ; "everywhere by Essence, Presence, and
Power, 'for in Him we live, and move, and have our being;' nowhere as
confined or inclosed." Since then God is in Heaven, beholding the deeds
of people, Himself Unchangeable, Almighty, All-holy, "let all the earth
keep silence before Him," literally, "hush before Him all the earth,"
waiting from Him in hushed stillness the issue of this tangled state of
being. And to the hashed soul, hushed to itself and its own thought,
hushed in awe of His Majesty and "His Presence, before His face," God
speaks .

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk Chapter 3](hab003)

</div>
