<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa031)  [Next](isa033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 32:0</span></span>

This chapter has been regarded by many as a continuation and conclusion
of the prediction commenced in the preceding chapter. Though it was,
however, probably uttered at about the same time, and with reference to
the same general subject, yet there is no impropriety in its being
separated. The previous chapter closes with a prediction that the
Assyrian army, which had been so much the object of dread, would be
totally destroyed. This would be of course followed with important
consequences, some of which are depicted in this chapter. The prophet,
therefore, states [Isa 32:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001) that the
defeat of Sennacherib would be followed by the peaceful and prosperous
state of the kingdom under a righteous prince; under whose reign there
would be ample protection [Isa 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002);
at which time the advantages of instruction would prevail, and the
ignorant would be enlightened [Isa
32:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#003); when there would be a proper
estimate put on moral worth, and when illiberality, hypocrisy, and
falsehood would be no longer held in repute [Isa
32:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005); and when the character of the
nation would be that of a people which devised and executed large and
liberal purposes [Isa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008). That this
has a reference to the reign of Hezekiah, has been abundantly shown by
Vitringa; and, indeed, must be obvious on the slightest inspection. For,

1\. It is immediately connected with the account of the destruction of
Sennacherib, and evidently means that the state of things here described
would immediately succeed that.

2\. There is nothing in the account that does not fully accord with the
prosperous and happy times of the reign of Hezekiah.

3\. There are statements in it which cannot be applied directly, or with
propriety literally to the times of the Messiah.

For example, the statement in the first verse that 'princes shall rule
in judgment' cannot be applied with any propriety to the apostles, since
they are not anywhere designated by that name. That, after the usual
manner of Isaiah, he might not also, in the progress of this
description, have glanced at the times of the Messiah, perhaps there can
be no reason to doubt. But the main and leading purpose was, doubtless,
to give a description of the happy times that would succeed the
destruction of the army of the Assyrian. Calvin supposes, not
improbably, I think, that this prophecy may have been uttered in the
time of Ahaz, in whose reign wickedness so much abounded, and ignorance
and idolatry so much prevailed. But whether the prophecy was actually
"uttered" in the time of Abaz or not - which cannot now be determined -
yet it may have been uttered in view of the ignorance, and superstition,
and hypocrisy, which prevailed in his reign, and which extended their
influence into the time of his successor, and on account of which the
nation was to be subjected to the calamities arising from the invasion
of Sennacherib. After that, the king Hezekiah would rule in
righteousness, and his kingdom would enjoy the blessings of his mild and
virtuous reign.

The prophet then [Isa 32:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#010)
proceeds to show, that "previous" to the prosperous times predicted,
there would be a state of desolation and alarm. This is indicated by his
calling on the daughters of luxury and fashion, who were reposing in
security and confidence, to rise up in consternation at the calamities
which were impending [Isa 32:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#010),
and by the assurance that there would be a time when they would sigh for
the luxuries which they had before enjoyed [Isa
32:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#012). This is descriptive of the
calamities which would attend the invasion of the Assyrian. Yet the
prophet says, as is usual with him, that these calamities would be
succeeded by more happy times [Isa
32:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015). They would continue until
the Spirit should be poured out from on high [Isa
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015), and the result of this would he
the prevalence of righteousness in the nation [Isa
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#016), and peace and safety [Isa
32:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017); there would be safety, and
the privilege of pursuing the peaceful pursuits of agriculture, and of
cultivating the entire land without molestation [Isa
32:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#019).

[Isaiah 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 32:1</span></span>

Behold, a king - That is, Hezekiah. That it refers to him is apparent
from the connection. The reign of Ahaz had been one of oppression and
idolatry. This was to be succeeded by the reign of one under whom the
rights of the people would be secured, and under whom there would be a
state of general prosperity. This may have been uttered while Ahaz was
on the throne, or it may have been when Hezekiah began to reign. Perhaps
the latter is the more probable, as Ahaz might not have tolerated
anything that would have looked like a reflection on his own reign; nor,
perhaps, while he was on the throne would Isaiah have given a
description that would have been a contrast between his reign and that
of his successor.

Shall reign in righteousness - That is, a righteous king shall reign; or
his administration shall be one of justice, and strongly in contrast
with that of his predecessor. This was certainly the general
characteristic of the reign of Hezekiah.

And princes shall rule - Hebrew, 'For princes, or, 'as to princes'
(לשׂרים les'ârı̂ym). Lowth proposes to read this without the ל (l), as
the ancient versions do. But it is not necessary to change the text. It
may be rendered, 'As to princes, they shall rule' (compare [Psa
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003)). The 'princes' here denote the
various officers of government, or those to whom the administration was
confided.

In judgment - That this is a just description of the reign of Hezekiah
is apparent from the history, see [Kg2
18:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#003) : 'He removed the high places,
and broke the images, and cut down the grove. He trusted in the Lord God
of Israel, so that after him was none like him among all the kings of
Judah, nor any that were before him, for he clave unto the Lord, and
departed not from following him.'

[Isaiah 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 32:2</span></span>

And a man - That is, evidently, the man referred to in the previous
verse, to wit, Hezekiah.

Shall be as an hiding-place from the wind - A place where one may take
refuge from a violent wind and tempest (see the note at [Isa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004)).

A covert - A place of shelter and security. Wind and tempest are
emblematic of calamity and oppression; and the sense is, that Hezekiah
would be the protector of his people, and would save them from the
calamities to which they had been subjected in former reigns.

As rivers of water - This figure is often used in Isaiah (see [Isa
35:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006); and the notes at [Isa
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018)). It means that the blessings of
such a reign would be as grateful and refreshing as gushing fountains
and running streams were to a thirsty traveler. Here it refers to the
benefits that would be conferred by the reign of Hezekiah - a reign
which, compared with that of his father, would be like a refreshing
fountain to a weary pilgrim in a pathless desert.

As the shadow of a great rock - In a burning desert of sand nothing is
more grateful than the cooling shade of a far-projecting rock. It not
only excludes the rays of the sun, but it has itself a refreshing
coolness that is most grateful to a weary traveler. The same figure is
often used by the classic writers (see Virgil, "Georg." iii, 145;
Hesiod, ii. 106).

In a weary land - A land where there is fatigue and weariness. Probably
here it is used to denote a land destitute of trees, and groves, and
pleasant abodes; a land where one expects weariness and fatigue without
any refreshment and shelter. The following description from Campbell's
"Travels in Africa" will explain this: 'Well does the traveler remember
a day in the wilds of Africa, where the country was chiefly covered with
burning sand; when, scorched with the powerful rays of an almost
vertical sun, the thermometer in the shade standing at 100 degrees
(Fahrenheit). He remembers long looking hither and thither for something
that would afford protection from the almost insupportable heat, and
where the least motion of air felt like a flame coming against the face.
At length he espied a huge loose rock leaning against the front of a
small cliff which faced the sun. At once he fled for refuge underneath
its inviting shade. The coolness emitted from this rocky canopy he found
exquisitely exhilarating. The wild beasts of the deserts were all fled
to their dens, and the feathered songsters were all roosting among the
thickest foliage they could find of the evergreen trees. The whole
creation around seemed to groan, as if their vigor had been entirely
exhausted. A small river was providentially at hand, to the side of
which, after a while, he ventured, and sipped a little of its cooling
water, which tasted better than the best Burgundy, or the finest old
hock in the world. During all this enjoyment, the above apropos text was
the interesting subject of the traveler's meditation; though the
allusion as a figure, must fall infinitely short of that which is meant
to be prefigured by it.'

(The whole of this passage is capable of beautiful application to the
Messiah and his times; while the language of the second verse cannot be
supposed descriptive of any "creature;" it is so associated in our minds
with the character and functions of the Divine Redeemer, that we cannot
easily acquiesce in any meaner application. 'To interpret the sublime
imagery of this verse [Isa 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002) in
application to a mere human being, would be quite repugnant to the
spirit of the sacred writers, by whom Yahweh alone is represented as the
source of protection and refreshment to his people, and all trust in
creatures solemnly interdicted' (Henderson). Doubtless, if Hezekiah be
at all intended, it is in a typical or inferior sense only. A greater
than Hezekiah is here; the language and figures used are precisely such
as are elsewhere by the prophet applied to Yahweh [Isa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006); [Isa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004); while the particulars
characteristic of the times predicted, are just such as elsewhere he
connects with gospel times (compare [Isa
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#018); [Isa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005)). The things predicted, according
to this view, are a righteous administration under Messiah the prince
[Isa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001); protection and refreshment
to his subjects; protection from the wrath of God and the temptations of
Satan, and the rage of the world; refreshment by the consolutions and
graces of his Spirit, which are as rivers of water in this dry land'
[Isa 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002); a desire for knowledge and
such facility in the acquisition of it, that even persons ordinarily
supposed disqualified should both clearly understand, and easily and
accurately express the truth [Isa
32:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#003); a just appreciation of
character and estimation of people in accordance therewith [Isa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005); and, finally, the prevalence of
a loving, liberal spirit, setting itself to devise and execute plans of
benevolence on a scale hitherto unprecedented [Isa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008); [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003); [Act
2:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044); [Co2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001), [Co2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004); [Co2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002))

[Isaiah 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 32:3</span></span>

And the eyes of them that see ... - The sense of this verse is, that
there shall be, under the reign of this wise and pious prince, on the
part of the prophets and teachers, a clear view of divine truth, and on
the part of the people who hear, a disposition to hearken and to attend
to it. The phrase 'of them that see,' refers probably to the prophets,
as those who were called seers (see the notes at [Isa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010); [Isa
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#010); compare [Sa1
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009)), or those who had visions (see
the note at [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)) of the things
that God would communicate to people. The word rendered 'be dim'
(תשׁעינה tishe‛eynâh), is derived from שׁעה shâ‛âh, which usually
signifies "to see, to look," but it also has a meaning similar to שׁעע
shâ‛a‛, "to spread over, to close, to make blind." Of this fact Lowth
seems not to have been aware when he proposed, without the authority of
any MS., to change the text. The sense is, that those who were prophets
and religious teachers should no more see obscurely, but should have
clear and just views of divine truth.

And the ears of them that hear - Of the people who were instructed by
their religious teachers.

Shall hearken - It shall be a characteristic of those times that they
shall be disposed to attend to the truth of God.

[Isaiah 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 32:4</span></span>

The heart also of the rash - Margin, 'Hasty.' The Hebrew word denotes
those who hasten; that is, those who are precipitate in forming a
judgment, or deciding on a course of action. They do not take time to
deliberate, and consequently they are led headlong into error, and into
improper courses of life.

Shall understand knowledge - They shall take time to deliberate; and
they shall consequently form a more enlightened judgment.

And the tongue of the stammerers - The 'stammerers' (compare the note at
[Isa 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011)) seem here to denote those
who had indistinct and confused views of subjects, or who were incapable
of expressing clear and intelligible views of divine truth.

Shall be ready to speak plainly - Margin, 'Elegantly.' The Hebrew is
צתות tsâthôth 'clear,' 'white,' usually applied to a bright, clear,
white light. The sense is, that there should be no indistinctness or
obscurity in their views and modes of utterance.

[Isaiah 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 32:5</span></span>

The vile person - Hebrew, 'Fool.' But the connection requires us to
understand this as the opposite of liberal; and it means a person who is
close, miserly, narrow-minded, covetous. This person is designated, very
appropriately, as a fool.

Shall be no more called liberal - It is probable that under the reign of
former princes, when all views of right and wrong had been perverted,
people of unprincipled character had been the subjects of flattery, and
names of virtue had been attributed to them by their friends and
admirers. But it would not be so under the virtuous reign of the prince
here celebrated. Things would be called by their right names, and
flattery would not be allowed to attribute to people, qualities which
they did not possess.

Nor the churl - The word 'churl' means properly a rude, surly, ill-bred
man; then a miser, a niggard. The Hebrew word means properly a deceiver,
a fraudulent man (Gesenius). The word avaricious, however, seems to suit
the connection. Lowth renders it, 'Niggard.' Noyes, 'Crafty.'

Bountiful - Flattery shall no more ascribe to a miserly man a character
which does not belong to him.

[Isaiah 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 32:6</span></span>

For the vile person - Hebrew, 'The fool.' This word more properly
expresses the idea than 'vile person.' The Hebrews Used the name fool to
denote not only one destitute of understanding, but a knave, a dishonest
man - regarding sin as the highest folly (see [Sa1
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#025); [Sa2
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033); [Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)).

Will speak villainy - Hebrew, 'Will speak folly.' That is, he will act
in accordance with his nature; it is his nature to speak folly, and he
will do it. Under a wicked and unjust administration such persons might
be the subjects flattery [Isa 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005),
and might be raised to office and power. But under the administration of
a virtuous king they would not be admitted to favor; and the reason was,
that they would act out their nature, and would corrupt all around them.
A monarch, therefore, who regarded the honor of his own throne, and the
welfare of his subjects, would exclude them from his counsels.

To make empty the soul of the hungry - Probably this refers to spiritual
hunger and thirst; and means that such a person would take away the
means of knowledge from the people, and leave them to error, ignorance,
and want. The sense is, that if such persons were raised to office, they
would corrupt the nation and destroy their confidence in God; and this
was a reason why a virtuous prince would exclude them from any
participation in his government.

[Isaiah 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 32:7</span></span>

The instruments also - In the Hebrew here there is a paronomasia which
cannot be imitated in a translation. The word 'instruments' here denotes
evidently the means by which the churl accomplishes his object; whether
it be by words, by judicial decisions, or by crafty devices. This is
also a kind of proverbial expression, and is given as a further reason
why such a person would not be employed by a wise and virtuous prince.

Are evil - He will make use of any unprincipled means, any wicked plan
or device, to accomplish his purpose. "With lying words." With false
representations; or with deceitful promises and assurances. His aim
would be particularly directed to the poor and humble, as more easily
deprived of their rights than the rich and powerful. It was also of
greater importance to defend the rights of the poor, and therefore the
prophet says that such a person should not be in the employ of a just
and virtuous ruler.

Even when the needy speaketh right - That is, although the cause of the
needy is one of truth and equity. When this would be manifest, the
unprincipled man in power would deprive him of his rights, and,
therefore, under a wise and virtuous administration, such a person
should not be employed.

[Isaiah 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 32:8</span></span>

But the liberal - This seems also to have the force of a proverbial
expression. The word 'liberal' means generous, noble, large-hearted,
benevolent; a man of large views and of public spirit; a man above
covetousness, avarice, and self-seeking; a man who is willing to devote
himself to the welfare of his country, and to the interests of his
fellow-men. It is implied here that such persons would be selected to
administer the affairs of the government I under the wise and virtuous
prince of whom the prophet speaks.

Deviseth liberal things - He purposes those things which will tend to
promote the public welfare, and not those merely which will conduce to
his private ends and gratification.

And by liberal things shall he stand - Margin, 'Be established.' That
is, according to the connection, he shall be confirmed, or approved in
the government of the virtuous king referred to. It is, however, a
proposition in a general form, and means also that a man by a liberal
course shall be established; that is, his character, reputation, hopes,
shall be established by it. This is true now. If a man wishes to obtain
permanent peace and honor, the esteem of his fellow-men, or the evidence
of divine approbation, it can be best done by large and liberal schemes
to advance the happiness of a dying world. He who is avaricious and
narrow-minded has no happiness, and no durable reputation; he who is
large-hearted and benevolent, has the approbation of the wise and good,
the favor of God, and a firm and unshaken support in the trials of life,
and in the agonies of death.

[Isaiah 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 32:9</span></span>

Rise up ... - Rosenmuller supposes that this commences a new vision or
prophecy; and that the former part [Isa
32:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009) refers to the desolation of
Judea by the invasion of Sennacherib, and the latter [Isa
32:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015) to the prosperity which would
succeed that invasion. It cannot be doubted that this is the general
reference of the passage, but there does not seem to be a necessity of
making a division here. The entire prophecy, including the whole
chapter, relates in general to the reign of Hezekiah; and as these
events were to occur during his reign, the prophet groups them together,
and presents them as constituting important events in his reign. The
general design of this portion of the prophecy [Isa
32:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009) is to show the desolation that
would come upon the land of Judea in consequence of that invasion. This
he represents in a poetical manner, by calling on the daughters of
fashion and ease to arouse, since all their comforts were to be taken
away.

Ye women that are at ease - They who are surrounded by the comforts
which affluence gives, and that have no fear of being reduced to wang
(compare [Isa 3:16-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016)).

Ye careless daughters - Hebrew, 'Daughters confiding;' that is, those
who felt no alarm, and who did not regard God and his threatenings.

[Isaiah 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 32:10</span></span>

Many days and years - Margin, 'Days above a year.' This is a literal
translation of the Hebrew. Septuagint, 'Make mention of a day of a year
in sorrow, with hope.' Targum, 'Days with years.' Kimchi supposes it
means 'two years.' Grotius supposes it means 'within three years.'
Various other interpretations may be seen in Poole's Synopsis. Gesenius
renders it, 'For a year's time,' according to the common expression 'a
year and a day,' denoting a complete year, and supposes that it means a
considerable time, a long period. The phrase literally means 'the days.
upon (or beyond) a year,' and may denote a long time; as the entire days
in a year would denote a long period of suffering. Lowth renders it, not
in accordance with the Hebrew, 'Years upon years.' Noyes, 'One year
more, and ye shall tremble.' Perhaps this expresses the sense; and then
it would denote not the length of time which they would suffer, but
would indicate that the calamities would soon come upon them.

For the vintage shall fail - A large part of the wealth and the luxury
of the nation consisted in the vintage. When the vine failed, there
would be, of course, great distress. The sense is, that in consequence
of the invasion of the Assyrians, either the people would neglect to
cultivate the lands, or they would fail to collect the harvest. This
might occur either from the dread of the invasion, or because the
Assyrian would destroy everything in his march.

[Isaiah 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 32:11</span></span>

Strip ye, and make ye bare - That is, take off your joyful and splendid
apparel, and put on the habiliments of mourning, indicative of a great
calamity.

And gird sackcloth - (See the note at [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024)).

[Isaiah 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 32:12</span></span>

They shall lament for the teats - Interpreters have been not a little
perplexed by this expression. Lowth supposes it is to be taken in
connection with the previous verse, and that it denotes that sackcloth
was to be girded upon the breast as well as upon the loins. Others have
supposed that it denotes to 'smite upon the breasts,' as a token of
grief; others, that the word 'breast' here denotes children by a
synecdoche, as having been nourished by the breast, and that the women
here were called to mourn over their children. But it is evident, I
think, that the word breasts here is used to denote that which nourishes
or sustains life, and is synonymous with fruitful fields. It is so used
in Homer (Iliad, ix. 141), where οίθαρ ἀρούρης oithar arourēs denotes
fertility of land. And here the sense doubtless is, that they would
mourn over the fields which once contributed to sustain life, but which
were now desolate. In regard to the grammatical difficulties of the
place, Rosenmuller and Gesenius may be consulted.

The pleasant fields - Margin, as in Hebrew, 'Fields of desire.'

[Isaiah 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 32:13</span></span>

Upon the land of my people - A description similar to this, in regard to
the consequences of the invasion of Sennacherib, is given in [Isa
7:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020) (see the notes at that
passage).

Yea, upon all the houses of joy - Margin, 'Burning upon.' The marginal
readling has originated from the supposition that the word כי kı̂y is
derived from כיה kâvâh, "to be burned." This conjecture has been adopted
by Junius and Tremellius, and by some others. But it is evidently mere
conjecture, and is not demanded. The word 'yea' will express the sense,
meaning that desolation, indicated by the growth of thorns and briers,
would come upon the cities that were then filled with joy. This does not
refer to Jerusalem, which was not taken by Sennacherib, but to the other
cities that were destroyed by him in his march, and this account accords
with the statement in [Isa 7:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020).

[Isaiah 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 32:14</span></span>

Because the palaces shall be forsaken - That is, the palaces in the
cities and towns which Sennacherib would lay waste. Or, if it refers, as
Lowth supposes, to the invasion of the land in the time of the
Chaldeans, then it relates to the palaces in Jerusalem. Vitringa
supposes that the temple at Jerusalem is particularly designated by the
word rendered palaces. But that is not the usual word to denote the
temlple, and it is not necessary to suppose that that is particularly
referred to. The word ארמון 'armôn usually denotes a palace, or royal
residence in some part of the royal citadel (see [Kg1
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#018); [Isa
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#002); [Jer
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018); [Amo
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#004), [Amo
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#007), [Amo
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#010), [Amo
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#012)).

The forts - Margin, 'Cliffs and watch-towers.' Hebrew, עפל ‛opel. This
word properly denotes a hill or a cliff, such as is an advantageous
situation for fortresses. It is translated in [Mic
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008), 'the stronghold;' in [Kg2
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#024), 'the tower;' in [Ch2
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#003); [Ch2
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#014); [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027); [Neh
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#021), 'Ophel.' With the article (the
hill) it was given, by way of eminence, to a bluff or hilt lying
northeast of mount Zion, and south of mount Moriah, which was surrounded
and fortified with a wall (Jos. Jewish Wars, vi. 6). It extends south
from mount Moriah, running down to the fountain of Siloam, lying between
the valley of Jehoshaphat on the east, and the Tyropeon or valley of
Cheesemongers on the west. It terminates over the pool of Siloam in a
steep point of rock forty or fifty feet high. The top of the ridge is
flat, and the ground is now tilled, and planted with olive and other
fruit trees (see Robinson's Bib. Researches, vol. i. pp. 341, 394). It
may be used here, however, to denote a hill or cliff, a
strongly-fortified place in general, without supposing of necessity that
it refers to the mountain in Jerusalem.

Towers - Towers were erected on the walls of cities at convenient
distances for purposes of observation.

Shall be for dens - Shall become places where banditti and robbers may
abide, and secure themselves.

Forever - This is evidently one instance in which the word 'forever'
(עד־עולם ‛ad-‛ôlâm), denotes a long time, because in the verse When the
word is used without any suet limitation, it denotes proper eternity

A joy of wild asses - A place where wild animals will have unlimited
range.

[Isaiah 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 32:15</span></span>

Until the Spirit - The Spirit of God, as the source of all blessings,
and especially as able to meet and remove the ills of the long calamity
and desolation. This evidently refers to some future period, when the
evils which the prophet was contemplating would be succeeded by the
spread of the true religion. If the prophet meant to confine his
description of calamities to those which would attend the invasion of
Sennacherib, then this refers to the piety and prosperity which would
prevail after that during the reign of Hezekiah. If he designed, as
Lowth supposes, to describe the calamites which would attend the
invasion of the Chaldeans and the desolation of the city of Jerusalem
during the captivity, then this refers to the prosperous times that
would occur after their return to their own land. And if he looked
forward beyond even that, then this refers to the times of the Messiah
also, and he designed to describe the happy period when the Messiah
should have come, and when the Spirit should be poured out. Vitringa
supposes that all three of these events are referred to. But although
the expressions are such as are used in reference to the times of the
Messiah, yet the word 'until' seems to limit the prediction to some
event previous to that. The plain sense of the passage is, that the city
would lie waste, and would be a pasture for flocks, until the Spirit
should be poured out; that is, would lie waste a long time, and then be
succeeded by the merciful interposition of God restoring them to their
land and privileges. This idea would seem to limit it. at the utmost, to
the return from Babylon.

Be poured out - This is a common and usual mode of indicating that the
influences of the Spirit of God would be imparted [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003); [Eze
39:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#029); [Joe
2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028); [Act
2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017).

From on high - From heaven (compare [Luk
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049)).

And the wilderness be a fruitful field - Until that change shall come
when the places that are desolate shall become fertile, and the places
which are now fertile and prosperous shall become desolate and barren.
This may refer to the time when Jerusalem, that would have lain so long
waste, would be again inhabited and cultivated, and when Babylon, then
so prosperous, would become desolate and ruined. The expression has a
proverbial cast and denotes change and revolution (see the note at [Isa
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#017)).

[Isaiah 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 32:16</span></span>

Then judgment shall dwell - Or, justice shall make its appropriate
dwelling-place there.

In the wilderness - In the place that was a wilderness, but that shall
now be turned to a fruitful field.

In the fruitful field - In the nation that is like a fruitful field; in
Judea restored.

[Isaiah 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 32:17</span></span>

And the work of righteousness - That which righteousness produces; or
the effect of the prevalence of righteousness on the nation.

Shall be peace - There shall be no internal agitation, and no conflicts
with foreign nations.

Quietness and assurance - This is a beautiful description of the happy
effect of the prevalence of piety; and it is as true now as it was in
the time of Isaiah. True religion would put an end to strifes and
litigations; to riots and mobs; to oppressions and tumults; to alarms
and robbery; to battle, and murder, and conflict.

[Isaiah 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 32:18</span></span>

And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation - In cities and
towns that would not be alarmed bv internal or external foes.

And in sure dwellings - In dwellings that would be secure from invasion.
- All this is descriptive of the peaceful times, and the general
security which followed the return from Babylon. To this period of
happiness and prosperity, Isaiah, as well as the other prophets, often
refers.

[Isaiah 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 32:19</span></span>

When it shall hail - Hebrew, ברדת ברד bârad beredeth - 'And it shall
hail in coming down. There is a paranomasia in the original here, which
cannot be expressed in a translation - a figure of speech, which, as we
have seen, is common in Isaiah. 'Hail' is an image of divine vengeance
or punishment; and the reference here is, doubtless, to the storms of
indignation that would come on the enemies of the Jews, particularly on
the Assyrians (see the notes at [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030)).

Coming down on the forest - Coming down on the army of the Assyrian,
which is here called 'a forest.' The same term 'forest' is given to the
army of the Assyrians in [Isa
10:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#018), [Isa
10:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033). The sense is, that the
divine judgment would come down on that army with as much severity as a
storm of hail descends on a forest - stripping the leaves from the
trees, destroying its beauty, and laying it waste.

And the city - According to Gesenius, this is Nineveh, the capital of
the Assyrian empire. According to Rosenmuller, Grotius, and others, it
is Babylon. Hensler supposes that it is Jerusalem, and that the sense
is, that as a city that is situated in a valley is safe when the storm
and tempest sweep over the hills, so would it be to Jerusalem when the
storm of wrath should sweep away the army of the Assyrian. But the
connection evidently requires us to understand it of the capital of the
enemy; though whether it be Nineveh or Babylon perhaps cannot be
determined.

Shall be low in a low place - Margin, 'Utterly abased.' Hebrew, 'In
humility shall be humbled.' The sense is, shall be completely prostrate.
Those who refer this to Jerusalem suppose it refers to the time when God
should humble it by bringing the enemy so near, and exciting so much
consternation and alarm. Those who refer it to Babylon suppose it
relates to its destruction. If referred to Nineveh, it must mean when
the pride of the capital of the Assyrian empire should be iratabled by
the complete overthrow of their army, and the annihilation of their
hopes. The connection seems to require us to adopt this latter
interpretation. The whole verse is very obscure; but perhaps the above
will express its general sense.

[Isaiah 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 32:20</span></span>

Blessed are ye - The sense of this verse is, that while the enemies of
the Jews would be overthrown, they themselves would be permitted to
cultivate their lands in security. Instead of predicting this directly,
the prophet implies that this would occur, by declaring that those who
were permitted to do this were happy.

That sow beside all waters - Hebrew, 'Upon (על ‛al) all waters.' This
may mean that they selected places near running streams as being most
fertile; or it may refer, as Lowth supposes, to the manner of sowing
grain, and particularly rice, in eastern countries. This is done by
casting the seed upon the water. This custom is referred to in [Ecc
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#001) : 'Cast thy bread,' that is, thy
seed, 'upon the waters, for thou shalt find it after many days;' that
is, cast thy seed upon the waters when the river overflows the banks,
and the seed will sink into the slime and mud, and will spring up when
the waters subside, and you will find it again after many days in a rich
and luxuriant harvest. Sir John Chardin thus describes this mode of
sowing: They sow it (the rice) upon the water; and before sowing, while
the earth is covered with water, they cause the ground to be trodden by
oxen, horses, and asses, who go mid-leg deep; and this is the way they
prepare the ground for sowing' (Harmer's Obs. vol. i. p. 280).

That send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass - That is, for
the purpose of treading the earth while the water is on it, and
preparing it for the seed. In this way the ground would need no plowing,
but the seed would fall into the slime, and be sufficiently covered when
the waters should subside. The idea in this verse is, that there would
be a state of security succeeding the destruction of their enemies; and
that they would be permitted to pursue the cultivation of the soil,
unannoyed and undisturbed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 33](isa033)

</div>
