<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa058)  [Next](isa060) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 59](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 59:0</span></span>

This chapter is closely connected in sense with the preceding, and is
designed to illustrate the same general sentiment; that the reason why
the religious services of the nation were not accepted, and the nation
delivered from calamity, was their hypocrisy and their other sins. The
previous chapter contained a bold and energetic reproof of their
expectation of the divine favor, when they were observing only external
rites without repentance, and even when they continued to practice
oppression and cruelty. This beautiful chapter states more in detail
their sins, and the consequences of their transgressions. The following
arrangement of the parts of the chapter, will show its design and scope
at a single view.

I. It was not because Yahweh was unable to save them that they were
exposed to such judgments, and visited with such calamities [Isa
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001). They were, therefore, not to
blame him. This general principle is stated, in order to prevent what
commonly occurs when people suffer much - a disposition to throw the
blame on God.

II\. It was for their sins that they were exposed to these judgments
[Isa 59:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002). The prophet proceeds to
specify those sins in detail, with a view to bring them to conviction
and to repentance.

1\. The general principle is stated, that it was their sins alone which
had separated between them and God [Isa
59:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002).

2\. Their hands were defiled with blood ([Isa
59:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#003), part first).

3\. Their lips had spoken falsehood ([Isa
59:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#003), last part).

4\. There was no justice among them ([Isa
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#004), part first).

5\. Their plans were mischievous ([Isa
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#004), second part).

6\. Their actions were like the egg of the cockatrice, hateful and
destructive as that egg when hatched [Isa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005).

7\. Their works were like the web of a spider, which could never be a
covering of righteousness [Isa 59:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#006).

8\. Their feet run to evil ([Isa 59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007),
part first).

9\. Their thoughts were evil ([Isa
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007), second part).

10\. They were strangers to the way of peace [Isa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008).

III\. After this statement of the prevalent sins of the nation, the
prophet introduces the people as making confession, that it was for
these and similar sins that they were exposed to the divine displeasure.
Identifying himself with the people, he enumerates the calamities to
which they were exposed, as a consequence of the sins which prevailed
[Isa 59:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#009). They were in darkness;
they waited in vain for light; they stumbled at noon-day; they vented
their sorrows like the roaring of bears, or the plaintive cry of the
dove, but all in vain.

IV\. Yahweh is represented as seeing this state of deep guilt; a state
where there was deep conviction of that guilt, and a readiness to make
confession; and as wondering that there was no intercessor, and as
himself interposing to bring deliverance and salvation [Isa
59:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#015). The characteristics of him
who should come to accomplish these purposes, were righteousness,
salvation, vengeance, and zeal [Isa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017), he would come to take
recompence on his foes, and to reward the wicked according to their
deeds [Isa 59:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#018).

V. The effect of this would be that the name of Yahweh would be feared
from the rising to the setting sun. Yahweh would erect a barrier against
the enemy when he should come in like a flood; and the Redeemer would
come to Zion to effect deliverance for those who should truly repent
[Isa 59:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#019).

VI\. A covenant would be established between God and those who would
turn away from transgressions [Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021). The nature of that covenant
was, that its blessings would be perpetual. The spirit which God would
give, and the words which he would put into their mouths, would abide
with them and their posterity forever.

'As this chapter,' says Lowth, 'is remarkable for the beauty, strength,
and variety of the images with which it abounds; so it is especially
distinguished by the eloquence of the composition, and the exact
construction of the sentences. From the first verse to the two last, it
falls regularly into stanzas of four lines.' This poetical form of the
chapter must be apparent to the slightest observation of the reader; and
there is perhaps no instance of more regular construction of the various
members and parts of a composition in the writings of the Hebrews.

The chapter has evidently a primary reference to the character of the
nation in the times of Isaiah. The deep depravity which is described, is
such as existed in the times of Manasseh; and one object of the prophet
was manifestly to bring them to conviction for their sins; and to show
them why they were suffering, or about to suffer, from the expressions
of the divine displeasure. But the chapter evidently also looks forward
to future times, and the close of it refers so manifestly to the times
of the Messiah, that it is impossible not to apply it to him.

[Isaiah 59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 59:1</span></span>

Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened - On the meaning of this
phrase, see the notes at [Isa 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002).

Neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear - On the meaning of this
phrase, see the notes at [Isa 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010).

[Isaiah 59:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 59:2</span></span>

But your iniquities - That is, the sins which the prophet had specified
in the previous chapter, and which he proceeds further to specify in
this.

Have separated - The word used here (בדל bâdal) conveys the idea of
division, usually by a curtain or a wall [Exo
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#033); [Eze
42:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#020). Thus the 'firmament' (רקיע
râqı̂ya‛, "expanse") is said to have "divided" or "separated" (מבדיל
mabedı̂yl) the waters from the waters [Gen
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006). The idea here is, that their sins
were like a partition between them and God, so that there was no contact
between them and him.

And your sins have hid his face from you - Margin, 'Made him hide.' The
Hebrew word here is in Hiphil, meaning 'to cause to hide.' Kimchi and
Aben Ezra understand it as causing him to hide his face; Vitringa as
hiding, his face. The metaphor, says Vitringa, is not taken from a man
who turns away his face from one because he does not choose to attend to
what is said, but from something which comes between two persons, like a
dense cloud, which hides one from the other. And, according to this, the
idea is, that their sins had risen up like a thick, dark cloud between
them and God, so that they had no clear view of him, and no contact with
him - as a cloud hides the face of the sun from us. A similar idea
occurs in [Lam 3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044) :

Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud,

That our prayers should not pass through.

But it seems to me more probable that the Hiphil signification of the
verb is here to be retained, and that the idea is, that their sins had
caused Yahweh to hide or turn away his face from their prayers from an
unwillingness to hear them when they were so deeply immersed in sin.
Thus the Septuagint, 'On account of your sins he has turned away his
face (ἀπέστρεψε τὸ πρόωπον apestrepse to prosōpon) from you, so that he
will not have mercy' (τοῦ μὴ ἐλεῆσαι tou mē eleēsai). It is universally
true that indulgence in sin causes God to turn away his face, and to
witchold mercy and compassion. He cannot pardon those who indulge in
transgression, and who are unwilling to abandon the ways of sin (compare
the notes at [Isa 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)).

[Isaiah 59:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 59:3</span></span>

For your hands are defiled with blood - The prophet proceeds here more
particularly to specify the sins of which they were guilty; and in order
to show the extent and depth of their depravity, he specifies the
various members of the body - the hands, the fingers, the lips, the
tongue, the feet as the agents by which people commit iniquity. See a
similar argument on the subject of depravity in [Rom
3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013), where a part of the
description which the prophet here gives is quoted by Paul, and applied
to the Jews in his own time. The phrase 'your hands are defiled with
blood,' means with the blood of the innocent; that is, they were guilty
of murder, oppression, and cruelty. See a similar statement in [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015), where the phrase 'your hands are
full of blood' occurs. The word rendered here 'defiled' (גאל gā'al)
means commonly to redeem, to ransom; then to avenge, or to demand and
inflict punishment for bloodshed. In the sense of defiling it occurs
only in the later Hebrew writers - perhaps used in this sense because
those who were avengers became covered, that is, defiled with blood.

And your fingers with iniquity - The fingers in the Scriptures are
represented as the agents by which any purpose is executed [Isa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008), 'Which their own fingers have
made' (compare [Isa 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008)). Some have
supposed that the phrase used here means the same as the preceding, that
they were guilty of murder and cruelty. But it seems more probable that
the idea suggested by Grotius is the true sense, that it means that they
were guilty of rapine and theft. The fingers are the instruments by
which theft - especially the lighter and more delicate kinds of theft -
is executed. Thus we use the word 'light-fingered' to denote anyone who
is dexterous in taking and conveying away anything, or anyone who is
addicted to petty thefts.

Your lips have spoken lies - The nation is false, and no confidence can
be reposed in the declarations which are made.

Your tongue hath muttered - On the word rendered 'muttered' (הגה hâgâh),
see the notes at [Isa 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019). Probably
there is included in the word here, the idea that they not only spoke
evil, but that they did it with a complaining, discontented, or
malicious spirit. It may also mean that they calumniated the government
of God, and complained of his laws; or it may mean, as Grotius supposes,
that they calumniated others - that is, that slander abounded among
them.

Perverseness - Hebrew, עולה ‛avlâh - 'Evil ' - the word from which our
word evil is derived.

[Isaiah 59:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 59:4</span></span>

None calleth for justice - Or rather, there is no one who brings a suit
with justice; no one who goes into court for the purpose of obtaining
justice. There is a love of litigation; a desire to take all the
advantage which the law can give; a desire to appeal to the law, not for
the sake of having strict justice done, but for the sake of doing injury
to others, and to take some undue advantage.

Nor any pleadeth for truth - Or, no one pleadeth with truth. He does not
state the cause as it is. He makes use of cunning and falsehood to gain
his cause.

They trust in vanity - They confide in quirks and evasions rather than
in the justice of their cause.

They conceive mischief - They form plans of evil, and they execute them
when they are fully ripe. Compare [Job
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035), where the same phrase occurs.
The sense is, that they form plans to injure others, and that they
expect to execute them by fraud and deceit.

[Isaiah 59:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 59:5</span></span>

They hatch cockatrice' eggs - Margin, 'Adders'.' On the meaning of the
word rendered here 'cockatrice,' see the notes at [Isa
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008). Some poisonous serpent is
intended, probably the adder, or the serpent known among the Greeks as
the basilisk, or cerastes. This figurative expression is designed to
show the evil nature and tendency of their works. They were as if they
should carefully nourish the eggs of a venomous serpent. Instead of
crushing them with the foot and destroying them, they took pains to
hatch them, and produce a venomous race of reptiles. Nothing can more
forcibly describe the wicked character and plans of sinners than the
language used here - plans that are as pernicious, loathsome, and
hateful as the poisonous serpents that spread death and ruin and alarm
everywhere.

And weave the spider's web - This phrase, in itself, may denote, as some
have understood it, that they formed plans designed to seize upon and
destroy others, as spiders weave their web for the purpose of catching
and destroying insects. But the following verse shows that the language
is used rather with reference to the tenuity and gossamer character of
the web, than with any such designs. Their works were like the web of
the spider. They bore the same relation to true piety which the web of
the spider did to substantial and comfortable raiment. They were vain
and useless. The word rendered here 'web' properly denotes the
cross-threads in weaving, the woof or filling; and is probably derived
from a word signify ing a cross-beam (see Rosenmuller in loc; also
Bochart, Hieroz. ii. 4. 23).

He that eateth of their eggs dieth - That is, he who partakes of their
counsels, or of the plans which they form, shall perish. Calvin says
that the meaning is, that 'whosoever had anything to do with them would
find them destructive and pestiferous.' Similar phrases, comparing the
plans of the wicked with the eggs and the brood of the serpent, are
common in the East. 'It is said,' says Roberts, speaking of India, 'of
the plans of a decidedly wicked and talented man, "That wretch! he
hatches serpents' eggs." "Beware of the fellow, his eggs are nearly
hatched." "Ah, my friend, touch not that affair, meddle not with that
matter; there is a serpent in the shell."'

And that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper - On the meaning of
the word rendered here 'viper,' see the notes at [Isa
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006). Margin, 'Sprinkled, is as if
there brake out a viper. Jerome renders it, 'Which if pierced, breaks
out into a basilisk.' The Septuagint renders it, 'And he who was about
to eat of their eggs having broken one that was putrid (συντρίψας οὔριον
suntripsas ourion), found in it a basilisk (βασόλισκον basiliskon). 'The
difference of translation in the text and the margin of the common
version has arisen from the fact that the translators supposed that the
word used here (זוּרה zûrâh) might be derived from זרה zârâh, to
sprinkle, or to scatter. But it is formed from the word זור zûr, to
squeeze, to press, to crush; and in [Job
39:15](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#015), is applied to the fact that the
ostrich might crush her eggs with her foot. The sense here is, that when
their plans were developed, they would be found to be evil and
pernacious - as when an egg should be broken open, a venomous setpent
would come forth. The viper, it is true, brings forth its young alive,
or is a viviparous animal. But Bochart has remarked, that though it
produces its young in this manner, yet that during the period of
gestation the young are included in eggs which are broken at the birth.
This is a very impressive illustration of the character and plans of the
wicked. The serpents here referred to are among the most venomous and
destructive that are known. And the comparison here includes two points
-

1\. That their plans resembled the egg of the serpent. The nature of the
egg cannot be easily known by an inspection. It may have a strong
resemblance to those which would produce some inoffensive and even
useful animals. It is only when it is hatched that its true nature is
fully developed. So it is with the plans of the wicked. When forming,
their true nature may not be certainly known, and it may not be easy to
determine their real character.

2\. Their plans, when developed, are like the poisonous and destructive
production of the serpent's egg. The true nature is then seen; and it is
ruinous, pernicious, and evil.

[Isaiah 59:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 59:6</span></span>

Their webs shall not become garments - The spider's web is unfit for
clothing; and the idea here is, that their works are as unfit to secure
salvation as the attenuated web of a spider is for raiment. The sense
is, says Vitringa, that their artificial sophisms avail nothing in
producing true wisdom, piety, virtue, and religion, or the true
righteousness and salvation of people, but are airy speculations. The
works of the self-righteous and the wicked; their vain formality, their
false opinions, their subtle reasonings, and their traditions, are like
the web of the spider. They bide nothing, they answer none of the
purposes of a garment of salvation. The doctrine is, that people must
have some better righteousness than the thin and gossamer covering which
their own empty forms and ceremonies produce (compare [Isa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006)).

[Isaiah 59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 59:7</span></span>

Their feet run to evil - In accordance with the design of the prophet to
show the entireness of their depravity, he states that all their members
were employed in doing evil. In [Isa
59:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#003). he had remarked that depravity
had extended to their hands, their fingers, their lips, and their
tongue; he here states that their feet also were employed in doing evil.
Instead of treading the paths of righteousness, and hastening to execute
purposes of mercy and justice, they were employed in journeyings to
execute plans of iniquity. The words 'run,' and 'make haste,' are
designed to intimate the intensity of their purpose to do wrong. They
did not walk slowly; they did not even take time to deliberate; but such
was their desire of wrong-doing, that they hastened to execute their
plans of evil. People usually walk slowly and with a great deal of
deliberation when any good is to be done; they walk rapidly, or they run
with haste and alacrity when evil is to be accomplished. This passage is
quoted by the apostle Paul [Rom 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#015),
and is applied to the Jews of his own time as proof of the depraved
character of the entire nation.

They make haste to shed innocent blood - No one can doubt that this was
the character of the nation in the time of Manasseh (see the
Introduction, Section 3). It is not improbable that the prophet refers
to the bloody and cruel reign of this prince. That it was also the
character of the nation when Isaiah began to prophesy is apparent from
[Isa 1:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015).

Their thoughts - That is, their plans and purposes are evil. It is not
merely that evil is done, but they intended that it should be done. They
had no plan for doing good; and they were constantly laying plans for
evil.

Wasting - That is, violence, oppression, destruction. It means that the
government was oppressive and tyrannical; and that it was the general
character of the nation that they were regardless of the interests of
truth and righteousness.

And destruction - Margin, 'Breaking.' The word commonly means breaking
or breach; then a breaking down, or destruction, as of a kingdom [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011); [Lam
3:47](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#047); or of individuals [Isa
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028). Here it means that they broke
down or trampled on the rights of others.

Are in their paths - Instead of marking their ways by deeds of
benevolence and justice, they could be tracked by cruelty and blood. The
path of the wicked through the earth can be seen usually by the
desolations which they make. The path of conquerors can be traced by
desolated fields, and smouldering ruins, and forsaken dwelling-places,
and flowing blood; and the course of all the wicked can be traced by the
desolations which they make in their way.

[Isaiah 59:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 59:8</span></span>

The way of peace they know not - The phrase 'way of peace' may denote
either peace of conscience, peace with God, peace among themselves, or
peace with their fellow-men. Possibly it may refer to all these; and the
sense will be, that in their whole lives they were strangers to true
contentment and happiness. From no quarter had they peace, but whether
in relation to God, to their own consciences, to each other, or to their
fellow-men, they were involved in continual strife and agitation (see
the notes at [Isa 57:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020)).

And there is no judgment in their goings - Margin, 'Right.' The sense
is, that there was no justice in their dealings. there was no
disposition to do right. They were full of selfishness, falsehood,
oppression, and cruelty.

They have made them crooked paths - A crooked path is an emblem of
dishonesty, fraud, deceit. A straight path is an emblem of sincerity,
truth, honesty, and uprightness (see [Psa
125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005); [Pro
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#015); and the notes at [Isa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004)). The idea is, that their
counsels and plans were perverse and evil. We have a similar expression
now when we say of a man that he is 'straightforward,' meaning that he
is an honest man.

[Isaiah 59:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 59:9</span></span>

Therefore is judgment far from us - This is the confession of the people
that they were suffering not unjustly on account of their crimes. The
word 'judgment' here is evidently to be taken in the sense of vengeance
or vindication. The idea is this, 'we are subjected to calamities and to
oppressions by our enemies. In our distresses we cry unto God, but on
account of our sins he does not hear us, nor does he come to vindicate
our cause.'

Neither doth justice overtake us - That is, God does not interpose to
save us from our calamities, and to deliver us from the hand of our
enemies. The word justice here is not to be regarded as used in the
sense that they had a claim on God, or that they were now suffering
unjustly, but it is used to denote the attribute of justice in God; and
the idea is, that the just God, the avenger of wrongs, did not come
forth to vindicate their cause, and to save them from the power of their
foes.

We wait for light - The idea here is, that they anxiously waited for
returning prosperity.

But behold obscurity - Darkness. Our calamities continue, and relief is
not afforded us.

For brightness - That is, for brightness or splendor like the shining of
the sun an emblem of happiness and prosperity.

[Isaiah 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 59:10</span></span>

We grope for the wall like the blind - A blind man, not being able to
see his way, feels along by a wall, a fence, or any other object that
will guide him. They were like the blind. They had no distinct views of
truth, and they were endeavoring to feel their way along as well as they
could. Probably the prophet here alludes to the threatening made by
Moses in [Deu 28:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028), 'And the Lord
shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart;
and thou shalt grope at noon-day as the blind gropeth in darkness, and
thou shalt not prosper in thy ways.'

We stumble at noon-day as in the night - The idea here is, that they
were in a state of utter disorder and confusion. Obstacles were in their
way on all hands, and they could no more walk than people could who at
noon-day found their path filled with obstructions. There was no
remission, no relaxation of their evils. They were continued at all
times, and they had no intervals of day. Travelers, though at night they
wander and fall, may look for approaching day, and be relieved by the
returning light. But not so with them. It was all night. There were no
returning intervals of light, repose and peace. It was as if the sun was
blotted out, and all was one long, uninterrupted, and gloomy night.

We are in desolate places - There has been great variety in the
interpretation of this phrase. Noyes, after Gesenius. translates it, 'In
the midst of fertile fields we are like the dead.' One principal reason
which Gesenius gives for this translation (Commentary in loc.) is, that
this best agrees with the sense of the passage, and answers better to
the previous member of the sentence, thus more perfectly preserving the
parallelism:

At noon-day we stumble as in the night;

In fertile fields we are like the dead.

Thus, the idea would be, that even when all seemed like noon-day they
were as in the night; and that though they were in places that seemed
luxuriant, they were like the wandering spirits of the dead. Jerome
renders it, Caliginosis quasi mortui. The Septuagint, 'They fall at
mid-day as at midnight: they groan as the dying' (ὡς ἀποθνῄσκοντες
στενάξουσιν hōs apothnēskontes stenachousin). The Syriac follows this.
'We groan as those who are near to death.' The Chaldee renders it, 'It
(the way) is closed before us as the sepulchre is closed upon the dead;'
that is, we are enclosed on every side by calamity and trial, as the
dead are in their graves. The derivation of the Hebrew word אשׁמנים
'ashemanı̂ym is uncertain, and this uncertainty has given rise to the
variety of interpretation. Some regard it as derived from שׁמם shâmam,
to be laid waste, to be desolate; and others from שׁמן shâman, to be, or
become fat.

The word שׁמנים shemannı̂ym, in the sense of fatness, that is, fat and
fertile fields, occurs in [Gen 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028),
[Gen 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039); and this is probably the
sense here. According to this, the idea is, we are in fertile fields
like the dead. Though surrounded by lands that are adapted to produce
abundance, yet we are cut off from the enjoyment of them like the dead.
Such is the disturbed state of public affairs; and such the weight of
the divine judgments, that we have no participation in these blessings
and comforts. The idea which. I suppose, the prophet means to present
is, that the land was suited to produce abundance, but that such was the
pressure of the public calamity, that all this now availed them nothing,
and they were like the dead who are separated from all enjoyments. The
original reference here was to the Jew suffering for their sins, whether
regarded as in Palestine under their heavy judgments, or as in Babylon,
where all was night and gloom. But the language here is strikingly
descriptive of the condition of the world at large. Sinners at noon-day
grope and stumble as in the night. In a world that is full of the light
of divine truth as it beams from the works and the word of God, they are
in deep darkness. They feel their way as blind people do along a wall,
and not a ray of light penetrates the darkness of their minds. And in a
world full of fertility, rich and abundant and overflowing in its
bounties, they are still like 'the dead.' True comfort and peace they
have not; and they seem to wander as in the darkness of night, far from
peace, from comfort, and from God.

[Isaiah 59:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 59:11</span></span>

We roar all like bears - This is designed still further to describe the
heavy judgments which had come upon them for their sins. The word
rendered here 'roar' (from המה hâmâh, like English, to hum, German,
hummen, spoken of bees), is applied to any murmuring, or confused noise
or sound. It sometimes means to snarl, as a dog [Psa
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007), [Psa
59:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015); to coo, as a dove [Eze
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#016); it is also applied to waves that
roar [Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004); [Isa
51:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#015); to a crowd or tumultuous
assemblage [Psa 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007); and to music
[Isa 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011); [Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036). Here it is applied to the low
growl or groan of a bear. Bochart (Hieroz. i. 3. 9), says, that a bear
produces a melancholy sound; and Horace (Epod. xvi. 51), speaks of its
low groan:

Nee vespertinus circumgemit ursus ovile.

Here it is emblematic of mourning, and is designed to denote that they
were suffering under heavy and long-continued calamity. Or, according to
Gesenius (Commentary in loc.), it refers to a bear which is hungry, and
which growls, impatient for food, and refers here to the complaining,
dissatisfaction, and murmuring of the people, because God did not come
to vindicate and relieve them.

And mourn sore like doves - The cooing of the dove, a plaintive sound,
is often used to denote grief (see [Eze
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#016); compare the notes at [Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014)).

We look for judgment ... - (See the notes at [Isa
59:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#009).)

[Isaiah 59:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 59:12</span></span>

Our sins testify against us - Hebrew, 'Answer against us.' The idea is,
that their past lives had been so depraved that they became witnesses
against them (compare the notes at [Isa
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009)).

We know them - We recognize them as our sins, and we cannot conceal from
ourselves the fact that we are transgressors.

[Isaiah 59:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 59:13</span></span>

In transgressing - That is, we have been guilty of this as a continuous
act.

And lying against the Lord - We have proved false to Yahweh. Though we
have been professedly his people, yet we have been secretly attached to
idols, and have in our hearts been devoted to the service of false gods.

And departing away from our God - By the worship of idols, and by the
violation of his law.

Speaking oppression and revolt - Forming plans to see how we might best
take advantage of the poor and the defenseless, and to mature our plans
of revolt against God.

Conceiving and uttering from the heart - (See the notes at [Isa
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#004)). The idea is, that they had
formed in their hearts schemes of deception, and that in their
conversation and their lives they had given utterance to them. All this
is the language of genuine contrition, where there is a consciousness of
deep guilt in the sight of God. There is an overpowering sense of the
evil of sin. and a willingness to make the most full and ample
acknowledgment, however mortifying it may be, of the errors and follies
of the life.

[Isaiah 59:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 59:14</span></span>

And judgment is turned away backward - The word 'judgment' is not used,
as in [Isa 59:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#009), to denote the divine
interposition to avenge and deliver them, but it is used in the sense of
justice, or lust decisions between man and man. The verse contains a
further confession of the evil of their course of life; and, among other
things, they acknowledged that they had been unjust in their legal
decisions. They had been influenced by partiality and by bribes; they
had condemned the innocent, they had acquitted the guilty. Judgment had
thus been lumped back by their sins when it seemed to be approaching and
entering the city.

And justice standeth afar off - This is a beautiful figure. justice is
represented as standing at a distance from the city. Deterred by their
sins, it would not enter. They prevented its approach, and it was
unknown among them.

For truth is fallen in the street - Or rather, perhaps, in the gate -
the place where justice was administered. The language here is all taken
from courts of justice, and the idea is, that there was no justice in
their decisions, but that their courts were unprincipled and corrupt.

And equity cannot enter - It stood at a distance, and the impenetrable
mass of guilt effectually prevented its approach to the capital.

[Isaiah 59:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 59:15</span></span>

Yea, truth faileth - That is, it is not to be found, it is missing. The
word used here (from עדר ‛âdar) means "to be left, to remain" [Sa2
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#022); then "to be missing or lacking"
[Sa1 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#019); [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026). Here it means that truth had no
existence there.

And he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey - Margin, 'Is
accounted mad.' Noyes renders this, 'And he that departeth from evil is
plundered.' Grotius renders it, 'The innocent man lies open to injury
from all.' The Septuagint, 'They took away the mind from understanding;'
or, 'They substituted opinion in the place of knowledge.' (Thompson's
Translation.) The phrase, 'He that departeth from evil,' means evidently
a man who did not, and would not, fall in with the prevailing iniquitous
practices, but who maintained a life of honesty and piety. It was one of
the evils of the times that such a man would be harassed, plundered,
ill-treated. The word rendered 'maketh himself a prey' (משׁתולל
mishetôlēl from שׁלל shâlal), is a word usually signifying to strip off,
to plunder, to spoil. Some have supposed that the word means to make
foolish, or to account mad, in [Job
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#017), [Job
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#019). Thus, in the passage before us,
the Septuagint understood the word, and this sense of the word our
translators have placed in the margin. But there is no reason for
departing here from the usual signification of the word as denoting to
plunder, to spoil; and the idea is, that the people of honesty and piety
were subject to the rapacity of the avaricious, and the oppression of
the mighty. They regarded them as lawful prey, and took every advantage
in stripping them of their property, and reducing them to want. This
completes the statement of the crimes of the nation, and the existence
of such deeds of violence and iniquity constituted the basis on which
God was led to interpose and effect deliverance. Such a state of crime
and consequent suffering demanded the divine interposition; and when
Yahweh saw it, he was led to provide a way for deliverance and reform.

The passage before us had a primary reference to the prevalence of
iniquity in the Jewish nation. But it is language also that will quite
as appropriately describe the moral condition of the world as laying the
foundation for the necessity of the divine interposition by the Messiah.
Indeed, the following verses undoubtedly refer to him. No one, it is
believed, can attentively read the passage, and doubt this. The mind of
the prophet is fixed upon the depravity of the Jewish nation. The hands,
the tongue, the eyes, the feet, the fingers, were all polluted. The
whole nation was sunk in moral corruption; and this was but a partial
description of what was occurring everywhere on the earth. In such a
state of things in the Jewish nation, and in the whole world, the
question could not but arise, whether no deliverer could be found. Was
there no way of pardon; no way by which deserved and impending wrath
could be diverted? From this melancholy view, therefore, the prophet
turns to him who was to be the Great Deliverer, and the remainder of the
chapter is occupied with a most beautiful description of the Redeemer,
and of the effect of his coming. The sentiment of the whole passage is,
"that the deep and extended depravity of man was the foundation of the
necessity of the divine interposition in securing salvation, and that in
view of the guilt of people, God provided one who was a Glorious
Deliverer, and who was to come to Zion as the Redeemer."

And the Lord saw it - He saw there was no righteousness; no light; no
love; no truth. All was violence and oppression: all was darkness and
gloom.

And it displeased him - Margin, 'Was evil in his eyes.' So Jerome, 'It
appeared evil in his eyes.' Septuagint, Καὶ οὐκ ἤρεσεν αὐτῷ Kai ouk
ēresen autō - 'And it did not please him.' The Hebrew, וירע vayēra‛
means, literally, 'It was evil in his eyes.' That is, it was painful or
displeasing to him. The existence of so much sin and darkness was
contrary to the benevolent feelings of his heart.

That there was no judgment - No righteousness; no equity; and that
iniquity and oppression abounded.

[Isaiah 59:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 59:16</span></span>

And he saw that there was no man - That is, no wise and prudent man
qualified to govern the affairs of the people. Or, that there was no man
qualified to interpose and put an end to these evils; no one qualified
to effect a reformation, and to save the nation from the calamities
which their sins deserved. The reason why God provided a Redeemer was,
that such was the extent and nature of human depravity, that no one on
earth could arrest it, and save the world. A similar expression occurs
in [Isa 41:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#028).

And wondered - This is language adapted to the mode of speaking among
men. It cannot be taken literally, as if God was amazed by suddenly
coming to the knowledge of this fact. It is designed to express, with
great emphasis, the truth, that there was no one to intercede, and that
the wicked world was lying in a helpless condition.

That there was no intercessor - On the meaning of the word here rendered
'intercessor,' see the notes at [Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006). The Chaldee renders it, 'There
was no man who could stand and pray for them.' In [Isa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005), Isaiah expresses the idea in the
following language: I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered
that there was none to uphold.'

Therefore his arm - On the meaning of this phrase, see the notes at [Isa
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010) (compare [Isa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005); [Isa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005)). The idea is, that salvation was
to be traced to God alone. It did not originate with man, and it was not
accomplished by his agency or help.

And his righteousness, it sustained him - Sustained by the consciousness
that he was doing right, he went forward against all opposition, and
executed his plan. This is language derived from the mode of speaking
among people, and it means that as a man who is engaged in a righteous
cause is sustained amidst much opposition by the consciousness of
integrity, so it is with God. The cause of redemption is the great cause
of righteousness on earth. In this cause the Redeemer was sustained by
the consciousness that he was engaged in that which was designed to
vindicate the interests of truth and justice, and to promote
righteousness throughout the universe.

[Isaiah 59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 59:17</span></span>

For he put on righteousness - That is, God the Redeemer. The prophet
here introduces him as going forth to vindicate his people clad like an
ancient warrior. In the declaration that he 'put on righteousness,' the
essential idea is, that he was pure and holy. The same image is used by
the prophet in another figure in [Isa
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005) (see the note at that place).

As a breastplate - The breastplate was a well-known piece of ancient
armor, designed to defend the breast from the darts and the sword of an
enemy. The design here is, to represent the Redeemer as a hero; and
accordingly allusion is made to the various parts of the armor of a
warrior. Yet he was not to be literally armed for battle. Instead of
being an earthly conqueror, clad in steel, and defended with brass, his
weapons were moral weapons, and his conquests were spiritual. The
various parts of his weapons were 'righteousness.' 'salvation,' and
'zeal.' This statement should have been, in itself, sufficient to keep
the Jews front anticipating a Messiah who would be a bloody warrior and
distinguished for deeds of conquest and blood. This figure of speech is
not uncommon. Paul (in [Eph 6:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014);
compare [Co2 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007)) has carried it out
to greater length, and introduced more particulars in the description of
the spiritual armor of the Christian.

And an helmet of salvation - The helmet was a piece of defensive armor
for the head. It was made of iron or brass, and usually surmounted by a
crest of hair. It was designed to guard the head from the stroke of a
sword. No particular stress should be laid on the fact, that it is said
that 'salvation' would be the helmet. The design is to represent the
Redeemer by the figure of a hero clad in armor, yet there seems to be no
particular reason why salvation should be referred to as the helmet, or
righteousness as the cuirass or breastplate. Nothing is gained by a
fanciful attempt to spiritualize or explain them.

And he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing - By 'garments,'
here, Vitringa supposes that there is reference to the interior garments
which were worn by the Orientals corresponding to the tunic of the
Romans. But it is more probable that the allusion is to the other parts
of the dress or armor in general of the ancient warrior. The statement
that he was clad in the garments of vengeance means, that he would go
forth to vindicate his people, and to take vengeance on his foes. It
would not be for mere defense that he would be thus armed for battle;
but he would go forth for aggressive movements, in subduing his enemies
and delivering his people (compare [Isa
63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)).

And was clad with zeal as a cloak - The cloak worn by men in military as
well as in civil life, was a loose flowing robe or mantle that was
thrown over the body, usually fastened on the right shoulder by a hook
or clasp, and suffered to flow in graceful folds down to the feet. In
battle, it would be laid aside, or secured by a girdle about the loins.
Vitringa remarks, that, as it was usually of purple color, it was
adapted to represent the zeal which would burn for vengeance on an
enemy. But the whole figure here is that drawn from a warrior or a
conqueror: a hero prepared alike for defense and offence. The idea is,
that he would be able to defend and vindicate his people, and to carry
on aggressive warfare against his enemies. But it was not to be a
warfare literally of blood and carnage. It was to be such as would be
accomplished by righteousness, and zeal, and a desire to secure
salvation. The triumph of righteousness was the great object still; the
conquests of the Redeemer were to be those of truth.

[Isaiah 59:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 59:18</span></span>

According to their deeds - The general sentiment of this verse is plain,
though there is not a little difficulty in the construction of the
Hebrew. Lowth pronounces the former part of the verse, as it stands in
the Hebrew text, to be 'absolutely unintelligible. By a slight change in
the Hebrew as it now stands (reading בעל ba‛al, "lord," instead of כעל
ke‛al "as according to"), Lowth supposes that he has obtained the true
sense, and accordingly translates it:

He is mighty to recompense;

He that is mighty to recompense shall requite.

This translation is substantially according to the Chaldee, but there is
no authority from manuscripts to change the text in this place. Nor is
it necessary. The particle כעל ke‛al occurs as a preposition in [Isa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007), in the sense of 'as according
to,' or 'according to,' and is similar in its form to the word מעל
mē‛al, which often occurs in the sense of from above, or from upon [Gen
24:64](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#064); [Gen
40:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#019); [Isa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#016); [Jer
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#011); [Amo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#011). The sense of the verse before us
is, that God would inflict just punishment on his enemies. It is a
general sentiment, applicable alike to the deliverance from Babylon and
the redemption of his church and people at all times. In order to effect
the deliverance of his people it was necessary to take vengeance on
those who had oppressed and enslaved them. So in order to redeem his
church, it is often necessary to inflict punishment on the nations that
oppose it, or to remove by death the adversaries that stand in his way.
This punishment is inflicted strictly according to their deeds. The
principal thought here is, undoubtedly, that as they had opposed and
oppressed the people of God, so he would take vengeance on them. He
would remove his enemies, and prepare the way in this manner for the
coming of his kingdom.

To the islands - On the use of the word 'islands' in Isaiah, see the
notes at [Isa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001). The idea here is,
that he would 'repay recompence' or take vengeance on the foreign
nations which had oppressed them.

[Isaiah 59:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 59:19</span></span>

So shall they fear - That is, the result of the divine interposition to
punish his enemies, shall be to secure the acknowledgment of the
existence and perfections of Yahweh in every part of the world. See
especially the notes at [Isa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#006).

When the enemy shall come in - There has been great variety in the
interpretation of this passage, and it is remarkable that our
translators have departed from all the ancient versions, and that the
present translation differs from nearly all the modern expositions of
the place. Lowth renders it:

When he shall come like a river straitened in his course,

Which a strong wind driveth along.

Jerome (the Vulgate) renders it, 'When he shall come as a violent river
which the Spirit of the Lord (spiritus Domini, or the wind of the Lord,
that is, a strong wind) drives along. The Septuagint, 'For the wrath of
the Lord will come like an impetuous stream; it will come with fury.'
The Chaldee, 'When they shall come who oppress, like an overflowing of
the river Euphrates.' The Syriac, 'Because when the oppressor shall come
as a river, the Spirit of the Lord shall humble him.' The reason of this
variety of interpretation is the ambiguity of the Hebrew words which
occur in the verse. The word which in our common version is rendered
'the enemy' (צר tsâr, from צרר tsârar, to press, compress, bind up
together; intrans. to be straitened, or compressed), may mean either:

1\. "An adversary, enemy, persecutor," synonymous with אויב 'ôyēb, as in
[Num 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009); [Deu
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027); [Job
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#009); or,

2\. "Straits, affliction" [Psa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002);
[Psa 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007); [Psa
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#011); or,

3\. "Strait, narrow" [Num 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#026); [Job
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#007).

'It may be, therefore, here either a noun meaning an enemy; or it maybe
an adjective qualifying the word river, and then will denote a river
that is closely confined within its banks, and that is urged forward by
a mass of accumulating waters, or by a mighty wind. According to this,
it will mean that Yahweh will come to take vengeance with the
impetuosity of a river that swells and foams and is borne forward with
violence in its course. The comparison of a warrior or hero with such a
mighty and impetuous torrent, is exceedingly forcible and beautiful, and
is not uncommon (see the notes at [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007)). The phrase rendered 'the Spirit
of the Lord' (יהוה רוח rûach yehovâh), may denote 'the wind of Yahweh,'
or a strong, violent, mighty wind. The appropriate signification of the
word רוח rûach, is wind, or breath; and it is well known that the name
of God is often in the Scriptures used to denote that which is mighty or
vast, as in the phrase, mountains of God, cedars of God, etc.

There is no reason why it should be here regarded as denoting 'the
Spirit of God,' - the great agent of enlightening and reforming the
world. It may be understood, as Lowth and others have applied it, to
denote a strong and violent wind - a wind urging on a mass of waters
through a compressed and straitened place, and thus increasing their
impetuosity and violence. The phrase 'Spirit of God' (אלהים רוח rûach
'ĕlohı̂ym), is used to denote a strong wind, in [Kg1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012); [Kg2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#016); [Isa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007); [Eze
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014); [Eze
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#013). The word rendered in our
version, 'shall lift up a standard' (נססה nosesâh), rendered in the
margin, 'put him' to flight,' if derived from נסס nāsas, and if written
with the points נססה nāsesâh, would denote to lift up, to elevate, as a
standard or banner, or anything to oppose and retard a foe. But the word
is probably derived from נוּס nûs, to flee, in the Piel נוסס nôsēs, "to
impel, to cause to flee."

Here it means, then, that the mighty wind impels or drives on the
compressed waters of the stream, and the whole passage means that Yahweh
would come to deliver his people, and to prostrate his foes with the
impetuosity of a violent river compressed between narrow banks, and
driven on by a mighty wind. True, therefore, as it is, that when a
violent enemy assails the church; when he comes in with error, with
violence, and with allies, like a flood, Yahweh will rear a standard
against him, and the influences of the Spirit of God may be expected to
interpose to arrest the evil; yet this passage does not teach that
doctrine, nor should it be so applied. It does teach that Yahweh will go
forth with energy and power to defend his people and to prostrate his
foes.

[Isaiah 59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 59:20</span></span>

And the Redeemer shall come - On the meaning of the word rendered here
'Redeemer,' see the notes at [Isa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001). This passage is applied by the
apostle Paul to the Messiah [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026); and Aben Ezra and Kimchi, among
the Jews, and Christians generally, suppose that it refers to him.

To Zion - On the word 'Zion,' see the notes at [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008). The Septuagint renders this,
Ἔνεκεν Σιὼν Heneken Siōn - 'On account of Zion.' The apostle Paul [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026), renders this, 'There shall come
out of Zion (ἐκ Σιὼν ek Siōn) the Deliverer,' meaning that he would
arise among that people, or would not be a foreigner. The idea in
Isaiah, though substantially the same, is rather that he would come as a
deliverer from abroad; that is, he would come from heaven, or be
commissioned by God. When it is said that he would come to Zion, it is
not meant that he would come exclusively to the Jews, but that his
mission would be primarily to them.

And unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob - There is much
variety in the interpretation of this passage. Paul [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026) quotes it thus, 'and shall turn
away ungodliness from Jacob;' and in this he has literally followed the
Septuagint. The Vulgate renders it as in our translation. The Chaldee,
'And shall turn transgressors of the house of Jacob to the law.' The
Syriac, 'To those who turn iniquity from Jacob.' Lowth has adopted the
rendering of the Septuagint, and supposes that an error has crept into
the Hebrew text. But there is no good authority for this supposition.
The Septuagint and the apostle Paul have retained substantially, as
Vitringa has remarked, the sense of the text. The main idea of the
prophet is, that the effect of the coming of the Messiah would be to
turn people from their sins. He would enter into covenant only with
those who forsook their transgressions, and the only benefit to be
derived from his coming would be that many would be thus turned from
their iniquities.

[Isaiah 59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 59:21</span></span>

As for me - In the previous part of the chapter, the prophet has spoken.
Here Yahweh is introduced as speaking himself, and as declaring the
nature of the covenant which he would establish. In the verse previous,
it had been stated that the qualifications on the part of people for
their partaking of the benefits of the Redeemer's work, were, that they
should turn from transgression. In this verse, Yahweh states what he
would do in regard to the covenant which was to be established with his
people. 'So far as I am concerned, I will enter into a covenant with
them and with their children.'

This is my covenant with them - (Compare the notes at [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006); [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008); [Isa
54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010)). The covenant here referred to,
is that made with people under the Messiah. In important respects it
differed from that made with the Jewish people under Moses. The word,
'covenant' here is evidently equivalent, as it is commonly, when applied
to a transaction between God and human beings, to a most solemn promise
on his part; and the expression is a most solemn declaration that, under
the Messiah, God would impart his Spirit to those who should turn from
transgression, and would abundantly bless them and their offspring with
the knowledge of his truth. When it is said, 'this is my covenant,' the
import evidently is, 'this is the nature or the tenure of my covenant,
or of my solemn promises to my people under the Messiah. It shall
certainly occur that my Spirit will be continually imparted to thy seed,
and that my words will abide with thee and them forever.'

My Spirit that is upon thee - The word 'thee' here does not refer, as
Jerome and others suppose, to the prophet, but to the pious Hebrew
people. The covenant under the Messiah, was not made especially with the
prophet or his posterity, but is a promise made to the church, and here
evidently refers to the true people of God: and the idea is, that the
Spirit of God would be continually imparted to his people, and to their
descendants forever. It is a covenant made with true believers and with
their children.

And my words - The Chaldee understands this of prophecy. But it seems
rather to refer to the truth of God in general which he had revealed for
the guidance and instruction of his church.

Shall not depart out of thy mouth - This phrase probably means, that the
truth of God would be the subject of perpetual meditation and
conversation. The covenant would be deemed so precious that it would
constantly dwell on the tongues of those who were interested in it.

Thy seed's seed - Thy descendants; thy posterity.

From henceforth and for ever - This is in accordance with the promises
which everywhere occur in the Scriptures, that God would bless the
posterity of his people, and that the children of the pious should
partake of his favor. See [Exo 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006) :
'Showing mercy unto thousands (that is, thousands of generations) of
them that love me and keep my commandments.' Compare [Deu
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037); [Deu
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029); [Deu
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#009); [Psa
89:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#024), [Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036); [Jer
32:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039). There is no promise of the
Bible that is more full of consolation to the pious, or that has been
more strikingly fulfilled than this. And though it is true that not all
the children of holy parents become truly pious; though there are
instances where they are signally wicked and abandoned, yet it is also
true that rich spiritual blessings are imparted to the posterity of
those who serve God and who keep his commandments. The following facts
are well known to all who have ever made any observation on this
subject:

1\. The great majority of those who become religious are the descendants
of those who were themselves the friends of God. Those who now compose
the Christian churches, are not those generally who have been taken from
the ways of open vice and profligacy; from the ranks of infidelity; or
from the immediate descendants of scoffers, drunkards, and blasphemers.
Such people usually tread, for a few generations at least, in the
footsteps of their fathers. The church is composed mainly of the
descendants of those who have been true Christians, and who trained
their children to walk in the ways of pure religion.

2\. It is a fact that comparatively a large proportion of the
descendants of the pious themselves for many generations become true
Christians. I know that it is often thought to be otherwise, and
especially that it is often said that the children of clergymen are less
virtuous and religious than others. But it should be remembered that
such cases are more prominent than others, and especially that the
profane and the wicked have a malicious pleasure in making them the
subject of remark. The son of a drunkard will be intemperate without
attracting notice - for such a result is expected; the son of an infidel
will be an infidel; the son of a scoffer will be a scoffer; of a thief a
thief; of a licentious man licentious, without being the subject of
special observation. But when the son of an eminent Christian treads the
path of open profligacy, it at once excites remark, because such is not
the usual course, and is not usually expected; and because a wicked
world has pleasure in marking the case, and calumniating religion
through such a prominent instance of imperfection and sin.

But such is not the common result of religious training. Some of the
most devotedly pious people of this land are the descendants of the
Huguenots who were expelled from France. A very large proportion of all
the piety in this country has been derived from the 'Pilgrims,' who
landed on the rock of Plymouth, and God has blessed their descendants in
New England and elsewhere with numerous revivals of religion. I am
acquainted with the descendants of John Rogers, the first martyr in
Queen Mary's reign, of the tenth and eleventh generations. With a single
exception, the oldest son in the family has been a clergymen - some of
them eminently distinguished for learning and piety; and there are few
families now in this land a greater proportion of whom are pious than of
that. The following statistical account made of a limited section of the
country, not more favored or more distinguished for piety than many
others, accords undoubtedly with similar facts which are constantly
occurring in the families of those who are the friends of religion. The
Secretary of the Massachusetts Sabbath School Society made a limited
investigation, in the year 1838, for the purpose of ascertaining the
facts about the religious character of the families of ministers and
deacons with reference to the charge so often urged that the 'sons and
daughters of ministers and deacons were worse than common children.' The
following is the result.

In 268 families which he canvassed, he found 1290 children over fifteen
years of age. Of these children 884, almost three-fourths, are hopefully
pious; 794 have united with the churches; sixty-one entered the
ministry; only seventeen are dissipated, and about half only of these
became so while with their parents. In eleven of these families there
are 123 children, and all but seven pious. In fifty-six of these
families there are 249 children over fifteen, and all hopefully pious.
When and where can any such result be found in the families of infidels,
of the vicious, or of irreligious people? Indeed, it is the great law by
which religion and virtue are perpetuated in the world. that God is
faithful to this covenant, and that he blesses the efforts of his
friends to train up generations for his service.

3\. All pious parents should repose on this promise of a faithful God.
They may and should believe that it is his design to perpetuate religion
in the families of those who truly serve and obey him. They should be
faithful in imparting religious truth; faithful in prayer, and in a
meek, holy, pure, and benevolent example; they should so live that their
children may safely tread in their footsteps; they should look to God
for his blessing on their efforts, and their efforts will not be in
vain. They shall see their children walk in the ways of virtue; and when
they die, they may leave the world with unwavering confidence that God
will not suffer his faithfulness to fail; that he will not break his
covenant, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips [Psa
89:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 60](isa060)

</div>
