<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa007)  [Next](isa009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 8:0</span></span>

In Isa. 7 the prophet had told Ahaz that God would give him a sign that
the lad of Judah should be safe from the threatened invasion of the
united armies of Syria and Israel. In this chapter Isa. 8, there is a
record of the primary fulfillment of that promise, [Isa
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001). From [Isa
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#005) to [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008), the prophet resumes and repeats
what he had said before in [Isa
7:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017), that although the land should
be safe from this invasion, yet one more formidable would occur by the
armies of Assyria. The cause of this is stated to be, that Judah had
despised the Lord, and had sought alliances with Syria and Israel. The
prophet then proceeds to exhort the people to put confidence in Yahweh -
assuring them that if they refused to confide in him, they must expect
to be destroyed, [Isa 8:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009); and the
chapter concludes with denouncing punishment on those that looked to
necromancers and diviners, rather than to the true God. The prophecy is
intimately connected with that in the previous chapter; and was
delivered, evidently, not far from the same time.

[Isaiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 8:1</span></span>

Take thee a great roll - The word which is here translated 'roll' more
properly signifies tablet. So the Chaldee renders it. Those tablets were
made of wood, metal, or stone, for the purpose of writing on; see [Isa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008); [Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002). On these tablets, or smooth
plates, writing was performed by cutting the letters with an iron
stylus, or small chisel. The process was slow, but the writing was
permanent. They sometimes used the skins of animals, or the bark of
trees, and subsequently the papyrus of Egypt (compare the note at [Isa
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#007)); and it is possible that Isaiah
may have used such a roll or volume on this occasion; compare [Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016).

With a man's pen - The word "pen" here (חרט chereṭ) denotes the iron
stylus, which was used to engrave or cut the letters in the metal or
wood. The phrase 'a man's pen,' has been variously interpreted. The
Chaldee renders it, 'Write in it an open, or clear writing, or an
expanded writing;' meaning that he should make it clear and distinct, so
as to be easily read. The Syriac, 'Write on it in the (usual) custom of
men.' The word which is translated 'man's אנושׁ 'ĕnôsh usually denotes
common men, the lower ranks, in opposition to the higher ranks of
society. And probably the direction means simply, 'write on it in
letters such as men commonly use; in a plain, open, distinct manner -
without using any mysterious emblems or characters, but so that men may
read it distinctly and easily.' A parallel place occurs in [Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002) : 'Write the vision and make it
plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it.'

Concerning - Hebrew ל (le). This preposition may denote concerning, of,
or to. I understand it here as referring to the heading or title of the
prophecy. This was to be set over the prophecy, as a running title, to
denote the main subject of it. The subject is indicated in the name
which is immediately added.

Maher - Hasten; or, he shall hasten. "Shalal." Spoil, or prey.

Hash - Hasten, or make speed.

Baz - Spoil, or prey. The name used here is a repetition of the same
idea - denoting haste in seizing prey, or spoil; and is repeated to give
emphasis, and to excite attention. The idea is, that the Assyrian would
hasten to his plunder - that it would be accomplished with speed. This
name was to be given to a child of Isaiah; and this child was to be a
sign of the event which was signified by the name; see [Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018); compare [Hab
2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002).

[Isaiah 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 8:2</span></span>

And I took unto me faithful witnesses - What was the precise object in
calling in these witnesses is not known. Some have supposed that it was
to bear testimony to the marriage of the prophet at that time. But it
may have been for the purpose of a public record of the prophecy; a
record so made, that the precise time when it was delivered could be
attested without dispute. The prophecy was an important one; and it was
important to know, in the most authentic and undisputed manner, that
such a prophecy had been delivered. It is probable that the prophecy,
attested by the names of those two men, was suspended in some public
place in the temple, so that it might be seen by the people, and allay
their fears; and in order to remove from the multitude every suspicion
that it was a prophecy after the event. That this was a real, and not a
symbolic transaction, is perfectly manifest, not only from the narrative
itself, but from [Isa 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018). They are
called 'faithful,' not off account of their private character, but
because their public testimony would be credited by the people.

To record - To bear witness.

Uriah the priest - This is, doubtless, the same man that is mentioned in
[Kg2 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010). He was a man of infamous
character; the accomplice of Ahaz in corrupting the true religion; but
still his testimony might be the more valuable to Ahaz, as he was
associated with him in his plans.

And Zechariah ... - It is not certainly known who this was. Perhaps he
was one of the Levites whose name is mentioned in [Ch2
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#013).

[Isaiah 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 8:3</span></span>

Then said the Lord ... - The name thus given was to be emblematic of a
particular event - that Assyria would soon take away the spoil of
Damascus and Samaria. It is not remarkable that the name Immanuel should
also be given to the same child, as signifying the presence and
protection of God in defending the nation from the invaders; see the
notes at [Isa 7:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014). Calvin thinks
that all this passed in a vision before the prophet; but it has every
mark of being a literal narrative of the birth of a son to Isaiah; and
without this supposition, it is impossible to understand the account
contained here.

[Isaiah 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 8:4</span></span>

For before ... - This must have occurred in a short time - probably
before the expiration of three years. A child would usually learn to
address his parents in that time. In fact, the event here predicted
occurred in less than three years from the time when the prophecy was
spoken; see the notes at [Isa 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016).

Before the king of Assyria - By the king, or by his conquests. By the
spoil of Samaria here, is to be understood, not the plunder which should
be carried away from the city, but from the kingdom of Samaria. In other
places, the land is called by the name of the capital; compare [Kg2
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#026); [Kg2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#019); [Jer
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005). The city of Samaria was not
plundered until eighteen years after the time mentioned here by the
prophet; [Isa 8:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#005). These verses
introduce again what was predicted in [Isa
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017), following, respecting the
invasion of the land by the king of Assyria. The cause of the invasion
is specified, and the consequences are foretold.

[Isaiah 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 8:6</span></span>

Forasmuch as this people - There has been a considerable difference of
opinion among interpreters respecting the 'people' to whom the prophet
here refers. Some have supposed that it refers to the kingdom of Judah
alone; others to a party in that kingdom; and others to the kingdom of
Judah in connection with the ten tribes, or the kingdom of Israel also.
The latter is probably the correct interpretation. The prophet reproves
the whole nation of the Jews for despising the mild and gentle reign of
the family of David, and for seeking the aid of foreign nations; the ten
tribes as seeking an alliance with Rezin and Pekah; and the kingdom of
Judah as seeking an alliance with the king of Assyria. It was
characteristic of the nation - both of the ten tribes, and of the tribe
of Judah - that they forsook the defense which they had in themselves.
and sought foreign alliances. Hence, God says, that he will bring upon
them the judgments which they deserve. That there is a joint reference
to both the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, is apparent from [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014). It cannot refer to the kingdom
of Judah alone, for it could not be brought as an accusation against
them, that they took pleasure in Rezin. In the opinion that it refers to
the kingdoms of Israel and of Judah - to the whole Jewish people,
Vitringa, Lowth, and Hengstenberg concur.

The waters of Shiloah that go softly - That flow gently. The name
Siloah, or Siloam, is found only three times in the Scriptures as
applied to waters; once in this place, where it is spoken of a running
water; once as a pool in Nehemiah - השׁלח ברכה berêkah hashelach - [Isa
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#015), and again as a pool, in the
account of the miracle of healing the man who was born blind; [Joh
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007), [Joh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#011). Siloam is on the east side of
the city of Jerusalem, to the southeast of the site of the temple, and
its waters flow into the valley of Jehoshaphat. The name means sent, or
sending, from שׁלח shâlach to send, and was probably given to it because
the waters were sent or made to pass through a subterranean passage or
aqueduct.

At present, it properly consists of two receptacles or reservoirs, the
waters from one of which flow into the other. The first, or upper one,
is now called the 'Fountain of the Virgin,' from a tradition that it was
here that the Virgin Mary resorted before her purification, in order to
wash her child's linen. This fountain is on the west side of the valley
of Jehoshaphat, and is about 1550 feet from the southeast corner of the
city wall. The cavity of this fountain is wholly excavated in the solid
rock. To enter it there is at first a descent of sixteen steps, to a
level place or platform of twelve feet in diameter, and then another
descent of ten steps to the water, making the whole depth twenty-five
feet. The basin here is about fifteen feet long by five or six wide, and
the height six or eight feet. There is some reason to suppose that this
is supplied by a fountain lying under the mosque of Omar, on the site of
the temple of Solomon. From this fountain the water is conducted by a
subterranean passage, in a direction a little to the west of south to
what is properly called the fountain of Siloam. This passage runs under
the extremity of mount Ophel; is cut entirely from the solid rock, and
is found by measurement to be 1750 feet in length.

At the lower part it is from ten to fifteen feet in height by two in
breadth; but in the middle so low, that it can be passed only by
creeping on the hands and knees. The passage is partly fiilled up with
sand. From this aqueduct the water is conveyed into the pool of Siloam,
situated near where the Tyropeon, or 'valley of cheesemongers,' opens
into the valley of Jehoshaphat. This reservoir is fifty-three feet long,
eighteen feet broad, and nineteen feet deep, though now there is usually
no water remaining within it. From this reservoir the water flows off
into the vale below, furnishing water for the gardens which are
constructed in terraces on the side of the valley. The water in both
these fountains is the same. It is sweet, and slightly brackish, but not
disagreeable. It is the common water now used by the inhabitants of the
neighboring village of Kefr Selwane - or the straggling village of
Siloam. For a full description of this fountain, see Robinson's Bib.
Researches, vol. i. pp. 493-514. This fountain was probably formerly
included within the walls, and furnished a part of the supply of water
to the city.

The meaning of this passage is this. The waters of Siloam denote the
reign of Yahweh, as manifesting itself in the administration of the
family of David - a mild, gentle, and munificent reign, beautifully
represented by the unfailing and gently flowing waters on which the
happiness of Jerusalem so much depended. That reign a large part of the
nation - the ten tribes - had rejected, and had set up a separate
kingdom, and had sought the aid of the king of Damascus. The remainder -
the kingdom of Judah - were in like manner now disposed to reject the
aid of Yahweh, and sought an alliance with the king of Assyria -
beautifully represented here by the river Euphrates. The waters of
Siloam - a gentle, small sweetly-flowing stream, represented the
government of Yahweh. The waters of the Euphrates - violent, rapid,
impetuous, and overflowing, represented the government of Assyria. The
one they despised; the other they sought and admired. The power of the
kingdom of David was then feeble and decayed. That of the Assyrian
monarch was vigorous, mighty, vast. They despised the one, and sought
the alliance of the other.

And rejoice - That is, they confide in, and feel that in their
protection riley are safe.

In Rezin - King of Syria.

And Remaliah's son - Pekah, king of Samaria; [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001). The crime here mentioned was
unique to the kingdom of Israel; showing that the prophet, in part at
least, had reference to them.

[Isaiah 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 8:7</span></span>

The waters of the river - By the river, in the Scripture, is commonly
meant the river Euphrates, as being, by way of eminence, the largest
river with which they were acquainted; and also as being that
distinguished by the fact that Abraham had lived beyond it, and crossed
it; see the note at [Isa 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020). In this
verse the image is kept up which was commenced in [Isa
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006). The Jews rejected the gentle
waters of Siloah, and sought the alliance of a foreign king, whose
kingdom stretched along, and extended beyond the Euphrates. It was
natural, therefore, to compare the invasion of the land to the
overflowing of mighty waters that would sweep everything away. A similar
comparison is found in Juvenal, who, in describing the introduction of
Eastern customs into Rome, represents the Orontes as flowing into the
Tiber: Jampridem Syrus in Tiberim defluxit Orontes. The comparison of an
invading army with an overflowing stream, or an inundation, is not
uncommon; see Lucan's Phars. vi. 272. Hor. Car. iv. 14, 15ff.

Strong and many - Violent waves, and numerous. It means that a mighty
host would come up upon the land.

Even the king of Assyria - It has been supposed by many that this is a
gloss, or explanation, which has crept into the text. There is no doubt
that it expresses the true sense of the passage, but it is remarkable
that Isaiah himself should furnish a literal explanation in the midst of
a figurative description.

And all his glory - Eastern kings marched in the midst of vast splendor.
They moved with all the magnificence of the court, and were attended
usually with their princes and nobles; with a splendid retinue; and with
all the insignia of royalty. Such was the case with Xerxes when he
invaded Greece; and such, too, with Darius, and with most of the
Oriental conquerors.

And he shall come up ... - The figure of overflowing waters is here
retained. To understand this, it is necessary to remark, that the
Euphrates annually overflows its banks to a very considerable extent. It
rises in the mountains of Armenia, and, flowing for a considerable
distance in a region where the mountains are covered with snow, it falls
into the level region of Mesopotamia or Syria, and flows through that
region, almost parallel with the Tigris, toward the Persian Gulf. From
its banks, vast numbers of canals were made, as in Egypt, to receive the
water, and to render the country fertile. By the melting of the snows in
Armenia, in the summer, the stream becomes greatly enlarged, and
overflows vast portions of the adjacent country in a manner similar to
the Nile. Usually the river is not very large. Otho says, that on the
12th of March, when he crossed the Euphrates, it was not more than 200
paces in width, but in its height, it extends 500 or 600 paces into the
plains on the right. Thevenot observes, that near to Bir, the Euphrates
seemed no larger than the Seine at Paris, but was very large when it was
swollen. At Babylon, it is said to be about four hundred feet in
breadth. That it overflows its banks, is abundantly attested by ancient
as well as modern travelers; see Rosenmuller and Gesenius on this verse.

Its channels - This word means either brooks, or valleys, or canals, or
channels of a river. The Euphrates flowed through a level region, and it
is not improbable that it had at various times made for itself many
channels. Besides this, there were many canals cut in various directions
to convey its waters to the gardens, farms, etc. All these the prophet
says would be full - and the water would extend even far beyond them.

[Isaiah 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 8:8</span></span>

He shall ... - That is, the Assyrians - though still retaining the idea
of an overflowing stream, or a deluge of waters.

Reach even to the neck - Chaldee, 'They shall come even to Jerusalem.'
'The prophet compares Jerusalem here,' says Kimchi, 'to the head of the
human body. As when the waters reach to the neck of a man, he is very
near drowning, so here, the prophet intimates that the whole land would
be deluged, and that it would be nearly utterly destroyed.' The figure
thus understood is a very sublime one Jerusalem was situated on hills -
elevated above the surrounding country, and, in reference to the whole
land, might be aptly compared to the human head. Thus, Josephus (De
Bello, lib. iii. ch. ii.), describing Jerusalem, says - Ἱεροσόλυμα
προανίσχουσα τῆς περιοίκου πάσης, ὥσπερ ἡ κεφαλὴ σώματος Hierosoluma
proanischousa tēs perioikou pasēs, hōsper hē kephalē sōmatos -
"Jerusalem, eminent above all the surrounding region, as the head of the
body." The country is represented as being laid under water - a vast sea
of rolling and tumultuous waves - with Jerusalem alone rising above
them, standing in solitary grandeur amidst the heaving ocean, and itself
in danger each moment of being ingulphed; see a similar figure, [Isa
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#028) :

He is spirit is like a torrent overflowing

It shall reach to the middle of the neck.

And so also, [Hab 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013) :

Thou didst go forth for the salvation of thy people,

For the salvation of thine anointed:

Thou didst smite the head from the house of the wicked,

Destroying the foundation even to the neck.

And the stretching out of his wings - This is a continuation of the same
idea under a new figure. The term wings is often applied to an army, as
well in modern as in ancient writings. It denotes that the invading army
would be so vast as, when expanded or drawn out, to fill the land.

Shall fill the breadth - Shall occupy the entire land, so that there
shall be no city or town which he shall not invade.

Thy land, O Immanuel - see the note at [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014). If this be understood as
referring to the son of Isaiah that was to be born, then it means that
the child was given as a pledge that the land would be safe from the
threatened invasion. It was natural, therefore, to address the child in
that manner; as reminding the prophet that this land, which was about to
be invaded, belonged to God, and was yet under his protection. Its
meaning may be thus paraphrased: 'O thou who art a pledge of the
protection of God - whose birth is an assurance that the land is under
his care, and who art given as such a sign to the nation.
Notwithstanding this pledge, the land shall be full of foes. They shall
spread through every part and endanger all.' Yet the name, the
circumstances of the birth, the promise at that time, would all remind
the prophet and the king, that, notwithstanding this, the land would be
still under the protection of God. If the language be understood as
referring to the future Messiah, and as an address made to him then, by
calling the land his land, it is intimated that it could not be brought
to utter desolation, nor could the country where he was to be born
remain wasted and ruined. It would be indeed invaded; the armies of the
Assyrian would spread over it, but still it was the land of Immanuel;
and was to be the place of his birth, and it was to be secure until the
time should arrive for him to come. The probability is, I think, that
the address is here solely to the Messiah; and that the purpose of God
is to fix the mind of the prophet on the fact that the Messiah must
come, as an assurance that the land could not be wholly and perpetually
desolate; see the notes at [Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014).

[Isaiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 8:9</span></span>

Associate yourselves - In the previous verses the prophet had seen the
Assyrian coming up on the land like an overwhelming flood. He looked
upon the danger, and his mind was turned to the pledge of safety which
God had given. The name Immanuel, and the promise connected with the
giving of that name [Isa 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016),
reminded him of the perfect safety of the nation, for it was a pledge
that God was with them; see [Isa 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010).
In view of this pledge of the protection of God, this verse is a
spirited apostrophe to the mighty host that was about to invade the
land. Though confederated and vast, yet they could not prevail. They
should be scattered, much as they might be prepared for victory, for God
had given a pledge that he would defend his people.

Associate - There has been much variety among interpreters about the
meaning of the Original word used here. It may mean "to be terrified, to
be alarmed," as well as to associate or become confederate. The Vulgate
and Chaldee render it, 'Be assembled, or congregated.' The Septuagint,
'Know, ye nations,' etc. The Syriac, 'Tremble, ye people,' etc. Still
the notion of associating, confederating, or entering into an alliance,
suits the connection better; answers to the parallelism in the latter
part of the verse, and is equally consonant with the original.

O ye people - Ye people of Assyria. This is an apostrophe to the mighty
multitudes that were to come up upon the land from that country.

And ye shall be broken in pieces - That is, though the confederacy be
mighty, yet shall not prevail. It shall not accomplish that which you
purpose - the entire destruction of the land of Judah.

Give ear, all ye of far countries - That should be particularly engaged
in the confederacy - Assyria, and the kingdoms allied with it.

Gird yourselves - As if for war; that is, prepare yourselves thoroughly
for conquest; see the note at [Isa
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#027). The repetition of this shows the
excited and agitated state of the prophet's mind. It is a strong,
emphatic mode of expression - denoting that they should be certainly
broken in pieces, notwithstanding the strength of their confederacy.

[Isaiah 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 8:10</span></span>

Take counsel together - This is an address to the same foreign nations.
It refers to the designs which they would form to destroy the Jewish
state.

Speak the word - That is, give the command - to overturn the nation of
the Jews.

It shall not stand - It shall not be accomplished.

For God is with us - Hebrew 'For Immanuel.' It indicates the confidence
of the prophet in view of the promise and the pledge. His reliance was
there. Though the enemies were strong and mighty; though the confederacy
was formidable; yet his simple reliance was in the name Immanuel! In
this he had confidence, in spite of all the violent efforts and designs
of the foes of Judah; see [Num 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009) :

Only, rebel not ye against the Lord:

Neither fear ye the people of the land;

For they are bread for us;

Their defense is departed from them,

And Jehovah is with us,

Fear thom not.

See also [Psa 46:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006) :

The heathen raged,

The kingdoms were moved.

He uttered his voice, the earth dissolved.

Jehovah of hosts is with us;

The God of Jacob is our refuge.

[Isaiah 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 8:11</span></span>

For the Lord spake thus - Spake that which immediately follows in the
next verse. Warned him not to Unite in the alliance with foreign
kingdoms which the nation was about forming.

With a strong hand - Margin, 'With strength of hand.' That is, when the
hand of God urged me. A strong prophetic impulse is often represented as
being produced by God's laying his hand on the prophet; or by his being
thus, as it were, urged or impelled to it; [Eze
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014) : 'The hand of Jehovah was strong
upon me;' [Kg2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015) : 'And it came to
pass, that when the minstrel played, the hand of the Lord came upon
him;' [Jer 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007) : 'O Lord, thou art
stronger than I, and hast prevailed;' see also [Ecc
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#024); [Kg1
18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046); [Kg2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015); [Eze
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022); [Eze
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#001); compare the Introduction,
section 7. 11. (3.) The meaning is, that the prophet was strongly, and
almost irresistibly, urged by the divine influence, to say what he was
about to say.

That I should not walk ... - That I should not approve, and fall in with
the design of Ahaz, and of the nation, in calling in the aid of the
Assyrian armies.

[Isaiah 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 8:12</span></span>

Say ye not - Do not join in their purposes of forming a confederacy. Do
not unite with the king and the people of Judah in their alarms about
the threatened invasion by the kings of Syria and Samaria, and in their
purpose to form an alliance with the king of Assyria. The reason why
they should not do this, he states in [Isa
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013), where he exhorts the nation to
put confidence in the Lord rather than in man. There has been, however,
great diversity in the interpretation of this passage. The Septuagint
renders the word קשׁר qesher, 'confederacy,' by the word σκληρόν sklēron
- 'Everything which this people say, is hard.' The Syriac, 'Do not say,
rebellion,' etc. The Chaldee understands the word in the same sense.
Lowth proposes to change the word קשׁר qesher, into קדשׁ qâdôsh, because
Dr. Seeker possessed one manuscript in which this reading was found; and
he translates the passage:

'Say ye not it is holy,

Of everything of which this people shall say it is holy.'

That is, 'call not their idols holy; nor fear ye the object of their
fear; that is, the gods of the idolaters.' But it is plain that this
does not suit the connection of the passage, since the prophet is not
reproving them for their idolatry, but is discoursing of the alliance
between the kings of Syria and Samaria. Besides, the authority of one
manuscript, without the concurrence of any ancient version, is not a
sufficient authority for changing the Hebrew text. Most commentators
have understood this word 'confederacy' as referring to the alliance
between the kings of Syria and Samaria; as if the prophet had said, 'Do
not join in the cry so common and almost universal in the nation, "There
is a confederacy between those two kingdoms; there is an alliance formed
which endangers our liberty" - a cry that produces alarm and trepidation
in the nation.' Thus Rosenmuller and Gesenius explain it.

Aben Ezra, and Kimchi, however. understand it of a conspiracy, which
they suppose was formed in the kingdom of Ahaz, against him and the
house of David; and that the prophet warns the people against joining in
such a conspiracy. But of the existence of such a conspiracy there is no
evidence. Had there been such a conspiracy, it is not probable that it
would have been so well known as to make it a proper subject of public
denunciation. Conspiracies are usually secret and concealed. I regard
this, however, as a caution to the prophet not to join in the prevailing
demand for an alliance with the king of Assyria. Ahaz trembled before
the united armies of Syria and Samaria. He sought, therefore, foreign
assistance - the assistance of the king of Assyria. It is probable that
in this he was encouraged by the leaders of the people, and that this
would be a popular measure with the mass of the nation. Yet it implied
distrust of God (note, [Isa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006)); and,
therefore, the prophet was directed not to unite with them in seeking
this 'confederacy,' or alliance, but to oppose it. The word translated
'confederacy,' קשׁר qesher is derived from the verb קשׁר qâshar, "to
bind, to fetter;" to enter into a conspiracy. It usually refers to a
conspiracy, but it may mean a combination or alliance of any kind. Or,
if it here means a conspiracy, a union between Ahaz and the Assyrians
may be regarded as a species of conspiracy, as it was an unnatural
alliance; a species of combination against the natural and proper
government of Judah - the theocracy.

Neither fear ye their fear - Do not partake of their alarm at the
invasion of the land by the united armies of Syria and Samaria. Rather
put confidence in God, and believe that he is able to save you; compare
[Pe1 3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013).

[Isaiah 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 8:13</span></span>

Sanctify ... - Regard Yahweh as holy; that is, worship and honor him
with pious fear and reverence. Regard him as the source of safety, and
the true defense. Ahaz and his people sought for aid from Assyria
against the armies of Syria and Samaria. The direction here is rather to
seek aid from God.

Let him be your fear - Do not be alarmed at what man can do [Isa
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012), but fear and honor God. Be
afraid to provoke his wrath by looking to other sources of help when his
aid only should be sought.

[Isaiah 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 8:14</span></span>

And he shall be for a sanctuary - The word translated sanctuary means,
literally, a holy place, a consecrated place, and is usually applied to
the tabernacle, or to the temple; [Exo
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#008); [Lev
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004); [Lev
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#012); [Jer
51:51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#051). It also means an asylum, or a
refuge, to which one might flee in case of danger, and be safe; see [Eze
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016). Among all ancient nations,
temples were regarded as safe places to which people might flee when
pursued, and when in danger. It was deemed sacrilege to tear a man away
from a temple or an altar. That the temple was so regarded among the
Jews is manifest; see [Kg1 1:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050); [Kg1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#028). In allusion to this, the prophet
says, that Yahweh would be a sanctuary; that is, an asylum, or refuge,
to whom they should flee in times of danger, and be safe; see [Psa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001) : 'God is our refuge and
strength;' [Pro 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010) : 'The name of
the Loan is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.'
It is also well known that temples and altars were regarded as asyla
among the Greeks and Romans. The reference here is rather to an altar,
as the asylum, than to a city or temple; as, in the other member of the
sentence, the same object is said to be a stone of stumbling - a figure
which would not be applicable to a temple or a city.

A stone of stumbling - A stone against which one should impinge, or over
which he should fall. The idea is, that none could run against a hard,
rough, fixed stone, or rock, without injuring himself. So the Jews would
oppose the counsels of God; instead of making him their refuge and
strength, they would resist his claims and appeals, and the consequence
would be their destruction. It is also to be remembered, that God is
often represented in the Scriptures as a rock, a firm defense, or place
of safety, to those who trust in him. But instead of their thus taking
refuge in him, they would oppose themselves to this firm rock, and ruin
themselves; see [Deu 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018), [Deu
32:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030), [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037); [Psa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014); [Psa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001); [Psa
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#002), [Psa
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#008); [Psa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002); [Psa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009). Many of the ancient Jewish
commentators applied this to the Messiah. - Gesenius in loc. It is also
applied to Christ in the New Testament, [Pe1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008).

A rock of offence - A rock over which they should fall. The English word
offence, had that meaning formerly, and retains it in our translation of
the Bible.

To both the houses of Israel - To the two kingdoms of Judah and Israel;
that is, to the wicked portion of them, not to those who were truly
pious.

For a gin - A net, or snare, to take birds. The idea is the same as in
the former part of the verse. By rejecting the counsel of God; by
despising his protection, and by resisting his laws, they would be
unexpectedly involved in difficulties, as birds which are caught in a
snare.

[Isaiah 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 8:15</span></span>

And many among them - Many by the invasion under the Assyrian. Many were
taken captive; many killed. and many were carried to Babylon. The
repetition here of so many expressions so nearly synonymous is emphatic,
and shows that it would be certainly done.

[Isaiah 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 8:16</span></span>

Bind up - This expression is one that is applicable to a volume, or roll
of writing. Thus far the prophet seems to have had the roll opened,
which is mentioned in [Isa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001). Now
the prophecy is complete, and he directs to bind it up, or close it.
Perhaps, also, it is implied that it would be useless any further to
address a rebellious and headstrong people. He had delivered his
message, but they disregarded it.

The testimony - The message; especially that of which Uriah and
Zechariah had been called to bear witness, [Isa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#002). Any message from God is, however,
sometimes called a testimony, as being that to which a prophet bears
witness; [Psa 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007); [Kg2
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#012); [Deu
4:45](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#045); [Deu
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#017), [Deu
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020); [Kg1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#003); [Neh
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#034).

Seal - Books were made in the form of rolls, and were often sealed when
completed - as we seal a letter. The mode of sealing them was not by wax
only, but by uniting them by any adhesive matter, as paste, or glue. Wax
in warm climates would be generally rendered useless by the heat. The
meaning here is, to secure, to close up - perhaps by passing a cord or
string around the volume, and making it secure, denoting that it was
finished; see [Dan 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026); [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004).

The law - The communication or command which he had delivered, and
which, being given by inspiration, had now the force of law.

Among my disciples - Most of the Jewish commentators suppose that the
volume, when completed by a prophet, was given for safe keeping to his
disciples, or to some employed to preserve it securely. The word
disciples means those who are taught, and here means those who were
taught by the prophet; perhaps the pious and holy part of the people who
would listen to his instructions. The Chaldee translates this verse, 'O
prophet, preserve the testimony, lest ye testify to those who will not
obey; seal and hide the law, because they will not learn it.'

[Isaiah 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 8:17</span></span>

And I will wait upon the Lord - This is the commencement of a new
subject. The prophet had closed his former message; but had seen that in
regard to the great mass of the nation, his exhortation had been in
vain. He now says, that having delivered his message, he would patiently
look to God alone. His hope was in him, though the nation looked
elsewhere; and though calamities were coming, yet he would still trust
in God only.

That hideth his face - This is a figurative expression, denoting the
withdrawing of his favor and protection. He would leave them, and give
them to deserved punishment; compare [Job
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#009); [Job
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#024); [Psa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024); [Psa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001); [Psa
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029).

And I will look for him - I will expect aid from him, and will believe
that his promises of final protection will yet be fulfilled; compare
[Hab 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003) :

For the vision is yet for an appointed time,

But at the end it shall speak, and not lie:

Though it tarry, wait for it;

Because it will surely come, it will not tarry.

[Isaiah 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 8:18</span></span>

Behold, I... - By 'signs and wonders,' here, it is meant that they, by
the names given them, were intended to teach important lessons to the
Jewish people. Their names were significant, and were designed to
illustrate some important truth; and especially the prophet here
intimates that they were to inculcate the truth in regard to the
presence and protection of God, to induce the people to look to him.
Thus the name immanuel, 'God with us,' [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014); and Shear-jashub, 'the remnant
shall return,' [Isa 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003), were both
significant of the fact that none but God could be the protector of the
nation. And in like manner, it is possible that his own name, signifying
the salvation of Jehovah, had been given him with such a reference. But
at all events, it was a name which would remind them of the truth that
he was now inculcating, that salvation was to be found in Yahweh, and
that they should look to him. Names of children were often thus
emblematic (see [Hos 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)); and the
prophets themselves were regarded as signs of important events; [Eze
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#024); compare the note at [Isa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003). This passage is quoted with
reference to the Messiah in [Heb 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013).

Which dwelleth in mount Zion - Mount Zion was the residence of the house
of David, or of the court, and it was often used to signify Jerusalem
itself. The sense here is, that God was the protector of Jerusalem, or
regarded that as his home; see the note at [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008).

[Isaiah 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 8:19</span></span>

And when they shall say - When the people, instead of putting confidence
in God, shall propose to apply to necromancers. In the time of Ahaz the
people were, as they were often, much inclined to idolatry; [Kg2
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010). In their troubles and
embarrassments, instead of looking to Yahweh, they imitated the example
of surrounding nations, and applied for relief to those who professed to
be able to hold converse with spirits. That it was common for idolatrous
people to seek direction from those who professed that they had the
power of divining, is well known; see [Isa
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#003); [Isa
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#004). It was expressly forbidden to
the Jews to have recourse to those who made such professions; [Lev
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#006); [Deu
18:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010). Yet, notwithstanding this
express command, it is evident that it was no uncommon thing for the
Jews to make application for such instructions; see the case of Saul,
who made application to the woman of Endor, who professed to have a
familiar spirit, in 1 Sam. 28:7-25. Among pagan nations, nothing was
more common than for persons to profess to have contact with spirits,
and to be under the influence of their inspiration. The oracle at
Delphi, of this nature, was celebrated throughout Greece, and throughout
the world. Kings and princes, warriors and nations, sought of the
priestess who presided there, responses in undertaking any important
enterprise, and were guided by her instructions; see the Travels of
Anacharsis, vol. ii. 376ff.

Seek unto - Apply to for direction.

That hath familiar spirits - Hebrew, אבות 'obôth. The word 'familiar,'
applied to spirit, is supposed to have been used by our translators to
imply that they were attended by an invisible spirit that was subject to
their call, or that would inspire them when they sought his direction.
The Hebrew word is used to denote a necromancer, a conjuror;
particularly one who was supposed to have power to call up the dead, to
learn Of them respecting future events; see [Sa1
28:7-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007); [Deu
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011). The word is most commonly
applied to women; as it was almost entirely confined to women to profess
this power; [Lev 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031); [Lev
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#006); 1 Sam. 28. The idea was, that
they could call up the spirits of the dead who were supposed to have
seen objects invisible to the living, and who could, therefore, inform
them in regard to things which mortals on earth could not see. The
Vulgate renders this by 'Pythons and diviners.' A Python, among the
Greeks and Romans, denoted one that had the spirit of prophesying, and
was particularly applied to the priestess of Apollo at Delphi. The
Septuagint renders the place thus: 'And if they say to you, Seek the
"ventriloquists," ἐγγαστριμύθους engastrimuthous, and those speaking
from the earth, and speaking vain things, who speak from the belly,' οἵ
ἐκ τῆς κοιλίας φωνοῦσιν hoi ek tēs koilias phōnousin. From this it is
evident, that the art of the ventriloquist, so well known now, was known
then; and it is highly probable that the secret of the art of
soothsayers consisted very much in being able to throw the voice, with
various modifications, into different places, so that it would seem to
come from a grave, or from an image of a dead person, that was made to
appear at the proper time.

And unto wizards - The word used here - ידענים yidde‛ônı̂ym - is derived
from the verb ידע yâda‛ to know; and means a wise man, a soothsayer, a
magician, or one possessed with a spirit of divination. The arts of the
magician, or soothsayer, were often the arts of one skilled in natural
magic; acquainted somewhat with the laws of chemistry; and able,
therefore, to produce appearances among an ignorant people that would
surprise them; see Brewster's Natural Magic, where this art is fully
explained.

That peep - This word is properly used of young birds, and means to
chirp, to pip; and also to make a small noise by the gentle opening of
the mouth. It is then applied to the gentle whispering which the
ancients ascribed to departed spirits; the small, low, shrill voice
which they were supposed to use, and which, probably, those attempted to
imitate who claimed the power of raising them to the earth. It was
believed among all the ancient nations, that departed spirits did not
speak out openly and clearly, but with an indistinct, low, gentle,
suppressed voice. Thus, in Virgil:

\- Pars tollere vocem

Exiguam.

AEneid, vi. 492.

\- gemitus lachrymabilis imo

Auditur tumulo, et vox reddita ferter ad aures.

AEneid, iii. 39.

Thus Horace:

Umbrae cum Sagana resonarint triste et acutum.

Sat. lib i. 8, 40.

Thus Homer, speaking of the shade or spirit of Patroclus, says that it
went with a whizzing sound: ̓Ωχετο τετριγυῖα Ǒcheto tetriguia. - Iliad,
ψ- 101.

He said, and with his longing arms essay'd

In vain to grasp the visionary shade;

Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly

And hears a feeble, lamentable cry.

This night my friend, so late in battle lost,

Stood at my side a pensive, plaintive ghost.

Pope.

So, also, Lucian says of the infernal regions, 'The whizzing shades of
the dead fly around us;' see Gesenius in loc. and Rosenmuller; also
Bochart's Hieroz., Part i. B. iii. ch. ii. p. 731.

And that mutter - The word used here - הגה hâgâh - usually means to
meditate, to consider; and then to speak, to utter. It also means to
sigh, to mourn, [Jer 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031); [Isa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007); to coo, as a dove, [Isa
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#014); [Isa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#011); and then to roar like a lion;
not the loud roar, but the grumbling, the suppressed roar (Bochart);
[Isa 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#004). The idea here is, probably,
that of gently sighing, or mourning - uttering feeble, plaintive
lamentations or sighs, as departed shades were supposed to do; and this
was; probably, imitated by necromancers. By thus feigning that they
conversed with the dead, they imposed on the ignorant populace, and led
them to suppose that they had supernatural powers.

Should not a people seek ... - Is it not proper that a people should
inquire of the God that is worshipped, in order to be directed in
perplexing and embarrassing events? Some have understood this to be a
question of the idolaters, asking whether it was not right and proper
for a people to seek counsel of those whom they worshipped as God. I
understand it, however, as a question asked by the prophet, and as the
language of strong and severe rebulge. 'You are seeking to idols, to the
necromancers, and to the dead, But Yahweh is your God. And should not a
people so signally favored, a people under his special care, apply to
him, and seek his direction?'

For the living - On account of the affairs of the living. To ascertain
what will be their lot, what is their duty, or what will occur to them.

To the dead - The necromancers pretended to have contact with the
spirits of the dead. The prophet strongly exposes the absurdity of this.
What could the dead know of this? How could they declare the future
events respecting the living? Where was this authorized? People should
seek God - the living God - and not pretend to hold consultation with
the dead.

[Isaiah 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 8:20</span></span>

To the law ... - To the revelation which God has given. This is a solemn
call of the prophet to try everything by the revealed will of God; see
[Isa 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016).

If they speak not - If the necromancers - those that pretended to have
contact with the dead.

According to this word - According to what God has revealed. By this
standard all their pretended revelations were to be tried. By this
standard all doctrines are still to be tried.

It is because - There has been a great variety of criticism upon this
verse, but our translation expresses, probably, the true idea. The word
rendered here 'because,' אשׁר 'ăsher, commonly denotes 'which;' but it
seems here to be used in the sense of the Syriac? "Dolath," or the Greek
ὅτι hoti.

No light - Margin, 'Morning.' Hebrew שׁחר shāchar. The word usually
means the morning light; the mingled light and darkness of the aurora;
daybreak. It is an emblem of advancing knowledge, and perhaps, also, of
prosperity or happiness after calamity, as the break of day succeeds the
dark night. The meaning here may be, 'If their teachings do not accord
with the law and the testimony, it is proof that they are totally
ignorant, without even the twilight of true knowledge; that it is total
darkness with them.' Or it may mean, 'If they do not speak according to
this word, then no dawn will arise, that is, no prosperity will smile
upon this people.' - Gesenius. Lowth understands it of obscurity,
darkness:

'If they speak not according to this word,

In which there is no obscurity.'

But there is no evidence that the word is ever used in this sense.
Others suppose that the Arabic sense of the word is to be retained here,
deception, or magic. 'If they speak not according to this oracle, in
which there is no deception.' But the word is not used in this sense in
the Hebrew. The meaning is, probably, this: 'The law of God is the
standard by which all professed communications from the invisible world
are to be tested. If the necromancers deliver a doctrine which is not
sustained by that, and not in accordance with the prophetic
communications, it shows that they are in utter ignorance. There is not
even the glimmering of the morning twilight; all is total night, and
error, and obscurity with them, and they are not to be followed.'

[Isaiah 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 8:21</span></span>

And they shall pass - The people who have been consulting necromancers.
This represents the condition of these who have sought for counsel and
direction, and who have not found it. They shall be conscious of
disappointment, and shall wander perplexed and alarmed through the land.

Through it - Through the land. They shall wander in it from one place to
another, seeking direction and relief.

Hardly bestead - Oppressed, borne down, agitated. The meaning is, that
the people would wander about, oppressed by the calamities that were
coming upon the nation, and unalleviated by all that soothsayers and
necromancers could do.

And hungry - Famished; as one effect of the great calamities that would
afflict the nation.

They shall fret themselves - They shall be irritated at their own folly
and weakness, and shall aggravate their sufferings by self-reproaches
for having trusted to false gods.

Their king and their God - The Hebrew interpreters understand this of
the false gods which they bad consulted, and in which they had trusted.
But their looking upward, and the connection, seem to imply that they
would rather curse the true God - the 'king and the God' of the Jewish
people. They would be subjected to the proofs of his displeasure, and
would vent their malice by reproaches and curses.

And look upward - For relief. This denotes the condition of those in
deep distress, instinctively casting their eyes to heaven for aid. Yet
it is implied that they would do it with no right feeling, and that they
would see there only the tokens of their Creator's displeasure.

[Isaiah 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 8:22</span></span>

And they shall look unto the earth - They would look upward and find no
relief, and then in despair cast their eyes to the earth to obtain help
there. Yet equally in vain. The whole image is one of intense anguish
brought on the nation for leaving the counselor the true God.

And behold ... - see the note at [Isa
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#030).

Trouble - Anguish, oppression, צרה tsârâh, from צור tsûr, to oppress, to
straiten, to afflict. This is a remarkable instance of the prophet
Isaiah's manner - of a rapid, impetuous, and bold style of utterance. He
accumulates images; piles words on each other; and deepens the anxiety
by each additional word, until we almost feel that we are enveloped by
the gloom, and see objects of terror and alarm on every side.

Dimness of anguish - These words should be kept separate in the
translation - צוּקה מעוּף me‛ûp tsûqâh, "darkness, oppression" -
accumulated epithets to heighten the gloom and terror of the scene.

And they shall be driven to darkness - Hebrew, מנדה ואפלה va'ăpēlâh
menudāch a darkness that is driven, or that is urged upon itself; that
becomes condensed, accumulated, until it becomes terrible and frightful.
The idea is that of a driving tempest, or an involving obscurity (מנדה
menudāch from נדה nâdâh, to push, thrust, impel, urge on, as a driving
storm). The prophet has thus accumulated every possible idea of gloom
and obscurity, and probably there is not anywhere a more graphic
description of gathering darkness and trouble, and of the consternation
of those involved in it, than this. So fearful and terrific are the
judgments of God when he comes forth to punish people!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 9](isa009)

</div>
