<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa011)  [Next](isa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 12:0</span></span>

This chapter [Isa 12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001) is a part of
the vision which was commenced in [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005). The prophet had foretold the
deliverance of the nation from the threatened invasion of Sennacherib
Isa. 10; he had then looked forward to the times of the Messiah, and
described the certainty, the character, and the consequences of this
reign Isa. 11. The eleventh chapter closes with a reference to the
deliverance of the nation from the oppression of the Egyptians. That
deliverance was celebrated with a beautiful ode, which was sung by
Miriam and 'all the women,' who 'went out after her with timbrels and
with dances' Exo. 15:1-21. In imitation of that deliverance, Isaiah
says, in this chapter, that the deliverance of which he speaks shall be
celebrated also with a song of praise; and this chapter; therefore, is
properly an expression of the feelings office redeemed people of God, in
view of his great mercy in interposing to save them.

It should be read in view of the great and glorious deliverance which
God has performed for us in the redemption of his Son; and with feelings
of lofty gratitude that he has brought us from worse than Egyptian
bondage - the bondage of sin. The song is far better applied to the
times of the Messiah, than it could be to anything which occurred under
the Jewish dispensation. The Jews themselves appear to have applied it
to his time. On the last day of the feast of tabernacles, they brought
water in a golden pitcher from the fountain of Siloam, and poured it,
mingled with wine, on the sacrifice that was on the altar, with great
rejoicing (see the notes at [Joh 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#014),
notes at [Joh 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)). This custom was
not required by Moses, and probably arose from the command in [Isa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003) of this chapter. Our Saviour
applied it to himself, to the benefits of his gospel, and to the
influences of the Spirit John 7; and the ancient Jews so applied it
also. 'Why is it called the house of drawing? Because from thence they
draw the Holy Spirit; as it is written, "and ye shall draw water with
joy from the fountains of salvation."' - ("Jerusalem Talmud" as quoted
by Lowth.)

[Isaiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 12:1</span></span>

And in that day - The day referred to in the previous chapter, the time
of the Messiah, when the effects of his reign shall be seen everywhere.
The duty of praise, however, is couched in such language as to make it
applicable to the event predicted in the former part of the prophecy
Isa. 10 - the delivering of the nation from the invasion of Sennacherib,
as well as the more glorious event on which the prophet fixed his eye
Isa. 11 - the coming and reign of the Messiah. The language of this song
of praise would be appropriate to both these events.

Thou shalt say - The address to an individual here, in the term 'thou,'
is equivalent to "everyone," meaning that "all" who were thus interested
in the divine interposition should say it.

O Lord - O Yahweh - the great author of this interposition.

I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me - If this language is
applied to the Jews, and supposed to be used by them in regard to the
invasion of Sennacherib, it means, that God suffered their land to be
invaded, and to be subjected to calamities, in consequence of their sins
([Isa 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006) ff.) If it is supposed to
be applied to the time of the Messiah, then it is language which every
redeemed sinner may use, that God was angry with him, but that his anger
is turned away. As applicable to the redeemed, it is an acknowledgement
which they all feel, that they have no claim to his mercy, and that it
lays the foundation for unceasing praise that his anger is turned away
by the plan of salvation.

[Isaiah 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 12:2</span></span>

Behold, God is my salvation - Or, God is the author, or source, of my
salvation. It has not been brought about by any human hands, but is to
be traced directly to him. The value of a gift is always enhanced by the
dignity and excellency of the giver, and it confers an inestimable value
on the blessings of salvation, that they are conferred by a being no
less than the infinite God. It is not by human or angelic power; but it
is to be traced directly and entirely to Yahweh.

I will trust, and not be afraid - Since God is its author; since he is
able to defend me, and to perfect that which he has begun, I will
confide in him, and not be afraid of the power or machinations of any
enemy. In his hands I am safe. God is the foundation of our confidence;
and trusting in him, his people shall never be moved.

For the Lord Jehovah - This is one of the four places in which our
translators have retained the original word Yahweh, though the Hebrew
word occurs often in the Scriptures. The other places where the word
Jehovah is retained in our version are, [Exo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003); [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018); lsa. [Psa
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004). The original in this place is
יהוה יה yâh yehovâh. The word יה yâh is an abbreviation of the word
Yahweh. The abbreviated form is often used for the sake of conciseness,
particularly in the Psalms, as in the expression "Hallelujah" (הללוּ־יה
halelû-yâh), that is, praise Yahweh ([Psa
89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009); [Psa
94:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007), [Psa
94:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012); [Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035); [Psa
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015); [Psa
106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001), [Psa
106:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#048); [Psa
111:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001); [Psa
113:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001), "et al.") In this place, and
[Isa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#004), "the repetition" of the
name seems to be used to denote "emphasis;" or perhaps to indicate that
Yahweh is the same always - an unchangeable God. In two codices of
Kennicott, however, the name יה yâh is omitted, and it has been
conjectured by some that the repetition is an error of transcribers; but
the best MSS. retain it. The Septuagint, the Chaldee, and the Syriac,
however, omit it.

Is my strength and my song - The same expression occurs in the hymn that
Moses composed after the passage of the Red Sea, in imitation of which
this song is evidently composed; [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002) :

Jehovah is my strength and my song,

And he is become my salvation.

The word 'strength' means, that he is the source of strength, and
implies that all who are redeemed are willing to acknowledge that all
their strength is n God. The word 'song' implies that he is the proper
object of praise; it is to celebrate his praise that the 'song' is
composed.

He also is become my salvation - This is also found in the song of Moses
[Exo 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002). It means that God had
become, or was the author of salvation. It is by his hand that the
deliverance bas been effected, and to him should be the praise.

[Isaiah 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 12:3</span></span>

Therefore - In view of all his mercies, the Hebrew is, however; simply,
'" and" ye shall draw.' It has already been intimated that the Jews
applied this passage to the Holy Spirit: and that probably on this they
based their custom of drawing water from the fountain of Siloam at the
feast of the dedication (note, [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)). The fountain of Siloam was in
the eastern part of the city, and the water was borne from that fountain
in a golden cup, and was poured, with every expression of rejoicing, on
the sacrifice on the altar. It is not probable, however, that this
custom was in use in the time of Isaiah. The language is evidently
figurative; but the meaning is obvious. A fountain, or a well, in the
sacred writings, is an emblem of that which produces joy and
refreshment; which sustains and cheers. The figure is often employed to
denote that which supports and refreshes the soul; which sustains man
when sinking from exhaustion, as the babbling, fountain or well
refreshes the weary and fainting pilgrim (compare [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)).

It is thus applied to God as an overflowing fountain, suited to supply
the needs of all his creatures [Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013); [Jer
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013); [Psa
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009); [Pro
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#027); and to his plan of salvation -
the sources of comfort which he has opened in the scheme of redeeming
mercy to satisfy the needs of the souls of people [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001); [Isa
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018); [Rev
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017). The word 'rivers' is used in the
same sense as 'fountains' in the above places [Isa
42:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#015); [Isa
43:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019). Generally, in the
Scriptures, streams, fountains, rivers, are used as emblematic of the
abundant fullness and richness of the mercies which God has provided to
supply the spiritual necessities of men. The idea here is, therefore,
that they should partake abundantly of the mercies of salvation; that it
was free, overflowing, and refreshing - like waters to weary pilgrims in
the desert; and that their partaking of it would be with joy. It would
fill the soul with happiness; as the discovery of an abundant fountain,
or a well in the desert, fills the thirsty pilgrim with rejoicing.

[Isaiah 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 12:4</span></span>

And in that day - (see [Isa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)).

Call upon his name - Margin, 'Proclaim.' It denotes to call upon him in
the way of celebrating his praise. The whole hymn is one of praise, and
not of prayer.

Declare among the people - Among all people, that they may be brought to
see his glory, and join in the celebration of his praise.

His doings - Particularly in regard to the great events which are the
subject of the previous predictions - his interposition in saving people
by the Messiah from eternal death.

Make mention - Hebrew, 'Cause it to be remembered' (see the note at [Isa
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)).

That his name is exalted - That it is worthy of adoration and praise. It
is worthy to be exalted, or lifted up in view of the nations of the
earth [Sa2 22:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#047); [Psa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#013); [Psa
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010).

[Isaiah 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 12:5</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord - This is the same expression which occurs in the
song of Moses [Exo 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021). Isaiah
evidently had that in his eye.

He hath done excellent things - Things that are exalted (גאות gê'ûth);
that are worthy to be celebrated, and had in remembrance; things that
are majestic, grand, and wonderful.

This is known in all the earth - Or, more properly, 'Let this be known
in all the earth.' It is worthy of being celebrated everywhere. It
should be sounded abroad through all lands. This expresses the sincere
desire of all who are redeemed, and who are made sensible of the
goodness and mercy of God the Saviour. The instinctive and the unceasing
wish is, that the wonders of the plan of redeeming mercy should be
everywhere known among the nations, and that all flesh should see the
salvation of our God.

[Isaiah 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 12:6</span></span>

Cry out - (צהלי tsahalı̂y). This word is usually applied to the neighing
of a horse [Jer 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008); [Jer
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016). It is also used to express joy,
pleasure, exultation, by a clear and loud sound of the voice [Isa
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#030); [Isa
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006); [Isa
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014); [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001); [Jer
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007); [Jer
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011). It is here synonymous with the
numerous passages in the Psalms, and elsewhere, where the people of God
are called on to exult, to shout, to make a noise as expressive of their
joy [Psa 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001); [Psa
148:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001); [Psa
149:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001); [Isa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#011); [Isa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023); [Jer
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007); [Zep
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014); [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009).

And shout - (ורני vāronı̂y). This word properly means to cry aloud [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020); [Pro
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#003); to cry for help [Lam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019); to raise a shout of joy, to
rejoice, or exult [Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024); [Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007); to praise, or celebrate with joy
[Psa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001); [Psa
51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015); [Psa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017); [Psa
89:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#013). Here it denotes the joy in view
of God's mercies, which leads to songs of exalted praise.

Thou inhabitant of Zion - Thou that dwellest in Zion; that is, thou who
art numbered with the people of God (note, [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)). The margin here is in accordance
with the Hebrew - 'Inhabitress of Zion;' and the word used here is
applicable to the people, rather than to an individual.

For great is the Holy One of Israel - That is, God has shown himself
great and worthy of praise, by the wonderful deliverance which he has
worked for his people. Thus closes this beautiful hymn. It is worthy of
the theme - worth to be sung by all. O, may all the redeemed join in
this song of deliverance; and may the time soon come, when the beautiful
vision of the poet shall be realized, in the triumphant song of
redemption echoing around the world:

'One song employs all nations; and all cry,

"Worthy the Lamb, for he was slain for us!"

The dwellers in the vales and on the rocks

Shout to each other, and the mountain-tops

From distant mountains catch the flying joy;

Till, nation after nation taught the strain,

Earth rolls the rapturous hosanna round.'

"The Task" Book vi.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 13](isa013)

</div>
