<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa054)  [Next](isa056) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 55](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 55:0</span></span>

This chapter is closely connected in sense with the preceding chapter.
It flows from the doctrines stated in [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), and is designed to state what
would follow from the coming of the Messiah. It would result from that
work that the most free and full invitations would be extended to all
people to return to God, and to obtain his favor. There would be such
ample provision made for the salvation of human beings, that the most
liberal invitations could be extended to sinners. The main idea in the
chapter, I conceive to be, that the effect of the work of the Redeemer
would be to lay the foundation for a universal invitation to people to
come and be saved. So ample would be the merits of his death [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), that all might come and
partake of eternal life. To state this, I suppose to be the main design
of this chapter. It may be regarded as comprising the following parts:

I. A universal invitation to come and embrace the provisions of mercy.

1\. All were invited to come, even they who were the most poor and
needy, who had no money, as freely as to running waters and streams [Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001).

2\. They were now regarded as spending their money and their labor for
that which produced no permanent satisfaction - descriptive of the world
in its vain efforts to find enjoyment [Isa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002).

3\. If they would come to God they should live, and he would make with
them an eternal covenant [Isa 55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003).

II\. To encourage them to this, the assurance is presented that God had
given the Messiah to be a leader of the people, and that under him
distant nations should embrace the truth and be saved [Isa
55:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004).

III\. In view of the fullness of the provisions of mercy, and of the
fact that a great leader had been provided, all are encouraged to come
and seek God. This invitation is pressed on their attention by several
considerations:

1\. Yahweh might now be found, and he was ready to pardon abundantly all
sinners who were disposed to forsake the error of their way and to
return to him [Isa 55:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006).

2\. God shows that his plans were high above those of people, and his
thoughts more elevated than theirs, and his counsels should stand. The
rain descended on the earth and accomplished his great plans, and so it
would be with his word. His promises would be fulfilled, and his designs
would take effect, and there was, therefore, every encouragement to
come, and partake of his favor and his grace [Isa
55:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#008).

3\. There should be rich and abundant blessings attending their return
to God, and universal rejoicing from their embracing the religion of the
Redeemer, and becoming interested in his mercy and salvation [Isa
55:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012).

There is not to be found in the Bible a chapter more replete with rich
invitations than this, nor perhaps is there anywhere to be found one of
more exquisite beauty. To the end of the world it will stand as the
fullest conceivable demonstration that God intended that the offers of
salvation should be made to all people, and that he designs that his
gospel shall accomplish the great plans which he had in view when he
devised the scheme of redemption. While this precious chapter remains in
the book of God, no sinner need despair of salvation who is disposed to
return to him; no one can plead that he is too great a sinner to be
saved; no one can maintain successfully that the provisions of mercy are
limited in their nature or their applicability to any portion of the
race; and no minister of the gospel need be desponding about the success
of the work in which he is engaged. The gospel shall just as certainly
produce the effect which God intended as the rain which comes down in
fertilizing showers upon the dry and thirsty earth.

[Isaiah 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 55:1</span></span>

Ho - (הוי hôy). This word here is designed to call attention to the
subject as one of importance.

Every one that thirsteth - The word 'thirst' often indicates intense
desire, and is thus applied to the sense of want which sinners often
have, and to their anxious wishes for salvation. It is not improbable
that the Savior had this passage in his eye when he pronounced the
blessing on those who hunger and thirst after righteousness [Mat
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006). No needs are so keen, none so
imperiously demand supply, as those of hunger and thirst. They occur
daily; and when long continued, as in the case of those who are
shipwrecked, and doomed to wander months or years over burning sands
with scarcely any drink or food, nothing is more distressing. Hence, the
figure is often used to denote any intense desire for anything, and
especially an ardent desire for salvation (see [Psa
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002); [Psa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001); [Psa
143:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#006); [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)). The invitation here is made to
all. 'Everyone' (כל kôl) is entreated to come. It is not offered to the
elect only, or to the rich, the great, the noble; but it is made to all.
It is impossible to conceive of language more universal in its nature
than this; and while this stands in the Word of God, the invitation may
be made to all, and should be made to all, and must be made to all. It
proves that provision is made for all. Can God invite to a salvation
which has not been provided? Can he ask a man to partake of a banquet
which has no existence? Can he ask a man to drink of waters when there
are none? Can he tantalize the hopes and mock the miseries of people by
inviting them to enter a heaven where they would be unwelcome, or to
dwell in mansions which have never been provided? (compare [Mat
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028); [Mar
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015); [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037); [Rev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)).

Come ye to the waters - Water, floods, overflowing streams, or copious
showers, are often used in the Scriptures to denote abundant blessings
from God, and especially the blessings which would exist under the
Messiah (see [Isa 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006); [Isa
43:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#020); [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003)).

And he that hath no money - The poor; they who would be unable to
purchase salvation if it were to be sold. The idea here is the absolute
freeness of the offer of salvation. No man can excuse himself for not
being a Christian because he is poor; no man who is rich can ever boast
that he has bought salvation, or that he has obtained it on more easy
terms because he had property.

Come ye, buy and eat - (Compare [Mat
13:44-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)). That is, procure it without
paying a price. The word rendered here 'buy' (שׁבר shâbar), properly
means to break, then to purchase etc. (grain), as that which is broken
in a mill (Gesenius), or that which breaks hunger; compare Eng.
breakfast (Castell.)

Buy wine - (יין yayin). Wine was commonly used in their feasts, and
indeed was an article of common drink (see the notes at [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006)). Here it is emblematic of the
blessings of salvation spoken of as a feast made for people. Wine is
usually spoken of as that which exhilarates, or makes glad the heart
[Jdg 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#013); [Sa2
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#028); [Psa
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015), and it is possible that the
image here may be designed specifically to denote that the blessings of
salvation make people happy, or dissipate the sorrows of life, and cheer
them in their troubles and woes.

And milk - Milk, in the Scriptures, is used to denote that which
nourishes, or is nutritious [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014); [Jdg
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001); [Jdg
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#025); [Isa
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#022); [Co1
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007). It is mentioned as used with wine
in [Sol 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001), 'I have drunk my wine
with my milk;' and with honey [Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011), 'Honey and milk are under my
tongue.' The sense here is, that the blessings of the gospel are suited
to nourish and support the soul as well as to make it glad and cheerful.

Without money ... - None are so poor that they cannot procure it; none
are so rich that they can purchase it with gold. If obtained at all by
the poor or the rich, it must be without money and without price. If the
poor are willing to accept of it as a gift, they are welcome; and if the
rich will not accept of it as a gift, they cannot obtain it. What a debt
of gratitude we owe to God, who has thus placed it within the reach of
all: How cheerfully and thankfully should we accept float as a gift
which no wealth, however princely, could purchase, and which, being
purchased by the merits of the Redeemer, is put within the reach of the
humblest child of Adam!

[Isaiah 55:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 55:2</span></span>

Wherefore do ye spend money - Margin, 'Weigh.' That is, in Hebrew,
'weigh silver.' Before money was coined, the precious metals were
weighed, and hence, to make a payment is represented as weighing out
silver [Gen 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#016).

For that which is not bread - The idea here is, that people are
endeavoring to purchase happiness, and are disappointed. Bread is the
support of life; it is therefore emblematic of whatever contributes to
support and comfort. And in regard to the pursuit of happiness in the
pleasures of life, and in ambition, vanity, and vice, people are as much
disappointed, as he would be who should spend his money, and procure
nothing that would sustain life.

And your labor for that which satisfieth not - You toil, and expend the
avails of your labor for that which does not produce satisfaction. What
a striking description of the condition of the world! The immortal mind
will not be satisfied with wealth, pleasure, or honor. It never has
been. Where is the man who is satisfied with his wealth, and who says it
is enough? Where is there one who is satisfied with pleasure, and
vanity, and gaiety? There is a void in the heart which these things do
not, cannot fill. There is a consciousness that the soul was made for
higher and nobler purposes, and that nothing but God can meet its
boundless desires. Where is the man who has ever been satisfied with
ambition? Alexander wept on the throne of the world; and though
Diocletian and Charles V descended voluntarily from the throne to
private life, it was because there was nothing in royalty to satisfy the
soul, and not because they found happiness enough there. There never was
a more simple and true description of this whole world than in this
expression of Isaiah, that people are spending their money and their
labor for that which satisfieth not.

Hearken diligently unto me - The idea is, that by attending to his words
and embracing his offers, they would find that without money or price
which they were vainly seeking at so much expense and with so much toil.

And eat ... - The prophet here returns to the image in the former verse.
They were invited to partake of that which would nourish the soul, and
which would fill it with joy.

And let your soul delight itself in fatness - 'Fatness in the Scriptures
is used to denote the richest food [Gen
27:28-39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028); [Job
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#016); [Psa
65:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#011), and hence, is an emblem of the
rich and abundant blessings resulting from the favor of God [Psa
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009); [Psa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005).

[Isaiah 55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 55:3</span></span>

Hear, and your soul shall live - That is, if you attend to my command
and embrace my promises, you shall live. Religion in the Scriptures is
often represented as life [Joh 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#040);
[Joh 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033); [Joh
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013); [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031); [Rom
5:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017); [Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004); [Rom
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006); [Jo1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#012); [Rev
2:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007). It stands opposed to the death
of sin - to spiritual and eternal death.

And I will make an everlasting covenant with you - On the word
'covenant,' see the notes at [Isa
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018); [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006); [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008). Here it means that God would
bind himself to be their God, their protector, and their friend. This
covenant would be made with all who would come to him. It would not be
with the nation of the Jews, as such, or with any community, as such,
but it would be with all who should embrace the offers of life and
salvation.

Even the sure mercies of David - I will confirm to you, and fulfill in
you, the solemn promises made to David. The transaction here referred to
is that which is celebrated in [Psa
89:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002) :

For I have said, mercy shall be built up forever;

Thy faithfulness hast thou established in the very heavens.

I have made a covenant with my chosen,

I have sworn unto David my servant,

Thy seed will I establish forever,

And build up thy throne to all generations.

A kingdom had thus been promised to David, and he had been assured that
the true religion should flourish among those who were to succeed him in
Israel. The prophet here says that this solemn promise. would be
fulfilled in those who should embrace the Messiah, and that God would
ratify with them this covenant. The word rendered here 'mercies' (חסד
chesed), properly means kindness, goodwill, pity, compassion; then
goodness, mercy, grace. The word rendered 'sure,' denotes that which is
established, or confirmed; that in which confidence may be placed. The
whole expression denotes that the covenant made with David was one which
promised great favors, and was one which was not to be abrogated, but
which was to be perpetual. With all who embraced the Messiah, God would
enter into such an unchanging and unwavering covenant - a covenant which
was not to be revoked.

[Isaiah 55:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 55:4</span></span>

Behold, I have given him - This is evidently the language of God
respecting the Messiah, or of David as representing the Messiah.
Rosenmuller supposes that the name David here is used to designate the
Messiah, and in support of this appeals to [Eze
34:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023); [Eze
37:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024); [Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009); [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005). An examination of these passages
will show that they all refer to the Messiah by the name of David; and
it is morally certain that in the passage before us, the name David [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003) suggested the Messiah. It seems
to me that this is to be regarded as a direct address respecting the
Messiah, and that the object of the speaker here is to state a reason
why he should be embraced. That reason was that God had constituted him
as a leader. The Chaldee renders this, 'Lo, I have constituted him as a
prince to the people, a king and ruler over all kingdoms.' Kimchi says
that it means that the Messiah would be a monitor or a mediator between
people and him who would accuse them. Grotius supposes that Jeremiah is
intended here; but in that opinion he is destined undoubtedly to stand
forever alone. The almost unbroken interpretation, from the earliest
times, is that which refers it directly to the Messiah.

For a witness to the people - Noyes renders this, 'A ruler.'
Rosenmuller, 'A monitor,' - one whose office it was publicly to
admonish, or reprove others in the presence of witnesses. Jerome renders
it, 'A witness.' The Septuagint, Μαρτύριον Marturion - 'A testimony.'
The Chaldee (רב rab), 'A prince.' The Hebrew word (עד ‛ēd) means
properly "a witness" [Pro 19:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#005); then
testimony, witness borne [Exo 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013);
[Deu 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#017); then a prince, chief,
lawgiver, commander. Compare the use of the verb in [Kg2
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#013); [Psa
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007); [Psa
81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009); [Lam
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#013). The parallelism requires us to
understand it in this sense here - as one who stood forth to bear solemn
testimony in regard to God to his law, and claims, and plans; and one
who, therefore, was designated to be the instructor, guide, and teacher
of people.

A leader - Chaldee, 'A king.' The idea is, that he would sustain the
relation of a sovereign. One of the important offices of the Messiah is
that of king.

A commander - Or, rather, a lawgiver. He would originate the laws and
institutions of his people.

[Isaiah 55:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 55:5</span></span>

Behold, thou shalt call ... - This is evidently an address to the
Messiah, and is a promise that the Gentiles should be called by him to
the fellowship of the gospel.

That thou knowest not - The phrase 'thou knowest not,' means a nation
that had not been regarded as his own people.

And nations that knew not thee - The pagan nations that were strangers
to thee.

Shall run unto thee - Indicating the haste and anxiety which they would
have to partake of the benefits of the true religion.

Because of the Lord thy God - From respect to the God who had appointed
the Messiah, and who had organized the Church.

For he hath glorified thee - [Joh
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#005). God had glorified him by
appointing him to be the Messiah; and he would glorify him in the future
triumphs of the gospel, in the day of judgment, and in the eternal
splendors of heaven.

[Isaiah 55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 55:6</span></span>

Seek ye the Lord - The commencement of religion in the heart is often
represented as seeking for God. or inquiring for his ways [Deu
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029); [Job
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008); [Job
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#005); [Psa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010); [Psa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002); [Psa
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#008). This is to be regarded as
addressed not to the Jewish exiles only or uniquely, but to all in view
of the coming and work of the Messiah. That work would be so full and
ample that an invitation could be extended to all to seek after God, and
to return to him. It is implied here:

1\. That people are by nature ignorant of God - since they are directed
to 'seek' for him.

2\. That if people will obtain his favor it must be sought. No man
becomes his friend without desiring it; no one who does not earnestly
seek for it.

3\. That the invitation to seek God should be made to all. In this
passage it is unlimited (compare [Isa
55:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#007)). Where there are sinners, there
the invitation is to be offered.

4\. That the knowledge of God is of inestimable value. He would not
command people to seek that which was worthless; he would not urge it
with so much earnestness as is here manifested if it were not of
inexpressible importance.

While he may be found - It is implied here:

1\. That God may now be found.

2\. That the time will come when it will be impossible to obtain his
favor.

The leading thought is, that under the Messiah the offer of salvation
will be made to people fully and freely. But the period will come when
it will be withdrawn. If God forsakes human beings; if he wholly
withdraws his Spirit; if they have committed the sin which hath never
forgiveness; or if they neglect or despise the provisions of mercy and
die in their sins, it will be too late, and mercy cannot then be found.
How unspeakably important, then, is it to seek for mercy at once - lest,
slighted now, the offer should be withdrawn. or lest death should
Overtake us, and we be removed to a world where mercy is unknown! How
important is the present moment - for another moment may place us beyond
the reach of pardon and of grace! How amazing the stupidity of men who
suffer their present moments to pass away unimproved, and who, amidst
the gaieties and the business of life, permit the day of salvation to
pass by, and lose their souls! And how just is the condemnation of the
sinner! If a man will not do so simple a thing as to ask for pardon, he
ought to perish. The universe will approve the condemnation of such a
man; and the voice of complaint can never be raised against that Holy
Being who consigns such a sinner to hell.

Call ye upon him - That is, implore his mercy (see [Rom
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013); compare [Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)). How easy are the terms of
salvation! How just will be the condemnation of a sinner if he will not
call upon God! Assuredly, if people will not breathe out one
broken-hearted petition to the God of heaven that they may be saved,
they have only to blame themselves if they are lost. The terms of
salvation could be made no easier; and man can ask nothing more simple.

While he is near - In an important sense God is equally near to us at
all times. But this figurative language is taken from the mode of
speaking among people, and it denotes that there are influences more
favorable for seeking him at some periods than others. Thus God comes
near to us in the preaching of his word, when it is borne with power to
the conscience; in his providences, when he strikes down a friend and
comes into the very circle where we move, or the very dwelling where we
abide; when he lays his hand upon us in sickness, he is near us by day
and by night; in a revival of religion, or when a pious friend pleads
with us, God is near to us then, and is calling us to his favor. These
are favorable times for salvation; times which, if they are suffered to
pass by unimproved, return no more; periods which will all soon be gone,
and when they are gone, the sinner irrecoverably dies.

[Isaiah 55:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 55:7</span></span>

Let the wicked ... - In this verse we are told what is necessary in
order to seek God and to return to him, and the encouragement which we
have to do it. The first step is for the sinner to forsake his way. He
must come to a solemn pause, and resolve to abandon all his
transgressions. His evil course; his vices; his corrupt practices; and
his dissipated companions, must be forsaken.

And the unrighteous man - Margin, "Man of iniquity." This is a literal
translation. The address is made to all people, for all are such.

His thoughts - The Hebrew word denotes all that is the object of
thought; and the idea is, that the man must abandon his plans and
purposes of life. The thoughts, in the sight of a holy God, are not less
important than the external deportment; and no man can obtain his favor
who is not ready to abandon his erroneous opinions, his pride and
vanity, his plans of evil, and his purposes of life that are opposed to
God.

And let him return unto the Lord - Man, in the Scriptures, is everywhere
described as having wandered away from the true God. Religion consists
in returning to him for pardon, for consolation, for protection, for
support. The true penitent is desirous of returning to him, as the
prodigal son returned to his father's house; the man who loves sin
chooses to remain at a distance from God.

And to our God - The God of his people; the God of the speaker here. It
is the language of those who have found mercy. The idea is, that he who
has bestowed mercy on us, will be ready to bestow it on others. 'We have
returned to God. We have had experience of his compassion, and we have
such a conviction of his overflowing mercy, that we can assure all
others that if they will return to our God, he will abundantly pardon
them.' The doctrine is, that they who have found favor have a deep
conviction of the abounding compassion of God, and such a sense of the
fullness of his mercy, that they are disposed to offer the assurance to
all others, that they may also obtain full forgiveness. Compare [Rev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017) - 'And let him that heareth say,
Come.'

For he will abundantly pardon - Margin, as Hebrew, 'Multiply to pardon.'
He abounds in forgiveness. This is the conviction of those who are
pardoned; this is the promise of inestimable worth which is made to all
who are willing to return to God. On the ground of this promise all may
come to him, and none who come shall be sent empty away.

[Isaiah 55:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 55:8</span></span>

For my thoughts are not your thoughts - Interpreters have differed in
regard to the connection of this verse with the preceding. It is
evident, I think, that it is properly connected with the subject of
pardon; and the sense must be, that the plans and purposes of God in
regard to forgiveness are as far above those of people as the heavens
are higher than the earth, [Isa 55:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#009).
But in what respects his plan of pardon differs from those of people,
the prophet does not intimate, and can be understood only by the views
which are presented in other parts of the Bible. The connection here
would seem to demand some such view as the following:

1\. People find it difficult to pardon at all. They harbor malice; they
seek revenge; they are slow to forgive an injury. Not so with God. He
harbors no malice; he has no desire of revenge; he has no reluctance to
forgive.

2\. It may refer to the number of offences. People, if they forgive
once, are slow to forgive a second time, and still more reluctant to
forgive a third time, and if the offence is often repeated they refuse
to forgive altogether. Not so with God. No matter how often we have
violated his law, yet be can multiply forgiveness in proportion to our
faults.

3\. The number of the offenders. People may pardon one or a few who
injure them, but if the number is greatly increased, their compassions
are closed, and they feel that the world is arrayed against them. Not so
with God. No matter how numerous the offenders - though they embrace the
inhabitants of the whole world - yet he can extend forgiveness to them
all.

4\. In regard to the aggravation of offences. People forgive a slight
injury. However, if it is aggravated, they are slow to pardon. But not
so with God. No matter bow aggravated the offence, he is ready to
forgive. It may be added:

5\. That his thoughts in regard to the mode of pardon are far above
ours. The plan of forgiveness through a Redeemer - the scheme of pardon
so fully illustrated in [Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001),
and on which the reasoning of the prophet here is based - is as far
above any of the modes of pardon among people, as the heavens are above
the earth. The scheme which contemplated the incarnation of the Son of
God; which proffered forgiveness only through his substituted
sufferings, and in virtue of his bitter death, was one which man could
not have thought of, and which surpasses all the schemes and plans of
people. In this respect, God's ways are not, our ways, and his thoughts
are not our thoughts.

But at the same time that this passage, refers primarily to the subject
of pardon, and should be interpreted as having a main reference to that,
it is also true of the ways of God in general. His ways are not our
ways, and his thoughts are not ours in regard to his plans in the
creation and government of the world. He has plans for accomplishing his
purposes which are different from ours, and he secures our own welfare
by schemes that cross our own. He disappoints our hopes; foils our
expectations; crosses our designs; removes our property, or our friends;
and thwarts our purposes in life. He leads us in a path which we bad not
intended: and secures our ultimate happiness in modes which are contrary
to all our designs and desires. It follows from this:

1\. That we should form our plans with submission to the higher purposes
of God.

2\. We should resign ourselves to him when he chooses to thwart our
plans, and to take away our comforts.

[Isaiah 55:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 55:9</span></span>

For as the heavens ... - This verse is designed merely to illustrate the
idea in the former. There is as great a difference between the plans of
God and those of people, as between the heavens and the earth. A similar
comparison occurs in [Psa 103:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#011) -

For as the heaven is high alcove the earth,

So great is his mercy toward them that fear him.

Compare [Psa 57:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#010) -

For thy mercy is great unto the heavens,

And thy truth unto the clouds.

Also [Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002) -

Mercy shall be built up forever,

Thy faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very heavens.

The idea in all these passages is substantially the same - that the
mercy and compassion of God are illimitable.

[Isaiah 55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 55:10</span></span>

For as the rain cometh down - The meaning of this verse and the
following is plain. This refers evidently, as the whole passage does, to
the times which should succeed the coming of the Messiah. The hearts of
people by nature are what the earth would be without the rains of heaven
- barren and sterile. But God says that his truth shall certainly
accomplish an effect similar to that produced by descending showers. The
rain never descends in vain. It makes the earth fertile, beautiful, and
lovely. So would it be with his truth in the moral world. The comparison
of truth with descending rain or dews is exceedingly beautiful, and
occurs not unfrequently in the Bible. See [Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002) -

My doctrine shall drop as the rain,

My speech shall distil as the dew,

As the small rain upon the tender herb,

And as the showers upon the grass.

Compare [Sa2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004); [Psa
72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006); [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006); the note at [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003).

And the snow - This is a part of the emblem or symbol designed to denote
the fertilizing effect of the truth of God. The snow, as well as the
rain, accomplishes important purposes in rendering the earth fertile. It
constitutes a covering that contributes to the warmth and preservation
of plants and vegetation in the colder latitudes, and on the hills and
mountains is accumulated in the winter months to fill the streams, or
produce the overflowing of the rivers in the spring and the summer. This
expression should not, however, be pressed ad unguem in the
interpretation, as if it contained any special spiritual signification.
It is a part of the general description of that which descends from
heaven to render the earth fertile.

From heaven - From the clouds.

And returneth not thither - That is, not in the form in which they
descend on the earth. They return not there as rain and snow. The main
idea is, they do not return without accomplishing the effect which God
intends.

And bud - Put forth its increase; causes it to sprout up, or germinate.
The word 'bud' is applied rather to the small protuberance on the ends
of limbs and branches, which contains the germ of the future leaf or
flower. This word צמח tsâmach means rather "to germinate," or to cause
to vegetate in general. It is applied to the putting forth of
vegetation. on the earth when the showers descend.

[Isaiah 55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 55:11</span></span>

So shall my word be - All the truth which God reveals is as much adapted
to produce an effect on the hard and sterile hearts of men as the rain
is on the earth.

It shall not return unto me void - It shall not return to me without
accomplishing that which I intend.

And it shall prosper - (See the note at [Isa
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013)). This proves:

1\. That God has a design in giving his Word to people. He has as
distinct an intention in his Word as he has in sending down rain upon
the earth.

2\. That whatever is his design in giving the gospel, it shall be
accomplished. It is never spoken in vain, and never fails to produce the
effect which he intends. The gospel is no more preached in vain than the
rain falls in vain. And though that often falls on barren rocks, or on
arid sands; on extended plains where no vegetation is produced, or in
the wilderness 'where no man is,' and seems to our eyes in vain, yet it
is not so. God has a design in each drop that falls on sands or rocks,
as really as in the copious shower that falls on fertile fields. And so
the gospel often falls on the hard and barren hearts of men. It is
addressed to the proud, the sensual, the avaricious, and the
unbelieving, and seems to be spoken in vain, and to return void unto
God. But it is not so. He has some design in it, and that will be
accomplished. It is proof of the fullness of his mercy. It leaves people
without excuse, and justifies himself. Or when long presented -
apparently long in vain - it ultimately becomes successful, and sinners
are at last brought to abandon their sins, and to turn unto God. It is
indeed often rejected and despised. It falls on the ears of people
apparently as the rain falls on the hard rock, and there are, so to
speak, large fields where the gospel is preached as barren and
unfruitful of any spiritual good as the extended desert is of
vegetation, and the gospel seems to be preached to almost entire
communities with as little effect as is produced when the rains fall on
the deserts of Arabia, or of Africa. But there will be better and
happier times. Though the gospel may not now produce all the good
effects which we may desire, yet it will be ultimately successful to the
full wish of the widest benevolence, and the whole world shall be filled
with the knowledge and the love of God.

[Isaiah 55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 55:12</span></span>

For ye shall go out with joy - This language is that which is properly
applicable to the exiles in Babylon, but there can be no doubt that the
prophet looks also to the future happier times of the Messiah (compare
the notes at [Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)).

The mountains and the hills - Language like this is common in Isaiah,
where all nature is called on to rejoice, or where inanimate objects are
represented as expressing their sympathy with the joy of the people of
God (see the note at [Isa 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008); [Isa
35:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001), [Isa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010); [Isa
42:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010); [Isa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023)). Indeed, this imagery is common
in all poetry. Thus, Virgil:

Ipsi laetitia voces ad sidera jactant,

Intonsi montes: ipsae jam carmina rupes,

Ipsa sonant arhusta.

Ec. v. 62ff.

The untill'd mountains strike the echoing sky;

And rocks and towers the triumph speed abroad.

Wrangham

Such language occurs especially in the poetry of the Orientals. Thus,
when the god Ramar was going to the desert, says Roberts, it was said to
him, 'The trees will watch for you; they will say, He is come, he is
come; and the white flowers will clap their hands. The leaves as they
shake will say, Come, come, and the thorny places will be changed into
gardens of flowers.'

And all the trees of the field shall clap their hands - To clap the
hands is expressive of joy and rejoicing (compare [Kg2
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#012); [Psa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001)). Thus, in [Psa
98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008), it is said:

Let the floods clap their hands;

Let the hills be joyful together.

Among the Jews the language was sometimes used to express malignant joy
at the calamity of others (compare [Job
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#003); [Job
34:37](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#037); [Lam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015); [Eze
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#006)). Here it is an expression of the
universal rejoicing which would attend the extension of the kingdom of
God on the earth.

[Isaiah 55:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 55:13</span></span>

Instead of the thorn - (Compare the notes at [Isa
11:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006); [Isa
35:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001); [Isa
41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019); [Isa
42:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#020)). The word rendered 'thorn'
(נעצוּץ na‛ătsûts) occurs only here and in [Isa
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#019). It evidently means a thorn,
hedge, or thorny-bush.

Shall come up the fir tree - (ברושׁ berôsh; see the notes at [Isa
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008); [Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024); [Isa
60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013); [Zac
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)). A change would be produced in
the moral condition of man as great as if in the natural world the rough
and useless thorn should be succeeded by the beautiful and useful
cypress (compare [Isa 60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013)).

And instead of the brier - The brier is everywhere an emblem of
desolation, and of an uncultivated country (see [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006); [Isa
7:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#023)).

The myrtle-tree - (see the notes at [Isa
41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019)). The idea here is, that under
the gospel the change would be as great in the moral world as if a field
all overrun with briers should at once become thick set with myrtles.

And it shall be to the Lord - The reference here is to all that had been
said in the chapter. The gift of the Messiah; the universal offer of the
gospel; the bestowing of pardon; the turning of the wicked unto God; and
the great and salutary changes produced by the gospel, would all be a
memorial of the benevolence and glory of Yahweh.

For a name - It should tend to diffuse his name; to spread abroad a
knowledge of himself.

An everlasting sign - On the meaning of the word rendered 'sign,' see
the notes at [Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), Here it means
that it would be an eternal memorial of the mercy and goodness of
Yahweh.

That shall not be cut off - The gospel with its rich and varied
blessings shall erect enduring monuments in the earth, to the praise and
honor of God. It will be more enduring as a memorial of him than all
altars and statues, and temples erected to celebrate and perpetuate
idolatry; as wide-diffused as are his works of creation, and more
fruitful of blessings than anything elsewhere conferred on man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 56](isa056)

</div>
