<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa033)  [Next](isa035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 34:0</span></span>

The thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth chapters make one distinct and
beautiful prophecy, consisting of two parts; the first containing a
denunciation of judgment on the enemies of the Jews, particularly Edom
Isa. 34; and the second a most beautiful description of the flourishing
state of the people of God which would follow these judgments [Isa
35:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001))

At what time the prophecy was delivered it is uncertain, and, indeed,
can be determined by nothing in the prophecy itself. It is observable,
however, that it is the close of the first part of the prophecies of
Isaiah, the remaining chapters to the fortieth, which commences the
second part of the prophecies, being occupied with an historical
description of the invasion of Sennacherib and his army. It has been
supposed (see the Introduction, Sections 2, 3,) that between the
delivery of the prophecies in the first and second portion of Isaiah, an
interval of some years elapsed, and that fire second part was delivered
for his own consolation, and the consolation of the people, near the
close of his life.

A somewhat similar purpose, as I apprehend, led to the composition and
publication of the prophecy before us. The general strain of his
prophecies thus far has been, that however numerous and mighty were the
enemies of the Jews, the people of God would be delivered from them all.
Such was the case in regard to the allied armies of Syria and Samaria
Isa. 7; 8; of the Assyrian Isa. 10; of Babylon Isa. 13; 14; of Moab [Isa
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001); [Isa
16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001); of Damascus and Ethiopia [Isa
17:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001); [Isa
18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001); of Egypt Isa. 19; [Isa
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001); and more particularly of the
Assyrians under Sennacherib [Isa
25:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001); 29-33 The prophecy before us
I regard as a kind of summing up, or recapitulation of all that he had
delivered; and the general idea is, that the people of God would be
delivered from all their foes, and that happier times under the Messiah
would succeed all their calamities. This he had expressed often in the
particular prophecies; he here expresses it in a summary and condensed
manner.

Keeping this general design of the prophecy in view, we may observe that
it consists of the following parts:

I. A general statement that all the enemies of the people of God would
be destroyed [Isa 34:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001).

1\. The nations of the earth are summoned to see this, and to become
acquainted with the purpose of God thus to destroy all his enemies [Isa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001).

2\. The destruction of the enemies of God described under the image of a
great slaughter [Isa 34:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#002).

3\. The same destruction described under the image of the heavens rolled
together as a scroll [Isa 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004).

II\. This general truth particularly applied to Edom or Idumea as among
the most virulent of their enemies [Isa
34:5-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005).

1\. Yahweh's vengeance would come upon the land of Idumea, and the land
would be covered with the slain, and soaked in blood [Isa
34:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005).

2\. The entire and utter desolation of the land of Idumea is foretold.
The kingdom should be destroyed, the land laid waste, and the whole
country become a dwelling place of wild beasts [Isa
34:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#009).

III\. The happy times that would succeed - the times of the Messiah -
are exhibited [Isa 35:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001) in language
of great beauty and sublimity. This is the substance of all that the
prophet had predicted, and all his visions terminate there. The
wilderness shall blossom; and the sick and afflicted shall be healed;
the desolate lands shall be fertile; there shall be no enemy to annoy,
and the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with songs
and everlasting joy upon their heads.

As so large a part of this prophecy relates to Edom, or Idumea, it may
be proper to preface the exposition of the chapter with a brief notice
of the history of that country, and of the causes for which God
denounced vengeance upon it.

Idumea was the name given by the Greeks to the land of Edom, the country
which was settled by Esau. The territory which they occupied extended
originally from the Dead Sea to the Elanitic gulf of the Red Sea. Their
territory, however, they extended considerably by conquest, and carried
their anna to the east and northeast of Moab, and obtained possession of
tile country of which Bozrah was the chief city. To this they had access
through the intervening desert without crossing the country of the
Moabites or Ammonites. The capital of East Idumea was Bozrah; the
capital of South Edom was Petra or Selah, called, in [Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007), Joktheel (see the notes at [Isa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)).

This country received its name from Esau, the son of Isaac, and the twin
brother of Jacob. He was called Edom, which signifies red, from the
color of the red pottage which he obtained from Jacob by the sale of his
birthright [Gen 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030). After his
marriage, he removed to mount Seir, and made that his permanent abode,
and the country adjacent to it received the name of Edom. Mount Seir had
been occupied by a people called Horites, who were displaced by Esau,
when he took possession of their country and made it his own [Deu
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012). The Edomites were at first
governed by princes, improperly translated 'dukes' in Gen. 36:9-31. They
were an independent people until the time of David. They seem to have
continued under the government of separate princes, until the
apprehension of foreign invasion compelled them to unite under one
leader, and to submit them. selves to a king, When the children of
Israel were passing through the wilderness, as the land of Edom lay
between them and Canaan, Moses sent ambassadors to the king of Edom
soliciting the privilege of a peaceful passage through their country, on
the ground that they were descended from the same ancestor, and
promising that the property of the Edomites should not be injured, and
offering to pay for all that they should consume [Num
20:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014).

To this reasonable request the king of Edom sent a positive refusal, and
came out with a strong army to resist them [Num
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#020). This refusal was long
remembered by the Jews, and was one cause of the hostile feeling which
was cherished against them. The kingdom of Edom seems to have risen to a
considerable degree of prosperity. There is, indeed, no direct mention
made of it after this until the time of David; but it seems to have then
risen into so much importance as to have attracted his attention. David
carried his arms there after having obtained a victory over the Syrians,
Moabites, and Ammonites. It is not known, indeed, what was the cause of
this war, but it is known that he killed eighteen thousand Edomites in
the valley of Salt [Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013); [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012), and the rest of them were
either brought into subjection under Joab, or forced to fly into foreign
countries. Hadad, their young king, fled to Egypt and was favorably
received by Pharaoh, and was highly honored at his court.

He was married to the sister of Tahpanes, who was the queen of Egypt
[Kg1 11:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#015). Yet though he lived at
the court of Pharaoh, he waited only for an opportunity to recover his
kingdom, and when David and Joab were dead, he proposed to the king of
Egypt to make an effort to accomplish it. He returned to Idumea, but was
unsuccessful in his attempts to overcome the garrisons which David had
stationed to guard and secure the country (Joe. Ant. viii. 2). The
kingdom of Edom continued under the house of David until the time of
Jehoshaphat, and was probably governed by deputies or viceroys appointed
by the kings of Judah. In the reign of Jehoshaphat they joined the
Moabites and Ammonites in an attempt to recover their freedom, but they
were unsuccessful. In the reign of Jehoram, the son of Jehoshaphat,
however, they rose in a body, and though they suffered great slaughter,
yet they regained their liberty [Ch2
21:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#008).

After this, no attempts were made to subdue them for more than sixty
years. In the reign of Amaziah, king of Judah, however, they were
attacked, and ten thousand of them fell in battle in the valley of Salt,
and many were made prisoners; their capital, Selah, was taken by storm,
and the two thousand captives were by Amaziah's orders thrown down the
ragged precipices near the city, and dashed in pieces ([Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007); [Ch2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#012); Universal History, vol. i. p.
380; Ed. Lond. 1779, 8vo). When the Jews were subdued by the
Babylonians, and carried captive, they seem to have regarded it as a
favorable opportunity to avenge all the injustice which they had
suffered from the hands of the Jews. They joined the Babylonians in
their attempts to subdue Jerusalem, and exulted in the fall and ruin of
the city.

Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom

In the day of Jerusalem; who said

Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.

[Psa 137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)

They seem to have resolved to take full vengeance for the fact that
their nation had been so long subjected by David and his successors; to
have cut off such of the Jews as attempted to escape; to have endeavored
to level the whole city with the ground; to have rejoiced in the success
of the Babylonians, and to have imbrued their hands in the blood of
those whom the Chaldeans had left - and were thus held to be guilty of
the crime of fratricide by God (see particularly [Oba
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010), [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018); [Eze
25:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#012); [Eze
35:3-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#003)). It was for this especially
that they were denounced and threatened by the prophets with heavy
judgment, and with the utter destruction of the nation [Isa
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005), [Isa
34:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#010); [Jer
49:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007), [Jer
49:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012); [Eze
25:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#012); [Eze
35:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001); [Joe
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019); [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011); [Oba
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002), [Oba
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008), [Oba
1:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017); [Mal
1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)). This refusing to aid their
brethren the Jews, and joining with the enemies of the people of God,
and exulting in their success, was the great crime in their history
which was to call down the divine vengeance, and terminate in their
complete and utter ruin.

But their exultation does not long continue, and their cruelty to the
Jews did not long remain unpunished. Five years after the taking of
Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar humbled all the states around Judea, and
particularly Idumea [Jer 25:15-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015);
[Mal 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003).

During the Jewish exile, it would appear the Edomites pressed forward
into the south of Palestine, of which they took possession as far as to
Hebron. Here they were subsequently attacked and subdued by John
Hyrcanus, and compelled to adopt the laws and customs of the Jews. The
name Idumea was transferred to this part of the land of Judea which they
occupied, arid this is the Idumea which is mentioned by Pliny, Ptolemy,
Strabo, and other ancient writers. Indeed the name Idumea was sometimes
given by the Roman writers to the whole of Palestine (Reland's
Palestine). Idumea, including the southern part of Judea, was henceforth
governed by a succession of Jewish prefects. One of these, Antipater, an
Idumean by birth, by the favor of Caesar, was made procurator of all
Judea. He was the father of Herod the Great, who become king of Judea,
including Idumea. While the Edomites had been extending themselves to
the northwest, they had in in turn been driven out from the southern
portion of their own territory, and from their chief city itself, by the
Nabatheans, an Arabian tribe, the descendants of Nebaioth, the oldest
son of Ishmael. This nomadic people had spread themselves over the whole
of desert Arabia, from the Euphrates to the borders of Palestine, and
finally to the Elanitic gulf of the Red Sea. They thus grew up into the
kingdom of Arabia Petrea, occupying very nearly the same territory which
was comprised within the limits of ancient Edom. A king of this country,
Aretas, is mentioned as cotemporary with Antiochus Epiphanes, about 166
b.c. From this time to the destruction of Jerusalem, the sovereigns of
Arabia Petrea came into frequent contact with the Jews and Romans, both
in war and peace.

The nominal independence of this kingdom continued for some thirty years
after the destruction of Jerusalem. Under the reign of Trajan, about 105
a.d., it was overrun and conquered by Cornelius Palma, then governor of
Syria, and formally annexed to the Roman empire (Dio. Cass. lxviii. 14;
Atom. Marcell. xiv. 8). The kingdom of Edom was thus blotted out, and
their name was lost. In their own land they ceased to be a separate
people, and mingled with the other descendants of Ishmael; in Judea they
became, under John Hyrcanus, converts to the Jewish faith; received the
rite of circumcision; and were incorporated with the Jews. Very
interesting remains of cities and towns of Idumea, and particularly of
Petrea, have been recently discovered by the travelers Burckhardt, and
Seetsen (see Universal History, vol. i. pp. 370-383; Amer. Bib.
Repository, vol. iii. pp. 247-270; Gesenius' Introduction to his Com. on
this chapter; the Travels of Burckhardt, Legh, Laborde, and Stephens;
Keith, On Prophecy, pp. 135-168; and Robinson's Bib. Researches, vol.
ii. p. 551ff)

[Isaiah 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 34:1</span></span>

Come near, ye nations, to hear - That is, to hear of the judgments which
God was about to execute, and the great purposes which he was about to
accomplish. If the supposition be correct, that this and the following
chapter contain a summing up of all that the prophet had thus far
uttered; a declaration that all the enemies of the people of God would
be destroyed - the most violent and bitter of whom was Idumea; and that
this was to be succeeded by the happy times of the Messiah, then we see
a plain reason why all the nations are summoned to hear and attend. The
events pertain to them all; the truths communicated are of universal
interest. "And all that is therein." Hebrew as in Margin, 'fulness
thereof;' that is, all the inhabitants of the earth.

All things that come forth of it - All that proceed from it; that is,
all the inhabitants that the world has produced. The Septuagint renders
it: 'The world and the people ὁ λαὸς ho laos) who are therein.'

[Isaiah 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 34:2</span></span>

For the indignation of the Lord - Yahweh is about to express his wrath
against all the nations which are opposed to his people.

He hath utterly destroyed them - In his purpose, or intention. The
prophet represents this as so certain that it may be exhibited as
already done.

[Isaiah 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 34:3</span></span>

Their slain also shall be cast out - They would lie unburied. The
slaughter Would be so extensive, and the desolation would be so entire,
that there would not remain enough to bury the dead (compare the notes
at [Isa 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019)).

And the mountains shall be melted with their blood - The expression here
is evidently hyperbolical, and means that as mountains and hills are
wasted away by descending showers and impetuous torrents, so the hills
would be washed away by the vast quantity of blood that would be shed by
the anger of Yahweh.

[Isaiah 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 34:4</span></span>

And all the host of heaven - On the word 'host' (צבא tsâbâ'), see the
note at [Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009). The heavenly bodies
often represent kings and princes (compare the note at [Isa
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#021)).

Shall be dissolved - (ינמקוּ venâmaqqû. This figure Vitringa supposes to
be taken from the common prejudice by which the stars appear to be
crystals, or gems, set in the azure vault of heaven, which may melt and
flow down by the application of heat. The sense is, that the princes and
nobles who had opposed God and his people would be destroyed, as if the
sparkling stars, like gems, should melt in the heavens, and flow down to
the earth.

And the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll - The word 'scroll'
here (ספר sêpher) means a roll, or a book. Books were made of parchment,
leaves, etc., and were rolled together instead of being bound, as they
are with us. The figure here is taken from what strikes the eye, that
the heaven above us is "an expanse" (רקיע râqı̂ya‛) [Gen
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008); [Psa
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002),) which is spread out; and which
might be rolled together, and thus pass away. It is possible that there
may be a reference also to the fact, that in a storm, when the sky is
filled with dark rolling clouds, the heavens seem to be rolled together,
and to be passing away. The sense is, that there would be great
destruction among those high in office and in power - a destruction that
would be well represented by the rolling up of the firmament, and the
destruction of the visible heavens and their host, and by leaving the
world to ruin and to night.

And all their host shall fall down - That is, their stars; either by
being as it were melted, or by the fact that the expanse in which they
are apparently located would be rolled up and removed, and there being
no fixtures for them they would fall. The same image occurs in [Rev
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#013). One somewhat similar occurs in
Virgil, Georg. i. 365ff.

As the leaf falleth off from the vine ... - That is, in a storm, or when
violently shaken.

[Isaiah 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 34:5</span></span>

For my sword shall be bathed in heaven - A sword is an instrument of
vengeance, and is often so used in the Scriptures, because it was often
employed in capital punishments (see the note at [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)). This passage bas given much
perplexity to commentators, on account of the apparent want of meaning
of the expression that the sword would be bathed in heaven. Lowth reads
it:

For my sword is made bare in the heavens;

Following in this the Chaldee which reads תתגלי tı̂thgallı̂y, 'shall be
revealed.' But there is no authority from manuscripts for this change in
the Hebrew text. The Vulgate renders it, Quoniam inebriatus est in coelo
gladius meuse - 'My sword is intoxicated in heaven.' The Septuagint
renders it in the same way, Ἐμεθύσθη ἡ μάχαιρά μον ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ
Emethusthē hē machaira mou en tō ouranō; and the Syriac and Arabic in
the same manner. The Hebrew word רוּתה rivetâh, from רוה râvâh, means
properly to drink to the full; to be satisfied, or sated with drink; and
then to be full or satiated with intoxicating liquor, to be drunk. It is
applied to the sword, as satiated or made drunk with blood, in [Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010) :

And the sword shall devour,

And it shall be satiate, and made drunk with their blood.

And thus in [Deu 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042), a similar
figure is used respecting arrows, the instruments also of war and
vengeance:

I will make mine arrows drunk with blood;

And my sword shall devour flesh.

A similar figure is often used in Oriental writers, where the sword is
represented as glutted, satiated, or made drunk with blood (see
Rosenmuller on [Deu 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042)). Thus
Bohaddinus, in the lift of Saladin, in describing a battle in which
there was a great slaughter, says, 'The swords drank of their blood
until they were intoxicated.' The idea here is, however, not that the
sword of the Lord was made drunk with blood in heaven, but that it was
intoxicated, or made furious with wrath; it was excited as an
intoxicated man is who is under ungovernable passions; it was in heaven
that the wrath commenced, and the sword of divine justice rushed forth
as if intoxicated, to destroy all before it. There are few figures, even
in Isaiah, that are more bold than this.

It shall come down upon Idumea - (see the Analysis of the chapter for
the situation of Idumea, and for the causes why it was to be devoted to
destruction).

Upon the people of my curse - The people devoted to destruction.

[Isaiah 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 34:6</span></span>

The sword of the Lord is filled with blood - The idea here is taken from
the notion of sacrifice, and is, that God would devote to sacrifice, or
to destruction, the inhabitants of Idumea. With reference to that, he
says, that his sword, the instrument of slaughter, would be satiated
with blood. "It is made fat with fatness." The allusion here is to the
sacrifices which were made for sin, in which the blood. and the fat were
devoted to God as an offering (see Lev. 7)

With the blood of lambs and goats - These were the animals which were
usually offered in sacrifice to God among the Jews. and to speak of a
sacrifice was the same as to speak of the offering of rams, lambs,
bullocks, etc. Yet it is evident that they denote here the people of
Idumea, and that these terms are used to keep up the image of a
sacrifice. The idea of sacrifice was always connected with that of
slaughter, as the animals were slaughtered before they were offered. So
here, the idea is, that there would be a great slaughter in Idumea; that
it would be so far of the nature of a sacrifice that they would be
devoted to God and to his cause. It is not probable that any particular
classes of people are denoted by the different animals mentioned here,
as the animals here mentioned include all, or nearly all those usually
offered in sacrifice, the expressions denote simply that all classes of
people in Idumea would be devoted to the slaughter. Grotius, however,
supposes that the following classes are intended by the animals
specified, to wit, by the lambs, the people in general; by the goats,
the priests; by the rams, the opulent inhabitants.

For the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah - Bozrah is mentioned here as
one of the chief cities of Idumea. It was a city of great antiquity, and
was known among the Greeks and Romans by the name of Bostra. It is
generally mentioned in the Scriptunes as a city of the Edomites [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001); [Jer
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#013), [Jer
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022); [Amo
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#012); but once it is mentioned as a
city of Moab [Jer 48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024). It probably
belonged at different periods to both nations, as in their wars the
possession of cities often passed into different hands. Bozrah lay
southeast of Edrei, one of the capitals of Bashan, and was thus not
properly within the limits of the Edomites, but was north of the
Ammonites, or in the region of Auranitis, or in what is now called tho
Houran. It is evident, therefore, that in the time of Isaiah, the
Edomites had extended their conquests to that region.

According to Burckhardt, who visited the Houran, and who went to Bozrah,
it is at this day one of the most important cities there. 'It is
situated,' says he, 'in the open plain, and is at present the last
inhabited place in the southeast extremity of the Houran; it was
formerly the capital of the Arabia Provincia, and is now, including its
ruins, the largest town in the Houran. It is of an oval shape, its
greatest length being from east to west; its circumference is three
quarters of an hour. It was anciently encompassed with a thick wall,
which gave it the reputation of great strength Many parts of this wall,
especially on the west side, remain; it was constructed of stones of
moderate size, strongly cemented together. The south, and southeast
quarters are covered with ruins of private dwellings, the walls Of many
of which are still standing, but the roofs are fallen in. The style of
building seems to have been similar to that observed in all the other
ancient towns of the Houran. On the west side are springs of fresh
water, of which I counted five beyond the precincts of the town, and six
within the walls; their waters unite with a rivulet whose source is on
the northwest side, within the town, and which loses itself in the
southern plain at several hours' distance; it is called by the Arabs, El
Djeheir. The principal ruins of Bozrah are the following: A square
building which within is circular, and has many arches and niches in the
wall.

The diameter of the arounda is four paces; its roof has fallen in, but
the walls are entire. It appears to have been a Greek church. An oblong
square building, called by the natives Deir Boheiry, or the Monastery of
the priest Boheiry. The gate of an ancient house com municating with the
ruins of an edifice, the only remains of which is a large semicircular
vault. The great mosque of Bozrah, which is certainly coeval with the
first era of Mahometanism, and is commonly ascribed to Omar el Khattah.
The walls of the mosque are covered with a fine coat of plaster, upon
which are many Curie inscriptions in bas-relief, running all round the
wall The remains of a temple, situated on the side of a long street
which runs across the whole town, and terminates at the western gate,'
etc. Of these, and other magnificent ruins of temples, theaters, and
palaces, all attesting its former importance, Burckhardt has given a
copious description in his Travels in Syria, pp. 226-235, Quarto Ed.
LoRd. 1822.

[Isaiah 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 34:7</span></span>

And the unicorns - Margin, 'Rhinoceros' (ראמים re'ēmı̂ym from ראם re'êm).
This was evidently an animal well known in Palestine, since it is
frequently mentioned in the Old Testament ([Num
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022); [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Job
39:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009); [Psa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021); [Psa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006); [Psa
92:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#010), in all which places it is
translated unicorn, or unicorn). The derivation of the word is
uncertain, and it has been regarded as doubtful what animal is intended.
The corresponding Arabic word denotes the oryx, a large and fierce
species of the antelope. Gesenius, Schultens, De Wette, and Rosenmuller
suppose that the buffalo is intended by the word. Bochart regards it as
denoting the gazelle, or a species of the antelope. It can hardly,
however, be regarded as so small an animal as the gazelle. The gazelle
is common in the neighborhood of mount Sinai; and when Laborde passed
through that region his companions killed four, 'the father and mother,
and two little animals a fortnight old.' He says of them: 'These
creatures, which are very lively in their movements, endeavored to bite
when they were caught; their hair is a brown yellow, which becomes pale
and long as the animals grows old.

In appearance they resemble the Guinea pig. Their legs are of the same
height, but the form of their feet is unique; instead of nails and
claws, they have three toes in front and four behind, and they walk.
like rabbits, on the whole length of the foot. The Arabs call it El
Oueber, and know no other name for it. It lives upon the scanty herbage
with which the rain in the neighborhood of springs supplies it. It does
not burrow in the earth, its feet not being calculated for that purpose;
but it conceals itself in the natural holes or clefts which it finds in
the rocks.' (Journey through Arabia Petrea, pp. 106, 107. Lond. 8vo.
1836.) Taylor (Heb. Con.) supposes it means the rhinoceros; a fierce
animal that has a single horn on the nose, which is very strong, and
which sometimes grows to the height of thirty-seven inches. The ancient
versions certainly regarded the word as denoting an animal with a single
horn. It denotes here, evidently, some strong, fierce, and wild animal
that was horned [Psa 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021), but
perhaps it is not possible to determine precisely what animal is meant.
For a more full investigation in reference to the kind of animal denoted
by the word reem, see the notes at [Job
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009). Here it represents that portion
of the people which was strong, warlike, and hitherto unvanquished, and
who regarded themselves as invincible.

Shall come down - Shall be subdued, humbled, destroyed.

With them - With the lambs and goats mentioned in [Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006). All classes of the people shall
be subdued and subjected to the slaughter.

And the bullocks with the bulls - The young bulls with the old. All
shall come down together - the fierce and strong animals representing
the fierce and strong people.

And their land shall be soaked with blood - Margin, 'Drunken;' the same
word which is rendered 'bathed' in [Isa
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005).

Their dust made fat - Their land manured and made rich with the slain. A
battlefield is usually distinguished afterward for its fertility. The
field of Waterloo has thus been celebrated, since the great battle
there, for producing rank and luxuriant harvests.

[Isaiah 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 34:8</span></span>

For it is the day of the Lord's vengeance - A time when Yahweh will take
vengeance.

The year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion - The time when he
will recompense, that is, punish those who have had a controversy with
Zion.

[Isaiah 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 34:9</span></span>

And the streams thereof - The idea here is, that there would be as great
and awful a destruction as if the streams everywhere should become pitch
or resin, which would be set on fire, and which would fill the land with
flame. This image is very striking, as we may see by supposing the
rivers and streams in any land to flow not with water, but with heated
pitch, turpentine, or tar, and that this was all suddenly kindled into a
flame. It cannot be supposed that this is to be taken literally. The
image is evidently taken from the destruction of Sodom and Gamorrah
([Gen 19:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#025)), an image which is
more fully used in reference to the same subject in [Jer
49:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#017) : 'And Edom shall be a
desolation;... as in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the
neighbor cities thereof, saith the Lord, no man shall abide there,
neither shall a son of man dwell in it.'

And the dust thereof into brimstone - The ruin shall be as entire as if
all the soil were turned into brimstone, which should be ignited and
left burning.

[Isaiah 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 34:10</span></span>

It shall not be quenched night nor day - That is, the burning brimstone
and pitch [Isa 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#009), the emblem of
perpetual and entire desolation, shall not be extinguished.

The smoke thereof shall go up for ever - Every river and rivulet is
Supposed to be heated pitch, and every particle of dust sulphur, and a 1
on fire, sending up from an extended region dense columns of smoke to
heaven. No idea of ruin could be more sublime; no idea of the vengeance
of God more terrible. This image has been copied by John to describe the
future woes of the wicked [Rev 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011),
and of mystical Babylon [Rev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009),
[Rev 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#018); [Rev
19:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002).

From generation to generation it shall lie waste - Full confirmation of
this may be seen in the travels of Seetsen, of Burckhardt, of Volney, of
Irby, and Mangles, extracts of which have been collected and arranged by
Keith (Evidences of Prophecy, pp. 135-168). Thus Volney says, 'From the
reports of the Arabs as of Bakir, and the inhabitants of Gaza, who
frequently go to Maan and Karak, on the road of the pilgrims, there are
to the southeast of the lake Asphaltites (Dead Sea), within three days'
journey, upward of thirty ruined towns, absolutely deserted. Several of
them have large edifices, with columns that may have belonged to the
ancient temples, or at least to Greek churches. The Arabs sometimes make
use of them to fold cattle in; but, in general, avoid them on account of
the enormous scorpions with which they swarm.' (Volney's Travels, vol.
ii. pp. 344-346.) It is remarkable that an infidel, as Volney was,
should in this, as in numerous other instances, have given a minute
confirmation of the ancient prophecies.

Seetsen says (Travels, p. 46), that he was told, that, 'at the distance
of two days and a half from Hebron he would final considerable ruins of
the ancient city of Abde, and that for all the rest of the journey be
would see no place of habitation; he would meet only with a few tribes
of wandering Arabs.' Burckhardt has given the following description on
of the eastern boundary of Edom, and of the adjoining part of Arabia
Petrea: 'It might with truth be called Petrea, not only on account of
its rocky mountains, but also of the elevated plain already described
(that is, Shera (Seir), the territory of the Edomites, Travels, pp. 410,
435), 'which is so much covered with stones, especially flints, that it
may with great propriety be called a stony desert, although susceptible
of culture; in many places it is grown over with wild herbs, and must
once have been thickly inhabited, for the traces of many towns and
villages are met with on both sides of the Hadj road between Maan and
Akaba, as well as between Mean and the plains of Houran, in which
direction also are many springs.

At present all this country is a desert, and Maan is the only inhabited
place in it.' (Burckhardt's Travels, p. 436.) Of the remains of ancient
cities still exposed to view in different places throughout Idumea,
Burckhardt describes the ruins of a large town, of which nothing remains
but broken walls anti heaps of stones; the ruins of several villages in
its vicinity (p. 418); the ruins of an ancient city, consisting of large
heaps of hewn blocks of siliceous stone; and the extensive ruins of
Arindela, an ancient town of Palestina Terria (p. 441). 'The following
ruined places are situated in Djebal Shera (Mount Seir), to the south
and southwest of Wady Musa - Kalaat Beni Madha, Djerba, Basta, Eyl,
Ferdakh, Anyk, Bir el Beytar, Shemakh, and Syk' (p. 444). Burckhardt
also gives a most interesting description of the ruins of the ancient
Petra which he discovered, the ancient capital of Edom, but which is too
long to be transcribed here (see his Travels, pp. 422-432; compare the
note at [Isa 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)).

None shall pass through it forever and ever - That is, it shall not be a
country through which caravans shall pass; there shrill be no roads, and
it shall not be deemed safe to travel through it. It will be recollected
that the original source of all their calamities, and the cause of all
the judgments that came upon them, was the fact that they would not let
the children of Israel pass peaceably through their land on their way to
Canaan (see the Introduction to the chapter). As a punishment for this,
God now says that their land shall not be passed through; it shall not
be a thoroughfare; there shall be no travelers in it. God usually
directs his punishment of individuals and of nations in the line of
their offences, and thus his judgments become commonly a recompence in
kind. Thus in [Sa2 22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#026), it is
said:

With the merciful, thou wilt show thyself merciful;

And with the upright man thou wilt show thyself upright.

With the pure thou wilt show thyself pure;

And with the froward thou wilt show thyself unsavory.

In accordance with this prediction that no one should pass through Edom,
Volney (Travels, vol. ii. p. 344) says, 'The country has not been
visited by any traveler, but it well merits Such an attention.' Thus
Burckhardt (Travels, p. 421) says, after he had entered, on the
northeast, the territories of the Edomites, that he 'was without
protection in the midst of a desert where no traveler had ever before
been seen. It was then,' he adds, 'that for the first time he had ever
felt fear during his travels in the desert, and his route thither was
the most dangerous he had ever traveled' (p. 400). 'Seetsen, on a piece
of paper pasted against the wall, notified his having penetrated the
country in a direct line between the Dead Sea and Mount Sinai (through
Idumea), a route never before accomplished.' (Burckhardt's Syria, p.
553.) Burckhardt had determined to attempt to pass the same way as being
the shortest way to Jerusalem; but he was repeatedly told it was
impossible; and the difficulty of the journey is illustrated in the
Travels of Captains Irby and Mangles. They offered five hundred piastres
to an Arab tribe if they would conduct them to Wady Musa, but nothing
would induce them to consent. 'They said they would not go if we would
give them five thousand piastres, observing that money was of no use to
a man if he lost his life' (p. 349). So strikingly has this prediction
been fulfilled.

[Isaiah 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 34:11</span></span>

But the cormorant - This and the following verses contain a description
of the desolations of Edom in language remarkably similar to that
employed in the account of the destruction of Babylon [Isa
13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020); [Isa
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023). The word here translated
'cormorant' (קאת qâ'ath), occurs in this place and in [Zep
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#014), where it is rendered
'cormorant,' and in [Lev 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018); [Deu
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#017); [Psa
102:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#006), where it is rendered 'pelican.'
Bochart supposes it is the ardea stellaris, or bitourn, which frequents
watery places in deserts, and makes a horrible noise. The pelican is a
sea-fowl, and cannot be intended here. The cormorant or water raven is a
large fowl of the pelican kind, which occupies the cliffs by the sea,
feeds on fish, and which is extremely voracious, and which is the emblem
of a glutton. It is not certain what fowl is intended here, but the word
properly denotes a water-fowl, and evidently refers to some bird that
inhabits desolate places.

And the bittern shall possess it - For a description of the bittern, see
the note at [Isa 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023).

The owl also and the raven - Well known birds that occupy deserts, and
old ruins of houses or towns. The image here is that of desolation and
ruin; and the sense is, that the land would be reduced to a waste that
would not be inhabited by man, but would be given up to wild animals.
How well this agrees with Edom, may be seen in the Travels of
Burckhardt, Seetsen, and others. In regard to the fact that the
cormorant (קאת qâ'ath) should be found there, it may be proper to
introduce a remark of Burckhardt, who seems to have had no reference to
this prophecy. 'The bird katta,' says he, 'is met with in immense
numbers. They fly in such large flocks that the boys often kill two or
three of them at a time, merely by throwing a stick among them.' So also
in regard to the fact that the owl and the raven shall dwell there, the
following statements are made by travelers: Captain Mangles relates
thatwhile he and his fellow-travelers were examining the ruins and
contemplating the sublime scenery of Petra, 'the screaming of the
eagles, hawks, and owls, which were soaring above their heads in
considerable numbers, seemingly annoyed at anyone approaching their
lonely habitation, added much to the singularity of the scene.' So says
Burckhardt: 'The fields of Tafyle (situated in the immediate vicinity of
Edom) are frequented by an immense number of crows.'

And he shall stretch out upon it - This is an illusion to the fact that
an architect uses a line, which is employed to lay out his work (see the
note at [Isa 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#017)).

The line of confusion - A similar expression occurs in [Kg2
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#013) : 'I will stretch over Jerusalem
the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab;' that is, I
will apply the same measure and rule of destruction to Jerusalem that
has been applied to Samaria. So Edom would be marked out for desolation.
It was the work which God had laid out, and which he intended to
perform.

And the stones of emptiness - Probably the plummet which the architect
commonly employed with his line (see the note at [Isa
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#017)). It is a fact, however, that
Edom is at present an extended waste of stones and barren rocks. 'We had
before us an immense expanse of dreary country, entirely covered with
black flints, with here and there some hilly chain rising from the
plain.' (Burckhardt's Travels in Syria, p. 445.)

[Isaiah 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 34:12</span></span>

They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom - A more correct
rendering of this would be, 'As to the nobles, they shall call them, but
there shall be there no kingdom.' The idea is, that the kingdom would be
desolate; there would be no people to rule. Or, there will be no nobles
there who shall survive the destruction, and who can undertake the
government of the state. The idea is taken from a government or
constitution where the monarch is chosen from the ranks of the nobility.
Idumea was formerly governed, as we have seen (see the Introduction to
the chapter), by dukes or princes; and it is probable that when it
became a monarchy it was a part of the constitution that the sovereign
should be chosen from their ranks. The idea here is, that none would be
left who could be called to the throne; or if any were left, they would
be unwilling to undertake the government of a country where all was
disorder and confusion.

And all her princes shall be nothing - Long since Idumea has ceased to
be a kingdom, and there are neither nobles nor princes there, nor are
there any remains of an organized and independent government.

[Isaiah 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 34:13</span></span>

And thorns ... - (see the note at [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006))

It shall be an habitation of dragons - On the meaning of the word
'dragons,' see the note at [Isa 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022).

Court for owls - A place of resort, a residence of owls. The word
rendered 'court' (חציר châtsı̂yr) means a dwelling-place, a habitation,
as well as an enclosure or court. The margin is, 'Daughters of the owl,'
or 'ostriches' (see the note at [Isa
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021)). 'I would,' says Stephens, when
standing amidst the ruins of Petra, the capital of Idumea (see the note
at [Isa 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)), and with this passage
of Isaiah in his eye, 'I would that the sceptic could stand as I did,
among the ruins of this city among the rocks, and there open the sacred
book, and read the words of the inspired penman, written when this
desolate place was one of the greatest cities in the world. I see the
scoff arrested, his cheek pale, his lip quivering, and his heart quaking
with fear, as the ancient city cries out to him in a voice loud and
powerful as one risen from the dead; though be would not believe Moses
and the prophets, he believes the hand-writing of God himself, in the
desolation and eternal ruin around him.' (Incidents of Travel in Egypt,
etc., vol. ii. p. 76.)

[Isaiah 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 34:14</span></span>

The wild beasts of the desert - There is in the original here a
paronomasia, which cannot be conveyed in a translation. The word
rendered, 'wild beasts of the desert' (ציים tsı̂yı̂ym), is rendered by the
Septuagint, δαιμόνια daimonia, 'demons.' On the meaning of the word, see
the note at [Isa 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021).

The wild beasts of the island - Margin, 'Ijim.' Hebrew, איּים 'ı̂yym (see
the note at [Isa 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022)). Probably the
term denotes the jackal. Gesenius supposes it is so called from its
howl, or nocturnal cry - from an Arabia word signifying to howl.

And the satyr - (see the note at [Isa
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021)).

Shall cry to his fellow - A most striking description of the desolation,
when all that is heard among the ruins shall be the doleful cry of wild
beasts.

The screech-owl - Margin, 'Night-monster.' The word לילית lı̂ylı̂yt (from
ליל layil, night) properly denotes a night-spectre - a creature of
Jewish superstition. The rabbis describe it in the form of a female
elegantly dressed that lay in wait for children at night - either to
carry them off, or to murder them. The Greeks had a similar idea
respecting the female ἔμπουτα empouta, and this idea corresponds to the
Roman fables respecting the Lamice, and Striges, and to the Arabic
notions of the Ghules, whom they described as female monsters that dwell
in deserts, and tear men to pieces (see Gesenius, Com. in loc; and
Bochart, Hieroz. ii. 831). The margin in our version expresses the
correct idea. All this is descriptive of utter and perpetual desolation
- of a land that should be full of old ruins, and inhabited by the
animals that usually make such ruins their abode.

[Isaiah 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 34:15</span></span>

There shall the great owl - (קפוז qı̂pôz). Gesenius supposes that this is
the arrow-snake, so called from its darting or springing, in the manner
of the rattle-snake - from an obsolete root to draw oneself together, to
contract. Bochart (Hieroz. ii. 3. 11. 408-419) has examined the meaning
of the word at length, and comes to the conclusion that it means the
serpent which the Greeks called acontias, and the Latins, jaculus - the
arrow-snake. The serpent is oviparous, and nourishes its young. The
ancient versions, however, understand it in the same sense as the קפד
qippôd in [Isa 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011) - the hedgehog or
porcupine.

Under her shadow - This might be done by the serpent that should coil up
and cherish her young.

The vultures ... - The black vulture, according to Bochart; according to
Gesenius, the kite, or falcon so called from its swift flight. Either of
them will suit the connection.

Also be gathered, every one with her mate - They shall make their nests
there; that is, this shall be their secure, undisturbed retreat.

[Isaiah 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 34:16</span></span>

Seek ye out - Lock carefully at the prediction, and its fulfillment.
This seems to be addressed to the inhabitants of that land, or to any
who might doubt, or be disposed to examine. They were invited to compare
the prediction with the fulfillment, and see how literally all would be
fulfilled - an examination which may be made now, and the prediction
will be seen to have been accomplished with most surprising
particularity and accuracy.

The book of the Lord - The book of Yahweh, which he has caused to be
written, referring, perhaps, especially to what Isaiah has here
recorded; including also what had been uttered by the other prophets in
regard to Edom. The main reference is, however, doubtless, to what
Isaiah has written; and the invitation is to compare his predictions
with the certain and remarkable evidence of the fulfillment. 'The
prophet evidently contemplated the insertion of his prophecy among the
sacred books of the Jews, from which those that followed him might judge
of the correctness of the prophecy' (Noyes). That a collection of the
various prophetic books was made, constituting one book or volume, and
regarded as the work of inspiration, is well known, and is referred to
during the captivity in Babylon by Daniel [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002). The direction to search that book
accords with the command of the Saviour [Joh
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039), and the direction of Nicodemus
[Joh 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#032), to search the Scriptures.

No one of these shall fail - Not one of these predictions, or these
things which have been spoken.

None shall want her mate - That is, none of the things which I have
spoken shall want a fulfillment as its companion. The language is here
evidently taken from the pairing of animals, and denotes that all that
is spoken shall be entirely fulfilled. Some have understood tilts as
referring to the wild animals of which he had spoken, and as meaning
that in desolate Idumea they should be appropriately paired, and should
breed and increase in abundance. But the more natural interpretation is
to refer it to the predictions of the prophet, as meaning that no one
thing which he had uttered should want a complete fulfillment.

For my mouth - The word 'my' is not in the Hebrew. The Hebrew phrase is
הוא כי־פי kı̂y-pı̂y hû', 'For the mouth, he hath commanded.' The word הוא
hû' stands for "He," that is, Yahweh, and the phrase means the same as
his mouth, that is, the mouth of God. The Septuagint renders it, 'For
the Lord hath commanded them.' Lowth renders it, 'For the mouth of
Jehovah,' changing הוא hû' into יהוה yehovâh in accordance with five
manuscripts and the translation of the Septuagint.

And his spirit - The Spirit of God; that is, Yahweh himself.

Hath gathered them - Will collect, or assemble; that is, the wild beasts
spoken of in the previous verses that shall occupy desolate Idumea. It
shall be the agency of God that shall bring them up upon the land to
occupy it forever.

[Isaiah 34:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 34:17</span></span>

And he hath cast the lot for them - He hath assigned to them the land of
Edom to be occupied by them as their portion. This language is taken
from the fact that countries were commonly apportioned, particularly
among conquerors, by the lot. In this way Judea was divided among the
tribes of Israel [Num 26:55-56](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055).

His hand hath divided it unto them by line - He has marked out, as a
surveyor does, the land of Edom as the dwelling-place of the beasts of
the forest. A land was usually surveyed and divided into proper parts or
portions before the lot was cast [Jos
18:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#004).

They shall possess it - The wild beasts mentioned in the previous
verses. The testimony of all travelers demonstrates that thus far this
prediction has been strikingly fulfilled.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 35](isa035)

</div>
