<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa057)  [Next](isa059) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 58](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 58:0</span></span>

The design of this chapter is to reprove the Jews for a vain dependence
on the performance of the outward forms of worship. The nation is
represented as diligent in the performance of the external rites of
their religion, and as expecting to avert the divine judgments by the
performance of those rites. They are represented as filled with
amazement, that though they were thus diligent and faithful, they had no
tokens of the divine approbation, but were left as if forsaken by God.
The main scope of the chapter is to state the reasons why their
religious services met with no tokens of the divine acceptance, and the
blessings which would follow the proper performance of their duties.

It is not certainly known to what period the prophet refers, whether to
the Jews in his own time, or to the Jews regarded as in Babylon.
Rosenmuller supposes the reference is wholly to the Jews suffering in
their captivity, and practicing their religious rites with a view of
obtaining the divine favor and a release. He argues this because there
is no reference here to sacrifices, but merely to fasting, and the
observance of the Sabbath; duties which they could perform even when far
away from the temple, and from their own land. But it seems more
probable that the reference here to fasting is designed as an instance
or specimen of the character of the people, and that this is made so
prominent because they abounded so much in it, and were so hypocritical
in its observance. It is possible that it was composed at or near the
time of some of the public fasts during the reign of Manasseh, and that
the fact that the external rites of religion were observed amidst the
abominations of that wicked reign roused the indignation of the prophet,
and led him to pour forth this severe reproof of the manner in which
they approached God.

The chapter comprises the following subjects:

I. A direction to the prophet openly and boldly to reprove the sins of
the nation [Isa 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001).

II\. The fact that the Jewish people were regular and diligent in the
observance of the external duties of religion, and that they expected
the divine favor on the ground of those observances [Isa
58:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002).

III\. The prophet states the reason why their excessive and punctual
religious duties had not been accepted or followed with the divine favor
and blessing.

1\. They still continued their heavy exactions on others, and made
everything tributary to their own pleasure [Isa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003).

2\. They did it for strife and debate; with hoarse contentions and angry
passions [Isa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004).

3\. It was with an affected and hypocritical seriousness and solemnity,
not as a proper expression of a deep sense of sin [Isa
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005).

IV\. The prophet states the true ways in which the favor of God might be
obtained, and the happy results which would follow the proper observance
of his commands, and the proper discharge of the duties of religion.

1\. The proper mode of fasting, and the happy results [Isa
58:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006).

\(1\) The kind of fasting which God had chosen [Isa
58:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006). It was to loose the bands of
wickedness, and undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free,
and to aid the poor and needy.

\(2\) The consequence of this [Isa
58:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008). Their light would break forth
as the morning, and the nation would prosper, and their prayers would be
heard.

2\. The special duty of removing the yoke of oppression, and of
regarding the poor and the oppressed, and the consequences [Isa
58:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009).

\(1\) The duty. God requires the yoke of oppression to he put away, and
the oppressed and the poor to be regarded by his people ([Isa
58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009), last clause, 10).

\(2\) The consequences which would follow from this [Isa
58:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010). Their light would rise in
obscurity, and their darkness would be as noonday; Yahweh would be their
guide, and the waste places would be repaired, and the desolations
cease.

3\. The duty of keeping the Sabbath, and the consequences [Isa
58:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013).

\(1\) The duty [Isa 58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013). They were
to cease to do their own pleasure, and to call it holy, and to regard it
with delight.

\(2\) The consequences [Isa 58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014).
They would then find delight in the service of Yahweh; and they would
ride upon the high places of the earth, and be abundantly blessed and
prospered.

[Isaiah 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 58:1</span></span>

Cry aloud - Margin, 'With the throat;' that is, says Gesenius, with open
throat, with full voice coming from the throat and breast; while one who
speaks low uses only the lips and tongue [Sa1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013). The Chaldee here introduces the
word prophet, 'O prophet, cry aloud.' The Septuagint renders it, 'Cry
with strength.' (ἐν ἰσχύΐ en ischui).

Spare not - That is, do not spare, or restrain the voice. Let it be
full, loud, and strong.

Lift up thy voice like a trumpet - Speak loud and distinct, so that the
language of reproof may be heard. The sense is, the people are
insensible and stupid. They need something to rouse them to a sense of
their guilt. Go and proclaim it so that all may hear. Speak not in
whispers; speak not to a part, but speak so earnestly that their
attention will be arrested, and so that all shall hear (compare the
notes at [Isa 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)). "And show my
people." This either refers to the Jewish people in the time of the
prophet; or to the same people in their exile in Babylon; or to the
people of God after the coming of the Messiah. Vitringa supposes that it
refers to the nominally Christian Church when it should have sunk into
the sins and formalities of the papacy, and that the direction here is
to the true ministers of God to proclaim the sins of a corrupt and
degenerate church. The main reason assigned by him for this is, that
there is no reference here to the temple, to the sacrifices, or to the
idolatry which was the prevailing sin in the time of Manasseh.
Rosenmuller, for a similar reason, supposes that it refers to the Jews
in Babylon. But it has already been remarked (see the analysis to the
chapter), that this reason does not appear to be satisfactory.

It is true that there is no reference here to the temple or to
sacrifices, and it may be true that the main sin of the nation in the
time of Manasseh was idolatry; but it is also true that formality and
hypocrisy were prominent sins, and that these deserved reproof. It is
true that while they adhered to the public forms of religion, the heart
was not in them; and that while they relied on those forms, and were
surprised that the divine favor was not manifested to them on account of
their observance, there was a good reason why that favor was witcheld,
and it was important that that reason should be stated clearly and
fully. It is probable, therefore, that the reference here is to the
times of the prophet himself, and that the subject of rebuke is the
formality, hypocrisy, and prevalent sins of the reign of Manasseh.

[Isaiah 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 58:2</span></span>

Yet they seek me daily - The whole description here is appropriate to
the character of formalists and hypocrites; and the idea is, that public
worship by sacrifice was celebrated daily in the temple, and was not
intermitted. It is not improbable also that they kept up the regular
daily service in their dwellings.

And delight to know my ways - Probably this means, they profess to
delight to know the ways of God; that is, his commands, truths, and
requirements. A hypocrite has no real delight in the service of God, or
in his truth, but it is true at the same time that there may be a great
deal of professed interest in religion. There may be a great deal of
busy and bustling solicitude about the order of religious services; the
external organization of the church; the ranks of the clergy; and the
claims of a liturgy. There may be much pleasure in theological
discussion; in the metaphysics of theology; in the defense of what is
deemed orthodoxy. There may be much pleasure in the mere music of
devotion. There may be pleasure in the voice of a preacher, and in the
power of his arguments. And there may be much pleasure in the
advancement of the denomination to which we are attached; the conversion
of people not from sin, but from a side opposite to us; and not to
holiness and to God, but to our party and denomination. True delight in
religion is in religion itself; in the service of God as such, and
because it is holy. It is not mere pleasure in creeds, and liturgies,
and theological discussions, and in the triumph of our cause, nor even
in the triumph of Christianity as a mere party measure; but it is
delight in God as he is, in his holy service, and in his truth.

As a nation that did righteousness - As a people would do who really
loved the ways of righteousness.

They ask of me the ordinances of justice - Their priests and prophets
consult about the laws and institutions of religion, as if they were
really afraid of violating the divine commands. At the same time that
they are full of oppression, strife, and wickedness, they are
scrupulously careful about violating any of the commands pertaining to
the rites of religion. The same people were subsequently so
conscientious that they did not dare to enter the judgment-hall of
Pilate lest they should disqualify themselves from partaking of the
Passover, at the same time that they were meditating the death of their
own Messiah, and were actually engaged in a plot to secure his
crucifixion! [Joh 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028). It is often
the case that hypocrites are most scrupulous and conscientious about
forms just as they are meditating some plan of enormous guilt, and
accomplishing some scheme of deep depravity.

They take delight in approaching to God - There is a pleasure which even
a hypocrite has in the services of religion, and we should not conclude
that because we find pleasure in prayer and praise, that therefore we
are truly pious. Our pleasure may arise from a great many other sources
than any just views of God or of his truth, or an evidence that we have
that we are his friends.

[Isaiah 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 58:3</span></span>

Wherefore have we fasted - They had fasted much, evidently with the
expectation of delivering themselves from impending calamities, and
securing the divine favor. They are here introduced as saying that they
had been disappointed. God had not interposed as they had expected.
Chagrined and mortified, they now complain that he had not noticed their
very conscientious and faithful regard for the duties of religion.

And thou seest not? - All had been in vain. Calamities still impended;
judgments threatened; and there were no tokens of the divine
approbation. Hypocrites depend on their fastings and prayers as laying
God under obligation to save them. If he does not interpose, they
complain and murmur. When fasting is the result of a humble and broken
heart, it is acceptable; when it is instituted as a means of purchasing
the divine favor, and as laying God under obligation, it can be followed
by no happy result to the soul.

Have we afflicted our soul - By fasting. Twenty-one manuscripts (six
ancient), says Lowth, have this in the plural number - 'our souls' and
so the Septuagint, Chaldee, and the Vulgate. The sense is not materially
affected, however. It is evident here that they regarded their numerous
fastings as laying the foundation of a claim on the favor of God, and
that they were disposed to complain when that claim was not
acknowledged. Fasting, like other religious duties, is proper; but in
that, as in all other services of religion, there is danger of supposing
that we bring God under obligations, and that we are laying the
foundation of a claim to his favor.

Thou takest no knowledge - Thou dost not regard our numerous acts of
self-denial.

Behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure - The prophet here
proceeds to state the reasons why their fastings were not succeeded as
they supposed they would be, by the divine favor. The first reason which
he states is, that even when they were fasting, they were giving full
indulgence to their depraved appetites and lusts. The Syriac has well
rendered this, 'In the day of your fasting you indulge your lusts, and
draw near to all your idols.' This also was evidently the case with the
Jews in the time of the Saviour. They were Characterized repeatedly by
him as 'an evil and adulterous generation,' and yet no generation
perhaps was ever more punctual and strict in the external duties of
fasting and other religious ceremonies.

And exact all your labors - This is the second reason why their fasting
was attended with no more happy results. The margin renders this
'griefs,' or things wherewith ye grieve others.' Lowth renders it, 'All
your demands of labor ye rigorously exact.' Castellio renders it, 'And
all things which are due to you, you exact.' The word rendered here
'labors' denotes usually hard and painful labor; toil, travail, etc. The
Septuagint renders it here, 'And goad (ὑπονύσσετε huponussete) all those
who are under your control' (τοὺς ὑποχειρίους ὑμῶν tous hupocheirious
humōn). The idea seems to be that they were at that time oppressive in
exacting all that was due to them; they remitted nothing, they forgave
nothing. Alas, how often is this still true! People may be most diligent
in the external duties of religion; most abundant in fasting and in
prayer, and at the same time most unyielding in demanding all that is
due to them. Like Shylock - another Jew like those in the time of Isaiah
- they may demand 'the pound of flesh,' at the same time that they may
be most formal, punctual, precise, and bigoted in the performance of the
external duties of religion. The sentiment taught here is, that if we
desire to keep a fast that shall be acceptable to God, it must be such
as shall cause us to unbind heavy burdens from the poor, and to lead us
to relax the rigor of the claims which would be oppressive on those who
are subject to us (see [Isa 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)).

[Isaiah 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 58:4</span></span>

Behold, ye fast for strife and debate - This is a third characteristic
of their manner of fasting, and a third reason why God did not regard
and accept it. They were divided into parties and factions, and probably
made their fastings an occasion of augmented contention and strife. How
often has this been seen! Contending denominations of Christians fast,
not laying aside their strifes; contending factions in the church fast
in order to strengthen their party with the solemn sanctions of
religion. One of the most certain ways for bigots to excite persecution
against those who are opposed to them is to 'proclaim a fast;' and when
together, their passions are easily inflamed, their flagging zeal
excited by inflammatory harangues, and their purpose formed to regard
and treat their dissentient brethren as incorrigible heretics and
irreconcilable foes. It may be added, also, that it is possible thus to
prostitute all the sacred institutions of religion for party and
inflammatory purposes. Even the ordinance of the Lord's Supper may be
thus abused, and violent partisans may come around the sacred memorials
of a Saviour's body and blood, to bind themselves more closely together
in some deed of persecution or violence, and to animate their drooping
courage with the belief that what has been in fact commenced with a view
to power, is carried on from a regard to the honor of God.

And to smite with the fist of wickedness - Lowth renders this, in
accordance with the Septuagint. 'To smite with the fist the poor;' but
this translation can be obtained only by a most violent and wholly
unauthorized change in the Hebrew text. The idea is plain, that 'even
when fasting' they were guilty of strife and personal combats. Their
passions were unsubdued, and they gave vent to them in disgraceful
personal encounters. This manifests a most extraordinary state of
society, and is a most melancholy instance to show how much people may
keep up the forms of religion, and even be punctual and exact in them,
when the most violent and ungovernable passions are raging in their
bosoms, and when they seem to be unconscious of any discrepancy between
the religious service and the unsubdued passions of the soul.

Ye shall not fast ... - It is not acceptable to God. It must be
offensive in his sight.

To make your voice to be heard on high - That is, in strife and
contention. So to contend and strive, says Grotius, that your voice can
be heard on the mountain top. Rosenmuller, however, supposes that it
means, that their fast was so conducted that they could not expect that
their prayers would ascend to heaven and be heard by God. But it seems
to me that the former is the correct interpretation. Their fastings were
accompanied with the loud and hoarse voice of contention and strife, and
on that account could not be acceptable to God.

[Isaiah 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 58:5</span></span>

Is it such a fast that I have chosen? - Is this such a mode of fasting
as I have appointed and as I approve?

A day for a man to afflict his soul? - Margin, 'To afflict his soul for
a day.' The reading in the text is the more correct; and the idea is,
that the pain and inconvenience experienced by the abstinence from food
was not the end in view in fasting. This seems to have been the mistake
which they made, that they supposed there was something meritorious in
the very pain incurred by such abstinence. Is there not danger of this
now? Do we not often feel that there is something meritorious in the
very inconveniences which we suffer in our acts of self denial? The
important idea in the passage before us is, that the pain and
inconvenience which we may endure by the most rigid fasting are not
meritorious in the sight of God. They are not that at which he aims by
the appointment of fasting. He aims at justice, truth, benevolence,
holiness [Isa 58:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006); and he esteems
the act of fasting to be of value only as it will be the means of
leading us to reflect on our faults, and to amend our lives.

Is it to bow down his head - A bulrush is the large reed that grows in
marshy places. It is, says Johnson, without knots or joints. In the
midst of water it grows luxuriantly, yet the stalk is not solid or
compact like wood, and, being unsupported by joints, it easily bends
over under its own weight. it thus becomes the emblem of a man bowed
down with grief. Here it refers to the sanctimoniousness of a hypocrite
when fasting - a man without real feeling who puts on an air of affected
solemnity, and 'appears to others to fast.' Against that the Saviour
warned his disciples, and directed them, when they fasted, to do it in
their ordinary dress, and to maintain an aspect of cheerfulness [Mat
6:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#017). The hypocrites in the time of
Isaiah seemed to have supposed that the object was gained if they
assumed this affected seriousness. How much danger is there of this now!
How often do even Christians assume, on all the more solemn occasions of
religious observance, a forced sanctimoniousness of manner; a demure and
dejected air; nay, an appearance of melancholy - which is often
understood by the worm to be misanthropy, and which easily slides into
misanthropy! Against this we should guard. Nothing more injures the
cause of religion than sanctimoniousness, gloom, reserve, coldness, and
the conduct and deportment which, whether right or wrong, will be
construed by those around us as misanthropy. Be it not forgotten that
the seriousness which religion produces is always consistent with
cheerfulness, and is always accompanied by benevolence; and the moment
we feel that our religious acts consist in merely bowing down the head
like a bulrush, that moment we may be sure we shall do injury to all
with whom we come in contact.

And to spread sackcloth and ashes under him - On the meaning of the word
'sackcloth,' see the notes at [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024). It was commonly worn around the
loins in times of fasting and of any public or private calamity. It was
also customary to sit on sackcloth, or to spread it under one either to
lie on, or to kneel on in times of prayer, as an expression of
humiliation. Thus in [Est 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003), it is
said. 'and many lay on sackcloth and ashes:' or, as it is in the margin,
'sackcloth and ashes were laid under many;' (compare [Kg1
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027)). A passage in Josephus strongly
confirms this, in which he describes the deep concern of the Jews for
the danger of Herod Agrippa, after having been stricken suddenly with a
violent disorder in the theater of Caesarea. 'Upon the news of his
danger, immediately the multitude, with their wives and children,
"sitting upon sackcloth according to their country rites," prayed for
the king; all places were filled with wailing and lamentation; while the
king, who lay in an upper room, beholding the people below thus falling
prostrate on the ground, could not himself refrain from tears' (Antiq.
xix. 8. 2). We wear crape - but for a somewhat different object. With us
it is a mere sign of grief; but the wearing of sackcloth or sitting on
it was not a mere sign of grief, but was regarded as tending to produce
humiliation and mortification. Ashes also were a symbol of grief and
sorrow. The wearing of sackcloth was usually accompanied with ashes [Dan
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#003); [Est
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001), [Est
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003). Penitents, or those in
affliction, either sat down on the ground in dust and ashes [Job
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008); [Job
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006); [Jon
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#006); or they put ashes on their head
[Sa2 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#019); [Lam
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#016); or they mingled ashes with their
food [Psa 102:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#009). The Greeks and the
Romans had also the same custom of strewing themselves with ashes in
mourning. Thus Homer (Iliad, xviii. 22), speaking of Achilles bewailing
the death of Patroclus, says:

Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread

The scorching ashes o'er his graceful head,

His purple garments, and his golden hairs;

Those he deforms, and these he tears.

Laertes (Odys. xxiv. 315), shows his grief in the same manner:

Deep from his soul he sighed, and sorrowing spread

A cloud of ashes on his hoary head.

So Virgil (AEn. x. 844), speaking of the father of Lausus, who was
brought to him wounded, says:

Canitiem immundo deformat pulvere.

Wilt thou call this a fast? - Wilt thou suppose that these observances
can be such as God will approve and bless? The truth here taught is,
that no mere outward expressions of penitence can be acceptable to God.

[Isaiah 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 58:6</span></span>

Is not this the fast that I have chosen? - Fasting is right and proper;
but that which God approves will prompt to, and will be followed by,
deeds of justice, kindness, charity. The prophet proceeds to specify
very particularly what God required, and when the observance of seasons
of fasting would be acceptable to him.

To loose the bands of wickedness - This is the first thing to be done in
order that their fasting might be acceptable to the Lord. The idea is,
that they were to dissolve every tie which unjustly bound their
fellowmen. The Chaldee renders it, 'Separate the congregation of
impiety;' but the more probable sense is, that if they were exercising
any unjust and cruel authority over others; if they had bound them in
any way contrary to the laws of God and the interests of justice, they
were to release them. This might refer to their compelling others to
servitude more rigidly than the law of Moses allowed; or to holding them
to contracts which had been fraudulently made; or to their exacting
strict payment from persons wholly incapacitated to meet their
obligations; or it might refer to their subjecting others to more rigid
service than was allowed by the laws of Moses, but it would not require
a very ardent imagination for anyone to see, that if he held slaves at
all, that this came fairly under the description of the prophet. A man
with a tender conscience who held slaves would have been likely to
suppose that this part of the injunction applied to himself.

To undo the heavy burdens - Margin, 'Bundles of the yoke.' The
Septuagint renders it, 'Dissolve the obligations of onerous contracts.'
The Chaldee, 'Loose the obligations of the writings of unjust judgment.'
The Hebrew means, 'Loose the bands of the yoke,' a figure taken from the
yoke which was borne by oxen, and which seems to have been attached to
the neck by cords or bands (see Fragments to Taylor's Calmer. No.
xxviii.) The yoke, in the Scripture, is usually regarded as an emblem of
oppression, or compulsory toil, and is undoubtedy so used here. The same
word is used to denote 'burden' (מוטה môṭâh), which in the subsequent
member is rendered 'yoke,' and the word which is rendered 'undo (התר
hatı̂r from נתי nātar), is elsewhere employed to denote emancipation from
servitude. The phrase here employed would properly denote the release of
captives or slaves, and would doubtless be so understood by those whom
the prophet addressed. Thus, in [Psa
105:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#017) :

He sent a man before them, even Joseph,

Who was sold for a servant;

Whose feet they hurt with fetters;

He was laid in iron:

Until the time when his word came,

The word of the Lord tried him.

The king sent and loosed him (ויתירהוּ vaytı̂yrēhû),

Even the ruler of the people, and let him go free.

And let the oppressed go free - Margin, 'Broken.' The Hebrew word רצוצים
retsûtsı̂ym is from the word רצץ rātsats, meaning "to break, to break
down" (see the notes at [Isa 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003)); to
treat with violence, to oppress. It may be applied to those who are
treated with violence in any way, or who are broken down by bard usage.
It may refer, therefore, to slaves who are oppressed by bondage and
toil; or to inferiors of any kind who are subjected to hard usage by
those who are above them; or to the subjects of a tyrant groaning under
his yoke. The use of the phrase here, 'go free,' however, seems to limit
its application in this place to those who were held in bondage. Jerome
renders it, 'Free those who are broken' (confracti). The Septuagint
Τεθρασμένος Tethrasmenos - 'Set at liberty those who are broken down.'
If slavery existed at the time here referred to, this word would be
appropriately understood as including that - at least would be so
understood by the slaves themselves - for if any institution deserves to
be called oppression, it is theft of slavery.

This interpretation would be confirmed by the use of the word rendered
free. That word (חפשׁים chophshı̂ym) evidently refers to the act of
freeing a slave. The person who had once been a slave, and who had
afterward obtained his freedom, was denominated חפשׁי chophshı̂y (see
Jahn, Bib. Ant. Section 171). This word occurs, and is so used, in the
following places; [Exo 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#012), 'And the
seventh (year) he shall go free;' [Exo
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#005), 'I will not go out free;' [Exo
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#027), 'He shall let him go free;'
[Deu 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012), 'Thou shalt let him go
free;' [Deu 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#013), 'When thou sendest
him out free' [Deu 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#018), 'When thou
sendest him away free;' [Job 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#019),
'The servant is free from his master;' that is, in the grave, where
there is universal emancipation. Compare [Jer
34:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#009), [Jer
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#014), [Jer
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#016) where the same Hebrew word is
used, and is applied expressly to the emancipation of slaves. The word
is used in other places in the Bible except the following: [Sa1
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025), 'And make his father's house
free in Israel,' referring to the favor which was promised to the one
who would slay Goliath of Gath. [Job
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005) : 'Who hath sent out the wild
donkey free?' [Psa 88:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005) : 'Free among
the dead.' The usage, therefore, is settled that the word properly
refers to deliverance from servitude. It would be naturally understood
by a Hebrew as referring to that, and unless there was something in the
connection which made it necessary to adopt a different interpretation,
a Hebrew would so understand it of course. In the case before us, such
an interpretation would be obvious, and it is difficult to see how a Jew
could understand this direction in any other way, if he was an owner. of
slaves, than that be should set them at once at liberty.

And that ye break every yoke - A yoke, in the Scriptures, is a symbol of
oppression, and the idea here is, that they were to cease all
oppressions, and to restore all to their lust and equal rights. The
prophet demanded, in order that there might be an acceptable 'fast,'
that everything which could properly be described as a 'yoke' should be
broken. How could this command be complied with by a Hebrew if he
continued to retain his fellow-men in bondage? Would not its fair
application be to lead him to emancipate those who were held as slaves?
Could it be true, whatever else he might do, that he would fully comply
with this injunction, unless this were done? If now this whole
injunction were fairly complied with in his land, who can doubt that it
would lead to the emancipation of the slaves? The language is such that
it cannot well be misunderstood. The prophet undoubtedly specifies those
things which properly denote slavery, and demands that they should all
be abandoned in order to an acceptable 'fast to the Lord,' and the fair
application of this injunction would soon extinguish slavery throughout
the world.

[Isaiah 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 58:7</span></span>

Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry? - The word renderd 'deal'
(פרס pâras), means to divide, to distribute. The idea is, that we are to
apportion among the poor that which will be needful for their support,
as a father does to his children. This is everywhere enjoined in the
Bible, and was especially regarded among the Orientals as an
indispensable duty of religion. Thus Job [Job
31:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016) beautifully speaks of his own
practice:

If I have witheld the poor from his desire,

Or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail;

Or have eaten my morsel myself alone,

And the fatherless hath not eaten thereof;

If I have seen any perish for want of clothing,

Or any poor without covering; - ...

Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade,

And mine arm be broken from the bone.

And that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house - Margin,
'Afflicted' Hospitality to all, and especially to the friendless and the
stranger, was one of the cardinal virtues in the Oriental code of
morals. Lowth renders this, 'The wandering poor.'

When thou seest the naked ... - This duty is also plain, and is
everywhere enjoined in the Bible (compare [Mat
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#038)).

And that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh - That is, from
thine own kindred or relations who are dependent on thee. Compare [Gen
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#014); [Gen
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#027); where the word 'flesh' is used
to denote near relations - relations as intimate and dear as if they
were a part of our flesh and blood [Gen
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023). To hide oneself from them may
denote either, first, to be ashamed of them on account of their poverty
or humble rank in life; or, secondly, to witchold from them the just
supply of their needs. Religion requires us to treat all our kindred,
whatever may be their rank, with kindness and affection, and enjoins on
us the duty of providing for the needs of those poor relatives who in
the providence of God are made dependent on us.

[Isaiah 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 58:8</span></span>

Then shall thy light - (See the notes at [Isa
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#007)). The idea here is, that if they
were faithful in the discharge of their duty to God, he would bless them
with abundant prosperity (compare [Job
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#017)). The image is, that such
prosperity would come on the people like the spreading light of the
morning.

And thine health - Lowth and Noyes render this, 'And thy wounds shall be
speedily healed over.' The authority on which Lowth relies, is the
version of Aquila as reported by Jerome, and the Chaldee. The Hebrew
word used here, (ארוּכה 'ărûkâh), means properly "a long bandage" (from
ארך 'ârak, "to make long"), such as is applied by surgeons to heal a
wound (compare the notes at [Isa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)).
It is then used to denote the healing which is secured by the
application of the bandage; and figuratively here means their
restoration from all the calamities which had been inflicted on the
nation. The word rendered 'spring forth' (from צמח tsâmach) properly
relates to the manner in which plants germinate (compare the notes at
[Isa 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#009)). Here the sense is, that if
they would return to God, they would be delivered from the calamities
which their crimes had brought on them, and that peace and prosperity
would again visit the nation.

And thy righteousness shall go before thee - Shall be thy leader - as an
army is conducted. The idea is that their conformity to the divine laws
would serve the purpose of a leader to conduct them in the ways of
peace, happiness, and prosperity.

The glory of the Lord - The allusion here is doubtless to the mode in
which the children of Israel came out of Egypt (see the notes at [Isa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005)).

Shall be thy rere-ward - Margin, 'Shall gather thee up.' That is, shall
bring up the rear (see the notes at [Isa
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#012)).

[Isaiah 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 58:9</span></span>

Then shalt thou call - The sense is, that if we go before God renouncing
all our sins, and desirous of doing our duty, then we have a right to
expect that he will hear us. But if we go indulging still in sin; if we
are false and hollow and hypocritical in our worship; or if, while we
keep up the regular forms of devotion, we are nevertheless guilty of
oppression, cruelty, and dishonesty, we have no right to expect that he
will hear us (see the notes at [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)).

If thou take away ... the yoke - (See the notes at [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)).

The putting forth of the finger - That is, if you cease to contemn and
despise others; if you cease to point at them the finger of scorn. It
was usual to make use of the middle finger on such occasions. Thus
Martial, ii. 28, 2:

Rideto multum -

\- et digitum porrigito medium.

So Juvenal, Sat. x. 52:

\- mediumque ostenderet unguem.

And speaking vanity - Lowth and Noyes render it thus, 'The injurious
speech.' Kimchi understands it of words of contention and strife. The
word used here (און 'âven) denotes either nothingness, vanity, a vain
and empty thing [Isa 41:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#029); [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002); or falsehood, deceit [Psa
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#004); [Pro
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#004); or unworthiness, wickedness,
iniquity [Job 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#021); [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013); here it means, probably, every
kind of false, harsh, and unjust speaking - all of which probably I
abounded among the Jews. The Septuagint renders it, ̔Ρῆμα γογγυσμοῦ Rēma
gongusmou - 'The word of murmuring.'

[Isaiah 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 58:10</span></span>

And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry - Lowth, on the authority of
eight manuscripts, renders this, 'If thou bring forth thy bread to the
hungry.' So the Syriac and Noyes. But the authority is not sufficient to
justify the change in the text, nor is it necessary. The word 'soul'
here is synonymous with heart, or benevolent affection; and the idea is,
if they expressed benevolent affection or kindness toward those in want.

Then shall thy light rise in obscurity - That is, it will be as if the
cheerful light of the sun should rise amidst the shades of midnight. The
sense is, that their calamities and trials would be suddenly succeeded
by the bright and cheerful light of prosperity.

[Isaiah 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 58:11</span></span>

And the Lord shall guide thee continually - Yahweh will go before you
and will lead you always.

And satisfy thy soul in drought - (See the notes at [Isa
41:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#017)). The word rendered 'drought'
(Margin, 'droughts;' Hebrew, צחצחות tsachetsâchôth) means "dry places" -
places exposed to the intense heat of a burning sun and parched up for
the want of moisture. The idea is, that God would provide for them as if
in such places copious rains were to fall, or refreshing fountains to
burst forth.

And make fat thy bones - Lowth, 'Shall renew thy strength.' Noyes,
'Strengthen thy bones.' Jerome renders it, 'Shall liberate thy bones.'
The Septuagint 'Thy bones shall be made fat.' The idea is undoubtedly
that of vigorous prosperity, and of strength. Job [Job
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#024) expresses a similar idea of a
strong man dying:

'His watering places for flocks abound with milk,

And his bones are moist with marrow.'

For the propriety of this translation, which differs from the common
version, see my notes on Job, in loc. The word used here (חלץ châlats),
however, does not often, if ever, denote to make fat. It rather means to
be manful, active, brave, ready for war; and the idea here is, probably,
derived from the preparation which is made for the active services of
war, rather than that of being made fat.

And thou shalt be like a watered garden - Syriac, 'Like paradise.' This
is a most beautiful image to denote continued prosperity and blessedness
- an image that would be particularly striking in the East. The ideas of
happiness in the Oriental world consisted much in pleasant gardens,
running streams, and ever-flowing fountains, and nothing can more
beautifully express the blessedness of the continued favor of the
Almighty. The following extract from Campbell (African Light), may
illustrate this passage: 'In a hot climate, where showers seldom fall,
except in what is called the rainy season, the difference between a well
and ill watered garden is most striking. I remember some gardens in
Africa, where they could lead no water upon them, the plants were all
stinted, sickly, or others completely gone, only the hole left where the
faded plant had been. The sight was unpleasant, and caused gloom to
appear in every countenance; they were pictures of desolation. But in
other gardens, to which the owners could bring daily supplies of water
from an overflowing fountain, causing it to traverse the garden, every
plant had a green, healthy appearance, loaded with fruit, in different
stages toward maturity, with fragrant scent proceeding from beds of
lovely flowers; and all this produced by the virtue God hath put into
the single article of water.'

Whose waters fail not - Margin, 'Lie,' or 'Deceive.' Hebrew, כזב kâzab -
'Lie.' Waters or springs lie or deceive when they become dried up, or
fail in the dry seasons of the year. They deceive the shepherd who
expected to obtain water there for himself or his flock; they deceive
the caravan which had traveled to the well-known fountain where it had
been often refreshed, and where, it is now found, its waters are dried
up, or lost in the sand. Hence, such a brook or fountain becomes an
emblem of a false and deceitful friend [Job
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#015) :

My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook,

As the stream of brooks they pass away.

But in the supplies which God makes for his people there is no such
deception. The fountains of pardon, peace, and joy are ever open and
ever full. The streams of salvation are always flowing. The weary
pilgrim may go there at any season of the year, and from any part of a
desolate world, and find them always full, refreshing, and free. However
far may be the pilgrimage to them from amidst the waste and burning
climes of sin, however many come to slake their thirst, and however
frequently they come, they find them always the same. They never fail;
and they will continue to flow on to the end of time.

[Isaiah 58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 58:12</span></span>

And they that shall be of thee - They that spring from thee; or thy
people.

Shall build the old waste places - Shall repair the old ruins, and
restore the desolate cities and fields to their former beauty. This
language is taken from the condition of Judea during the long captivity
at Babylon. The land would have been desolated by the Chaldeans, and
lain waste for a period of seventy years. Of course all the remains of
their former prosperity would have gone to decay, and the whole country
would be filled with ruins. But all this, says the prophet, would be
restored if they were obedient to God. and would keep his law. Their
descendants would be so numerous that the land would be entirely
occupied and cultivated again, and cities and towns would rise with
their former beauty and magnificence.

Thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations - That is, the
foundations which had endured for generations. The word 'foundations'
here (מוסד môsâd), means properly the foundation of a building, that is,
on which a building rests. Here it means the foundation when that alone
remains; and is equivalent to ruins. The Hebrew phrase translated 'of
many generational' (דור־ודור dôr-vâdôr, generation and generation), is
equivalent to one generation after another, and is the usual form of the
superlative degree. The exact amount of time is not designated; but the
phrase is equivalent to a long time - while one generation passes away
after another. Vitringa applies this to the gospel, and supposes that it
means that the church, after long decay and desolation, would rise to
its former beauty and glory. The promise is indeed general; and though
the language is taken from the recovery of Palestine from its ruins
after the captivity, yet there can be no objection to applying it in a
more general sense, as teaching that the people of God, if they are
faithful in keeping his commandments, and in manifesting the spirit
which becomes the church, will repair the ruins which sin has made in
the world, and rebuild the wastes and the desolations of many ages.

Sin has spread its desolations far and wide. Scarce the foundations of
righteousness remain in the earth. Where they do remain, they are often
covered over with ruined fragments, and are surrounded by frightful
wastes. The world is full of the ruins which sin has caused; and there
could be no more striking illustration of the effects of sin on all that
is good, than the ruins of Judea during the seventy years of exile, or
than those of Palmyra, of Baalbec, of Tyre, of Ephesus, and of
Persepolis, at present. It is for the church of God to rebuild these
wastes, and to cause the beauties of cultivated fields, and the glories
of cities rebuilt, to revisit the desolate earth; in other words, to
extend the blessings of that religion which will yet clothe the earth
with moral loveliness, as though sin had not spread its gloomy and
revolting monuments over the world.

And thou shalt be called - The name which shall appropriately designate
what you will do.

The repairer of the breach - Lowth, 'The repairer of the broken mound.'
The phrase properly means, 'the fortifier of the breach;' i. e:, the one
who shall build up the breach that is made in a wall of a city, either
by the lapse of time, or by a siege.

The restorer of paths to dwell in - Lowth and Noves render this, 'The
restorer of paths to be frequented by inhabitants.' The Septuagint
renders it, 'And thou shalt cause thy paths to rest in the midst of
thee;' and Jerome. Avertens semitas in quietem - 'Turning the paths into
rest,' which the Jewish exposition explains to mean, 'Thou shalt build
walls so high that no enemy can enter them.' So Grotius renders it,
'Turning thy paths to rest;' that is, thou shalt leave no way of access
to robbers. The Chaldee renders it, 'Converting the wicked to the law.'
The common English version has probably expressed correctly the sense.
The idea is, that they would repair the public highways which had long
lain desolate, by which access was had to their dwelling-places. It does
not mean, however, that the paths or ways were to be places in which to
dwell, but that the ways which led to their dwelling-places were to be
restored, or repaired. These roads, of course, in the long desolations
would be ruined. Thorns, and brambles, and trees would have grown upon
them; and having been long neglected, they would be impassable. But the
advantages of a free contact from one dwelling and one city to another,
and throughout the land, would be again enjoyed. Spiritually applied, it
means the same as the previous expression, that the church of God would
remove the ruins which sin has caused, and diffuse comfort and happiness
around the world. The obstructed and overrun paths to a quiet and
peaceable dwelling on earth would be cleared away, and the blessings of'
the true religion would be like giving free and easy access from one
tranquil and prosperous dwelling-place to another.

[Isaiah 58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 58:13</span></span>

If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath - The evident meaning of
this is, that they were sacredly to observe the Sabbath, and not to
violate or pollute it (see the notes at [Isa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002)). The idea, says Grotius, is,
that they were not to travel on the Sabbath day on ordinary journeys.
The 'foot' is spoken of as the instrument of motion and travel. 'Ponder
the paths of thy feet' [Pro 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026); that
is, observe attentively thy goings. 'Remove thy foot from evil' [Pro
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#027); that is, abstain from evil, do
not go to execute evil. So here, to restrain the foot from the Sabbath,
is not to have the foot employed on the Sabbath; not to be engaged in
traveling, or in the ordinary active employments of life, either for
business or pleasure.

From doing thy pleasure on my holy day - Two things may here be
observed:

1\. God claims the day as his, and as holy on that account. While all
time is his, and while he requires all time to be profitably and
usefully employed, he calls the Sabbath especially his own - a day which
is to be observed with reference to himself, and which is to be regarded
as belonging to him. To take the hours of that day, therefore, for our
pleasure, or for work which is not necessary or merciful, is to rob God
of that which he claims as his own.

2\. We are not to do our own pleasure on that day. That is, we are not
to pursue our ordinary plans of amusement; we are not to devote it to
feasting, to riot, or to revelry. It is true that they who love the
Sabbath as they should will find 'pleasure' in observing it, for they
have happiness in the service of God. But the idea is, here, that we are
to do the things which God requires, and to consult his will in the
observance. It is remarkable that the thing here adverted to, is the
very way in which the Sabbath is commonly violated. It is not
extensively a day of business, for the propriety of a periodical
cessation from toil is so obvious, that people will have such days
recurring at moderate intervals. But it is a day of pastime and
amusement; a day not merely of relaxation from toil, but also of
relaxation from the restraints of temperance and virtue. And while the
Sabbath is God's great ordinance for perpetuating religion and virtue,
it is also, by perversion, made Satan's great ordinance for perpetuating
intemperance, dissipation, and sensuality.

And call the Sabbath a delight - This appropriately expresses the
feelings of all who have any just views of the Sabbath. To them it is
not wearisome, nor are its hours heavy. They love the day of sweet and
holy rest. They esteem it a privilege, not a task, to be permitted once
a week to disburden their minds of the cares, and toils, and anxieties
of life. It is a 'delight' to them to recall the memory of the
institution of the Sabbath, when God rested from his labors; to recall
the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, to the memory of which the Christian
Sabbath is consecrated; to be permitted to devote a whole day to prayer
and praise, to the public and private worship of God, to services that
expand the intellect and purify the heart. To the father of a family it
is the source of unspeakable delight that he may conduct his children to
the house of God, and that he may instruct them in the ways of religion.
To the Christian man of business, the farmer, and the professional man,
it is a pleasure that he may suspend his cares, and may uninterruptedly
think of God and of heaven. To all who have any just feeling, the
Sabbath is a 'delight;' and for them to be compelled to forego its
sacred rest would be an unspeakable calamity.

The holy of the Lord, honorable - This more properly means, 'and call
the holy of Yahweh honorable.' That is, it does not mean that they who
observed the Sabbath would call it 'holy to Yahweh and honorable;' but
it means that the Sabbath was, in fact, 'the holy of Yahweh,' and that
they would regard it as 'honorable.' A slight inspection of the Hebrew
will show that this is the sense. They who keep the Sabbath aright will
esteem it a day "to be honored" (מכבד mekubâd).

And shalt honor him - Or rather, shalt honor it; to wit, the Sabbath.
The Hebrew will bear either construction, but the connection seems to
require us to understand it of the Sabbath rather than of the Lord.

Not doing thine own ways - This is evidently explanatory of the phrase
in the beginning of the verse. 'if thou turn away thy foot.' So the
Septuagint understands it: Οὐκ άρεῖς τὸς πόδα σου ἐπ ̓ ἔργῳ Ouk areis
ton poda sou ep' ergō - 'And will not lift up thy foot to any work.'
They were not to engage in secular labor, or in the execution of their
own plans, but were to regard the day as belonging to God, and to be
employed in his service alone.

Nor finding thine own pleasure - The Chaldee renders this, 'And shalt
not provide on that day those things which are necessary for thee.'

Nor speaking thine own words - Lowth and Noyes render this, 'From
speaking vain words.' The Septuagint, 'Nor utter a word in anger from
thy mouth.' The Chaldee renders it, 'Words of violence.' It is necessary
to add some epithet to make out the sense, as the Hebrew is literally,
'and to speak a word.' Probably our common translation has expressed the
true sense, as in the previous members of the verse the phrase 'thine
own' thrice occurs. And according to this, the sense is, that on the
Sabbath our conversation is to be such as becomes a day which belongs to
God. It is not less important that our conversation should be right on
the Sabbath than it is that our conduct should be.

[Isaiah 58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 58:14</span></span>

Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord - That is, as a consequence
of properly observing the Sabbath, thou shalt find pleasure in Yahweh.
It will be a pleasure to draw near to him, and you shall no longer be
left to barren ordinances and to unanswered prayers. The delight or
pleasure which God's people have in him is a direct and necessary
consequence of the proper observance of the Sabbath. It is on that day
set apart by his own authority, for his own service, that he chooses to
meet with his people, and to commune with them and bless them; and no
one ever properly observed the Sabbath who did not find, as a
consequence, that he had augmented pleasure in the existence, the
character, and the service of Yahweh. Compare [Job
22:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021), where the principle stated
here - that the observance of the law of God will lead to happiness in
the Almighty - is beautifully illustrated (see also [Psa
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004)).

And I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth - A
phrase like this occurs in [Deu 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)
: 'He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat
the increase of fields.' In [Hab 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019),
the phrase also occurs: 'He will make my feet like hinds' feet, and he
will make me to walk upon mine high places.' So also [Psa
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033) : 'He maketh my feet like hinds'
feet, and setteth me upon my high places.' In [Amo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013), it is applied to God: 'He maketh
the morning darkness, and treadeth upon the high places of the earth.'
Kimchi, Calvin, and Grotius suppose that the idea here is, that God
would restore the exiled Jews to their own land - a land of mountains
and elevated places, more lofty than the surrounding regions. Vitringa
says that the phrase is taken from a conqueror, who on his horse or in
his chariot, occupies mountains, hills, towers, and monuments, and
subjects them to himself. Rosenmuller supposes it means, 'I will place
you in lofty and inaccessible places, where you will be safe from all
your enemies.' Gesenius also supposes that the word 'high places' here
means fastnesses or strongholds, and that to walk over those
strongholds, or to ride over them, is equivalent to possessing them, and
that he who has possession of the fastnesses has possession of the whole
country (see his Lexicon on the word במה bâmâh, No. 2). I give these
views of the most distinguished commentators on the passage, not being
able to determine satisfactorily to myself what is the true
signification. Neither of the above expositions seems to me to be
entirely free from difficulty. The general idea of prosperity and
security is undoubtedly the main thing intended; but what is the
specific sense couched under the phrase 'to ride on the high places of
the earth,' does not seem to me to be sufficiently explained.

And feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father - That is, thou
shalt possess the land promised to Jacob as an inheritance.

For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it - This formula often occurs
when an important promise is made, and it is regarded as ample security
for the fulfillment that Yahweh has promised it. What more ample
security can be required, or conceived, than the promise of the eternal
God?

Remarks on [Isa 58:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)

I. From [Isa 58:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001), and the
exposition given of these verses, particularly [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006), we may make the following
remarks respecting slavery.

1\. That the prophets felt themselves at entire liberty to animadvert on
slavery as an evil. They did not feel themselves restrained from doing
it by the fact that slavery was sustained by law, or by the plea that it
was a civil institution, and that the ministers of religion had nothing
to do with it. The holy men who were sent by God as his ambassadors, did
not suppose that, in lifting up the voice against this institution, they
were doing anything contrary to what fairly came within their notice as
religious teachers, nor did they regard it as, in such a sense, a civil
institution that they were not to advert to it.

It is often said in our country that slavery is a civil institution;
that it pertains solely to political affairs; that the constitution and
the laws suppose its existence, and make provision for its perpetuity;
that it is not appropriate for the ministers of religion, and for
ecclesiastical bodies to intermeddle with it. This plea, however, might
have been urged with much more force among the Hebrews. Their
constitution was, what ours is not, of divine appointment, and it would
have been easy for a friend of slavery to say that the prophets were
interfering with what was sanctioned by the laws, and with the
arrangements which were made for its perpetuity in the commonwealth. Why
would not such an argument have as much weight then as it should be
allowed to have now?

2\. The prophet Isaiah felt himself at entire liberty to exhort the
people to restore their slaves to freedom. He considered that slavery
was as proper a subject for him to discuss as any other. He treated it
as entirely within his province, and did not hesitate at all to express
his views on it as an evil, and to demand that the evil should cease, in
order to an acceptable worship of God.

3\. He does not speak of it as a good and desirable institution, or as
contributing to the welfare of the community. It is, in his view, a hard
and oppressive system; a system which should be abandoned if people
would render acceptable service to God. There is no apology made for it;
no pleading for it as a desirable system; no attempt made to show that
it is in accordance with the laws of the land and with the laws of God.
It would not be difficult to imagine what would be the emotions of
Isaiah if, after he had written this 58th chapter of his prophecies, it
should be represented that he was the friend of slavery, or if he were
to read some of the vindications of the systems published in this
Christian land by ministers of the gospel, and by ecclesiastical bodies,
or should hear the sentiments uttered in debate in Synods, Assemblies,
Conferences, and Conventions.

4\. It may be inferred from the exposition given, that Isaiah did not
suppose that slavery was in accordance with the spirit of the Mosaic
institutions, or that those institutions were designed to perpetuate it.
His treatment of it is just such as would be natural on the supposition
that the Mosaic institutions were so made that, while it was for a while
tolerated - just as polygamy and divorce were - yet that it was the
tendency and design of the Mosaic system ultimately to remove the evil
entirely, and to make the Hebrews throughout a free people, and that it
was therefore proper for him, as a prophet, to enjoin on them the duty
of letting all the oppressed go free. It may be added, that if this was
proper in the time of Isaiah, it cannot be less proper under the light
of the gospel and in the nineteenth century.

II\. From the closing portion of this chapter [Isa
58:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013), we may derive the following
important inferences respecting the Sabbath:

1\. It is to be of perpetual obligation. The whole chapter occurs in the
midst of statements that relate to the times of the Messiah. There is no
intimation that the Sabbath was to be abolished, but it is fairly
implied that its observance was to be attended with most happy results
in those future times. At all events, Isaiah regarded it as of binding
obligation, and felt that its proper observance was identified with the
national welfare.

2\. We may see the manner in which the Sabbath is to be observed. In no
place in the Bible is there a more full account of the proper mode of
keeping that holy day. We are to refrain from ordinary traveling and
employments; we are not to engage in doing our own pleasure; we are to
regard it with delight, and to esteem it a day worthy to be honored; and
we are to show respect to it by not performing our own ordinary works,
or pursuing pleasures, or engaging in the common topics of conversation.
In this description there occurs nothing of unique Jewish ceremony, and
nothing which indicates that it is not to be observed in this manner at
all times. Under the gospel, assuredly, it is as proper to celebrate the
Sabbath in this way, as it was in the times of Isaiah, and God doubtless
intended that it should be perpetually observed in this manner.

3\. Important benefits result from the right observance of the Sabbath.
In the passage before us, these are said to be, that they who thus
observed it would find pleasure in Yahweh, and would be signally
prospered and be safe. But those benefits are by no means confined to
the Jewish people. It is as true now as it was then, that they who
observe the Sabbath in a proper manner find happiness in the Lord - in
his existence, perfections, promises, law, and in communion with him -
which is to be found nowhere else. Of this fact there are abundant
witnesses now in every Christian church, and they will continue to be
multiplied in every coming age. And it is as true that the proper
observance of the Sabbath contributes to the prosperity and safety of a
nation now, as it ever did among the Jewish people. It is not merely
from the fact that God promises to bless the people who keep his holy
day; though this is of more value to a nation than all its armies and
fleets; but it is, that there is in the institution itself much that
tends to the welfare and prosperity of a country.

It is a time when worldliness is broken in upon by a periodical season
of rest, and when the thoughts are left free to contemplate higher and
purer objects. It is a time when more instruction is imparted on moral
and religious subjects, than on all the other days of the week put
together. The public worship of God tends to enlarge the intellect, and
purify the heart. No institution has ever been originated that has
contributed so much to elevate the common mind; to diffuse order, peace,
neatness, decency among people, and thus to perpetuate and extend all
that is valuable in society, as the Sabbath. Anyone may be convinced of
this, who will be at the pains to compare a neighborhood, a village, or
a city where the Sabbath is not observed with one where it is; and the
difference will convince him at once, that society owes more to the
Sabbath than to any single institution besides, and that in no way
possible can one-seventh portion of the time be so well employed as in
the manner contemplated by the Christian day of rest.

4\. Society will have seasons of cessation from labor, and when they are
not made occasions for the promotion of virtue, they will be for the
promotion of vice. Thus among the Romans an annual Saturnalia was
granted to all, as a season of relaxation from toil, and even from the
restraints of morality, besides many other days of periodical rest from
labor. Extensively among pagan nations also, the seventh day of the
week, or a seventh portion of the time, has been devoted to such
relaxation. Thus, Hesiod says, Ἑβδομον ἱερον ἡμαρ Hebdomon hieron hēmera
- The seventh day 'is holy.' Homer and Callimachus give it the same
title. Philo says of the seventh any. Ἐόρτη γὰρ ου ̓ μιας πολέως η χώρας
ἐστὶν ἀλλὰ τοῦ πακτὸς Heortē gar ou mias poleōs ē chōras estin alla tou
pantos - 'It is a feast, not of one city or one country only, but of
all.' Josephus (Contra Apion. ii.), says, 'There is no city, however
barbarous, where the custom of observing the seventh day which prevails
among the Jews is not also observed.' Theophilus of Antioch (ii.), says,
'Concerning the seventh day, which all people celebrate.' Eusebius says,
'Almost all the philosophers and poets acknowledge the seventh day as
holy.' See Grotius, De Veritate, i.

It is evident that this custom did not originate by chance, nor was it
kept up by chance. It must have been originated by far-spreading
tradition, and must have been observed either because the day was
esteemed to be holy, or because it was found to be convenient or
advantageous to observe such a periodical season of rest. In accordance
with this feeling, even the French nation during the Revolution, while
they abolished the Christain Sabbath, felt so deeply the necessity of a
periodical rest from labor, that they appointed the decade - or one day
in ten, to be observed as a day of relaxation and amusement. Whatever,
therefore, may have been the origin of the Sabbath, and whatever may be
the views which may be entertained of its sacredness, it is now reduced
to a moral certainty that people will have a periodical season of
cessation from labor. The only question is, In what way shall it be
observed? Shall it be devoted to amusement, pleasure, and vice; or shall
it be employed in the ways of intelligence, virtue, and religion? It is
evident that such a periodical relaxation may be made the occasion of
immense good to any community; and it is not less evident that it may be
the occasion of extending far the evils of intemperance, profaneness,
licentiousness, and crime. It is vain to attempt to blot out wholly the
observance of the Christian Sabbath; and since it will and must be
observed as a day of cessation from toil, all that remains is for
society to avail itself of the advantages which may be derived from its
proper observance, and to make it the handmaid of temperance,
intelligence, social order, and pure religion.

5\. It is deeply, therefore, to be regretted that this sacred
institution has been, and is so widely abused in Christian lands. As it
is, it is extensively a day of feasting, amusement, dissipation, and
revelry. And while its observance is, more decidedly than anything else,
the means of perpetuating virtue and religion on earth, it is perhaps
not too much to say that it is the occasion of more intemperance, vice,
and crime than all the other days of the week put together. This is
particularly the case in our large cities and towns. A community cannot
be disbanded from the restraints of labor one-seventh part of the time
without manifest evil, unless there are salutary checks and restraints.
The merchant cannot safely close his counting-room; the clerk and
apprentice cannot safely be discharged; the common laborer cannot safely
be dismissed from toil, unless there is something that shall be adapted
on that day to enlarge the understanding, elevate the morals, and purify
the heart. The welfare of the community demands that; and nowhere more
than in this country. Who can doubt that a proper observance at the holy
Sabbath would contribute to the prosperity of this nation? Who can doubt
that the worship of God; the cultivation of the heart; the contemplation
of moral and religious truth; and the active duties of benevolence,
would contribute more to the welfare of the nation, than to devote the
day to idleness, amusement, dissipation, and sin?

6\. While the friends of religion, therefore, mourn over the desecration
of the Christian Sabbath, let them remember that their example may
contribute much to secure a proper observance of that day. On the
friends of the Redeemer it devolves to rescue the day from desecration;
and by the divine blessing it may be done. The happiness of every
Christian is indissolubly connected with the proper observance of the
Sabbath. The perpetuity of the true religion, and its extension
throughout the earth, is identified with the observance of the Sabbath.
And every true friend of God the Saviour, as he values his own peace,
and as he prizes the religion which he professes to love, is bound to
restrain his foot on the Sabbath; to cease to find his own pleasure, and
to speak his own words on that holy day; and to show that the Sabbath is
to him a delight, and that he esteems it as a day to be honored and to
be loved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 59](isa059)

</div>
