<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa030)  [Next](isa032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 31:0</span></span>

It is evident that this chapter was composed at about the same time as
the preceding, and relates to the same subject. The general object, like
the former, is to dissuade the Jews from their contemplated alliance
with Egypt, and to lead them to rely on God. In doing this, the prophet
first denounces a woe on those who went down to Egypt to seek aid [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001); he then states that God will
punish them for it [Isa 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002); he then
urges the utter inability of the Egyptians to furnish the aid which was
needed, since Yahweh was about to stretch out his arm over them also,
and they, as well as those who sought their aid, should suffer under his
displeasure [Isa 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003). The prophet
then, in order to recall them from this contemplated alliance, and to
induce them to put confidence in Yahweh, assures them by two most
beautiful figures [Isa 31:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#004) that God
would protect their city in the threatened invasion, and save it from
destruction. He calls on them, therefore [Isa
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006), to turn unto God; assures them
[Isa 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#007) that at that time every man
would see the folly of trusting in idols; and finally [Isa
31:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#008), assures them of the complete
overthrow of the army of the Assyrian. The scope of the prophecy is,
therefore, simple and direct; the argument condensed, impressive, and
beautiful. It is not improbable, by any means, that these exhortations
of Isaiah had a sensible effect on the conduct of Hezekiah. The whole
narrative respecting the invasion of Sennacherib would lead to the
conclusion, that at first Hezekiah himself joined in the purpose of
seeking the alliance with Egypt, but that he was afterward led to
abandon it, and to use all his influence to induce his people also to
rely on the aid of God; compare [Isa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#006), with [Isa
36:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018).

[Isaiah 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 31:1</span></span>

Wo - (see the note at [Isa 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)).

To them that go down to Egypt - (see the note at [Isa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002)).

And stay on horses - (see the note at [Isa
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#016)).

And trust in chariots - (see the note at [Isa
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)). That they were often used in
war, is apparent from the following places [Jos
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#004); [Jdg
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#019); [Sa1
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#005); [Sa2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004).

Because they are many - Because they hope to secure the aid of many. See
the references above. It is evident that their confidence in them would
be in proportion to the number which they could bring into the field.

But they look not ... - (see the note at [Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001))

[Isaiah 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 31:2</span></span>

Yet he also is wise - God is wise. It is in vain to attempt to deceive
him, or to accomplish such purposes without his knowledge.

And will bring evil - The punishment which is due to such want of
confidence in him.

But will arise against the house of the evil-doers - This is a general
proposition, and it is evidently just as true now as it was in the time
of Isaiah.

[Isaiah 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 31:3</span></span>

Now the Egyptians are men - They are nothing but people; they have no
power but such as other people possess. The idea here is, that the case
in reference to which they sought aid was one in which "divine" help was
indispensable, and that, therefore, they relied on the aid of the
Egyptians in vain.

And their horses flesh, and not spirit - There is need, not merely of
"physical" strength, but of wisdom, and intelligence, and it is in vain
to look for that in mere brutes.

Both he that helpeth - Egypt, whose aid is sought.

And he that is holpen - Judah, that had sought the aid of Egypt. Neither
of them would be able to stand against the wrath of God.

[Isaiah 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 31:4</span></span>

For thus hath the Lord spoken - The design of this verse and the
following is to assure the Jews of the certain protection of Yahweh, and
thus to induce them to put their trust in him rather than to seek the
alliance with Egypt. To do this the prophet makes use of two striking
illustrations, the first of which is, that Yahweh would be no more
alarmed at the number and power of their enemies than a fierce lion
would be that was intent on his prey, and could not be frightened from
it by any number of men that should come against him. The "point" of
this comparison is, that as the lion that "was intent on his purpose"
could not be frightened from it by numbers, so it would be with Yahweh,
who "was equally intent on his purpose" - the defense of the city of
Jerusalem. It does not mean, of course, that the purpose of God and of
the lion resembled each other, but merely that there was similar
"intensity of purpose," and similar adherence to it notwithstanding all
opposition. The figure is one that denotes the highest vigilance,
firmness, steadiness, and a determination on the part of Yahweh that
Jerusalem should not fall into the hands of the Assyrians.

Like as the lion - The divine nature and purposes are often represented
in the Scriptures by metaphors, allegories, and comparisons taken from
animals, and especially from the lion (see [Deu
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020); [Job
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#016); [Psa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#002); [Hos
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#010)).

And the young lion - The vigorous, strong, fierce lion. The use of the
two here, gives intensity and strength to the comparison. It is
observable that the lion is seldom mentioned alone in the Scriptures.

Roaring on his prey - Roaring as he seizes on his prey. This is the
moment of the greatest intensity of purpose in the lion, and it is
therefore used by Isaiah to denote the intense purpose of Yahweh to
defend Jerusalem, and not to be deterred by any number of enemies.

When a multitude of shepherds is called forth - When the neighborhood is
alarmed, and all the inhabitants turn out to destroy him. This
comparison is almost exactly in the spirit and language of Homer, "Il."
xii. 209, following:

So pressed with hunger from the mountain's brow,

Descends a lion on the flocks below;

So stalks the lordly savage o'er the plain,

In sullen majesty and stern disdain:

In vain loud mastiffs bay him from afar,

And shepherds gall him with an iron war;

Regardless, furious, he pursues his way;

He foams, he roars, he rends the panting prey.

Pope

So also Il. xviii. 161, 162:

\- But checked he turns; repulsed attacks again.

With fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires

Nor yields a step, nor from his post retires;

So watchful shepherds strive to force in vain,

The hungry lion from the carcass slain.

Pope

He will not be afraid - He will be so intent on his prey that he will
not heed their shouting.

Nor abase himself - That is, he will not be frightened, or disheartened.

So shall the Lord of hosts - That is, with the same intensity of
purpose; with the same fixedness of design. He will be as little
dismayed and diverted from his purpose by the number, the designs, and
the war shout of the Assyrian armies.

[Isaiah 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 31:5</span></span>

As birds flying - This is another comparison indicating substantially
the same thing as the former, that Yahweh would protect Jerusalem. The
idea here is, that He would do it in the same manner as birds defend
their young by hovering over them, securing them under their wings, and
leaping forward, if they are suddenly attacked, to defend them. Our
Saviour has used a similar figure to indicate his readiness to have
defended and saved the same city [Mat
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027), and it is possible that he may
have had this passage in his eye. The phrase 'birds flying,' may denote
the "rapidity" with which birds fly to defend their young, and hence,
the rapidity with which God would come to defend Jerusalem; or it may
refer to the fact that birds, when their young are attacked, fly, or
flutter around them to defend them; they will not leave them.

And passing over - פסוח pâsoach. Lowth renders this, 'Leaping forward.'
This word, which is usually applied in some of its forms to the Passover
[Exo 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013), [Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023), [Exo
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027); [Num
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#004); [Jos
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#011); [Ch2
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018), properly means, as a verb, "to
pass over," and hence, to preserve or spare. The idea in the passage is,
that Yahweh would protect Jerusalem, as a bird defends its young.

[Isaiah 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 31:6</span></span>

Turn ye unto him - In view of the fact that he will assuredly defend
Jerusalem, commit yourselves unto him rather than seek the aid of Egypt.

Have deeply revolted - For the meaning of this phrase, see the note at
[Isa 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015).

[Isaiah 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 31:7</span></span>

For in that day - That is, in the invasion of Sennacherib, and the
events that shalt be consequent thereon.

Every man shall cast away his idols - (see the note at [Isa
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022); compare the note at [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)).

For a sin - Or rather, the sin which your own hands have made. The sense
is, that the making of those idols had been a sin, or sin itself. It had
been "the" sin, by way of eminence, which was chargeable upon them.

[Isaiah 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 31:8</span></span>

Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword - The sword is often used as
an instrument of punishment. It is not meant here literally that the
sword would be used, but it is employed to denote that complete
destruction would come upon them.

Not of a mighty man - The idea here is, that the army should not fall by
the valor of a distinguished warrior, but that it should be done by the
direct interposition of God (see [Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)).

Of a mean man - Of a man of humble rank. His army shall not be slain by
the hand of mortals.

But he shall flee - The Assyrian monarch escaped when his army was
destroyed, and fled toward his own land; [Isa
37:37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#037).

From the sword - Margin, 'For fear of.' The Hebrew is 'From the face of
the sword;' and the sense is, that he would flee in consequence of the
destruction of his host, here represented as destroyed by the sword of
Yahweh.

And his young men - The flower and strength of his army.

Shall be discomfited - Margin, 'For melting;' or 'tribute,' or
'tributary.' Septuagint, Εἰς ἥττημα Eis hēttēma - 'For destruction.' The
Hebrew word (מס mas), derived probably from מסס mâsas, "to melt away, to
dissolve") is most usually employed to denote a levy, fine, or tax - so
called, says Taylor, because it wastes or exhausts the substance and
strength of a people. The word is often used to denote that people
become tributary, or vassals, as in [Gen
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#015); [Deu
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#011); compare [Jos
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#010); [Sa2
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#024); [Kg1
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#006); [Kg1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#013); [Est
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001). Probably it does not here mean
that the strength of the Assyrian army would become literally tributary
to the Jews, but that they would be as if they had been placed under a
levy to them; their vigor and strength would melt away; as property and
numbers do under taxation and tribute.

[Isaiah 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 31:9</span></span>

And he shall pass over - Margin, 'His rock shall pass away for fear.'
The Hebrew would bear this, but it does not convey a clear idea. The
sense seems to be this. The word rendered 'stronghold' (Hebrew, 'His
rock') denotes his fortifications, or the places of strength in which he
trusted. Probably the Assyrian monarch had many such places which he
regarded as perfectly secure, both in the limits of his own kingdom, and
on the line of his march toward Judea. Those places would naturally be
made strong, in order to afford a refuge in case of a defeat. The idea
here is, that so great would be his alarm at the sudden destruction of
his army and the failure of his plans, that in his flight he would "pass
over" or "beyond" these strong places; he would not even stop to take
refuge there and reorganize his scattered forces, but would flee with
alarm "beyond" them, and make his way to his own capital. This appears
to have been most strikingly fulfilled (see [Isa
37:37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#037)).

And his princes - Those, perhaps, that ruled over his dependent
provinces.

Shall be afraid of the ensign - That is, of any standard or banner that
they saw. They would suppose that it was the standard of an enemy. This
denotes a state of great consternation, when all the princes and nobles
under the command of the Assyrian would be completely dismayed.

Whose fire is in Zion ... - That is, whose altar is there, and always
burns there. That was the place where he was worshipped, and it was a
place, therefore, which he would defend. The meaning is, that they would
be as certainly destroyed as the God whose altar was in Jerusalem was a
God of truth, and would defend the place where he was worshipped.

And his furnace ... - (see the note at [Isa
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001)). Where his altar continually
burns. The word rendered 'furnace' (תנור tannûr) means properly a baking
oven [Exo 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#003); [Lev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004); [Lev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#009); [Lev
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#035). This was either a large conical
pot which was heated, in which the cakes were baked at the sides; or an
excavation made in the earth which was heated by putting wood in it, and
when that was removed, the dough was put in it. Perhaps the whole idea
here is, that Yahweh had a home in Jerusalem, with the usual appendages
of a house; that his fire and his oven were there, an expression
descriptive of a dwelling-place. If so, then the meaning is, that he
would defend his own home, and that the Assyrian could not expect to
prevail against it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 32](isa032)

</div>
