<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa029)  [Next](isa031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 30:0</span></span>

It is probable that the prophecy in this chapter was delivered about the
same time as that in the previous chapter, and on the same general
occasion. It is evident that it refers to the time of Hezekiah, when the
Jews were alarmed by an apprehended invasion of the king of Assyria.
Hezekiah had revolted from the king of Assyria [Kg2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007); and it is probable that many of
the leaders of the Jews began to be alarmed at the prospect that their
land would be invaded by him, especially as it was known that it was the
intention of Sennacherib to make war on Egypt, and that he could easily
take Judea in his way. In such circumstances it was natural that they
should propose an alliance with the Egyptians, and seek to unite their
forces with theirs to repel the common danger. Instead of looking to
God, and relying on his aid, they had probably entered into such an
alliance, offensive and defensive [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001). To see the impropriety of such a
league, it is to be remembered that God had promised to be the protector
of his people, and that he had prohibited alliances with the surrounding
nations; that it was a leading part of the Jewish policy, as instituted
by Moses, to keep them a distinct and independent people; and that
special care had been exercised to keep them from returning to the
customs, or depending on the aid of the Egyptians. This alliance had
been formed unquestionably contrary to the solemn counsel and warning of
Isaiah [Isa 20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001), and he now
reproves them for it, and endeavors to recall them again to confidence
in God.

The following is a summary of the contents of the chapter:

I. The prophet denounces 'wo' on them for seeking the aid of Egypt [Isa
30:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001).

II\. He assures them that Egypt would be unable to help them, and that
the effect would be that they would yet be ashamed themselves of the
alliance [Isa 30:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#003).

III\. The prophet is directed to make a solem record that the prevailing
character of the Jews was that of a rebellious people [Isa
30:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008).

IV\. The judgment of God is denounced against them for forming this
alliance, under the image of a wall that is ready to fall on them, and
destroy them [Isa 30:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#012).

V. The prophet tells them of the true way in which they may have peace
and confidence, and that is, by putting their trust in God, and assures
them that God waits to become their defender [Isa
30:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015).

VI\. God "would" yet bless them. The people would see the vanity of
their reliance on Egypt, and would turn unto God, and their turning to
him would be attended with most rich and valuable blessings. These
blessings are described in highly figurative and beautiful language [Isa
30:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#019))

VII\. Yahweh would show himself the protector of his people; and would,
in a signal and sudden manner, overthrow and destroy the Assyrian, and
deliver his people [Isa 30:27-33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027).

The scope, therefore, of the chapter is to lead them to look away from
Egypt, and to put confidence in God, at whose hand they were about to
experience so signal a deliverance from the much dreaded invasion of
Sennacherib.

[Isaiah 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 30:1</span></span>

Wo, - (see the note at [Isa 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001)).

To the rebellious children - To those whom he had nourished as children,
and who had rebelled against him (see the note at [Isa
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)).

That take counsel, but not of me - They look to Egypt, and depend on a
human arm.

And that cover with a covering - The idea here, according to our
translation, is, that they seek protection or a covering from the
impending calamity. Lowth renders this, 'Who ratify covenants;'
supposing that the reference is to the fact that in ancient times
compacts were formed by offering sacrifices, and by pouring out
libations. The Hebrew, according to Lowth, means, 'who pour out a
libation.' So the Septuagint renders it, Συνθήκας sunthēkas - 'And thou
hast made covenants.' The Syriac renders it, 'Who pour out libations.'
The Hebrew word נסך nâsak properly conveys the idea of pouring out, and
is applied:

\(1\) to the act of pouring out wine as a drink offering, or as a
libation to God [Gen 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#014); [Exo
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#009); [Ch1
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#018); [Hos
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004);

\(2\) to the act of pouring out oil, that is, to anointing kings and
rulers [Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Dan
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#008);

\(3\) to the act of pouring out melted metals, that is, to cast them
[Isa 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019); [Isa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010).

The word also may have a meaning kindred to סכך sâkak and denote "to
cover," as in [Isa 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007). Various
derivatives from the word are rendered 'to cover withal' [Num
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#007); 'the covering' [Isa
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#020); 'the web,' that is, that which
is woven for a covering [Jdg 16:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#013).
The idea, however, which best suits the connection here is probably that
suggested by Lowth, in accordance with the Septuagint, and the Syriac,
and adopted by Rosenmuller, Gesenius, and others, "to make a libation;"
that is, to ratify a covenant, or compact.

But not of my Spirit - It was not such as was suggested by his Spirit,
and not such as he would approve.

That they may add sin to sin - They add to the sin of rebellion against
God that of forming an alliance. Sins do not usually stand alone. When
one is committed, it is often necessary to commit others in order to
carry out and complete the plan which that contemplated.

[Isaiah 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 30:2</span></span>

That walk to go down to Egypt - Hebrew, 'Going in the descent to Egypt.'
That is, they do it by their ambassadors [Isa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004). The journey to Egypt from
Palestine is always represented as going down [Gen
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#010); [Gen
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#003); [Gen
43:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#015); [Num
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#015); [Deu
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022).

To strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh - To form an
alliance with Pharaoh, that thus they might be able to repel the
threatened invasion. Pharaoh was the general name of the kings of Egypt,
in the same manner as Caesar was the common name of the emperors of
Rome.

To trust in the shadow of Egypt - A 'shadow' (צל tsêl) is an emblem of
protection and defense, as a shade is a protection from the burning rays
of the sun (see the note at [Isa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006)).

[Isaiah 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 30:3</span></span>

Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame - (see the note at
[Isa 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#005)).

Your confusion - Hebrew, 'For reproach.' It would either occur that the
Egyptians "would" not enter into an alliance; or that if they did, they
"could" not defend them, and in either case it would be the source of
deep regret and shame.

[Isaiah 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 30:4</span></span>

For his princes - The sense of this verse seems to be this. The prophet
is stating the fact that the Jews would be ashamed of their attempted
alliance with Egypt. In this verse, and the following, he states the
manner in which they would be made sensible of their folly in seeking
this alliance. He therefore enumerates several circumstances in regard
to the manner in which the alliance had been sought, and the
disappointment that would follow after all their vain confidence. He
therefore states [Isa 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004), that the
Jews had employed persons of the highest respectability and honor, even
princes, to secure the alliance; that they had gone to Egypt with much
difficulty - through a land where lions, and vipers, and fiery serpents
abounded; that they had at much hazard taken their treasures down to
Egypt in order to secure the alliance [Isa
30:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005), and that after all, the
Egyptians could not aid them. The phrase 'his princes,' refers to the
princes of Judah, the ambassadors that the Jews sent forth, and the idea
is, that they regarded the alliance as of so much importance that they
had employed their most honorable men - even their princes - to secure
it.

Were at Zoan - Had come to Zoan, or were there on the business of their
embassy. On the situation of Zoan, see the notes at [Isa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011), [Isa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013). It was the residence of the
kings in Lower Egypt, and would be the place to which the ambassadors
would naturally resort to negotiate an alliance.

Came to Hanes - Respecting the situation of this place there has been
much diversity of opinion among interpreters. The Chaldee renders it by
the more full word "Tahpanhes;" and Grotius supposes that the word is
contracted from Tahpanhes [Jer 43:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#007),
and that the name was sometimes abbreviated and written חנס chânēs.
Vitringa supposes that it was Anusis, situated in the Delta of the Nile,
and the residence of the king of the same name. Herodotus (ii. 137)
mentions a city of that name, Ἄνυσίς Anusis. Anusis was a king of Egypt
before the irruption of the Ethiopians, and it was not uncommon for a
king to give his own name to a city. Probably Anusis is the city
intended here; and the sense is, that they had come to the royal
residence for the purpose of negotiating an alliance. It is known that
in the time of Jeremiah (588 years before Christ) "Tahpanhes" was the
capital of the nation (see [Jer 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#009)).

[Isaiah 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 30:5</span></span>

They were all ashamed - That is, all the legates or ambassadors. When
they came into Egypt, they found them either unwilling to enter into an
alliance, or unable to render them any aid, and they were ashamed that
they had sought their assistance rather than depend on God (compare [Jer
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#036)).

[Isaiah 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 30:6</span></span>

The burden of the beasts of the south - The word 'south' here refers
doubtless to the country to the south of Judea; and particularly to
Egypt. Thus it is used in [Dan 11:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#005).
The phrase 'beasts of the south,' here refers to the animals that were
traveling to Egypt. Isaiah, in vision, sees the caravan heavily laden
with treasures pursuing a southern direction on its way to Egypt. The
word 'burden' is used in two senses, to denote that which is borne, a
heavy burden; or an oracle, a solemn prophetic message (see the notes at
[Isa 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001); [Isa
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001); [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)). Many understand the word here
in the latter sense, and regard this as the title of a prophetic message
similar to those in [Isa 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001); [Isa
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001); [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001). But the word is doubtless used
here in its ordinary signification, to denote the load which is borne on
animals, and here especially the treasures which were borne down to
Egypt, for the purpose of securing their friendly alliance. The prophet
sees the caravan, or the beasts of the ambassadors heavily laden with
rich treasures, traveling southward toward Egypt, and cries out, 'O the
heavy burden, the load of treasures going to the south!'

Into the land of trouble and anguish - Egypt; so called either because
it was the land where the Hebrews had formerly suffered so severe
oppressions; or because it was a land where the subjects were now
grievously oppressed, and borne down with cruel laws; or because it was
yet to be a land of trouble, from which the Jews could expect no aid.
The general idea is, that Egypt was not a land of liberty and happiness,
but a country where cruelty, oppression, and woe abounded. One source of
trouble, as emblematic of all, the prophet immediately mentions when he
designates that it abounded with venomous reptiles.

The viper - (אפעה 'eph‛eh). Septuagint, Ἀσπίδες Aspides 'asps' (see [Isa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005)). This is a well-known species of
serpent. It is probably the same as the El-Effah of the Arabs which is
thus described by Mr. Jackson: 'It is remarkable for its quick and
penetrating poison; it is about two feet long and as thick as a man's
arm, beautifully spotted with yellow and brown, and sprinkled over with
blackish specks, similar to the horn-nosed snake. They have a wide
mouth, by which they inhale a great quantity of air, and when inflated
therewith they eject it with such force as to be heard at a considerable
distance.' It is well known that Egypt produced venomous reptiles in
abundance. Cleopatra destroyed herself with the bite of an asp which she
had concealed for that purpose.

And fiery flying serpent - (מעופף שׂרף s'ârâph me‛ôpēp). Septuagint,
Ἔκγονα ἀσπίδων περομένων Ekgona aspidōn petomenōn. This is the flying
serpent so often referred to in the Scriptures. See a description of it
in the notes at [Isa 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#029). It is
known to have abounded in the Arabian deserts, and was doubtless found
also in Egypt as being in the same latitude, and infested with similar
reptiles. Niebuhr thus describes a species of serpent which answers to
this account. 'There is at Bakra a sort of serpents which they call Heie
Sursurie, or Heie Thiare. They commonly keep upon the date trees; and as
it would be laborious for them to come down from a very high tree in
order to ascend another, they twist themselves by the tail to a branch
of the former, which, making a spring, by the motion they give it, throw
themselves to the second. Hence, it is that the modern Arabs call them
the flying serpents - Heie Thiare. Lord Anson, as quoted by Niebuhr,
also speaks of them as follows: 'The Spaniards informed us that there
was often found in the woods a most mischievous serpent, called the
flying snake, which, they said, darted itself from the boughs of trees
on either man or beast that came within its reach, and whose sting they
took to be inevitable death.' There was a species of serpent which the
Greeks called Αξοντίας Acontias, and the Roman Jaculus, from their swift
darting motion, and perhaps the same species is here referred to which
Lucan calls Jaculique volucres. That these venomous reptiles abounded in
Egypt is expressly testified by profane writers. Thus Ammianus says
(xxii. 15), that 'Egypt nourishes innumerable serpents, basilisks, and
twoheaded serpents (amphisbaenas), and the seytalus (a serpent of a
glistening color), and the acontias (Latin, Jaculus), and adders, and
vipers, and many others.'

They will carry their riches - Presents, designed to induce the
Egyptians to enter into the alliance. That it was a common custom to
make presents when one king sent an embassy to another, whether the
design was to show friendship or civility, or to form an alliance, is
well known in regard to all the nations of the East. The custom prevails
at the present day, and is often referred to in Scripture (see [Kg1
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#019); [Kg2
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#008); [Kg2
18:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014)).

[Isaiah 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 30:7</span></span>

For the Egyptians shall help in vain - That is, if they enter into the
alliance, they shall not be able to defend you from the invader. The
other member of the sentence would seem to imply that they would make
promises of aid, and would even boast of being able to deliver them, but
that they would fail in their promises.

Therefore have I cried - Therefore have I the prophet cried, that is, I
do call her so.

Concerning this - Concerning this country; that is, Egypt. Some have
understood this as referring to Jerusalem, but the connection requires
us to understand it of Egypt.

Their strength is to sit still - This is evidently designed to be an
expressive appellation of Egypt. The word rendered here, without much
propriety, 'strength' (רהב râhab) is a proper name of Egypt, and is
several times applied to it; [Isa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009)
:

Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab

And wounded the dragon?

In this passage there can be no doubt that it refers to Egypt. So in
[Psa 87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004); [Psa
89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010) (see the margin). Why it was
given to Egypt is unknown, and can only be conjectured. Bochart ("Geog.
Sacra," i. 4. 24) supposes that it is derived from the word ῥιβι ribi,
which singifies "a pear," and that it was given to the Delta or Lower
Egypt on account of its form, as somewhat resembling a pear. But there
is not clear evidence that such was the meaning of the word, and there
is no reason why we should forsake the usual sense of the Hebrew word.
The verb רהב râhab means to urge, press on, attack [Pro
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#003); to be highspirited, fierce, full
of courage; to behave proudly [Isa
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#005); and has, in most instances, a
relation to pride, to arrogance, to boasting [Job
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#013); [Psa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004). The noun "Rahab" indicates
ferocity, haughtiness, boasting, insolence; and the name was doubtless
given to Egypt on account of its insolence and pride. It is used here
because Egypt would be full of self-confidence, and would boast that she
could aid the suppliant Jews, and deliver them from the threatened
invasion. The phrase rendered 'to sit still,' is a part of the name
which the prophet gave to her. Though she boasted, yet would she sit
still; she would be inefficient, and would do nothing; and the whole
name, therefore, may be rendered, 'I call her, the blusterer that
sitteth still;' that is, 'they are courageous in talking; cowards in
acting.' (Taylor)

[Isaiah 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 30:8</span></span>

Now go - This is a direction to the prophet to make a permanent record
of the character of the Jewish people. The fact to be recorded was, that
they were rebellious [Isa 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#009); the
design for which the record was to be made was to show to future times
that this had been the uniform character of the nation. The record was
to be preserved that it might be a proof of the care of God toward the
nation even in the midst of their long-continued and obstinate
perverseness.

Write it before them - Before the Jews themselves, that they may see the
record, and may have it constantly before them.

In a table - Or ON a table. The word לוח lûach denotes a tablet either
of stone to engrave upon [Deu 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009);
[Exo 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018); or of wood [Kg1
7:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#036). It is not improbable that this
was to be exposed to public view in some conspicuous place near the
temple.

And note it - Engrave it; that is, record it.

In a book - On parchment, or in the usual way of writing (see the note
at [Isa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)).

For the time to come - Hebrew as Margin, 'The latter day.' It was to be
made in order that future ages might know what had been the character of
that people, and what had been the patience and forbearance of God in
regard to them.

[Isaiah 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 30:9</span></span>

That this is a rebellious people - (see the note at [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)).

Lying children - They had promised in solemn covenant to take Yahweh as
their God, but they had been unfaithful to their vows.

[Isaiah 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 30:10</span></span>

Which say to the seers - The prophets (see the note at [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)).

See not - They desire not that they should communicate to them the will
of Yahweh.

Prophesy not unto us right things - It is not probable that they
"openly" demanded of the prophets that they should declare falsehood and
deceit, but their conduct was as if they had required that. The sense
is, they bore with impatience the theatenings and commands of the true
prophets; they were offended at their plainness and their reproofs of
their vices; and they preferred the false prophets, who fell in with
their prejudices, and who did not denounce the judgment of God for their
crimes.

Speak unto us smooth things - That is, those things which are in
accordance with our feelings, prejudices, and desires; which assure us
of prosperity and success, and which will not disturb us with the
apprehension of punishment. This was spoken particularly of their desire
to make a league with Egypt, an enterprise for which the true prophets
threatened them with the divine displeasure, but which probably the
false prophets encouraged.

Prophesy deceits - Not that they would openly and avowedly demand to be
deceived, but they demanded that which the prophet says would be
deceits. No man "professedly" desires to be deceived; but many a man is
willing to put himself under that kind of teaching which is deceit, and
which he might know to be falsehood if he would examine it.

[Isaiah 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 30:11</span></span>

Get ye out of the way - Or, rather, 'Recede from the way;' or 'Turn
aside from the way.' The words "way" and "path" are used to denote the
true religion, or the true doctrines of God [Mat
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014); [Mat
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016); [Joh
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#004); [Act
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026); [Act
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009), [Act
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023); [Pe2
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#015). The request here was that the
true prophets would recede from the stern and true precepts of religion,
and turn to the ways of falsehood and deceit.

Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us - The sense of this
is, 'Let us hear no more of this name. We are weary of constantly
hearing it, as if there was nothing else but the ceaseless repetition of
the name "The Holy One of Israel.'" It is to be remembered that the
prophets spoke in this name, and often commenced their prophecies with
the announcement, 'thus saith the Holy One of Israel.' No one more
frequently used this than Isaiah (see [Isa
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#012), [Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015); compare [Isa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004); [Isa
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019), [Isa
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024); [Isa
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#020); [Isa
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006); [Isa
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#007); [Isa
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#019); [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001); [Isa
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#014)). It is probable that a
reference constantly to the fact that he was holy, was that which most
troubled them. How descriptive of the feelings of sinners! How striking
an illustration of the fact that they do not wish to hear of the name or
laws of the Holy Lord God! And what a melancholy proof of depravity is
it when people pursue such a course that they do not wish to hear of
Him, and desire no more to be troubled with His name and laws!

[Isaiah 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 30:12</span></span>

Wherefore thus saith the Holy One - Yahweh. There may be some reference
here to the fact adverted to in [Isa
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#011), that they were weary of the
name of the Holy One of Israel, and of the perpetual reiteration of his
commands. Isaiah, as if to show them how little he was disposed to
comply with their prejudices, again makes an appeal to that name, and
urges the authority of Yahweh. It is often proper to "repeat" the very
doctrine to which sinners object, and which has given them offence. That
they are offended, shows that their minds are "awake" to the truth, and
gives some indication that their consciences trouble them. Ministers of
God should never shrink from their duty because people oppose them; they
should never cease to speak in the name and by the authority of the Holy
One of Israel, because that name may excite opposition and disgust.

Ye despise this word - That is, the word or message of Yahweh [Isa
28:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#013); or perhaps it means the word
'Holy One of Israel.' The sense is, that they did not trust in the
promise and protection of Yahweh, but relied on human aid.

And trust in oppression - Margin, 'Fraud.' The word עשׁק ‛osheq properly
denotes oppression, or extortion [Ecc
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#007); [Eze
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#007), [Eze
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#012); then, that which is obtained by
extortion, and also by fraud [Lev 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#004);
[Psa 62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011); [Ecc
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#007). It may refer here to the fact
that they had, by unjust and oppressive exactions, obtained the
treasures referred to in [Isa 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006), by
which they hoped to conciliate the favor of Egypt; or it may mean that
they trusted in their fraudulent purposes toward God, that is, to a
false and perfidious course, by which they were unfaithful to him.

Perverseness - A crooked, perverse, rebellious course. They refused
submission to Yahweh, and relied on the aid of strangers.

[Isaiah 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 30:13</span></span>

Therefore this iniquity - That is, this refusing to trust in Yahweh, and
this intention to seek the alliance of Egypt. The general sense of the
figure here is, that their depending on Egypt would involve them
ultimately in complete and awful ruin - ruin that should come upon them
as suddenly as when a wall that had been long swelling out gives way.

As a breach ready to fall - Like a breaking forth, or a bursting in a
wall.

Swelling out in a high wall - That is, where the foundation is not firm,
and where one part of the wall sinks, and it inclines to one side until
it suddenly bursts forth. A similar figure is used by the Psalmist [Psa
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003) :

Ye shall be slain all of you

As a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.

Whose breaking cometh suddenly - Though it has been long leaning and
swelling, yet the actual bursting forth would be in an instant. So would
it be with the destruction that would come upon the Jews. Though by
their sins they had been long preparing for it, yet it would come upon
them by a sudden and tremendous crash. So it will be with all sinners.
Destruction may seem to be long delayed - as a wall may be long
inclining, and may seem to prepare imperceptibly to fall; but in due
time it will come suddenly upon them, when too late to obtain relief.

[Isaiah 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 30:14</span></span>

And he shall break it as the breaking - That is, its breaking shall be
like the breaking of a potter's vessel. The Septuagint reads it, 'And
its fall (τὸ πτῶμα to ptōma) shall be like the breaking of an earthen
vessel,'

As the breaking of the potter's vessel - That is, as an earthen, fragile
vessel, which is easily dashed to pieces. The image here is all drawn
from the bursting forth, or the complete ruin of the swelling wall; but
the sense is, that the Jewish republic would be entirely broken,
scattered, demolished.

He shall not spare in the bursting of it - Figuratively in the bursting
of the wall; literally in the destruction of the Jewish state and
polity.

A sherd - A piece of pottery; a fragment.

To take fire from the hearth - Large enough to carry coals on.

Or to take water withal out of the pit - Out of the fountain, or pool;
that is, it shall be broken into small fragments, and the ruin shall be
complete - as when a wall tumbles down and is completely broken up. The
sense is, that the republic of Israel would be completely ruined, so
that there should not be found a man of any description who could aid
them. The prophet does not specify when this would be. It is not
necessary to suppose that it would occur on the invasion of Sennacherib,
or that it would be the immediate consequence of seeking the aid of
Egypt, but that it would be a consequence, though a remote one. Perhaps
the figure used would lead us to look to some remote period. A high wall
will begin to give way many years before its fall. The swell will be
gradual, and perhaps almost imperceptible. For some time it may appear
to be stationary; then perhaps some new cause will produce an increase
of the projecting part, until it can no longer sustain itself, and then
the ruin will be sudden and tremendous. So it would be with the Jews.
The seeking of the alliance with Egypt was "one" cause - though a remote
one - of their final ruin. Their forsaking God and seeking human aid,
was gradually but certainly "undermining" the foundations of the state -
as a wall may be gradually undermined. Frequent repetitions of that
would more and more impair the real strength of the republic, until, for
their accumulated acts of want of confidence, the patience of God would
be exhausted, and the state would fall like a mighty, bursting wall. The
prophecy was fulfilled in the invasion of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans; it
had a more signal and awful fulfillment in its destruction by the
Romans.

[Isaiah 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 30:15</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord God - The design of this verse is to give a
reason for the destruction that should come upon them. That reason was,
that God had indicated to them the path of truth and safety, but they
chose not to follow it, and refused to put confidence in him.

In returning - In returning to God; that is, if you are converted to
him.

And rest - That is, by calmly reposing on God for assistance, and not
seeking the alliance of Egypt (see [Exo
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013)).

In quietness - In a collected, quiet state of mind.

In confidence - By putting simple trust in God.

Shall be your strength - You shall be safe; your enemies shall not be
able to overcome and subdue you.

But ye would not - When Jerusalem was threatened by Sennacherib,
Hezekiah did put this confidence in God, and reposed calmly and securely
on his promises [Isa 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#015), [Isa
36:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018), [Isa
36:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#021); but it is not improbable that
when the city was first threatened, and Hezekiah heard of the
preparations made by the Assyrians, he had joined with the party in
Jerusalem who proposed an alliance with Egypt, and that this was known
to Sennacherib [Isa 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#006). Probably,
however, before the invasion had actually commenced he had seen the
impropriety of this, either because the aid of Egypt could not be
secured, or because Isaiah had warned him of this, and had been brought
to put his trust entirely in Yahweh. Yet the offence had been
"committed" of refusing to put implicit confidence in Yahweh, and of
seeking the aid of Egypt, and for that the punishment is threatened in
this chapter [Isa 30:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#016).

[Isaiah 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 30:16</span></span>

But ye said, No - Ye who proposed an alliance with Egypt.

For we will flee upon horses - The word 'flee' (נוּס nûc), usually
signifies to flee before or from any person or thing. But here it seems
to have the notion of making a rapid motion in general, and not to refer
to the fact that they expected to flee "from" their enemy, for it does
not seem to have been a part of their expectation. The idea seems to be
that by their alliance with Egypt they would secure the means of "rapid
motion," whatever might be the necesity or occasion for it, whether
against or from an enemy. The sense is, 'we will by this alliance secure
the assistance of cavalry;' and, doubtless, the design was to employ it
in the attack and discomfiture of their foes. It will be recollected
that Moses [Deu 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016) strictly forbade
that the future monarch of the Jews should 'multiply horses to himself,
to cause the people to return to Egypt,' and that consequently the
employment of cavalry was against the laws of the nation. For the
reasons of this prohibition, see the note at [Isa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007). The attempt, therefore, in the
time of Hezekiah to call in the aid of the cavalry of Egypt, was a
violation of both the letter and the spirit of the Jewish institutions
(compare [Isa 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001); [Hos
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004)).

Therefore shall ye flee - You shall fly before your enemies; you shall
be defeated and scattered.

We will ride upon the swift - That is, upon fleet horses or coursers.
Arabia was celebrated, and is still, for producing fleet coursers, and
the same was formerly true of Egypt (see the note at [Isa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007)).

[Isaiah 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 30:17</span></span>

One thousand ... - The sense of this is, that you shall be easily
alarmed and overcome by those who are inferior in numbers and strength.
The number 'one thousand,' is put for a large indefinite number;
probably meaning all.

At the rebuke of one - The number one here is put to denote a very small
number; a number in the ordinary course of warfare entirely
disproportionate to those who would be vanquished. There is probably a
reference here to the prediction in [Deu
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030) :

How should one chase a thousand,

And two put ten thousand to flight,

Except their Rock had sold them

And Yahweh had shut them up?

At the rebuke of five - Of a very small number.

Till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain - The word
rendered 'beacon' (תרן toren), (Greek ἱστὸς histos, "a mast"), denotes
properly the mast of a ship [Isa
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#023); [Eze
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#005); then anything resembling a mast,
a flagstaff, or a beacon of any kind. It may refer to a staff or mast
erected on a promontory to warn sailors, or to be a landmark - as it is
not improbable that the masts of ships would be employed for that
purpose; or it may refer to a flagstaff, erected on a conspicuous place,
to which the nation could rally in time of war. On the sea coasts of
America such beacons are often erected. Those which I have seen consist
of a pole erected on an eminence or rising ground, with a cask or barrel
painted white on the top. The idea seems to be, that of a long pole
erected for any purpose, and which was standing alone, stripped of its
leaves and branches, and without ornament. So would be the few,
solitary, and scattered Jews when driven before their enemies.

And as an ensign on a hill - (see [Isa
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026), note; [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012), note). The idea is, that those
who should escape would be few in number, and would stand alone, as a
beacon in view of all the nations, to admonish them of the justice of
God, and the truth of his threatening - like an ensign floating on a
hill that can be seen from afar. What a striking description is this of
the condition of the Jews in our times, and indeed in all ages since
their dispersion! Their strength, and influence, and power as a people
are gone. They stand as beacons to warn the nations of the evils of a
want of confidence in God, and of his justice.

[Isaiah 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 30:18</span></span>

And therefore - The sense of the words rendered 'and therefore,' may be
better expressed by the phrase, 'yet moreover,' meaning, that
notwithstanding their sins, and the necessity of punishing them, Yahweh
would be longsuffering, and would yet bring the nation to repentance.

And therefore will he be exalted - Lowth renders this in accordance with
a conjecture of Houbigant, 'Shall he expect in silence, by reading ידוּם
yâdûm instead of ירוּם yârûm. But there is no authority for this except
a single MS. Rosenmuller supposes it means, in accordance with the
interpretation of Jarchi, that he would delay, that is, that his mercy
would be "long" or his judgment remote. But the sense seems to be, that
God would be so forbearing that his character would be "exalted," that
is, that people would have more elevated conceptions of his truth,
mercy, and faithfulness.

For the Lord is a God of judgment - He will do what is right. He will
spare the nation still; and yet establish among them the true religion,
and they shall flourish.

Blessed are all they that wait for him - This seems to have been
recorded to encourage them, when the threatened calamities should come
upon them, to put their confidence in God, and to trust that he would
yet appear and restore the nation to himself. This verse is the
commencement of the annunciation of the blessings which should yet be
conferred on them. The description of these blessings is continued to
[Isa 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026).

[Isaiah 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 30:19</span></span>

For the people shall dwell in Zion - (see the note at [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)). The language here is evidently
adapted to a return from the captivity. The whole design of the passage
[Isa 30:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#019) is to describe a future
state of prosperity by images mainly drawn from the idea of temporal
enjoyment. The sense is, that in some period subsequent to the
calamities that would befall them for their improper reliance on the aid
of Egypt [Isa 30:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#016), there would be
prosperity, peace, and joy in Jerusalem. The order of events, as seen by
the prophet in vision, seems to be this. He sees the people threatened
with an invasion by Sennacherib. He sees them forget their reliance on
God and seek the aid of Egypt. He sees, as a consequence of this, a long
series of calamities resulting in the downfall of the republic, the
destruction of the city, and the captivity at Babylon. Yet he sees, in
the distant prospect, prosperity, happiness, security, piety, the
blessing of God, and rich and abundant future mercies resting on his
people. That the blessings under the Messiah constitute a part of this
"series" of mercies no one can doubt who attentively considers the
language in [Isa 30:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#025).

Thou shalt weep no more - (see the note at [Isa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008)).

He will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry - When in
your calamities you shall cry unto him for deliverance, he shall hear
you, and restore you to your own land. This is in accordance with the
statements in [Isa 26:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#008) (see the
notes at these verses), that in their captivity in Babylon they would
seek God.

He will answer thee - (see [Jer
29:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#012)).

[Isaiah 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 30:20</span></span>

And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity - The bread that is
eaten in a time of calamity; that is, he would bring upon them sore
distress and want.

The water of affliction - Margin, 'Oppression.' That is, water drank in
times of affliction and oppression, or in the long and weary days of
captivity.

Yet shall not thy teachers - Your public instructors and guides [Psa
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009); [Isa
43:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#027); [Dan
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003); [Amo
8:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011). This refers to "all" those
who would be the true guides and teachers of the people of God in
subsequent times; and relates, therefore, not only to prophets and pious
men whom God would raise up under their own dispensation, but also to
all whom he would appoint to communicate his will. It is a promise that
the church of God should never want a pious and devoted ministry
qualified to make known his will and defend his truth.

Be removed into a corner - The word used here (יכנף yikânēp from כנף
kânap) occurs nowhere else in the Scriptures. It is probably derived
from כנף kânâp, "a wing;" and in the Syriac and Chaldee, it means to
collect together. The Septuagint renders this, 'And they who deceived
thee shall no more come near unto thee.' The Syriac, 'And he (that is,
the Lord) shall no more collect thy seducers.' The Chaldee, 'And he
shall no more take away his own glory from the house of his sanctuary.'
Rosenmuller, in accordance with Schultens, renders it, 'And thy teachers
shall no more hide themselves,' referring to the fact that the wing of a
fowl furnishes a hiding-place or shelter. This would accord with the
general idea that they should not be removed from public view. Lowth,
singularly, and without authority from versions or manuscripts, renders
it,

'Yet the timely rain shall no more be restrained.'

The general idea is, evidently, that they should be no more taken away;
and probably the specific idea is that proposed by Taylor ("Heb. Con."),
that thy teachers shall no more, as it were, be winged, or fly away;
that is, be removed by flight, or as a flock of birds moving together
rapidly on the wing.

[Isaiah 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 30:21</span></span>

And thine ears shall hear a word - A command or admonition. You shall
not be left without spiritual guides and directors.

Behind thee - That is, says Vitringa, the voice of conscience, as an
"invisible" guide, shall admonish you. The idea, however, seems to be
that if they were ignorant of the way, or if they were inclined to err,
they should be admonished of the true path which they ought to pursue.
The idea is taken either from the practice of teachers who are
represented as "following" their pupils and admonishing them if they
were in danger of going astray (Grotius; or from shepherds, who are
represented as following their flocks, and directing them when they
wandered. The Jews understand this voice 'from behind' to be the כל בת
bath kol - 'the daughter of the voice;' a divine admonition which they
suppose attends the pious. The essential thought is, that they would not
be left without a guide and instructor; that, if they were inclined to
go astray, they would be recalled to the path of truth and duty. Perhaps
there is the idea, also, that the admonition would come from some
"invisible" influence, or from some unexpected quarter, as it is often
the case that those who are inquiring on the subject of religion receive
light from quarters where they least expected, and from sources to which
they were not looking. It is also true that the admonitions of
Providence, of conscience, and of the Holy Spirit, seem often to come
from "behind" us. that is, they "recall" us from the path in which we
were going, and restrain us from a course that would be fraught with
danger.

When ye turn to the right hand ... - When you shall be in danger of
wandering from the direct and straight path. The voice shall recall you,
and direct you in the way in which you ought to go.

[Isaiah 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 30:22</span></span>

Ye shall defile also - That is, you shall regard them as polluted and
abominable. This is language which is often used respecting their
treatment of the images and altars of idolatry when they became objects
of abomination, and when they were induced to abandon them (see [Kg2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008), [Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010), [Kg2
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016)). It is not improbable that
before destroying them they would express their abhorrence of them by
some act of polluting or defiling them, as significant of their contempt
for the objects of degraded idolatry (see the note at [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)). The sense of the whole passage
is, that the effect of the judgments which God was about to bring upon
the nation would be, to turn them from idolatry, to which as a nation
they had been signally prone.

The covering - The images of idols were usually made of wood or clay,
and overlaid with gold. That gold and silver were used "to plate" them
is apparent from [Deu 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025); and the
whole process of making them from wood, and then of overlaying them with
plates of gold and silver is described with graphic power and severity
of irony in [Isa 40:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019); [Isa
41:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#006).

Thy graven images of silver - Margin, 'The graven images of thy silver.'
Probably the construction in the text is correct, as meaning that the
images were not made of entire silver, but of wood or clay, plated with
silver.

And the ornament - The golden plates or the covering of the images.

Thy molten images - The word 'molten' refers to those which were made by
"casting" (see the notes at [Isa
40:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019)).

Thou shalt cast them away - (see the note at [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)). This would be in accordance
with the express direction of Moses; [Deu
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025) : 'The graven images of their
gods shall ye burn with fire; thou shalt not desire the silver or gold
that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein, for
it is an abomination unto the Lord thy God.'

[Isaiah 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 30:23</span></span>

Then shall he give the rain of thy seed - That is, he shall send rain on
the seed which is sown. You will be allowed to cultivate the soil
without molestation, and God will give you fruitful seasons and abundant
harvests. This is a poetic description of a happy or golden age, when
there would be peace and prosperity (compare the notes at [Isa
11:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)).

And bread of the increase of the earth - And bread which the ground
shall produce.

And it shall be fat and plenteous - It shall be rich and abundant; that
is, there shall be prosperity and an ample supply for your needs.

Feed in large pastures - This is a description of security when their
cattle should be permitted to roam at large, and have abundant pasturage
- an image of prosperity that would be very gratifying to a people whose
main conception of wealth consisted in abundance of flocks and herds.

[Isaiah 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 30:24</span></span>

The young donkeys that ear the ground - Hebrew, 'Labouring,' or
'cultivating the ground,' that is, plowing it. The Old English word
"ear" (from the Latin aro) meant to till, to cultivate. The word is now
obselete, but this is the sense which it has in the Bible [Gen
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#006); [Exo
34:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#021); [Deu
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#004); [Sa1
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#012).

Shall eat clean provender - Margin, 'Leavened,' or 'savory.' The word
rendered 'provender' (בליל belı̂yl) is a verbal from בלל bâlal, "to mix,
mingle, confuse;" and denotes provender that is made by "mixing" various
substances, "maslin" or "farago," a mixture of barley, oats, vetches,
and beans, which seem to have been sown together, and reaped at the same
time [Job 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005); [Job
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#006). The word rendered 'clean,' (חמיץ
châmiyts) is not quite so plain in its signification. Kimchi explains it
by נקי nâqiy, "pure, clean." Gesenius renders it 'salted,' and supposes
that it refers to fodder that was mixed with salted hay. The Septuagint
renders it, 'Provender mixed with winnowed barley.' But the real notion
of the word is that which is "fermented," from חמיץ châmēts, "to be
sour;" to be leavened. Lowth renders it, 'well fermented.' Noyes, 'well
seasoned.' The idea seems to be that of a provender made of a mixture of
various substances - as of grain, beans, vetches, herbs, hay, and
probably salt, which, when mixed, "would" ferment, and which was
regarded as nutritious and wholesome for cattle. A similar compound is
used by the Arabs still (see Bochart, i. 2, 7; and Faber, and Harmer's
"Observations," i. 409).

Which hath been winnowed - That is, which is the pure grain, which is
not fed to them as it is sometimes, before it is separated from the
chaff. Grain shall be so abundant in that time of prosperity that even
the cattle may be fed with grain prepared as it is usually for man.

With the shovel - The large shovel by which the grain in the chaff was
thrown up in the wind that the grain might be separated from the chaff.

The fan - This word properly means that by which anything is "scattered"
- a shovel by which the grain is thrown or tossed into the wind. 'Those
who form their opinion of the latter article by an English fan, will
entertain a very erroneous notion. That of the East is made of the
fibrous part of the palmirah or cocoa-tree leaves, and measures about a
yard each way.' (Roberts).

[Isaiah 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 30:25</span></span>

In the day of the great slaughter - When the enemies of the people of
God shall have been destroyed - probably in a time subsequent to the
slaughter of the army of the Assyrians.

When the towers fall - The towers of the enemy; perhaps referring here
to the towers of Babylon. After they should fall, the Jews would be
favored with the time of prosperity to which the prophet here refers.

[Isaiah 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 30:26</span></span>

Moreover - In addition to all the blessings which are enumerated above.

The light of the moon - Light is in the Scriptures an emblem of purity,
intelligence, happiness, prosperity; as darkness is an emblem of
ignorance, calamity, and sin. This figure is often used by the poets.
Thus Horace:

Soles melius nitent.

Carm. liv.: Od. v. 8.

The figure of augmenting light to denote the blessings of religion, and
especially of the gospel, is often employed by Isaiah (compare the notes
at [Isa 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005); [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002); [Isa
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#017); [Isa
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010); [Isa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008), [Isa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010); [Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001), [Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003), [Isa
60:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)). The sense of this passage
is, that in those future days the light would shine intensely, and
without obscurity; that though they had been walking in the light of the
true religion, yet that their light would be greatly augmented, and that
they would have much clearer views of the divine character and
government. That this refers to the times of the Messiah there can be
little or no room to doubt. It is language such as Isaiah commonly
employs to describe those times; and there is a fullness and splendor
about it which can suit no other period. There is nothing in the
connection, moreover, which forbids such an interpretation of the
passage.

Shall be as the light of the sun - Shall be clear, bright, intense. The
sense is, there shall be a great increase of light, as if the light of
the moon were suddenly increased to the brightness of the meridian sun.

Shall be seven-fold - Seven times as intense and clear as usual, as if
the light of seven days were concentrated into one. The word 'seven' in
the Scriptures often denotes a complete or perfect number; and indicates
"completeness" or "perfections." The phrase 'as the light of seven
days,' Lowth supposes is a gloss which has been introduced into the text
from the margin. The reasons which he adduces for this supposition are,
that it is missing in the Septuagint, and that it interrupts the
rhythmical construction. But this is not sufficient authority for
rejecting the words from the text. No authority of MSS. is adduced for
thus rejecting them, and they are found in the Vulgate, the Chaldee, and
the Syriac. They are missing, however, in the Arabic.

In the day - Vitringa supposes that this refers to the time of the
Maccabees; but although there may be a reference to that time, yet the
idea is evidently designed to include the future times of the Messiah.
The sense of the prophet is, that subsequent to the great calamities
which were to befall them, there would be a time of glorious prosperity,
and the design of this was to comfort them with the assurance that their
nation would not be wholly destroyed.

Bindeth up the breach of his people - Or the wound. The calamity that
should come upon them is thus represented as a wound inflicted on them
by the stripes of punishment (see the notes at [Isa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)). Yahweh would heal it by
restoring them to their own land, and to their former privileges.

[Isaiah 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 30:27</span></span>

Behold, the name of the Lord cometh - (compare the notes at [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)). The verses following, to the
end of the chapter, are designed evidently to describe the destruction
of the army of Sennacherib. This is expressly declared in [Isa
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#031), and all the circumstances in
the prediction accord with that event. There is no necessity of
supposing that this is the commencement of a new prophecy, for it is
connected with the main subject in the previous part of the chapter. The
whole prophecy was composed evidently in view of that threatened
invasion. In the apprehension of that, they sought the aid of Egypt [Isa
30:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001), for that, the prophet
denounces judgment on them ([Isa 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008)
ff); in view of these judgments, however, he promises a more happy state
[Isa 30:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018); and now, in the close
of the chapter, in order to deter them from the alliance, he assures
them that, without any foreign aid, the Assyrian would be destroyed by
Yahweh himself. The phrase 'name of Yahweh,' is probably another mode of
designating Yahweh himself; as the name of God is often put for God
himself (see [Act 3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006), [Act
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012), 30; [Act
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010); [Co1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)). The idea is, that the
destruction of the Assyrian hosts would be accomplished by the immediate
power of Yahweh himself without any need of the aid of the Egyptian or
of any foreign alliances.

From afar - That is, from heaven (compare the note at [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)).

Burning with his anger - Or, rather, his anger is enkindled.

And the burden thereof - Margin, 'Grievousness of flame.' Lowth renders
it, 'The flame rageth violently.' Noyes, 'Violent is the flame.' The
Septuagint renders it, 'A burning wrath' The word משׂאה mas'â'âh, from
נשׂא nâs'â' "to bear, lift up, carry," means properly a lifting up [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002); a burden [Zep
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#018); then a mounting up, particularly
of a flame or smoke in a conflagration [Jdg
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#038). This seems to be the idea here,
that the anger of God would be like a heavy, dark column of mingled
smoke and flame bursting out, and rising up over a city.

His lips are full of indignation - All this language is of course
figurative, and means that he would issue a command to destroy the
Assyrians, or that they would be destroyed in such a manner as most
effectively to exhibit his displeasure.

And his tongue as a devouring fire - That is, he shall issue a command
that shall destroy like a raging and devouring fire.

[Isaiah 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 30:28</span></span>

And his breath - The word רוח rûach properly means "wind," air in
motion; then a breathing, an exhalation, a breath; then the soul,
spirit, etc. The idea here seems to be that of excited, and rapid, and
agitated breathing, as when one is in anger (compare [Jdg
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#003); [Zac
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008)).

As an overflowing stream - This figure is common to express desolating
judgments (see the notes at [Isa 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008);
[Isa 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022); [Isa
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#017); compare [Psa
69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002), [Psa
69:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#015)).

Shall reach to the midst of the neck - Isaiah [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008), in describing the invasion of
Sennacherib, and comparing it to an oveflowing torrent, says it would
'reach even to the neck;' that is, it would overflow the land, and even
approach the head, the capital, but that that would be spared. By the
use of a similar figure, and perhaps referring to that, he here says,
that the judgment of God would overflow the army of the Assyrians, but
that it would approach only to the neck, the head would still be spared;
the commander and sovereign would not be destroyed. In accordance with
this prediction, the angel in one night, as with an overflowing flood,
cut off the army, and yet spared the sovereign, Sennacherib, who escaped
with his life [Isa 37:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036). The word
rendered 'shall reach' (רחצה yechĕtseh) properly means "shall divide,"
or cut into two parts [Gen 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#008); [Num
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#037), [Num
31:42](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#042); [Jdg
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#043); and the idea here seems to be
that a man who is in the water seems to be "divided" into two parts, one
part above, and one in the water.

To sift the nations - Doubtless many nations were laid under requisition
to furnish an army so large as that of Sennaherib, as the kingdom of
Assyria was made up of a number of tributary people and provinces. The
word rendered 'to sift' refers to the act of winnowing or fanning grain,
in which the grain is "tossed" or thrown from the shovel into the air.
As the chaff is driven away by the wind, so the nations in the army of
Sennacherib would be scattered.

With the sieve of vanity - That is, of emptiness or perdition; he would
so scatter them that nothing would be left.

A bridle in the jaws of the people - The idea is, that he had all these
nations as much under his control as a man has a horse with a bridle in
his mouth. The same idea the prophet has used in reference to the same
subject in [Isa 37:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#029) :

I will put my bridle in thy jaws,

And I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

Causing them to err - That shall cause them to wander; that is, he would
turn them from the path in which they had designed to go. They had
purposed to go to Jerusalem, but he would lead them back to their own
land, discomfited and disheartened (see [Isa
37:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#029)).

[Isaiah 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 30:29</span></span>

Ye shall have a song - That is, ye inhabitants of Jerusalem shall
rejoice when the army of the Assyrian is destroyed.

As in the night, when a solemnity is kept - The word 'solemnity' here
(חג châg) denotes a festival, or feast; and refers, by way of eminence,
to the Passover, which is usually designated as "the feast;" that is,
the principal festival of the Jews (see [Mat
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015); [Joh
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001), [Joh
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#011), [Joh
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#013), [Joh
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)). This festival was kept at first
at night, and was required to be so celebrated ever afterward [Exo
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#042); [Deu
16:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001).

As when one goeth with a pipe - Music was used in the daily service of
the temple, and their processions and celebrations were all with
instrumental music. The simple idea is, that the sudden and complete
destruction of the army of Sennacherib would be the occasion of the
highest joy.

[Isaiah 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 30:30</span></span>

And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard - That is, he
would give command to destroy them. They could not fail to recognize his
voice, and to feel that it was accomplished by him.

The lighting down of his arm - The descent of his arm - alluding to the
act of striking, as with a sword, by which an army is cut down.

With the flame - (see the note at [Isa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#006)).

And tempest, and hailstones - With us it is rare that a storm of hail
would be severe enough to destroy an army. But in oriental countries and
in tropical climates, storms of hail are not unfrequently of sufficient
violence to do it if the army were encamped in the open field. The
following extract of a letter from one of our own countrymen, will show
that this would be by no means an improbable occurrence: 'We had got
perhaps a mile and a half on our way, when a cloud rising in the west
gave indications of approaching rain. In a few minutes we discovered
something falling from the heavens with a heavy splash, and with a
whitish appearance. I could not conceive what it was, but observing some
gulls near, I supposed it to be them darting for fish; but soon after
discovered that they were large balls of ice falling. Immediately we
heard a sound like rumbling thunder, or ten thousand carriages rolling
furiously over the pavement.

The whole Bosphorus was in a foam, as though heaven's artillery had been
charged upon us and our frail machine. Our fate seemed inevitable; our
umbrellas were raised to protect us, the lumps of ice stripped them into
ribbons. We fortunately had a bullock's hide in the boat, under which we
crawled and saved ourselves from further injury. One man of the three
oarsmen had his hand literally smashed, another much injured in the
shoulder, Mr. H. received a blow on the leg, my right hand was somewhat
disabled, and all more or less injured. It was the most awful and
terrific scene I ever witnessed, and God forbid that I should be ever
exposed to another. Balls of ice as large as my two fists fell into the
boat, and some of them came with such violence as certainly to have
broken an arm or leg, had they struck us in those parts. One of them
struck the blade of an oar and split it. The scene lasted perhaps five
minutes; but it was five minutes of the most awful feeling I ever
experienced.

When it passed over, we found the surrounding hills covered with masses
of ice, I cannot call it hail, the trees stripped of their leaves and
limbs, and everything looking desolate. The scene was awful beyond all
description. I have witnessed repeated earthquakes; the lightning has
played, as it were, about my head; the wind roared, and the waves at one
moment have thrown me to the sky, and the next have sunk me into a deep
abyss. I have been in action, and have seen death and destruction around
me in every shape of horror; but I never before had the feeling of awe
which seized upon me on this occasion, and still haunts, and I fear
forever will haunt me. My porter, the boldest of my family, who had
ventured an instant from the door, had been knocked down by a hailstone,
and had they not dragged him in by the heels, would have been battered
to death. Two boatmen were killed in the upper part of the village, and
I have heard of broken bones in abundance. Imagine to yourself the
heavens suddenly frozen over, and as suddenly broken to pieces in
irregular masses of from half a pound to a pound weight, and
precipitated to the earth.' (Commodore Porter's "Letters from
Constantinople and its Environs," vol. i. p. 44.)

[Isaiah 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 30:31</span></span>

For through the voice of the - Lord By the command of the Lord; that is,
his voice going forth in the manner specified in [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030).

Which smote with a rod - Who was accustomed to smite as with a rod; that
is, his government was tyrannical and severe. As he had been accustomed
to smite in that manner, so he would now meet the proper reward of his
oppression of the nations.

[Isaiah 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">isa 30:32</span></span>

And in every place - Margin, 'Every passing of the rod founded.' Lowth
renders it, 'Whenever shall pass the rod of correction.' The whole
design of the passage is evidently to foretell the sudden destruction of
the army of the Assyrians, and to show that this would be accomplished
by the agency of God. The idea seems to be, that in all those places
where the rod of the Assyrian would pass, that is, where he would cause
devastation and desolation, there would be the sound of rejoicing with
instruments of music when he should be overthrown.

The grounded staff - The word 'staff' here, or "rod," seems to refer to
that by which the Assyrian smote the nations [Isa
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#031); or rather perhaps the Assyrian
king himself as a rod of correction in the hand of Yahweh (see [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005)). The word rendered 'grounded'
(מוסדה mûsâdâh) has given great perplexity to commentators. Lowth
supposes it should be מוסרח ("correction"), according to a conjecture of
Le Clerc. Two manuscripts also read it in the same way. But the
authority from the MSS. is not sufficient to justify a change in the
present Hebrew text. This word, which is not very intelligibly rendered
'grounded,' is derived from יסד yâsad, to "found, to lay the foundation
of a building" [Ezr 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#012); [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011); then to establish, to appoint,
to ordain [Psa 104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008); [Hab
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012). The idea here is, therefore,
that the rod referred to had been "appointed, constituted, ordained" by
God; that is, that the Assyrian had been designated by him to accomplish
important purposes as a rod, or as a means of punishing the nations.

Shall pass - In his march of desolation and conquest.

Which the Lord shall lay upon him - Or rather, as it should be
translated, 'upon which Yahweh should lay,' that is, the rod, meaning
that in all those places where Yahweh should lay this appointed scourge
there would be yet rejoicing.

It shall be with tabrets and harps - Those places where he had passed,
and which he had scourged, would be filled with joy and rejoicing at his
complete overthrow, and at their entire deliverance from the scourge.
For a description of the tabret and harp, see the notes at [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012).

And in battles of shaking - In the Hebrew there is an allusion here to
what is said in [Isa 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#028), that he
would 'sift,' that is, agitate or toss the nations as in a winnowing
shovel.

Will he fight with it - Margin, 'Against them.' Yahweh would fight
against the 'rod,' to wit, the Assyrian, and destroy him (see [Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)).

[Isaiah 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">isa 30:33</span></span>

For Tophet - The same idea is conveyed in this verse as in the
preceding, but under another form, and with a new illustration. The
sense is, that the army of the Assyrians would be completely destroyed,
as if it were a large pile of wood in the valley of Hinnom that should
be fired by the breath of God. The word (תפתה tâpeteh) with the ה (h)
paragogic), denotes properly what causes loathing or abhorrence; that
which produces disgust and vomiting (from the Chaldee תיף tūph to spit
out); [Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006), 'I was an
"abhorrence'" (תפת tôpheth), improperly rendered in our version, 'I was
among them as a tabret.' The word occurs only in [Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010); [Jer
7:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031); [Jer
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#006), [Jer
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#011), [Jer
19:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013), and in this place. It is
applied to a deep valley on the southeast of Jerusalem, celebrated as
the seat of idolatry, particularly of the worship of Moloch. The name
also of 'the valley of Hinnom' was given to it; and hence, the name
"Gehenna" γέεννα geenna, [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022),
[Mat 5:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029); [Mat
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028); [Mat
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#009); [Mat
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015), [Mat
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#033); [Mar
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043), [Mar
9:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#045), [Mar
9:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#047); [Luk
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#005); [Jam
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006)), as denoting the place of future
torments, of which the valley of Hinnom, or Tophet, was a striking
emblem.

This valley was early selected as the seat of the worship of Moloch,
where his rites were celebrated by erecting a huge brass image with a
hollow trunk and arms, which was heated, and within which, or on the
arms of which, children were placed as a sacrifice to the horrid idol.
To drown their cries, drums were beaten, which were called תף tôph, or
תפים tôphiym, and many suppose the name Tophet was given to the place on
this account (see [Kg2 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003); [Kg2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006); [Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)). The name 'valley of Hinnom,'
or Gehenna, was probably from the former possessor or occupier of that
name. In subsequent times, however, this place was regarded with deep
abhorrence. It became the receptacle of all the filth of the city; and
hence, in order to purify the atmosphere, and prevent contagion, it was
needful to keep fires there continually burning. It was thus a most
striking emblem of hell-fire, and as such is used in the New Testament.
Hezekiah was firmly opposed to idolatry; and it is not improbable that
he had removed the images of Moloch, and made that valley the receptacle
of filth, and a place of abomination, and that the prophet refers to
this tact in the passage before us.

Is ordained - Was fitted up, appointed, constituted. The prophet by a
figure represents Hezekiah as having fitted up this place as if for the
appropriate punishment of the Assyrians.

Of old - Margin, as in Hebrew, 'From yesterday.' This expression may
mean simply 'formerly, some time since,' as in [Exo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010); [Sa2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#017). The idea here seems to be, that
Tophet had been formerly, or was already prepared as if for the
destruction of Sennacherib and his army. His ruin would be as certain,
and as sudden, "as if," in the valley of Tophet, the breath of Yahweh
should set on fire the vast materials that had been collected, and were
ready to be kindled. It does not mean that Tophet had actually been
prepared "for" the army of Sennacherib; it does not mean that his army
would actually be destroyed there - for it was on the other side of the
city that they were cut off (see the notes at [Isa
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#032)); it does not mean that they
would be consigned to hell-fire; but it means that that place had been
fitted up as if to be an emblematic representation of his ruin; that the
consuming fires in that valley were a striking representation of the
sudden and awful manner in which the abhorred enemies of God would be
destroyed.

For the king is prepared - For Hezekiah; as if the place had been fitted
up for his use in order to consume and destroy his enemies. It is not
meant that Hezekiah actually had this in view, but the whole language is
figurative. It was as if that place had been fitted up by Hezekiah as a
suitable place in which entirely to destroy his foes.

He hath made it deep and large - Vast; as if able to contain the entire
army that was to be destroyed.

The pile thereof - The wood that was collected there to be consumed.

The breath of the Lord - As if Yahweh should breathe upon it, and
enkindle the whole mass, so that it should burn without the possibility
of being extinguished. The meaning is, that the destruction of the
Assyrian would as really come from Yahweh as if he should, by his own
agency, ignite the vast piles that were collected in the valley of
Hinnom.

Like a stream of brimstone - Brimstone, or sulphur, is used in the
Scriptures to denote a fire of great intensity, and one that cannot be
extinguished [Gen 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024); [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006); [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022); [Rev
9:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#017). Hence, it is used to denote
the eternal torments of the wicked in hell [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010); [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020); [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008).

Doth kindle it - The army of the Assyrians would be destroyed in a
manner which would be well represented by Yahweh'S sending down upon a
vast pile collected in the valley of Hinnom, a burning stream of
sulphurous flame that should ignite and consume all before it (see the
notes at [Isa 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 31](isa031)

</div>
