<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa026)  [Next](isa028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 27:0</span></span>

For the general design of this chapter see the analysis of Isa. 24. Many
different expositions have been given of its design, and indeed almost
every commentator has had his own theory, and has differed from almost
every other. Some of the different views which have been taken may be
seen in the notes at [Isa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001), and
may be examined at length in Vitringa. I regard the most simple and
obvious interpretation as the correct one; and that is, that it is a
continuation of the vision commenced in Isa. 24, and referring to the
same great event - the captivity at Babylon and the deliverance from
that captivity. This subject has been pursued through the [Isa
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001), the [Isa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001), and the [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001) chapters. In the [Isa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001) and the [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001) chapters, the main design was to
show the joy which would be evinced on their rescue from that land. The
main purpose of this is to show the effect of that captivity and
deliverance in purifying the Jews themselves, and in overcoming their
propensity to idolatry, on account of which the captivity had been suf
fered to take place. The "design" of the chapter is, like that of many
others in Isaiah, to comfort them when they should be oppressed during
their long and painful exile. The general plan of the chapter is:

1\. A statement that their great enemy, the leviathan, should be
destroyed [Isa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001); and,

2\. A song, in alternate responses, respecting the people of God, under
the image of a vineyard yielding rich wines [Isa
27:2-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002). In this song Yahweh's
protection over the vineyard is shown [Isa
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003); he declares that he is not
actuated by fury [Isa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#004); his people
are exhorted to trust in him [Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005); a full promise that the Jews
shall yet flourish is given [Isa 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006);
Yahweh says that his judgments are mild on them [Isa
27:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#007), and that the design is to
purify his people [Isa 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009), for their
sins they should be punished [Isa
27:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#010); yet that they should be
restored to their own land, and worship him in the holy mount at
Jerusalem [Isa 27:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012).

[Isaiah 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 27:1</span></span>

In that day - In that future time when the Jews would be captive in
Babylon, and when they would sigh for deliverance (see the note at [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001)). This verse might have been
connected with the previous chapter, as it refers to the same event, and
then this chapter would have more appropriately commenced with the poem
or song which begins in [Isa 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002).

With his sore - Hebrew, הקשׁה haqāshâh - 'Hard.' Septuagint, Τὴς ἁγίαν
Tēn hagian - 'Holy.' The Hebrew means a sword that is hard, or
well-tempered and trusty.

And great, and strong sword - The sword is an emblem of war, and is
often used among the Hebrews to denote war (see [Gen
27:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#040); [Lev
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#025)). It is also an emblem of
justice or punishment, as punishment then, as it is now in the Turkish
dominions, was often inflicted by the sword [Deu
32:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041); [Psa
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#012); [Heb
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037). Here, if it refers to the
overthrow of Babylon and its tyrannical king, it means that God would
punish them by the armies of the Medes, employed as his sword or
instrument. Thus in [Psa 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013), David
prays, 'Deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword' (compare
the notes at [Isa 10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005)).

Leviathan - לויתן livyâthân. The Septuagint renders this, Τὴν δράκοντα
Tēn drakonta - 'The dragon.' The word 'leviathan' is probably derived
from לוה lâvâh in Arabic, to weave, to twist (Gesenius); and literally
means, "the twisted animal." The word occurs in six places in the Old
Testament, and is translated in [Job
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#008), 'mourning,' Margin, 'leviathan;'
in [Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001), 'leviathan' - in which
chapter is an extended description of the animal; in [Psa
74:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014), it is rendered 'leviathan,' and
seems to be applied to Pharaoh; and in [Psa
104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026), and in the passage before us,
where it is twice also rendered 'leviathan.' Bochart (Hierez. ii. 5.
16-18) has gone into an extended argument to show that by the leviathan
the crocodile is intended; and his argument is in my view conclusive. On
this subject, Bochart, Dr. Good (on Job 41), and Robinson's Calmet, may
be consulted.

The crocodile is a natural inhabitant of the Nile and of other Asiatic
and African rivers; is of enormous voracity and strength, as well as of
fleetness in swimming; attacks mankind and all animals with prodigious
impetuosity; and is furnished with a coat of mail so scaly and callous
that it will resist the force of a musket ball in every part except
under the belly. It is, therefore, an appropriate image by which to
represent a fierce and cruel tyrant. The sacred writers were accustomed
to describe kings and tyrants by an allusion to strong and fierce
animals. Thus, in [Eze 29:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003), the
dragon, or the crocodile of the Nile, represents Pharaoh; in [Eze
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#002), Pharaoh is compared to a young
lion, and to a whale in the seas; in [Psa
74:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013), Pharaoh is compared to the
dragon, and to the leviathan. In Dan. 7, the four monarchs that should
arise are likened to four great beasts. In Rev. 12, Rome, the new
Babylon, is compared to a great red dragon.

In the place before us, I suppose that the reference is to Babylon; or
to the king and tyrant that ruled there, and that had oppressed the
people of God. But among commentators there has been the greatest
variety of explanation. As a "specimen" of the various senses which
commentators often assign to passages of Scripture, we may notice the
following views which have been taken of this passage. The Chaldee
Paraphrast regards the leviathans, which are twice mentioned, as
referring, the first one to some king like Pharaoh, and the second to a
king like Sennacherib. rabbi Moses Haccohen supposes that the word
denotes the most select or valiant of the rulers, princes, and
commanders that were in the army of the enemy of the people of God.
Jarchi supposes that by the first-mentioned leviathan is meant Egypt, by
the second Assyria, and by the dragon which is in the sea, he thinks
"Tyre" is intended.

Aben Ezra supposes that by the dragon in the sea, Egypt is denoted.
Kimchi supposes that this will be fulfilled only in the times of the
Messiah, and that the sea monsters mentioned here are Gog and Magog -
and that these denote the armies of the Greeks, the Saracens, and the
inhabitants of India. Abarbanel supposes that the Saracens, the Roman
empire, and the other kingdoms of Gentiles, are intended by these sea
monsters. Jerome, Sanctius, and some others suppose that "Satan" is
denoted by the leviathan. Brentius supposes that this was fulfilled in
the day of Pentecost when Satan was overcome by the preaching of the
gospel. Other Christian interpreters have supposed, that by the
leviathan first mentioned "Mahomet" is intended; by the second,
"heretics;" and by the dragon in the sea, "Pagan India." Luther
understood it of Assyria and Egypt; Calvin supposes that the description
properly applies to the king of Egypt, but that under this image other
enemies of the church are embraced, and does not doubt that
"allegorically" Satan and his kingdom are intended. The more simple
interpretation, however, is that which refers it to Babylon. This suits
the connection: accords with the previous chapters; agrees with all that
occurs in this chapter, and with the image which is used here. The
crocodile, the dragon, the sea monster - extended, vast, unwieldy,
voracious, and odious to the view - would be a most expressive image to
denote the abhorrence with which the Jews would regard Babylon and its
king.

The piercing serpent - The term 'serpent' (נחשׁ nāchâsh) may be given to
a dragon, or an extended sea monster. Compare [Job
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013). The term 'piercing,' is, in the
Margin, 'Crossing like a bar.' The Septuagint renders it, Ὄφιν Φεύγοντα
Ophin pheugonta - 'Flying serpent. The Hebrew, בריח bāriyach, rendered
'piercing,' is derived from ברץ bârach," to flee;" and then to stretch
across, or pass through, as a bar through boards [Exo
36:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#033). Hence, this word may mean
fleeing; extended; cross bar for fastening gates; or the cross piece for
binding together the boards for the tabernacle of the congregation [Exo
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#026); [Exo
36:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#031). Lowth renders it, 'The rigid
serpent;' probably with reference to the hard scales of the crocodile.
The word "extended, huge, vast," will probably best suit the connection.
In [Job 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013), it is rendered, 'the
crooked serpent;' referring to the constellation in the heavens by the
name of the Serpent (see the note at that place). The idea of piercing
is not in the Hebrew word, nor is it ever used in that sense.

That crooked serpent - This is correctly rendered; and refers to the
fact that the monster here referred to throws itself into immense
volumes or folds, a description that applies to all serpents of vast
size. Virgil has given a similar description of sea monsters throwing
themselves into vast convolutions:

'Ecce autem gemini a Tenedo tranquilla per alta

\- immensis orbibus angues.'

\- AEn. ii. 203.

And again:

'Sinuantque immensa volumine terga.'

Idem. 208.

The reference in Isaiah, I suppose, is not to "different" kings or
enemies of the people of God, but to the same. It is customary in Hebrew
poetry to refer to the same subject in different members of the same
sentence, or in different parts of the same parallelism.

The dragon - Referring to the same thing under a different image - to
the king of Babylon. On the meaning of the word 'dragon,' see the note
at [Isa 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022).

In the sea - In the Euphrates; or in the marshes and pools that
encompass Babylon (see [Isa 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015),
note; [Isa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002), note). The sense of
the whole verse is, that God would destroy the Babylonian power that was
to the Jews such an object of loathsomeness and of terror.

[Isaiah 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 27:2</span></span>

Sing ye unto her - That is, sing unto, or respecting the vineyard. The
word rendered 'sing' (ענוּ ‛anû) signifies properly, "answer, respond
to;" and then, sing a responsive song, where one portion of the choir
responds to another (see [Exo 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021)).
This has been well expressed here by Lowth in his translation:

'To the beloved Vineyard, sing ye a responsive song.'

It is the commencement of a song, or hymn respecting Judea, represented
under the image of a vineyard, and which is probably confirmed to the
close of the chapter.

A vineyard - (see the notes at [Isa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001) ff) The Hebrew phrase rendered 'a
vineyard of red wine' is the title to the song; or the responsive song
respects the 'vineyard of red wine.'

Of red wine - (חמר chemer). Lowth proposes to read instead of this, חמד
chemed, pleasantness, beauty, or beloved." He observes that many
manuscripts have this meaning, and that it is followed by the Septuagint
and the Chaldee. The Septuagint reads it: Ἀμπελών καλλὸς Ampelōn kallos
- 'Beautiful vineyard.' This would well suit the connection, and this
slight error in transcribing might have easily occurred. But the
authority in the manuscripts for the change is not conclusive. The word
which now occurs in the text denotes properly "wine," from חמר châmar,
to "ferment." The word חמר châmar also has the signification "to be red"
[Psa 75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009); [Job
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#016); and according to this, our
translators have rendered it 'of red wine.' Bochart (Geog. Sac. ii. 1,
29) renders it, 'A vineyard fertile in producing wine.' The correct
translation would be one that would not seem very congruous in our
language, 'a vineyard of wine,' or 'a wine-vineyard.'

[Isaiah 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 27:3</span></span>

I the Lord do keep it - There is understood here or implied an
introduction; as 'Yahweh said' (compare [Psa
121:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#003)).

I will water it every moment - That is, constantly, as a vinedresser
does his vineyard.

[Isaiah 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 27:4</span></span>

Fury is not in me - That is, I am angry with it no more. He had punished
his people by removing them to a distant land. But although he had
corrected them for their faults, yet he had not laid aside the affection
of a Father.

Who would set - Hebrew, 'Who would give me.' The Septuagint renders
this, 'Who would place me to keep the stubble in the field?' Great
perplexity has been felt in regard to the interpretation of this
passage. Lowth translates it:

'O that I had a fence of the thorn and the brier;'

evidently showing that he was embarrassed with it, and could not make of
it consistent sense. The whole sentence must refer either to the people
of God, or to his enemies. If to his people, it would be an indication
that they were like briers and thorns, and that if his fury should rage
they would be consumed, and hence, he calls upon them [Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005) to seize upon his strength, and
to be at peace with him. If it refers to his enemies, then it expresses
a wish that his enemies were in his possession; or a purpose to go
against them, as fire among thorns, and to consume them if they should
presume to array themselves against his vineyard. This latter I take to
be the true sense of the passage. The phrase 'who would set me,' or in
Hebrew, 'who will give me,' may be expressed by "utinam," indicating
strong desire; and may be thus paraphrased: 'I retain no anger against
my people. I have indeed punished them; but my anger has ceased. I shall
now defend them. If they are attacked by foes, I will guard them. When
their foes approach, "I desire, I earnestly wish," that they may be in
my possession, that I may destroy them - as the fire rages through
briers and thorns.' It expresses a firm determination to defend his
people and to destroy their enemies, unless [Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005), which he would prefer, they
should repent, and be at peace with him.

The briers and thorns - His enemies, and the enemies of his people
(compare the notes at [Isa 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#017); [Isa
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#017)). Perhaps the phrase is used
here to denote enemies, because briers and thorns are so great enemies
to a vineyard by impeding growth and fertility.

I would go through them - Or, rather, I would go against them in battle
to destroy them.

I would burn them up together - As fire devours the thorns and briers;
that is, I would completely destroy them.

[Isaiah 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 27:5</span></span>

Or let him - The Hebrew word rendered here or (או 'ô) means "unless;"
and the sense is, the enemies of the Jewish people shall be completely
destroyed as briers are by fire, "unless" they flee to God for a refuge.

Take hold of my strength - That is, let the enemy take hold of me to
become reconciled to me. The figure here is taken probably from the act
of fleeing to take hold of the horns of the altar for refuge when one
was pursued (compare [Kg1 1:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050); [Kg1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#028)).

That he may make peace with me - With me as the guardian of the
vineyard. If this were done they would be safe.

And he shall make peace with me - That is, even the enemy of me and of
my vineyard "may" be permitted to make peace with me. Learn,

\(1\) That God is willing to be reconciled to his enemies.

\(2\) That peace must be obtained by seeking his protection; by
submitting to him, and laying hold of his strength.

\(3\) That if this is not done, his enemies must be inevitably
destroyed.

\(4\) He will defend his people, and no weapon that is formed against
them shall prosper.

[Isaiah 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 27:6</span></span>

He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root - This language is
derived from the vine, as the shoots or cuttings of the vine take root
and flourish. To take root, therefore, is an emblem denoting that the
descendants of Jacob, or the people of God, would increase and prosper.

Shall blossom and bud - An image also taken from the vine, or from fruit
trees in general, and meaning that they should greatly flourish in the
time succeeding their return from the captivity.

And fill the face of the world with fruit - On the meaning of the word
'face,' see the note at [Isa 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007). The
sense is, that the people of God would so increase and flourish that the
true religion would ultimately fill the entire world. The same idea of
the universal prevalence of the true religion is often advanced by this
prophet, and occurs in various parts of the hymns or songs which we are
now considering (see [Isa 25:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006)). The
figure which is used here, drawn from the vine, denoting prosperity by
its increase and its fruit, is beautifully employed in [Psa
92:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013) :

Those that be planted in the house of Yahweh,

Shall flourish in the courts of our God.

They shall still bring forth fruit in old age;

They shall be rich and green.

[Isaiah 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 27:7</span></span>

Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote them? - Has God
punished his people in the same manner and to the same extent as he has
their enemies? It is implied by this question that he had not. He had
indeed punished them for their sins, but he had I not destroyed them.
Their enemies he had utterly destroyed.

According to the slaughter of those that are slain by him - Hebrew,
'According to the slaying of his slain.' That is, not as our translation
would seem to imply, that their enemies had been slain "BY" them; but
that they were 'their slain,' inasmuch as they had been slain on their
account, or to promote their release and return to their own land. It
was not true that their enemies had been slain "by" them; but it was
true that they had been slain on their account, or in order to secure
their return to their own country.

[Isaiah 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 27:8</span></span>

In measure ... - This verse in our translation is exceedingly obscure,
and indeed almost unintelligible. Nor is it much more intelligible in
Lowth, or in Noyes; in the Vulgate, or the Septuagint. The various
senses which have been given to the verse may be seen at length in
Vitringa and Rosenmuller. The idea, which I suppose to be the true one,
without going into an examination of others which have been proposed, is
the following, which is as near as possible a literal translation:

In moderation in sending her (the vineyard)

Away didst thou judge her,

Though carrying her away with a rough tempest

In the time of the east wind.

The word rendered 'measure' (סאסאה sa'se'âh) occurs nowhere else in the
Scriptures. It is probably derived from סאה se'âh, "a measure;" usually
denoting a measure of grain, containing, according to the rabbis, a
third part of an ephah, that is, about "a peck." The word used here is
probably a contraction of סאה סאה se'âh se'âh literally, "measure by
measure," i: e., "moderately," or in moderation. So the rabbis generally
understand it. The idea is 'small measure by small measure,' not a large
measure at a time; or, in other words, moderately, or in moderation. It
refers, I suppose, to the fact that in inflicting judgment on his
people, it had not been done with intolerable severity. The calamity had
not been so overwhelming as entirely to cut them off, but had been
tempered with mercy.

When it shooteth forth - This expression does not convey an intelligible
idea. The Hebrew, בשׁלחה beshallechâh - literally, "in sending her
forth," from שׁלח shâlach "to send," or "to put forth" - refers, I
suppose, to the fact that God had sent her, that is, his vineyard, his
people, forth to Babylon; he had cast them out of their own land into a
distant country, but when it was done it was tempered with mercy and
kindness. In this expression there is indeed a mingling of a metaphor
with a literal statement, since it appears rather incongruous to speak
of sending forth a "vineyard;" but such changes in expressions are not
uncommon in the Hebrew poets.

Thou wilt debate with it - Or, rather, thou hast "judged" it; or hast
punished it. The word ריב riyb means sometimes to debate, contend, or
strive; but it means also to take vengeance [Sa1
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039), or to punish; to contend with
anyone so as to overcome or punish him. Here it refers to the fact that
God "had" had a contention with his people, and had punished them by
removing them to Babylon.

He stayeth - ( הגה hâgâh). This word means in one form "to meditate," to
think, to speak; in another, "to separate," as dross from silver, to
remove, to take away [Pro 25:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#004). Here
it means that he "had" removed, or separated his people from their land
as with the sweepings of a tempest. The word 'stayeth' does not express
the true sense of the passage. It is better expressed in the margin,
'when he removeth it.'

His rough wind - A tempestuous, boisterous wind, which God sends. Winds
are emblematic of judgment, as they sweep away everything before them.
Here the word is emblematic of the calamities which came upon Judea by
which the nation was removed to Babylon; and the sense is, that they
were removed as in a tempest; they were carried away as if a violent
storm had swept over the land.

In the day of the east wind - The east wind in the climate of Judea was
usually tempestuous and violent; [Job
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#021) :

The east wind carrieth him away and he departeth;

And, as a storm, hurleth them out of his place.

[Jer 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#017) :

I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy.

(Compare [Gen 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#006); [Exo
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013); [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021); [Job
38:24](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#024); [Psa
78:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026); [Hab
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006)). This wind was usually hot,
noxious, blasting and scorching (Taylor).

[Isaiah 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 27:9</span></span>

By this - This verse states the whole design of the punishment of the
Jews. They were taken away from their temple, their city, and their
land; they were removed from the groves and altars of idolatry by which
they had been so often led into sin; and the design was to preserve them
henceforward from relapsing into their accustomed idolatry.

The iniquity of Jacob - The sin of the Jewish people, and particularly
their tendency to idolatry, which was their easily besetting sin.

Be purged - (see the note at [Isa
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)).

And this is all the fruit - And this is all the "object" or "design" of
their captivity and removal to Babylon.

When he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalk stones - That is,
Yahweh shall make the stones of the altars reared in honor of idols like
chalk stones; or shall throw them down, and scatter them abroad like
stones that are easily beaten to pieces. The sense is, that Yahweh,
during their captivity in Babylon, would overthrow the places where they
had worshipped idols.

The groves and images shall not stand up - The groves consecrated to
idols, and the images erected therein (see the note at [Isa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008)).

[Isaiah 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 27:10</span></span>

Yet the defensed city - Gesenius supposes that this means Jerusalem. So
Calvin and Piscator understand it. Others understand it of Samaria,
others of Babylon (as Vitringa, Rosenmuller, and Grotius), and others of
cities in general, denoting those in Judea, or in other places. To me it
seems plain that Babylon is referred to. The whole description seems to
require this; and especially the fact that this song is supposed to be
sung after the return from captivity to celebrate their deliverance. It
is natural, therefore, that they should record the fact that the strong
and mighty city where they had been so long in captivity, was now
completely destroyed. For the meaning of thee phrase 'defensed city,'
see the note at [Isa 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#002).

Shall be desolate - (see [Isa 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#002);
compare the notes at Isa. 13)

The habitation forsaken - The habitation here referred to is Babylon. It
means the habitation or dwelling-place where "we" have so long dwelt as
captives (compare [Pro 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#033); [Pro
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#020); [Pro
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#015)).

And left like a wilderness - See the description of Babylon in the notes
at [Isa 13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020).

There shall the calf feed - It shall become a vast desert, and be a
place for beasts of the forest to range in (compare [Isa
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#023); see the note at [Isa
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#017)).

And consume the branches thereof - The branches of the trees and shrubs
that shall spring up spontaneously in the vast waste where Babylon was.

[Isaiah 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 27:11</span></span>

When the boughs thereof are withered - This is a further description of
the desolation which would come upon Babylon. The idea is, that Babylon
would be forsaken until the trees should grow and decay, and the
branches should fall to be collected for burning. That is, the
desolation should be entire, undisturbed, and long continued The idea of
the desolation is, therefore, in this verse carried forward, and a new
circumstance is introduced to make it more graphic and striking. Lowth,
however, supposes that this refers to the vineyard, and to the fact that
the vine-twigs are collected in the East from the scarcity of fuel for
burning. But it seems to me that the obvious reference is to Babylon,
and that it is an image of the great and prolonged desolation that was
coming upon that city.

They shall be broken off - That is, by their own weight as they decay,
or by the hands of those who come to collect them for fuel.

The women come - Probably it was the office mainly of the women to
collect the fuel which might be necessary for culinary purposes. In
eastern climates but little is needed; and that is collected of the
twigs of vineyards, of withered stubble, straw, hay, dried roots, etc.,
wherever they can be found.

And set them on fire - That is, to burn them for fuel.

Of no understanding - Of no right views of God and his government -
wicked, sinful [Pro 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032); [Pro
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#002); [Jer
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#021).

[Isaiah 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 27:12</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall beat off -
The word which is used here (חבט châbaṭ) means properly "to beat off
with a stick," as fruit from a tree [Deu
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020). It also means to beat out grain
with a stick [Jdg 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011); [Rut
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#017) The word which is rendered in the
other member of the sentence, 'shall be gathered' (לקט lâqaṭ), is
applied to the act of "collecting" fruit after it has been beaten from a
tree, or grain after it has been threshed. The use of these words here
shows that the image is taken from the act of collecting fruit or grain
after harvest; and the expression means, that as the farmer gathers in
his fruit, so God would gather in his people. In the figure, it is
supposed that the garden or vineyard of Yahweh extends from the
Euphrates to the Nile; that his people are scattered in all that
country; that there shall be agitation or a shaking in all that region
as when a farmer beats off his fruit from the tree, or beats out his
grain; and that the result would be that all those scattered people
would be gathered into their own land. The time referred to is,
doubtless, after Babylon should be taken; and in explanation of the
declaration it is to be remembered that the Jews were not only carried
to Babylon, but were scattered in large numbers in all the adjacent
regions. The promise here is, that from all those regions where they had
been scattered they should be re-collected and restored to their own
land.

From the channel of the river - The river here undoubtedly refers to the
river Euphrates (see the note at [Isa
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015)).

Unto the stream of Egypt - The Nile. "And ye shall be gathered one by
one." As the farmer collects his fruits one by one - collecting them
carefully, and not leaving any. This means that God will not merely
collect them as a nation, but as "individuals." He will see that none is
overlooked, and that all shall be brought in safety to their land.

[Isaiah 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 27:13</span></span>

The great trumpet shall be blown - This verse is designed to describe in
another mode the same fact as that stated in [Isa
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012), that Yahweh would re-collect
his scattered people. The figure is derived from the trumpet which was
blown to assemble a people for war (Grotius); or from the blowing of the
trumpet on occasion of the great feasts and festivals of the Jews
(Vitringa). The idea is, that God would summon the scattered people to
return to their own land. The "way" in which this was done, or in which
the will of God would be made known to them, is not specified. It is
probable, however, that the reference here is to the decree of Cyrus
[Ezr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001), by which they were permitted
to return to their own country.

Which were ready to perish - Who were reduced in numbers, and in power,
and who were ready to be annihilated under their accumulated and
long-continued trials.

In the land of Assyria - The ten tribes were carried away into Assyria
[Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006); and it is probable that
many of the other two tribes were also in that land. A portion of the
ten tribes would also be re-collected, and would return with the others
to the land of their fathers. Assyria also constituted a considerable
part of the kingdom of the Chaldeans, and the name Assyria may be given
here to that country in general.

And the outcasts - Those who had fled in consternation to Egypt and to
other places when these calamities were coming upon the nation (see [Jer
41:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#017); [Jer
42:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#015)).

And shall worship the Lord - Their temple shall be rebuilt; their city
shall be restored; and in the place where their fathers worshipped shall
they also again adore the living God. This closes the prophecy which was
commenced in Isa. 24; and the design of the whole is to comfort the Jews
with the assurance, that though they were to be made captive in a
distant land, yet they would be again restored to the land of their
fathers, and again worship God there. It is almost needless to say that
this prediction was completely fulfilled by the return of the Jews to
their own country under the decree of Cyrus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 28](isa028)

</div>
