<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam003)  [Next](jam005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 4:0</span></span>

In [Jam 3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#013) the apostle had
contrasted the wisdom which is from above with that which is from
beneath. The former is peaceable, pure, and gentle, leading to universal
kindness and order; the latter earthly, sensual, and devilish. The
points suggested in this chapter grow directly out of the remarks made
there, and are designed to show the effect of the "wisdom which
descendeth not from above," as evinced in the spirit of this world, and
thus by contrast to show the value of true wisdom, or of the spirit of
religion. Accordingly, the apostle illustrates the effects of the wisdom
of this world, or the spirit of this world, by showing what it produces,
or what they do who are under its influence. We are not to suppose that
the persons to whom the apostle addressed this Epistle were actually
guilty of the things here referred to themselves, but such things had an
existence in the world, and it gave more life and spirit to the
discussion to represent them as existing "among them." In illustrating
the subject, he refers to the following things as resulting from the
spirit that is opposite to the wisdom which is from above, namely:

\(1\) Wars and fightings, which are to be traced solely to the lusts of
men, [Jam 4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001);

\(2\) The neglect of prayer, showing the reason why they did not have
the things which were necessary, [Jam
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#002);

\(3\) The fact that when they prayed they did not obtain what they
needed, because they prayed with improper motives, in order to have the
means of gratifying their sensual desires, [Jam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003);

\(4\) The desire of the friendship of the world as one of the fruits of
being under the influence of the wisdom which is not from above, [Jam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004);

\(5\) Envy, as another of these fruits, [Jam
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#005).

In view of these things, and of the danger to which they were exposed of
acting under their influence, the apostle proceeds to give them some
solemn cautions and admonitions. He tells them that God resists all who
are proud, but gives grace to all who are humble, [Jam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006); he counsels them to submit to
God, [Jam 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007), to resist the devil,
[Jam 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007), to draw nigh to God, [Jam
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008), to cleanse their hands and their
hearts, [Jam 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008), to be afflicted and
mourn over their sins, and to become serious and devout, [Jam
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#009), and to humble themselves before
God that he might lift them up [Jam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#010); he commands them not to speak
evil one of another, since by so doing they in fact set themselves up to
be judges, and in the circumstances became judges of the law as well as
of their brethren, [Jam 4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011). He
then rebukes the confident spirit which lays its plans for the future
with no just view of the frailty and uncertainty of human life, and
shows them that all their plans for the future should be formed with a
distinct recognition of their dependence on God for success, and even
for the continuance of life, [Jam
4:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013). The chapter closes with an
affirmation that to him that knows how to do good and does it not, to
him it is sin, [Jam 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#017), implying
that all he had said in the chapter might indeed be obvious, and that
they would be ready to admit that these things were true, and that if
they knew this, and did not do right, they must be regarded as guilty.

[James 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 4:1</span></span>

From whence come wars and fightings among you? - Margin, "brawlings."
The reference is to strifes and contentions of all kinds; and the
question, then, as it is now, was an important one, what was their
source or origin? The answer is given in the succeeding part of the
verse. Some have supposed that the apostle refers here to the contests
and seditions existing among the Jews, which afterwards broke out in
rebellion against the Roman authority, and which led to the overthrow of
the Jewish nation. But the more probable reference is to domestic
broils, and to the strifes of sects and parties; to the disputes which
were carried on among the Jewish people, and which perhaps led to scenes
of violence, and to popular outbreaks among themselves. When the apostle
says "among you," it is not necessary to suppose that he refers to those
who were members of the Christian church as actually engaged in these
strifes, though he was writing to such; but he speaks of them as a part
of the Jewish people, and refers to the contentions which prevailed
among them as a people - contentions in which those who were Christian
converts were in great danger of participating, by being drawn into
their controversies, and partaking of the spirit of strife which existed
among their countrymen. It is known that such a spirit of contention
prevailed among the Jews at that time in an eminent degree, and it was
well to put those among them who professed to be Christians on their
guard against such a spirit, by stating the causes of all wars and
contentions. The solution which the apostle has given of the causes of
the strifes prevailing then, will apply substantially to all the wars
which have ever existed on the earth.

Come they not hence, even of your lusts? - Is not this the true source
of all war and contention? The word rendered "lusts" is in the margin
rendered "pleasures." This is the usual meaning of the word (ἡδονὴ
hēdonē); but it is commonly applied to the pleasures of sense, and
thence denotes desire, appetite, lust. It may be applied to any desire
of sensual gratification, and then to the indulgence of any corrupt
propensity of the mind. The lust or desire of rapine, of plunder, of
ambition, of fame, of a more extended dominion, I would be properly
embraced in the meaning of the word. The word would equally comprehend
the spirit which leads to a brawl in the street, and that which prompted
to the conquests of Alexander, Caesar, or Napoleon. All this is the same
spirit evinced on a larger or smaller scale.

That war in your members - The word "member" (μέλος melos) denotes,
properly, a limb or member of the body; but it is used in the New
Testament to denote the members of the body collectively; that is, the
body itself as the seat of the desires and passions, [Rom
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013), [Rom
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019); [Rom
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005), [Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023); [Col
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005). The word war here refers to the
conflict between those passions which have their seat in the flesh, and
the better principles of the mind and conscience, producing a state of
agitation and conflict. See the notes at [Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023). Compare [Gal
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017). Those corrupt passions which
have their seat in the flesh, the apostle says are the causes of war.
Most of the wars which have occurred in the world can be traced to what
the apostle here calls lusts. The desire of booty, the love of conquest,
the ambition for extended rule, the gratification of revenge, these and
similar causes have led to all the wars that have desolated the earth.
Justice, equity, the fear of God, the spirit of true religion, never
originated any war, but the corrupt passions of men have made the earth
one great battle-field. If true religion existed among all men, there
would be no more war. War always supposes that wrong has been done on
one side or the other, and that one party or the other, or both, is
indisposed to do right. The spirit of justice, equity, and truth, which
the religion of Christ would implant in the human heart, would put an
end to war forever.

[James 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 4:2</span></span>

Ye lust, and have not - That is, you wish to have something which you do
not now possess, and to which you have no just claim, and this prompts
to the effort to obtain it by force. You desire extension of territory,
fame, booty, the means of luxurious indulgence, or of magnificence and
grandeur, and this leads to contest and bloodshed. These are the causes
of wars on the large scale among nations and of the contentions and
strifes of individuals. The general reason is, that others have that
which we have not, and which we desire to have; and not content with
endeavoring to obtain it, if we can, in a peaceful and honest manner,
and not willing to content ourselves without its possession, we resolve
to secure it by force. Socrates is reported by Plato to have said on the
day of his death, "nothing else but the body and its desires cause wars,
seditions, and contests of every kind; for all wars arise through the
possession of wealth."

Phaedo of Plato, by Taylor, London, 1793, p. 158. The system of wars in
general, therefore, has been a system of great robberies, no more honest
or honorable than the purposes of the foot-pad, and more dignified only
because it involves greater skill and talent. It has been said that "to
kill one man makes a murderer, to kill many makes a hero." So it may be
said, that to steal a horse, or to rob a house, makes a man a thief or
burglar; to fire a dwelling subjects him to the punishment of arson; but
to plunder kingdoms and provinces, and to cause cities, towns, and
hamlets to be wrapped in flames, makes an illustrious conqueror, and
gives a title to what is deemed a bright page in history. The one
enrolls the name among felons, and consigns the perpetrator to the
dungeon or the gibbet; the other, accompanied with no more justice, and
with the same spirit, sends the name down to future times as immortal.
Yet in the two the all-discerning eye of God may see no difference
except in the magnitude of the crime, and in the extent of the injury
which has been inflicted. In his way, and according to the measure of
his ability, the felon who ends his life in a dungeon, or on the gibbet,
is as worthy of grateful and honored remembrance as the conqueror
triumphing in the spoils of desolated empires.

Ye kill - Margin, or "envy." The marginal reading "envy" has been
introduced from some doubt as to the correct reading of the text,
whether it should be φονεύτε phoneute, "ye kill," or φθονεῖτε
phthoneite, "ye envy." The latter reading has been adopted by Erasmus,
Schmidius, Luther, Beza, and some others, though merely from conjecture.
There is no authority from the manuscripts for the change. The correct
reading undoubtedly is, ye kill. This expression is probably to be taken
in the sense of having a murderous disposition, or fostering a brutal
and murderous spirit. It is not exactly that they killed or committed
murder previous to "desiring to have," but that they had such a covetous
desire of the possessions of others as to produce a murderous and bloody
temper. The spirit of murder was at the bottom of the whole; or there
was such a desire of the possessions of others as to lead to the
commission of this crime. Of what aggressive wars which have ever
existed is not this true?

Desire to have - That is, what is in the possession of others.

And cannot obtain - By any fair and honest means; by purchase or
negotiation: and this leads to bloody conquest. All wars might have been
avoided if men had been content with what they had, or could rightfully
obtain, and had not desired to have what was in the possession of
others, which they could not obtain by honest and honorable means. Every
war might have been avoided by fair and honorable negociation.

Ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not - Notwithstanding
you engage in contentions and strifes, you do not obtain what you seek
after. If you sought that from God which you truly need, you would
obtain it, for he would bestow upon you all that is really necessary.
But you seek it by contention and strife, and you have no security of
obtaining it. He who seeks to gain anything by war seeks it in an unjust
manner, and cannot depend on the divine help and blessing. The true way
of obtaining anything which we really need is to seek it from God by
prayer, and then to make use of just and fair means of obtaining it, by
industry and honesty, and by a due regard for the rights of others. Thus
sought, we shall obtain it if it would be for our good; if it is
withheld, it will be because it is best for us that it should not be
ours. In all the wars which have been waged on the earth, whether for
the settlement of disputed questions, for the adjustment of boundaries,
for the vindication of violated rights, or for the permanent extension
of empire, how rare has it been that the object which prompted to the
war has been secured! The course of events has shown that indisposed as
men are to do justice, there is much more probability of obtaining the
object by patient negotiation than there is by going to war.

[James 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 4:3</span></span>

Ye ask, and receive not - That is, some of you ask, or you ask on some
occasions. Though seeking in general what you desire by strife, and
without regard to the rights of others, yet you sometimes pray. It is
not uncommon for men who go to war to pray, or to procure the services
of a chaplain to pray for them. It sometimes happens that the covetous
and the quarrelsome; that those who live to wrong others, and who are
fond of litigation, pray. Such men may be professors of religion. They
keep up a form of worship in their families. They pray for success in
their worldly engagements, though those engagements are all based on
covetousness. Instead of seeking property that they may glorify God, and
do good; that they may relieve the poor and distressed; that they may be
the patrons of learning, philanthropy, and religion, they do it that
they may live in splendor, and be able to pamper their lusts. It is not
indeed very common that persons with such ends and aims of life pray,
but they sometimes do it; for, alas! there are many professors of
religion who have no higher aims than these, and not a few such
professors feel that consistency demands that they should observe some
form of prayer. If such persons do not receive what they ask for, if
they are not prospered in their plans, they should not set it down as
evidence that God does not hear prayer, but as evidence that their
prayers are offered for improper objects, or with improper motives.

Because ye ask amiss - Ye do it with a view to self-indulgence and
carnal gratification.

That you may consume it upon your lusts - Margin, "pleasures." This is
the same word which is used in [Jam
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001), and rendered lusts. The reference
is to sensual gratifications, and the word would include all that comes
under the name of sensual pleasure, or carnal appetite. It was not that
they might have a decent and comfortable living, which would not be
improper to desire, but that they might have the means of luxurious
dress and living; perhaps the means of gross sensual gratifications.
Prayers offered that we may have the means of sensuality and
voluptuousness, we have no reason to suppose God will answer, for he has
not promised to hear such prayers; and it becomes every one who prays
for worldly prosperity, and for success in business, to examine his
motives with the closest scrutiny. Nowhere is deception more likely to
creep in than into such prayers; nowhere are we more likely to be
mistaken in regard to our real motives, than when we go before God and
ask for success in our worldly employments.

[James 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 4:4</span></span>

Ye adulterers and adulteresses - These words are frequently used to
denote those who are faithless towards God, and are frequently applied
to those who forsake God for idols, [Hos
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001); [Isa
57:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#003), [Isa
57:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#007); Ezek. 16; 23. It is not
necessary to suppose that the apostle meant that those to whom he wrote
were literally guilty of the sins here referred to; but he rather refers
to those who were unfaithful to their covenant with God by neglecting
their duty to him, and yielding themselves to the indulgence of their
own lusts and passions. The idea is, "You have in effect broken your
marriage covenant with God by loving the world more than him; and, by
the indulgence of your carnal inclinations, you have violated those
obligations to self-mortification and self-denial to which you were
bound by your religious engagements." To convince them of the evil of
this, the apostle shows them what was the true nature of that friendship
of the world which they sought. It may be remarked here, that no terms
could have been found which would have shown more decidedly the nature
of the sin of forgetting the covenant vows of religion for the pleasures
of the world, than those which the apostle uses here. It is a deeper
crime to be unfaithful to God than to any created being; and it will yet
be seen that even the violation of the marriage contract, great as is
the sin, is a slight offence compared with unfaithfulness toward God.

Know ye not that the friendship of the world - Compare [Jo1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015). The term world here is to be
understood not of the physical world as God made it, for we could not
well speak of the "friendship" of that, but of the community, or people,
called "the world," in contradistinction from the people of God. Compare
[Joh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031); [Co1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020); [Co1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019); [Gal
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003); [Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008). The "friendship of the world"
(φιλία τοῦ κόσμου philia tou kosmou) is the love of that world; of the
maxims which govern it, the principles which reign there, the ends that
are sought, the amusements and gratifications which characterize it as
distinguished from the church of God. It consists in setting our hearts
on those things; in conforming to them; in making them the object of our
pursuit with the same spirit with which they are sought by those who
make no pretensions to religion. See the notes at [Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002).

Is enmity with God - Is in fact hostility against God, since that world
is arrayed against him. It neither obeys his laws, submits to his
claims, nor seeks to honor him. To love that world is, therefore, to be
arrayed against God; and the spirit which would lead us to this is, in
fact, a spirit of hostility to God.

Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world - "Whoever" he may be,
whether in the church or out of it. The fact of being a member of the
church makes no difference in this respect, for it is as easy to be a
friend of the world in the church as out of it. The phrase "whosoever
will" (βούληθῇ boulēthē) implies "purpose, intention, design." It
supposes that the heart is set on it; or that there is a deliberate
purpose to seek the friendship of the world. It refers to that strong
desire which often exists, even among professing Christians, to secure
the friendship of the world; to copy its fashions and vanities; to enjoy
its pleasures; and to share its pastimes and its friendships. Wherever
there is a manifested purpose to find our chosen friends and associates
there rather than among Christians; wherever there is a greater desire
to enjoy the smiles and approbation of the world than there is to enjoy
the approbation of God and the blessings of a good conscience; and
wherever there is more conscious pain because we have failed to win the
applause of the world, or have offended its votaries, and have sunk
ourselves in its estimation, than there is because we have neglected our
duty to our Saviour, and have lost the enjoyment of religion, there is
the clearest proof that the heart wills or desires to be the "friend of
the world."

Is the enemy of God - This is a most solemn declaration, and one of
fearful import in its bearing on many who are members of the church. It
settles the point that anyone, no matter what his professions, who is
characteristically a friend of the world, cannot be a true Christian. In
regard to the meaning of this important verse, then, it may be remarked:

\(1\) that there is a sense in which the love of this world, or of the
physical universe, is not wrong. That kind of love for it as the work of
God, which perceives the evidence of his wisdom and goodness and power
in the various objects of beauty, usefulness, and grandeur, spread
around us, is not evil. The world as such - the physical structure of
the earth, of the mountains, forests flowers, seas, lakes, and vales -
is full of illustrations of the divine character, and it cannot be wrong
to contemplate those things with interest, or with warm affection toward
their Creator.

\(2\) when that world, however, becomes our portion; when we study it
only as a matter of science, without "looking through nature up to
nature's God;" when we seek the wealth which it has to confer, or
endeavor to appropriate as our supreme portion its lands, its minerals,
its fruits; when we are satisfied with what it yields, and when in the
possession or pursuit of these things, our thoughts never rise to God;
and when we partake of the spirit which rules in the hearts of those who
avowedly seek this world as their portion, though we profess religion,
then the love of the world becomes evil, and comes in direct conflict
with the spirit of true religion.

\(3\) the statement in this verse is, therefore, one of most fearful
import for many professors of religion. There are many in the church
who, so far as human judgment can go, are characteristically lovers of
the world. This is shown:

\(a\) by their conformity to it in all in which the world is
distinguished from the church as such;

\(b\) in their seeking the friendship of the world, or their finding
their friends there rather than among Christians;

\(c\) in preferring the amusements of the world to the scenes where
spiritually-minded Christians find their chief happiness;

\(d\) in pursuing the same pleasures that the people of the world do,
with the same expense, the same extravagance, the same luxury;

\(e\) in making their worldly interests the great object of living, and
everything else subordinate to that.

This spirit exists in all cases where no worldly interest is sacrificed
for religion; where everything that religion peculiarly requires is
sacrificed for the world. If this be so, then there are many professing
Christians who are the "enemies of God." See the notes at [Phi
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#018). They have never known what is
true friendship for him, and by their lives they show that they can be
ranked only among his foes. It becomes every professing Christian,
therefore, to examine himself with the deepest earnestness to determine
whether he is characteristically a friend of the world or of God;
whether he is living for this life only, or is animated by the high and
pure principles of those who are the friends of God. The great Searcher
of hearts cannot be deceived, and soon our appropriate place will be
assigned us, and our final Judge will determine to which class of the
two great divisions of the human family we belong - to those who are the
friends of the world, or to those who are the friends of God.

[James 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 4:5</span></span>

Do ye think that the Scripture saith in vain - Few passages of the New
Testament have given expositors more perplexity than this. The
difficulty has arisen from the fact that no such passage as that which
seems here to be quoted is found in the Old Testament; and to meet this
difficulty, expositors have resorted to various conjectures and
solutions. Some have supposed that the passage is spurious, and that it
was at first a gloss in the margin, placed there by some transcriber,
and was then introduced into the text; some that the apostle quotes from
an apocryphal book; some, that he quotes the general spirit of the Old
Testament rather than any particular place; some regard it not as a
quotation, but read the two members separately, supplying what is
necessary to complete the sense, thus: "Do you think that the Scripture
speaks in vain, or without a good reason, when it condemns such a
worldly temper? No; that you cannot suppose. Do you imagine that the
Spirit of God, which dwelleth in us Christians, leads to covetousness,
pride, envy? No. On the contrary, to such as follow his guidance and
direction, he gives more abundant grace and favor." This is the solution
proposed by Benson, and adopted by Bloomfield. But this solution is by
no means satisfactory. Two things are clear in regard to the passage:

\(1\) that James meant to adduce something that was said somewhere, or
which could be regarded as a quotation, or as authority in the case, for
he uses the formula by which such quotations are made; and,

\(2\) that he meant to refer, not to an apocryphal book, but to the
inspired and canonical Scriptures, for he uses a term ἡ γραφὴ hē graphē
- the Scripture) which is everywhere employed to denote the Old
Testament, and which is nowhere applied to an apocryphal book, [Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042); [Mat
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029); [Mat
26:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#054), [Mat
26:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056); [Joh
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#022); [Joh
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039); [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038), [Joh
7:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#042); [Joh
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035), et al. The word is used more
than fifty times in the New Testament, and is never applied to any books
but those which were regarded by the Jews as inspired, and which
constitute now the Old Testament, except in [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016), where it refers to the writings
of Paul. The difficulty in the case arises from the fact that no such
passage as the one here quoted is found in so many words in the Old
Testament, nor any of which it can fairly be regarded as a quotation.
The only solution of the difficulty which seems to me to be at all
satisfactory, is to suppose that the apostle, in the remark made here in
the form of a quotation, refers to the Old Testament, but that he had
not his eye on any particular passage, and did not mean to quote the
words literally, but meant to refer to what was the current teaching or
general spirit of the Old Testament; or that he meant to say that this
sentiment was found there, and designed himself to embody the sentiment
in words, and to put it into a condensed form.

His eye was on envy as at the bottom of many of the contentions and
strifes existing on earth, [Jam 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#016),
and of the spirit of the world which prevailed everywhere, [Jam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004); and he refers to the general
teaching of the Old Testament that the soul is by nature inclined to
envy; or that this has a deep lodgement in the heart of man. That truth
which was uttered every where in the Scriptures, was not taught "in
vain." The abundant facts which existed showing its developement and
operation in contentions, and wars, and a worldly spirit, proved that it
was deeply imbedded in the human soul. This general truth, that man is
prone to envy, or that there is much in our nature which inclines us to
it, is abundantly taught in the Old Testament. [Ecc
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004), "I considered all travail, and
every right work, that for this a man is envied of his neighbor." [Job
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002), "wrath killeth, and envy slayeth
the silly one." [Pro 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030), "envy is
the rottenness of the bones." [Pro
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004), "who is able to stand before
envy?" For particular instances of this, and the effects, see [Gen
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#014); [Gen
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001); [Gen
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#011); [Psa
106:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#016); [Psa
73:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003). These passages prove that there
is a strong propensity in human nature to envy, and it was in accordance
with the design of the apostle to show this. The effects of envy to
which be himself referred evinced the same thing, and demonstrated that
the utterance given to this sentiment in the Old Testament was not "in
vain," or was not false, for the records in the Old Testament on the
subject found a strong confirmation in the wars and strifes and
worldliness of which he was speaking.

Saith in vain - Says falsely;" that is, the testimony thus borne is
true. The apostle means that what was said in the Old Testament on the
subject found abundant confirmation in the facts which were continually
occurring, and especially in those to which he was adverting.

The spirit that dwelleth in us - Many have supposed that the word
"spirit" here refers to the Holy Spirit, or the Christian spirit; but in
adopting this interpretation they are obliged to render the passage,
"the spirit that dwells in us lusteth against envy," or tends to check
and suppress it. But this interpretation is forced and unnatural, and
one which the Greek will not well bear. The more obvious interpretation
is to refer it to our spirit or disposition as we are by nature, and it
is equivalent to saying that we are naturally prone to envy.

Lusteth to envy - Strongly tends to envy. The margin is "enviously," but
the sense is the same. The idea is, that there is in man a strong
inclination to look with dissatisfaction on the superior happiness and
prosperity of others; to desire to make what they possess our own; or at
any rate to deprive them of it by detraction, by fraud, or by robbery.
It is this feeling which leads to calumny, to contentions, to wars, and
to that strong worldly ambition which makes us anxious to surpass all
others, and which is so hostile to the humble and contented spirit of
religion. He who could trace all wars and contentions and worldly plans
to their source - all the schemes and purposes of even professed
Christians, that do so much to mar their religion and to make them
worldly-minded, to their real origin - would be surprised to find how
much is to be attributed to envy. We are pained that others are more
prosperous than we are; we desire to possess what others have, though we
have no right to it; and this leads to the various guilty methods which
are pursued to lessen their enjoyment of it, or to obtain it ourselves,
or to show that they do not possess as much as they are commonly
supposed to. This purpose will be accomplished if we can obtain more
than they have; or if we can diminish what they actually possess; or if
by any statements to which we can give currency in society, the general
impression shall be that they do not possess as much wealth, domestic
peace, happiness, or honor, as is commonly supposed - for thus the
spirit of envy in our bosoms will be gratified.

[James 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 4:6</span></span>

But he giveth more grace - The reference here is undoubtedly to God.
Some have regarded this clause as a continuation of the quotation in the
previous verse, but it is rather to be considered as a declaration of
the apostle himself. The writer had just spoken of envy, and of the
crimes which grew out of it. He thought of the wars and commotions of
the earth, and of the various lusts which reigned among men. In the
contemplation of these things, it seems suddenly to have occurred to him
that all were not under the influence of these things; that there were
cases where men were restrained, and where a spirit opposite to these
things prevailed. Another passage of Scripture struck his mind,
containing the truth that there was a class of men to whom God gave
grace to restrain these passions, and to subdue these carnal
propensities. They were the humble, in contradistinction to the proud;
and he states the fact that "God giveth more grace;" that is, that in
some instances he confers more grace than in the cases referred to; to
some he gives more grace to overcome their evil passions, and to subdue
their corrupt inclinations, than he does to others. The meaning may be
thus expressed: - "It is true that the natural spirit in man is one that
tends to envy, and thus leads to all the sad consequences of envy. But
there are instances in which higher grace or favor is conferred; in
which these feelings are subdued, and these consequences are prevented.
They are not indeed to be found among the proud, whom God always
resists; but they are to be found among the meek and the humble.
Wherefore submit yourselves to his arrangements; resist the devil; draw
nigh to God; purify yourselves, and weep over your past offences, and
you shall find that the Lord will lift you up, and bestow his favor upon
you," [Jam 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#010).

Wherefore he saith - The reference here is to [Pro
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034), "Surely he scorneth the
scorners; but he giveth grace unto the lowly." The quotation is made
exactly from the Septuagint, which, though not entirely literal,
expresses the sense of the Hebrew without essential inaccuracy. This
passage is also quoted in [Pe1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005).

God resisteth the proud - The proud are those who have an inordinate
self-esteem; who have a high and unreasonable conceit of their own
excellence or importance. This may extend to anything; to beauty, or
strength, or attainments, or family, or country, or equipage, or rank,
or even religion. A man may be proud of anything that belongs to him, or
which can in any way be construed as a part of himself, or as pertaining
to him. This does not, of course, apply to a correct estimate of
ourselves, or to the mere knowledge that we may excel others. One may
know that he has more strength, or higher attainments in learning or in
the mechanic arts, or greater wealth than others, and yet have properly
no pride in the case. He has only a correct estimate of himself, and he
attaches no undue importance to himself on account of it. His heart is
not lifted up; he claims no undue deference to himself; he concedes to
all others what is their due; and he is humble before God, feeling that
all that he has, and is, is nothing in his sight. He is willing to
occupy his appropriate place in the sight of God and men, and to be
esteemed just as he is. Pride goes beyond this, and gives to a man a
degree of self-estimation which is not warranted by anything that he
possesses. God looks at things as they are; and hence he abhors and
humbles this arrogant claim, [Lev
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019); [Job
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#017); [Psa
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#012); [Pro
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#013); [Pro
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018); [Pro
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#013); [Isa
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#009); [Isa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001); [Dan
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037); [Zac
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011). This resistance of pride he
shows not only in the explicit declarations of his word, but in the
arrangements of his providence and grace:

\(1\) In his providence, in the reverses and disappointments which
occur; in the necessity of abandoning the splendid mansion which we had
built, or in disappointing us in some favorite plan by which our pride
was to be nurtured and gratified.

\(2\) in sickness, taking away the beauty and strength on which we had
so much valued ourselves, and bring us to the sad condition of a sick
bed.

\(3\) in the grave, bringing us down to corruption and worms. Why should
one be proud who will soon become so offensive to his best friends that
they will gladly hide him in the grave?

\(4\) in the plan of salvation he opposes our pride. Not a feature of
that plan is fitted to foster pride, but all is adapted to make us
humble.

\(a\) The necessity for the plan - that we are guilty and helpless
sinners;

\(b\) the selection of a Saviour - one who was so poor, and who was so
much despised by the world, and who was put to death on a cross;

\(c\) our entire dependence on him for salvation, with the assurance
that we have no merit of our own, and that salvation is all of grace;

\(d\) the fact that we are brought to embrace it only by the agency of
the Holy Spirit, and that if we were left to ourselves we should never
have one right thought or holy desire - all this is fitted to humble us,
and to bring us low before God. God has done nothing to foster the
self-estimation of the human heart; but how much has he done to "stain
the pride of all glory? See the notes at [Isa
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#009).

But giveth grace unto the humble - The meaning is, that he shows them
favor; he bestows upon them the grace needful to secure their salvation.
This he does:

\(1\) because they feel their need of his favor;

\(2\) because they will welcome his teaching and value his friendship;

\(3\) because all the arrangements of his grace are adapted only to such
a state of mind. You cannot teach one who is so wise that he already
supposes he knows enough; you cannot bestow grace on one who has no
sense of the need of it. The arrangements of salvation are adapted only
to an humble heart.

[James 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 4:7</span></span>

Submit yourselves therefore to God - That is, in his arrangements for
obtaining his favor. Yield to what he has judged necessary for your
welfare in the life that is, and your salvation in the life to come. The
duty here enjoined is that of entire acquiescence in the arrangements of
God, whether in his providence or grace. All these are for our good, and
submission to them is required by the spirit of true humility. The
object of the command here, and in the succeeding injunctions to
particular duties, is to show them how they might obtain the grace which
God is willing to bestow, and how they might overcome the evils against
which the apostle had been endeavoring to guard them. The true method of
doing this is by submitting ourselves in all things to God.

Resist the devil, and he will flee from you - While you yield to God in
all things, you are to yield to the devil in none. You are to resist and
oppose him in whatever way he may approach you, whether by allurements,
by flattering promises, by the fascinations of the world, by temptation,
or by threats. See [Pe1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009). Satan
makes his way, and secures his triumphs, rather by art, cunning,
deception, and threatenings, than by true courage; and when opposed
manfully, he flies. The true way of meeting him is by direct resistance,
rather than by argument; by steadfastly refusing to yield in the
slightest degree, rather than by a belief that we can either convince
him that he is wrong, or can return to virtue when we have gone a
certain length in complying with his demands. No one is safe who yields
in the least to the suggestions of the tempter; there is no one who is
not safe if he does not yield. A man, for example, is always safe from
intemperance if he resists all allurements to indulgence in strong
drink, and never yields in the slightest degree; no one is certainly
safe if he drinks even moderately.

[James 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 4:8</span></span>

Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you - Compare [Ch2
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#002). This declaration contains a
great and important principle in religion. If we wish the favor of God,
we must come to him; nor can we hope for his mercy, unless we approach
him and ask him for it. We cannot come literally any nearer to God than
we always are, for he is always round about us; but we may come nearer
in a spiritual sense. We may address him directly in prayer; we may
approach him by meditation on his character; we may draw near to him in
the ordinances of religion. We can never hope for his favor while we
prefer to remain at a distance from him; none who in fact draw near to
him will find him unwilling to bestow on them the blessings which they
need.

Cleanse your hands, ye sinners - There may possibly be an allusion here
to [Isa 1:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015); "Your hands are full
of blood; wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes; cease to do evil." The heart is the seat of
motives and intentions - that by which we devise anything; the hands,
the instruments by which we execute our purposes. The hands here are
represented as defiled by blood, or by acts of iniquity. To wash or
cleanse the hands was, therefore, emblematic of putting away
transgression, [Mat 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024). Compare
[Deu 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#006); [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006). The heathen and the Jews were
accustomed to wash their hands before they engaged in public worship.
The particular idea here is, that in order to obtain the favor of God,
it is necessary to put away our sins; to approach him with a desire to
be pure and holy. The mere washing of the hands, in itself, could not
recommend us to his favor; but that of which the washing of the hands
would be an emblem, would be acceptable in his sight. It may be inferred
from what is said here that no one can hope for the favor of God who
does not abandon his transgressions. The design of the apostle is,
evidently, to state one of the conditions on which we can make an
acceptable approach to God. It is indispensable that we come with a
purpose and desire to wash ourselves from all iniquity, to put away from
us all our transgressions. So David said, "I will wash my hands in
innocency; so will I compass thine altar. O Lord," [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006).

("To obtain the favor of God, it is necessary to put away our sins" - is
somewhat unguarded phraseology. If the favor of God were not obtained
but on this condition, none ever would obtain it. The passage is a
strong injunction to holiness and singleness of heart: it does not say,
however, that by these we obtain acceptance with God. Of his favor,
holiness is the fruit, the effect, and not the cause. The sinner must
not think of getting quit of his sins to prepare him for going to God by
Jesus; but he must first go to Jesus to prepare for laying aside his
sins. Yet in every approach to God, it is true there must be a "desire
"to be free from sin; and this doubtless is the view of the commentary;
indeed it is so expressed, though some words are objectionable.)

And purify your hearts - That is, do not rest satisfied with a mere
external reformation; with putting away your outward transgressions.
There must be a deeper work than that; a work which shall reach to the
heart, and which shall purify the affections. This agrees with all the
requisitions of the Bible, and is in accordance with what must be the
nature of religion. If the heart is wrong, nothing can be right. If,
while we seek an external reformation, we still give indulgence to the
secret corruptions of the heart, it is clear that we can have no true
religion.

Ye double-minded - See the notes at [Jam
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#008). The apostle here seems to have
had his eye on those who were vacillating in their purposes; whose
hearts were not decidedly fixed, but who were halting between good and
evil. The heart was not right in such persons. It was not settled and
determined in favor of religion, but vibrated between that and the
world. The proper business of such persons, therefore, was to cleanse
the heart from disturbing influences, that it might settle down in
unwavering attachment to that which is good.

[James 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 4:9</span></span>

Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep - That is, evidently, on account of
your sins. The sins to which the apostle refers are those which he had
specified in the previous part of the chapter, and which he had spoken
of as so evil in their nature, and so dangerous in their tendency. The
word rendered "be afflicted" means, properly, to endure toil or
hardship; then to endure affliction or distress; and here means, that
they were to afflict themselves - that is, they were to feel distressed
and sad on account of their transgressions. Compare [Ezr
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021). The other words in this clause
are those which are expressive of deep grief or sorrow. The language
here used shows that the apostle supposed that it was possible that
those who had done wrong should voluntarily feel sorrow for it, and
that, therefore, it was proper to call upon them to do it.

(All who feel true sorrow for sin, do so voluntarily; but it is not
intended by this assertion to insinuate that repentance is not the work
of the Spirit. He operates on men without destroying their freedom, or
doing violence to their will: "in the day of his power they are
willing." Nor is it improper to call on men to do that for which they
require the Spirit's aid. That aid is not withheld in the hour of need;
and everywhere the Bible commands sinners to believe and repent.)

Let your laughter be turned to mourning - It would seem that the persons
referred to, instead of suitable sorrow and humiliation on account of
sin, gave themselves to joyousness, mirth, and revelry. See a similar
instance in [Isa 22:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012). It is often
the case, that those for whom the deep sorrows of repentance would be
peculiarly appropriate, give themselves to mirth and vanity. The apostle
here says that such mirth did not become them. Sorrow, deep and
unfeigned, was appropriate on account of their sins, and the sound of
laughter and of revelry should be changed to notes of lamentation. To
how many of the assemblies of the vain, the gay, and the dissipated,
might the exhortation in this passage with propriety be now addressed!

Your joy to heaviness - The word here rendered heaviness occurs nowhere
else in the New Testament. It means dejection, sorrow. It is not gloom,
melancholy, or moroseness, but it is sorrow on account of sin. God has
so made us that we should feel sorrow when we are conscious that we have
done wrong, and it is appropriate that we should do so.

[James 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 4:10</span></span>

Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord - Compare [Mat
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#012). See the notes at [Jam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006). That is, be willing to take your
appropriate place in the dust on account of your transgressions. This is
to be "in the sight of the Lord," or before him. Our sins have been
committed against him; and their principal aggravation, whoever may have
been wronged by them, and great as is their criminality in other
respects, arises from that consideration. [Psa
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004), "against thee, thee only, have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight." [Luk
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#018), "I will arise and go to my
father, and will say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee." As the Being against whom we have sinned is the only one
who can pardon, it is proper that we should humble ourselves before him
with penitent confession.

And he shall lift you up - He will exalt you from the condition of a
broken-hearted penitent to that of a forgiven child; will wipe away your
tears, remove the sadness of your heart, fill you with joy, and clothe
you with the garments of salvation. This declaration is in accordance
with all the promises in the Bible, and with all the facts which occur
on the earth, that God is willing to show mercy to the humble and
contrite, and to receive those who are truly penitent into his favor.
Compare [Luk 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#022).

[James 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 4:11</span></span>

Speak not evil one of another, brethren - It is not known to whom the
apostle here particularly refers, nor is it necessary to know. It is
probable that among those whom he addressed there were some who were
less circumspect in regard to speaking of others than they should be,
and perhaps this evil prevailed. There are few communities where such an
injunction would not be proper at any time, and few churches where some
might not be found to whom the exhortation would be appropriate. Compare
the [Eph 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031) note; [Pe1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001) note. The evil here referred to is
that of talking against others - against their actions, their motives,
their manner of living, their families, etc. Few things are more common
in the world; nothing is more decidedly against the true spirit of
religion.

He that speaketh evil of his brother - Referring here probably to
Christian brother, or to a fellow Christian. The word may however be
used in a larger sense to denote anyone - a brother of the human race.
Religion forbids both, and would restrain us from all evil speaking
against any human being.

And judgeth his brother - His motives, or his conduct. See the notes at
[Mat 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001).

Speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the law - Instead of manifesting
the feelings of a brother he sets himself up as judge, and not only a
judge of his brother, but a judge of the law. The law here referred to
is probably the law of Christ, or the rule which all Christians profess
to obey. It is that which James elsewhere calls the "law of liberty,"
(Notes, [Jam 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025)) the law which
released men from the servitude of the Jewish rites, and gave them
liberty to worship God without the restraint and bondage [Act
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010); [Gal
4:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021) implied in that ancient system
of worship; and the law by which it was contemplated that they should be
free from sin. It is not absolutely certain to what the apostle refers
here, but it would seem probable that it is to some course of conduct
which one portion of the church felt they were at liberty to follow, but
which another portion regarded as wrong, and for which they censured
them.

The explanation which will best suit the expressions here used, is that
which supposes that it refers to some difference of opinion which
existed among Christians, especially among those of Jewish origin, about
the binding nature of the Jewish laws, in regard to circumcision, to
holy days, to ceremonial observances, to the distinctions of meats, etc.
A part regarded the law on these subjects as still binding, another
portion supposed that the obligation in regard to these matters had
ceased by the introduction of the gospel. Those who regarded the
obligation of the Mosaic law as still binding, would of course judge
their brethren, and regard them as guilty of a disregard of the law of
God by their conduct. We know that differences of opinion on these
points gave rise to contentions, and to the formation of parties in the
church, and that it required all the wisdom of Paul and of the other
apostles to hush the contending elements to peace.

Compare the notes at [Col 2:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016). To
some such source of contention the apostle doubtless refers here; and
the meaning probably is, that they who held the opinion that all the
Jewish ceremonial laws were still binding on Christians, and who judged
and condemned their brethren who did not observe them, by such a course
judged and condemned "the law of liberty" under which they acted - the
law of Christianity that had abolished the ceremonial observances, and
released men from their obligation. The judgment which they passed,
therefore, was not only on their brethren, but was on that law of
Christianity which had given greater liberty of conscience, and which
was intended to abolish the obligation of the Jewish ritual. The same
thing now occurs when we judge others for a course which their
consciences approve, because they do not deem it necessary to comply
with all the rules which we think to be binding.

Not a few of the harsh judgments which one class of religionists
pronounce on others, are in fact judgments on the laws of Christ. We set
up our own standards, or our own interpretations, and then we judge
others for not complying with them, when in fact they may be acting only
as the law of Christianity, properly understood, would allow them to do.
They who set up a claim to a right to judge the conduct of others,
should be certain that they understand the nature of religion
themselves. It may be presumed, unless there is evidence to the
contrary, that others are as conscientious as we are; and it may
commonly be supposed that they who differ from us have some reason for
what they do, and may be desirous of glorifying their Lord and Master,
and that they may possibly be right. It is commonly not safe to judge
hastily of a man who has turned his attention to a particular subject,
or to suppose that he has no reasons to allege for his opinions or
conduct.

But if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge -
It is implied here that it is the simple duty of every Christian to obey
the law. He is not to assume the office of a judge about its propriety
or fitness; but he is to do what he supposes the law to require of him,
and is to allow others to do the same. Our business in religion is not
to make laws, or to declare what they should have been, or to amend
those that are made; it is simply to obey those which are appointed, and
to allow others to do the same, as they understand them. It would be
well for all individual Christians, and Christian denominations, to
learn this, and to imbibe the spirit of charity to which it would
prompt.

[James 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 4:12</span></span>

There is one lawgiver - There is but one who has a right to give law.
The reference here is undoubtedly to the Lord Jesus Christ, the great
Legislator of the church. This, too, is a most important and vital
principle, though one that has been most imperfectly understood and
acted on. The tendency everywhere has been to enact other laws than
those appointed by Christ - the laws of synods and councils - and to
claim that Christians are bound to observe them, and should be punished
if they do not. But it is a fundamental principle in Christianity that
no laws are binding on the conscience, but those which Christ has
ordained; and that all attempts to make other laws pertaining to
religion binding on the conscience is a usurpation of his prerogatives.
The church is safe while it adheres to this as a settled principle; it
is not safe when it submits to any legislation in religious matters as
binding the conscience.

Who is able to save and to destroy - Compare [Mat
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028). The idea here would seem to be,
that he is able to save those whom you condemn, and to destroy you who
pronounce a judgment on them. Or, in general, it may mean that he is
intrusted with all power, and is abundantly able to administer his
government; to restrain where it is necessary to restrain; to save where
it is proper to save; to punish where it is just to punish. The whole
matter pertaining to judgment, therefore, may be safely left in his
hands; and, as he is abundantly qualified for it, we should not usurp
his prerogatives.

Who art thou that judgest another? - "Who art thou, a weak and frail and
erring mortal, thyself accountable to that Judge, that thou shouldest
interfere, and pronounce judgment on another, especially when he is
doing only what that Judge permits him to do?" See this sentiment
explained at length in the notes at [Rom
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004). Compare the [Rom
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001) note, and [Mat
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001) note. There is nothing more
decidedly condemned in the Scriptures than the habit of pronouncing a
judgment on the motives and conduct of others. There is nothing in which
we are more liable to err, or to indulge in wrong feelings; and there is
nothing which God claims more for himself as his peculiar prerogative.

[James 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 4:13</span></span>

Go to now - The apostle here introduces a new subject, and refers to
another fault which was doubtless prevalent among them, as it is
everywhere, that of a presumptuous confidence respecting the future, or
of forming plans stretching into the future, without any proper sense of
the uncertainty of life, and of our absolute dependence on God. The
phrase "go to now," (ἄγε νῦν age nun,) is a phrase designed to arrest
attention, as if there were something that demanded their notice, and
especially, as in this case, with the implied thought that that to which
the attention is called is wrong. See [Jam
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001). Compare [Gen
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007); [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018).

Ye that say - You that form your plans in this manner or that speak thus
confidently of what you will do in the future. The word say here
probably refers to what was in their thoughts, rather than to what was
openly expressed.

Today or tomorrow we will go into such a city - That is, they say this
without any proper sense of the uncertainty of life, and of their
absolute dependence on God.

And continue there a year - Fixing a definite time; designating the
exact period during which they would remain, and when they would leave,
without any reference to the will of God. The apostle undoubtedly means
to refer here to this as a mere specimen of what he would reprove. It
cannot be supposed that he refers to this single case alone as wrong.
All plans are wrong that are formed in the same spirit. "The practice to
which the apostle here alludes," says the editor of the Pictorial Bible,
"is very common in the East to this day, among a very respectable and
intelligent class of merchants. They convey the products of one place to
some distant city, where they remain until they have disposed of their
own goods and have purchased others suitable for another distant market;
and thus the operation is repeated, until, after a number of years, the
trader is enabled to return prosperously to his home. Or again, a
shopkeeper or a merchant takes only the first step in this process -
conveying to a distant town, where the best purchases of his own line
are to be made, such goods as are likely to realise a profit, and
returning, without any farther stop, with a stock for his own concern.
These operations are seldom very rapid, as the adventurer likes to wait
opportunities for making advantageous bargains; and sometimes opens a
shop in the place to which he comes, to sell by retail the goods which
he has bought." The practice is common in India. See Roberts" Oriental
Illustrations.

And buy and sell, and get gain - It is not improbable that there is an
allusion here to the commercial habits of the Jews at the time when the
apostle wrote. Many of them were engaged in foreign traffic, and for
this purpose made long journeys to distant trading cities, as
Alexandria, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, etc. - Bloomfield.

[James 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 4:14</span></span>

Whereas, ye know not what shall be on the morrow - They formed their
plans as if they knew; the apostle says it could not be known. They had
no means of ascertaining what would occur; whether they would live or
die; whether they would be prospered, or would be overwhelmed with
adversity. Of the truth of the remark made by the apostle here, no one
can doubt; but it is amazing how men act as if it were false. We have no
power of penetrating the future so as to be able to determine what will
occur in a single day or a single hour, and yet we are almost habitually
forming our plans as if we saw with certainty all that is to happen. The
classic writings abound with beautiful expressions respecting the
uncertainty of the future, and the folly of forming our plans as if it
were known to us. Many of those passages, some of them almost precisely
in the words of James, may be seen in Grotius and Pricaeus, in loc. Such
passages occur in Anacreon, Euripides, Menander, Seneca, Horace, and
others, suggesting an obvious but much-neglected thought, that the
future is to is all unknown. Man cannot penetrate it; and his plans of
life should be formed in view of the possibility that his life may be
cut off and all his plans fail, and consequently in constant preparation
for a higher world.

For what is your life? - All your plans must depend of course on the
continuance of your life; but what a frail and uncertain thing is that!
How transitory and evanescent as a basis on which to build any plans for
the future! Who can calculate on the permanence of a vapor? Who can
build any solid hopes on a mist?

It is even a vapour - Margin, "For it is." The margin is the more
correct rendering. The previous question had turned the attention to
life as something peculiarly frail, and as of such a nature that no
calculation could be based on its permanence. This expression gives a
reason for that, to wit, that it is a mere vapor. The word "vapor"
(ἀτμὶς atmis,) means a mist, an exhalation, a smoke; such a vapor as we
see ascending from a stream, or as lies on the mountain side on the
morning, or as floats for a little time in the air, but which is
dissipated by the rising sun, leaving not a trace behind. The comparison
of life with a vapor is common, and is as beautiful as it is just. Job
says,

O remember that my life is Wind;

Mine eyes shall no more see good.

[Job 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007).

So the Psalmist,

For he remembered that they were but flesh,

A wind that passeth away and that cometh not again.

[Psa 78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039).

Compare [Ch1 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015); [Job
14:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#010).

And then vanisheth away - Wholly disappears. Like the dissipated vapor,
it is entirely gone. There is no remnant, no outline, nothing that
reminds us that it ever was. So of life. Soon it disappears altogether.
The works of art that man has made, the house that he has built, or the
book that he has written, remain for a little time, but the life has
gone. There is nothing of it remaining - any more than there is of the
vapor which in the morning climbed silently up the mountain side. The
animating principle has vanished forever. On such a frail and evanescent
thing, who can build any substantial hopes?

[James 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 4:15</span></span>

For that ye ought to say - Instead of what you do say, "we will go into
such a city," you ought rather to recognise your absolute dependence on
God, and feel that life and success are subject to his will. The meaning
is not that we ought always to be saying that in so many words, for this
might become a mere ostentatious form, offensive by constant unmeaning
repetition; but we are, in the proper way, to recognise our dependence
on him, and to form all our plans with reference to his will.

If the Lord will ... - This is proper, because we are wholly dependent
on him for life, and as dependent on him for success. He alone can keep
us, and he only can make our plans prosperous. In a thousand ways he can
thwart our best-laid schemes, for all things are under his control. We
need not travel far in life to see how completely all that we have is in
the hands of God, or to learn how easily he can frustrate us if he
pleases. There is nothing on which the success of our plans depends over
which we have absolute control; there is nothing, therefore, on which we
can base the assurance of success but his favor.

[James 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 4:16</span></span>

But now ye rejoice in your boastings - That is, probably, in your
boastings of what you can do; your reliance on your own skill and
sagacity. You form your plans for the future as if with consummate
wisdom, and are confident of success. You do not anticipate a failure;
you do not see how plans so skilfully formed can fail. You form them as
if you were certain that you would live; as if secure from the
numberless casualties which may defeat your schemes.

All such rejoicing is evil - It is founded on a wrong view of yourselves
and of what may occur. It shows a spirit forgetful of our dependence on
God; forgetful of the uncertainty of life; forgetful of the many ways by
which the best-laid plans may be defeated. We should never boast of any
wisdom or skill in regard to the future. A day, an hour may defeat our
best-concerted plans, and show us that we have not the slightest power
to control coming events.

[James 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 4:17</span></span>

Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is
sin - That is, he is guilty of sin if he does not do it. Cotton Mather
adopted it as a principle of action, "that the ability to do good in any
case imposes an obligation to do it." The proposition in the verse
before us is of a general character, but probably the apostle meant that
it should refer to the point specified in the previous verses - the
forming of plans respecting the future. The particular meaning then
would be, "that he who knows what sort of views he should take in regard
to the future, and how he should form his plans in view of the
uncertainty of life, and still does not do it, but goes on recklessly,
forming his plans beastingly and confident of success, is guilty of sin
against God." Still, the proposition will admit of a more general
application. It is universally true that if a man knows what is right,
and does not do it, he is guilty of sin.

If he understands what his duty is; if he has the means of doing good to
others; if by his name, his influence, his wealth, he can promote a good
cause; if he can, consistently with other duties, relieve the
distressed, the poor, the prisoner, the oppressed; if he can send the
gospel to other lands, or can wipe away the tear of the mourner; if he
has talents by which he can lift a voice that shall be heard in favor of
temperance, chastity, liberty, and religion, he is under obligations to
do it: and if, by indolence, or avarice, or selfishness, or the dread of
the loss of popularity, he does not do it, he is guilty of sin before
God. No man can be released from the obligation to do good in this world
to the extent of his ability; no one should desire to be. The highest
privilege conferred on a mortal, besides that of securing the salvation
of his own soul, is that of doing good to others - of alleviating
sorrow, instructing ignorance, raising up the bowed down, comforting
those that mourn, delivering the wronged and the oppressed, supplying
the wants of the needy guiding inquirers into the way of truth, and
sending liberty, knowledge, and salvation around the world. If a man
does not do this when he has the means, he sins against his own soul,
against humanity, and against his Maker; if he does it cheerfully and to
the extent of his means, it likens him more than anything else to God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 5](jam005)

</div>
