<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer006)  [Next](jer008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 7:1</span></span>

In Jer. 7-10 he addresses the people as they flocked into Jerusalem from
the country, to attend the solemn services in the temple upon a fastday.
Jehoiakim Jer. 26 had just ascended the throne, and was so incensed at
this sermon that he would have put Jeremiah to death but for the
influence of Ahikam. With the accession of Jehoiakim all hope of
averting the ruin of the country had passed away. He represented the
reverse of his father's policy, and belonged to that faction, who placed
their sole hope of deliverance in a close alliance with Pharaoh-Necho.
As this party rejected the distinctive principles of the theocracy, and
the king was personally an irreligious man, the maintenance of the
worship of Yahweh was no longer an object of the public care. At this
time upon a public fast-day, appointed probably because of the
calamities under which the nation was laboring, Jeremiah was commanded
by Yahweh to stand at the gate of the temple, and address to the people
as they entered words of solemn warning. The whole sermon divides itself
into three parts;

In Jer. 7-10 he addresses the people as they flocked into Jerusalem from
the country, to attend the solemn services in the temple upon a fastday.
Jehoiakim Jer. 26 had just ascended the throne, and was so incensed at
this sermon that he would have put Jeremiah to death but for the
influence of Ahikam. With the accession of Jehoiakim all hope of
averting the ruin of the country had passed away. He represented the
reverse of his father's policy, and belonged to that faction, who placed
their sole hope of deliverance in a close alliance with Pharaoh-Necho.
As this party rejected the distinctive principles of the theocracy, and
the king was personally an irreligious man, the maintenance of the
worship of Yahweh was no longer an object of the public care. At this
time upon a public fast-day, appointed probably because of the
calamities under which the nation was laboring, Jeremiah was commanded
by Yahweh to stand at the gate of the temple, and address to the people
as they entered words of solemn warning. The whole sermon divides itself
into three parts;

\(1\) It points out the folly of the superstitious confidence placed by
the people in the temple, while they neglect the sole sure foundation of
a nation's hope. A sanctuary long polluted by immorality must inevitably
be destroyed Jer. 7:2-8:3.

\(2\) complaints follow of a more general character, in which the
growing wickedness of the nation and especially of the leaders is
pointed out Jer. 8:4-9:24.

\(3\) lastly the prophet shows the possibility of averting the evils
impending upon the nation Jer. 9:25-10:25.

[Jer 10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001). The temple had several
entrances [Ch2 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#009); and the gate or
door here mentioned is probably that of the inner court, where Baruch
read Jeremiah's scroll [Jer 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#010). The
prophet stood in the doorway, and addressed the people assembled in the
outer court.

All ye of Judah - Better, literally all Judah (compare [Jer
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#002)).

[Jeremiah 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 7:3</span></span>

If the people repented, instead of being led into captivity, God would
maintain their national existence. It is a promise of the continuance of
an old blessing.

[Jeremiah 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 7:4</span></span>

The temple of the Lord - Thrice repeated, to emphasize the rejection of
the cry ever upon the lips of the false prophets. In their view the
maintenance of the temple-service was a charm sufficient to avert all
evil.

These - The buildings of the temple, to which Jeremiah is supposed to
point. The Jews put their trust in the material buildings.

[Jeremiah 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 7:5</span></span>

A summary of the conditions indispensable on man's part, before he can
plead the terms of the covenant in his favor.

[Jer 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#006)

In this place - i. e., in Jerusalem. The prophet refers to innocent
blood shed there judicially. Of one such judicial murder Jehoiakim had
already been guilty [Jer 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#023).

[Jer 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#007)

Why then do not the Jews still possess a land thus eternally given them?
Because God never bestows anything unconditionally. The land was
bestowed upon them by virtue of a covenant [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007); the Jews had broken the
conditions of this covenant [Jer
7:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005), and the gift reverted to the
original donor.

[Jeremiah 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 7:10</span></span>

We are delivered - Jeremiah accuses them of trusting in the ceremonial
of the temple instead of leading holy lives. "You break," he says, "the
Ten Commandments, and then you go to the Temple; and when the service is
over you say, We are delivered. We have atoned for our past actions, and
may start afresh with easy minds upon a new course of wickedness."

[Jeremiah 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 7:11</span></span>

Robbers - literally, tearers, those who rob with violence. The temple
was the place which sheltered them. It had been consecrated to God. Now
that it harbors miscreants, must it not as inevitably be destroyed as a
den of robbers would be by any righteous ruler?

[Jeremiah 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 7:12</span></span>

Go ye unto my place in Shiloh - This argument roused the indignation of
the people [Jer 26:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#008), [Jer
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#011). The ark, Jeremiah shows, had
not always been at Jerusalem. The place first chosen, as the center of
the nation's worship, was Shiloh, a town to the north of Bethel,
situated in the powerful tribe of Ephraim ([Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001) note). The ruin of Shiloh is
ascribed [Psa 78:58-64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#058) to the idolatry
which prevailed in Israel after the death of Joshua; a similar ruin due
to similar causes should fall on Jerusalem [Jer
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#014). The site of Shiloh is identified
with Seilun, the ruins of which are so insignificant as to bear out
Jerome's remark, "At Silo, where once was the tabernacle and ark of the
Lord, there can scarcely be pointed out the foundation of an altar."

At the first - In the first stage, the first period of the existence of
the Jewish commonwealth, Shiloh was to the Judges what Jerusalem
subsequently was to the kings; and as the fall of Shiloh through the
wickedness of Eli's sons marked the period when the government by Judges
was to pass away, and the second stage begin; so the power of the kings
perished at the fall of Jerusalem, and left the way clear for the third
stage of Jewish polity, government by the scribes.

[Jeremiah 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 7:13</span></span>

Rising up early and speaking - A proverbial expression for "speaking
zealously and earnestly." It is used only by Jeremiah.

[Jeremiah 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 7:15</span></span>

The whole seed of Ephraim - i. e., the whole of the nine northern
tribes. Their casting out was a plain proof that the possession of the
symbols of God's presence does not secure a Church or nation from
rejection, if unworthy of its privileges.

[Jeremiah 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 7:16</span></span>

They had reached that stage in which men sin without any sense of guilt
(see [Jo1 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016)).

Neither make intercession to me - In [Jer
14:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007) we have an intercessory prayer
offered by Jeremiah, but not heard. The intercession of Moses prevailed
with God [Num 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#002); [Num
14:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#013); [Num
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022), because the progress of the
people then wins upward; the progress now was from bad to worse, and
therefore in [Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001) we read that
the intercession even of Moses and Samuel (see [Sa1
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#023)) would profit nothing.

[Jeremiah 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 7:17</span></span>

The proof of the hopeless immorality of the people is this, that they
worship pagan deities

\(1\) generally in the cities of Judah, and not in the capital only; and

\(2\) publicly in the streets of Jerusalem. Such public idolatry could
have been practiced only in the reign of a king like Jehoiakim.

[Jeremiah 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 7:18</span></span>

Children ... fathers ... women - All members of the family take part in
this idolatry.

Cakes - Probably very similar to those offered at Athens to Artemis.

To the queen of heaven - A Persian and Assyrian deity, who was supposed
to symbolize a quality possessed by moonlight of giving to nature its
receptive power, as the sun represented its quickening power. The moon
thus became generally the symbol of female productiveness, and was
worshipped as such at Babylon. Disgraceful usages to which every woman
was obliged once to submit formed part of her worship.

[Jeremiah 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 7:19</span></span>

Do they not provoke ... - literally, Is it not themselves ("that they
provoke") to the shame of their faces?

[Jeremiah 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 7:20</span></span>

Upon man, and upon beast - All creation in some mysterious way shares in
man's fall and restoration [Rom
8:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019).

[Jeremiah 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 7:21</span></span>

The meaning is, Increase your sacrifices as you will. Acid
burnt-offering to peace-offerings. All is in vain as long as you neglect
the indispensable requirements of obedience and moral purity. Eat flesh
is equivalent to sacrifice. The flesh of animals offered in sacrifice
was usually eaten by the offerers, and this meal was regarded as a
symbol of reconciliation. God and man partook of the same victim, and so
were made friends. This passage [Jer
7:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021) is the Haphtarah (lesson) from
the prophets, after the Parashah, Lev. 6-8, or Lesson from the Law. The
selection of such a Haphtarah shows that the Jews thoroughly understood
that their sacrifices were not the end of the Law, but a means for
spiritual instruction.

[Jeremiah 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 7:23</span></span>

Obey ... - These words are not found verbatim in the Pentateuch, but are
a sum mary of its principles. Sacrifice is never the final cause of the
covenant, but always obedience ([Exo
19:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005); [Lev
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#045). Compare Exo. 20; Deut. 11, in
which the moral object of the Mosaic dispensation is most clearly
taught). In connection with Jeremiah's argument, notice that [Amo
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#025) (taken in conjunction with [Jos
5:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#002)) proves that the ceremonial law
was not observed during the 40 years' wandering in the wilderness. A
thing so long in abeyance in the very time of its founder, could not be
of primary importance.

[Jeremiah 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 7:24</span></span>

Imagination - Better, as in the margin.

And went backward - literally, as in the margin; i. e., they turned
their back upon Me to follow their own devices.

[Jeremiah 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 7:27</span></span>

Rather, Though thou ... yet etc.

[Jeremiah 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 7:28</span></span>

A nation - The "nation." Israel holds so unique a position among all
nations that for it to disobey God is marvelous.

Truth ... - Fidelity to God. Though they have the name of Yahweh often
upon their lips and swear by Him [Jer
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#002), yet it is only profession without
practice.

[Jeremiah 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 7:29</span></span>

Jeremiah summons the people to lament over the miserable consequences of
their rejection of God. In the valley of Hinnom, where lately they
offered their innocents, they shall themselves fall before the enemy in
such multitudes that burial shall be impossible, and the beasts of the
field unmolested shall prey upon their remains.

[Jer 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)

The daughter of Zion, defiled by the presence of enemies in her
sanctuary, and rejected of God, must shear off the diadem of her hair,
the symbol of her consecration to God, just as the Nazarite, when
defiled by contact with a corpse, was to shave his crowned head.

Take up a lamentation ... - Or, lift up a "lamentation on the bare
hill-sides" [Jer 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002).

[Jer 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030)

They have set their abominations ... - Probably a reference to the reign
of the fanatic Manasseh, in whose time the worship of Astarte and of the
heavenly bodies was the established religion of the land [Kg2
21:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003), and even the temple was used
for idolatrous services. The people had never heartily accepted Josiah's
reformation.

[Jer 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031)

The high places - Here, probably, not natural hills, but artificial
mounts, on which the altars were erected.

Tophet (marginal reference note) is not here a proper name; as applied
to Baal-worship the term is not an ordinary one, but almost unique to
Jeremiah. Comparing this verse with [Jer
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#005); [Jer
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035), it will be found that Baal is
in those passages substituted for Tophet. Just as it is the practice of
the prophets to substitute "Bosheth, shame," for Baal (see [Jer
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#024)), so here Jeremiah uses "Tophet,
an object of abhorrence" (compare [Job
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006) note), in just the same way.

Valley of the son of Hinnom - See [Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008) note.

To burn ... - The children were not burned alive, but slain first [Eze
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021).

[Jer 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032)

The valley of slaughter - Where they killed their helpless children,
there shall they be slaughtered helplessly by their enemies.

Till there be no place - Rather, for want of room elsewhere.

[Jeremiah 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 7:34</span></span>

Silence and desolation are to settle upon the whole land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 8](jer008)

</div>
