<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1004)  [Next](jo2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 5:0</span></span>

This chapter embraces the following subjects:

I. A continuance of the discussion about "love," [Jo1
5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001). These verses should have been
attached to the previous chapter.

II\. The victory which is achieved over the world by those who are born
of God. The grand instrumentality by which this is done, is by the
belief that Jesus is the Son of God, [Jo1
5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004).

III\. The evidence that Jesus "is" the Son of God; or the means by which
that truth is so believed as to secure a victory over the world, [Jo1
5:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006). In this part of the chapter
the apostle goes fully into the nature of this evidence, or the ways in
which the Christian becomes so thoroughly convinced of it as to give to
faith this power. He refers to these sources of evidence:

\(a\) The witness of the Spirit, [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006).

\(b\) The record borne in heaven, [Jo1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007) - if that verse is genuine.

\(c\) The evidence borne on earth, by the Spirit, the water, and the
blood - all bearing witness to that one truth.

\(d\) The credit which is due to the testimony of God, or which the soul
pays to it, [Jo1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008).

\(e\) The fact that he who believes on the Son of God has the witness in
himself, [Jo1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#010),

\(f\) The amount of the record, that has given to us eternal life
through his Son, [Jo1 5:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011).

IV\. The reason why all this was written by the apostle, [Jo1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#013). It was that they might know that
they had eternal life, and might believe on the name of the Saviour.

V. The effect of this in leading us to the throne of grace, with the
assurance that God will hear us, and will grant our requests, [Jo1
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014).

VI\. The power of prayer, and the duty of praying for those who have
sinned. The encouragement to this is, that there are many sins which are
not unto death, and that we may hope that God will be merciful to those
who have not committed the unpardonable offence, [Jo1
5:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016).

VII\. A summary of all that the apostle had said to them, or of the
points of which they were sure in the matter of salvation, [Jo1
5:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018). They knew that those who are
born of God do not sin; that the wicked one cannot permanently injure
them; that they were of God, while all the world lay in wickedness; that
the Son of God had come, and that they were truly united to that Saviour
who is the true God, and who is eternal life.

VIII\. An exhortation to keep themselves from all idolatry, [Jo1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021).

[1 John 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 5:1</span></span>

Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ - Is the Messiah; the
anointed of God. On the meaning of the word Christ, see the notes at
[Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). Of course, it is meant here
that the proposition, that "Jesus is the Christ," should be believed or
received in the true and proper sense, in order to furnish evidence that
anyone is born of God. Compare the notes at [Jo1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003). It cannot be supposed that a mere
intellectual acknowledgment of the proposition that Jesus is the Messiah
is all that is meant, for that is not the proper meaning of the word
believe in the Scriptures. That word, in its just sense, implies that
the truth which is believed should make its fair and legitimate
impression on the mind, or that we should feel and act as if it were
true. See the notes at [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016). If,
in the proper sense of the phrase, a man does believe that Jesus "is the
Christ," receiving him as he is revealed as the Anointed of God, and a
Saviour, it is undoubtedly true that that constitutes him a Christian,
for that is what is required of a man in order that he may be saved. See
the notes at [Act 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#037).

Is born of God - Or rather, "is begotten of God." See the notes at [Joh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)

And everyone that loveth him that begat - That loves that God who has
thus begotten those whom he has received as his children, and to whom he
sustains the endearing relation of Father.

Loveth him also that is begotten of him - That is, he will love all the
true children of God; all Christians. See the notes at [Jo1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020). The general idea is, that as all
Christians are the children of the same Father; as they constitute one
family; as they all bear the same image; as they share his favor alike;
as they are under the same obligation of gratitude to him, and are bound
to promote the same common cause, and are to dwell together in the same
home forever, they should therefore love one another. As all the
children in a family love their common father, so it should be in the
great family of which God is the Head.

[1 John 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 5:2</span></span>

By this we know that we love the children of God ... - This is repeating
the same truth in another form. "As it is universally true that if we
love Him who has begotten us, we shall also love His children, or our
Christian brethren, so it is true also that if we love His children it
will follow that we love Him." In other places, the apostle says that we
may know that we love God if we love those who bear His image, [Jo1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014). He here says, that there is
another way of determining what we are. We may have undoubted evidence
that we love God, and from that, as the basis of an argument, we may
infer that we have true love to His children. Of the fact that we may
have evidence that we love God, apart from that which we derive from our
love to His children, there can be no doubt. We may be conscious of it;
we may find pleasure in meditating on His perfections; we may feel sure
that we are moved to obey Him by true attachment to Him, as a child may
in reference to a father. But, it may be asked, how can it be inferred
from this that we truly love His children? Is it not easier to ascertain
this of itself than it is to determine whether we love God? Compare [Jo1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020). To this it may be answered, that
we may love Christians from many motives: we may love them as personal
friends; we may love them because they belong to our church, or sect, or
party; we may love them because they are naturally amiable: but the
apostle says here, that when we are conscious that an attachment does
exist toward Christians, we may ascertain that it is genuine, or that it
does not proceed from any improper motive, by the fact that we love God.
We shall then love Him as His children, whatever other grounds of
affection there may be toward them.

And keep his commandments - See the notes at [Joh
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015).

[1 John 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 5:3</span></span>

For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments - This
constitutes true love; this furnishes the evidence of it.

And his commandments are not grievous - Greek, "heavy" - βαρεῖαι
bareiai; that is, difficult to be borne as a burden. See [Mat
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030). The meaning is, that his laws
are not unreasonable; the duties which he requires are not beyond our
ability; his government is not oppressive. It is easy to obey God when
the heart is right; and those who endeavor in sincerity to keep his
commandments do not complain that they are hard. All complaints of this
kind come from those who are not disposed to keep his commandments.
Indeed, they object that his laws are unreasonable; that they impose
improper restraints; that they are not easily complied with; and that
the divine government is one of severity and injustice. But no such
complaints come from true Christians. They find his service easier than
the service of sin, and the laws of God more mild and easy to be
complied with than were those of fashion and honor, which they once
endeavored to obey. The service of God is freedom; the service of the
world is bondage. No man ever yet heard a true Christian say that the
laws of God, requiring him to lead a holy life, were stern and
"grievous." But who has not felt this in regard to the inexorable laws
of sin? What votary of the world would not say this if he spoke his real
sentiments? Compare the notes at [Joh
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032).

[1 John 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 5:4</span></span>

For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world - The world, in its
maxims, and precepts, and customs, does not rule him, but he is a
freeman. The idea is, that there is a conflict between religion and the
world, and that in the heart of every true Christian religion secures
the victory, or triumphs. In [Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033), the Saviour says, "Be of good
cheer; I have overcome the world." See the notes at that verse. He
obtained a complete triumph over him "who rules the darkness of the
world," and laid the foundation for a victory by his people over all
vice, error, and sin. John makes this affirmation of all who are born of
God. "Whatsoever," or, as the Greek is, "Everything which is begotten of
God," (πᾶν τὸ γεγενημένον pan to gegenēmenon;) meaning to affirm,
undoubtedly, that "in every instance" where one is truly regenerated,
there is this victory over the world. See the [Jam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004) note; [Jo1
2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015) note. It is one of the settled
maxims of religion, that every man who is a true Christian gains a
victory over the world; and consequently a maxim as settled, that where
the spirit of the world reigns supremely in the heart, there is no true
religion. But, if this be a true principle, how many professed
Christians are there who are strangers to all claims of piety - for how
many are there who are wholly governed by the spirit of this world!

And this is the victory - This is the source or means of the victory
which is thus achieved.

Even our faith - Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, [Jo1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#005). He overcame the world, [Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033), and it is by that faith which
makes us one with him, and that imbues us with his Spirit, that we are
able to do it also.

[1 John 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 5:5</span></span>

Who is he ... - Where is there one who can pretend to have obtained a
victory over the world, except he who believes in the Saviour? All else
are worldly, and are governed by worldly aims and principles. It is true
that a man may gain a victory over one worldly passion; he may subdue
some one evil propensity; he may abandon the "happy" circle, may break
away from habits of profaneness, may leave the company of the
unprincipled and polluted; but still, unless he has faith in the Son of
God, the spirit of the world will reign supreme in his soul in some
form. The appeal which John so confidently made in his time may be as
confidently made now. we may ask, as he did, where is there one who
shows that he has obtained a complete victory over the world, except the
true Christian? Where is there one whose end and aim is not the present
life? Where is there one who shows that all his purposes in regard to
this world are made subordinate to the world to come?

There are those now, as there were then, who break away from one form of
sin, and from one circle of sinful companions; there are those who
change the ardent passions of youth for the soberness of middle or
advanced life there are those who see the folly of profaneness, and of
gaiety, and intemperance; there are those who are disappointed in some
scheme of ambition, and who withdraw from political conflicts; there are
those who are satiated with pageantry, and who, oppressed with the cares
of state, as Diocletian and Charles V were, retire from public life; and
there are those whose hearts are crushed and broken by losses, and by
the death, or what is worse than death, by the ingratitude of their
children, and who cease to cherish the fond hope that their family will
be honored, and their name perpetuated in those whom they tenderly loved
- but still there is no victory over the world. Their deep dejection,
their sadness, their brokenness of spirit, their lamentations, and their
want of cheerfulness, all show that the spirit of the world still reigns
in their hearts.

If the calamities which have come upon them could be withdrawn; if the
days of prosperity could be restored, they would show as much of the
spirit of the world as ever they did, and would pursue its follies and
its vanities as greedily as they had done before. Not many years or
months elapse before the worldly mother who has followed one daughter to
the grave, will introduce another into the frivolous world with all the
brilliancy which fashion prescribes; not long will a worldly father
mourn over the death of a son before, in the whirl of business and the
exciting scenes of ambition, he will show that his heart is as much
wedded to the world as it ever was. If such sorrows and disappointments
conduct to the Saviour, as they sometimes do; if they lead the troubled
mind to seek peace in his blood, and support in the hope of heaven, then
a real victory is obtained over the world; and then, when the hand of
affliction is withdrawn, it is seen that there has been a work of grace
in the soul that has effectually changed all its feelings, and secured a
triumph that shall be eternal.

[1 John 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 5:6</span></span>

This is he - This Son of God referred to in the previous verse. The
object of the apostle in this verse, in connection with [Jo1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008), is to state the nature of the
evidence that Jesus is the Son of God. He refers to three well-known
things on which he probably had insisted much in his preaching - the
water, and the blood, and the Spirit. These, he says, furnished evidence
on the very point which he was illustrating, by showing that that Jesus
on whom they believed was the Son of God. "This," says he, "is the same
one, the very person, to whom the well-known and important testimony is
borne; to him, and him alone, these undisputed things appertain, and not
to any other who should claim to be the Messiah and they all agree on
the same one point," [Jo1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008).

That came - ὁ εἰδὼν ho eidōn. This does not mean that when he came into
the world he was accompanied in some way by water and blood; but the
idea is, that the water and the blood were clearly manifest during his
appearing on earth, or that they were remarkable testimonials in some
way to his character and work. An ambassador might be said to come with
credentials; a warrior might be said to come with the spoils of victory;
a prince might be said to "come" with the insignia of royalty; a prophet
comes with signs and wonders; and the Lord Jesus might also be said to
have come with power to raise the dead, and to heal disease, and to cast
out devils; but John here fixes the attention on a fact so impressive
and remarkable in his view as to be worthy of special remark, that he
"came" by water and blood.

By water - There have been many opinions in regard to the meaning of
this phrase. See Pool's Synopsis. Compare also Lucke, "in loc." A mere
reference to some of these opinions may aid in ascertaining the true
interpretation.

\(1\) Clement of Alexandria supposes that by "water" regeneration and
faith were denoted, and by "blood" the public acknowledgment of that.

\(2\) some, and among them Wetstein, have held that the words are used
to denote the fact that the Lord Jesus was truly a man, in
contradistinction from the doctrine of the "Docetae;" and that the
apostle means to say that he had all the properties of a human being - a
spirit or soul, blood, and the watery humors of the body.

\(3\) Grotius supposes that by his coming "by water," there is reference
to his pure life, as water is the emblem of purity; and he refers to
[Eze 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025); [Isa
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016); [Jer
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014). As a sign of that purity, he
says that John baptized him, [Joh
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028). A sufficient objection to this
view is, that as in the corresponding word "blood" there is undoubted
reference to blood literally, it cannot be supposed that the word
"water" in the same connection would be used figuratively. Moreover, as
Lucke (p. 287) has remarked, water, though a "symbol" of purity, is
never used to denote "purity itself," and therefore cannot here refer to
the pure life of Jesus.

\(4\) many expositors suppose that the reference is to the baptism of
Jesus, and that by his "coming by water and blood," as by the latter
there is undoubted reference to his death, so by the former there is
reference to his baptism, or to his entrance on his public work. Of this
opinion were Tertullian, OEcumenius, Theophylact, among the fathers, and
Capellus, Heumann, Stroth, Lange, Ziegler, A. Clarke, Bengel,
Rosenmuller, Macknight, and others, among the moderns. A leading
argument for this opinion, as alleged, has been that it was then that
the Spirit bare witness to him, [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016), and that this is what John here
refers to when he says, "It is the Spirit that beareth witness," etc. To
this view, Locke urges substantially the following objections:

\(a\) That if it refers to baptism, the phrase would much more
appropriately express the fact that Jesus came baptizing others, if that
were so, than that he was baptized himself. The phrase would be strictly
applicable to John the Baptist, who came baptizing, and whose ministry
was distinguished for that, [Mat 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001);
and if Jesus had baptized in the same manner, or if this had been a
prominent characteristic of his ministry, it would be applicable to him.
Compare [Joh 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002). But if it means that
he was baptized, and that he came in that way "by water," it was equally
true of all the apostles who were baptized, and of all others, and there
was nothing so remarkable in the fact that he was baptized as to justify
the prominence given to the phrase in this place.

\(b\) If reference be had here, as is supposed in this view of the
passage, to the witness that was borne to the Lord Jesus on the occasion
of his baptism, then the reference should have been not to the "water"
as the witness, but to the "voice that came from heaven," [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017), for it was that which was the
witness in the case. Though this occurred at the time of the baptism,
yet it was quite an independent thing, and was important enough to have
been referred to. See Lucke, "Com. in loc." These objections, however,
are not insuperable. Though Jesus did not come baptizing others himself
[Joh 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002), and though the phrase would
have expressed that if he had, yet, as Christian baptism began with him;
as this was the first act in his entrance on public life; as it was by
this that he was set apart to his work; and as he designed that this
should be always the initiatory rite of his religion, there was no
impropriety in saying that his "coming," or his advent in this world,
was at the beginning characterized by water, and at the close by blood.
Moreover, though the "witness" at his baptism was really borne by a
voice from heaven, yet his baptism was the prominent thing; and if we
take the baptism to denote all that in fact occurred when he was
baptized, all the objections made by Lucke here vanish.

\(5\) some, by the "water" here, have understood the ordinance of
baptism as it is appointed by the Saviour to be administered to his
people, meaning that the ordinance was instituted by him. So Beza,
Calvin, Piscator, Calovius, Wolf, Beausobre, Knapp, Lucke, and others
understand it. According to this the meaning would be, that he appointed
baptism by water as a symbol of the cleansing of the heart, and shed his
blood to effect the ransom of man, and that thus it might be said that
he "came by water and blood;" to wit, by these two things as effecting
the salvation of people. But it seems improbable that the apostle should
have grouped these things together in this way. For.

\(a\) the "blood" is that which he shed; which pertained to him
personally; which he poured out for the redemption of man; and it is
clear that, whatever is meant by the phrase "he came," his coming by
"water" is to be understood in some sense similar to his coming by
"blood;" and it seems incredible that the apostle should have joined a
mere "ordinance" of religion in this way with the shedding of his blood,
and placed them in this manner on an equality.

\(b\) It cannot be supposed that John meant to attach so much importance
to baptism as would be implied by this. The shedding of his blood was
essential to the redemption of people; can it be supposed that the
apostle meant to teach that baptism by water is equally necessary?

\(c\) If this be understood of baptism, there is no natural connection
between that and the "blood" referred to; nothing by which the one would
suggest the other; no reason why they should be united. If he had said
that he came by the appointment of two ordinances for the edification of
the church, "baptism and the supper," however singular such a statement
might be in some respects, yet there would be a connection, a reason why
they should be suggested together. But why should baptism and the blood
shed by the Saviour on the cross be grouped together as designating the
principal things which characterized his coming into the world?

\(6\) there remains, then, but one other interpretation; to wit, that he
refers to the "water and the blood" which flowed from the side of the
Saviour when he was pierced by the spear of the Roman soldier. John had
himself laid great stress on this occurrence, and on the fact that he
had himself witnessed it, (see the notes at [Joh
19:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)); and as, in these Epistles,
he is accustomed to allude to more full statements made in his Gospel,
it would seem most natural to refer the phrase to that event as
furnishing a clear and undoubted proof of the death of the Saviour. This
would be the obvious interpretation, and would be entirely clear, if
John did not immediately speak of the "water" and the "blood" as
"separate" witnesses, each as bearing witness to an important point,
"as" separate as the "Spirit" and the "water," or the "Spirit" and the
"blood;" whereas, if he refers to the mingled water and blood flowing
from his side, they both witness only the same fact, to wit, his death.

There was no "special" significancy in the water, no distinct testifying
to anything different from the flowing of the blood; but together they
bore witness to the "one" fact that he actually died. But here he seems
to suppose that there is some special significancy in each. "Not by
water only, but by water and blood." "There are three that bear witness,
the Spirit, and the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one."
These considerations seem to me to make it probable, on the whole, that
the fourth opinion, above referred to, and that which has been commonly
held in the Christian church is correct, and that by the "water" the
"baptism" of the Saviour is intended; his baptism as an emblem of his
own purity; as significant of the nature of his religion; as a rite
which was to be observed in his church at all times. That furnished an
important attestation to the fact that he was the Messiah (compare the
notes at [Mat 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015)), for it was by
that that he entered on his public work, and it was then that a
remarkable testimony was borne to his being the Son of God. He himself
came thus by water as an emblem of purity; and the water used in his
church in all ages in baptism, together with the "blood" and the
"Spirit" bears public testimony to the pure nature of his religion.

It is possible that the mention of the "water" in his baptism suggested
to John also the water which flowed from the side of the Saviour at his
death, intermingled with blood; and that though the primary thought in
his mind was the fact that Jesus was baptized, and that an important
attestation was then given to his Messiahship, yet he "may" have
instantly adverted to the fact that "water" performed so important a
part, and was so important a symbol through all his work; water at his
introduction to his work, as an ordinance in his church, as symbolical
of the nature of his religion, and even at his death, as a public
attestation, in connection with flowing blood, to the fact that he truly
"died," in reality, and not, as the "Docetae" pretended, in appearance
only, thus completing the work of the Messiah, and making an atonement
for the sins of the world. Compare the notes at [Joh
19:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034).

And blood - Referring, doubtless, to the shedding of his blood on the
cross. He "came" by that; that is, he was manifested by that to people,
or that was one of the forms in which he appeared to people, or by which
his coming into the world was characterized. The apostle means to say
that the blood shed at his death furnished an important evidence or
"witness" of what he was. In what way this was done, see the notes at
[Jo1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008).

Not by water only, but by water and blood - John the Baptist came "by
water only;" that is, he came to baptize the people, and to prepare them
for the coming of the Messiah. Jesus was distinguished from him in the
fact that his ministry was characterized by the shedding of blood, or
the shedding of his blood constituted one of the peculiarities of his
work.

And it is the Spirit - Evidently the Holy Spirit.

That beareth witness - That is, he is the great witness in the matter,
confirming all others. He bears witness to the soul that Jesus came "by
water and blood," for that would not be received by us without his
agency. In what way he does this, see the notes at [Jo1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008).

Because the Spirit is truth - Is so eminently true that he may be called
truth itself, as God is so eminently benevolent that he may be called
love itself. See the notes at [Jo1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008).

[1 John 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 5:7</span></span>

For there are three that bear record in heaven ... - There are three
that "witness," or that "bear witness" - the same Greek word which, in
[Jo1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008), is rendered "bear witness" -
μαρτυροῦντες marturountes. There is no passage of the New Testament
which has given rise to so much discussion in regard to its genuineness
as this. The supposed importance of the verse in its bearing on the
doctrine of the Trinity has contributed to this, and has given to the
discussion a degree of consequence which has pertained to the
examination of the genuineness of no other passage of the New Testament.
On the one hand, the clear testimony which it seems to bear to the
doctrine of the Trinity, has made that portion of the Christian church
which holds the doctrine reluctant in the highest degree to abandon it;
and on the other hand, the same clearness of the testimony to that
doctrine, has made those who deny it not less reluctant to admit the
genuineness of the passage.

It is not consistent with the design of these notes to go into a full
investigation of a question of this sort. And all that can be done is to
state, in a brief way, the "results" which have been reached, in an
examination of the question. Those who are disposed to pursue the
investigation further, can find all that is to be said in the works
referred to at the bottom of the page. The portion of the passage, in
[Jo1 5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007), whose genuineness is
disputed, is included in brackets in the following quotation, as it
stands in the common editions of the New Testament: "For there are three
that bear record (in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit:
and these three are one. And there are three that bear witness on
earth,) the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these three agree
in one." If the disputed passage, therefore, be omitted as spurious, the
whole passage will read, "For there are three that bear record, the
Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these three agree in one." The
reasons which seem to me to prove that the passage included in brackets
is spurious, and should not be regarded as a part of the inspired
writings, are briefly the following:

I. It is missing in all the earlier Greek manuscripts, for it is found
in no Greek manuscript written before the 16th century. Indeed, it is
found in only two Greek manuscripts of any age - one the Codex
Montfortianus, or Britannicus, written in the beginning of the sixteenth
century, and the other the Codex Ravianus, which is a mere transcript of
the text, taken partly from the third edition of Stephen's New
Testament, and partly from the Complutensian Polyglott. But it is
incredible that a genuine passage of the New Testament should be missing
in all the early Greek manuscripts.

II\. It is missing in the earliest versions, and, indeed, in a large
part of the versions of the New Testament which have been made in all
former times. It is wanting in both the Syriac versions - one of which
was made probably in the first century; in the Coptic, Armenian,
Slavonic, Ethiopic, and Arabic.

III\. It is never quoted by the Greek fathers in their controversies on
the doctrine of the Trinity - a passage which would be so much in point,
and which could not have failed to be quoted if it were genuine; and it
is not referred to by the Latin fathers until the time of Vigilius, at
the end of the 5th century. If the passage were believed to be genuine -
nay, if it were known at all to be in existence, and to have any
probability in its favor - it is incredible that in all the
controversies which occurred in regard to the divine nature, and in all
the efforts to define the doctrine of the Trinity, this passage should
never have been referred to. But it never was; for it must be plain to
anyone who examines the subject with an unbiassed mind, that the
passages which are relied on to prove that it was quoted by Athanasius,
Cyprian, Augustin, etc., (Wetstein, II., p. 725) are not taken from this
place, and are not such as they would have made if they had been
acquainted with this passage, and had designed to quote it. IV. The
argument against the passage from the external proof is confirmed by
internal evidence, which makes it morally certain that it cannot be
genuine.

\(a\) The connection does not demand it. It does not contribute to
advance what the apostle is saying, but breaks the thread of his
argument entirely. He is speaking of certain things which bear "witness"
to the fact that Jesus is the Messiah; certain things which were well
known to those to whom he was writing - the Spirit, and the water, and
the blood. How does it contribute to strengthen the force of this to say
that in heaven there are "three that bear witness" - three not before
referred to, and having no connection with the matter under
consideration?

\(b\) The "language" is not such as John would use. He does, indeed,
elsewhere use the term "Logos," or "Word" - ὁ Λόγος ho Logos, [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); [Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001), but it is never in this form,
"The Father, and the Word;" that is, the terms "Father" and "Word" are
never used by him, or by any of the other sacred writers, as
correlative. The word "Son" - ὁ Υἱός ho Huios - is the term which is
correlative to the "Father" in every other place as used by John, as
well as by the other sacred writers. See [Jo1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003); [Jo1
2:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022); [Jo1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#014); [Jo2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#003), [Jo2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#009); and the Gospel of John, "passim."
Besides, the correlative of the term "Logos," or "Word," with John, is
not "Father," but "God." See [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001).
Compare [Rev 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013).

\(c\) Without this passage, the sense of the argument is clear and
appropriate. There are three, says John, which bear witness that Jesus
is the Messiah. These are referred to in [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006); and in immediate connection with
this, in the argument, [Jo1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008), it is
affirmed that their testimony goes to one point, and is harmonious. To
say that there are other witnesses elsewhere, to say that they are one,
contributes nothing to illustrate the nature of the testimony of these
three - the water, and the blood, and the Spirit; and the internal sense
of the passage, therefore, furnishes as little evidence of its
genuineness as the external proof. V. It is easy to imagine how the
passage found a place in the New Testament. It was at first written,
perhaps, in the margin of some Latin manuscript, as expressing the
belief of the writer of what was true in heaven, as well as on earth,
and with no more intention to deceive than we have when we make a
marginal note in a book. Some transcriber copied it into the body of the
text, perhaps with a sincere belief that it was a genuine passage,
omitted by accident; and then it became too important a passage in the
argument for the Trinity, ever to be displaced but by the most clear
critical evidence. It was rendered into Greek, and inserted in one Greek
manuscript of the 16th century, while it was missing in all the earlier
manuscripts.

VI\. The passage is now omitted in the best editions of the Greek
Testament, and regarded as spurious by the ablest critics. See Griesbach
and Hahn. On the whole, therefore, the evidence seems to me to be clear
that this passage is not a genuine portion of the inspired writings, and
should not be appealed to in proof of the doctrine of the Trinity. One
or two remarks may be made, in addition, in regard to its use.

\(1\) even on the supposition that it is genuine, as Bengel believed it
was, and as he believed that some Greek manuscript would still be found
which would contain it , yet it is not wise to adduce it as a
proof-text. It would be much easier to prove the doctrine of the Trinity
from other texts, than to demonstrate the genuineness of this.

\(2\) it is not necessary as a proof-text. The doctrine which it
contains can be abundantly established from other parts of the New
Testament, by passages about which there can be no doubt.

\(3\) the removal of this text does nothing to weaken the evidence for
the doctrine of the Trinity, or to modify that doctrine. As it was never
used to shape the early belief of the Christian world on the subject, so
its rejection, and its removal from the New Testament, will do nothing
to modify that doctrine. The doctrine was embraced, and held, and
successfully defended without it, and it can and will be so still.

[1 John 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 5:8</span></span>

And there are three that bear witness in earth - This is a part of the
text, which, if the reasoning above is correct, is to be omitted. The
genuine passage reads, [Jo1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007), "For
there are three that bear record (or witness, μαρτυροῦντες marturountes)
- the Spirit, and the water, and the blood." There is no reference to
the fact that it is done "in earth." The phrase was introduced to
correspond with what was said in the interpolated passage, that there
are three that bear record "in heaven."

The Spirit - Evidently the Holy Spirit. The assertion here is, that that
Spirit bears witness to the fact that Jesus is the Son of God, [Jo1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#005). The testimony of the Holy Spirit
to this fact is contained in the following things:

\(1\) He did it at the baptism of Jesus. Notes, [Mat
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016).

\(2\) Christ was eminently endowed with the influences of the Holy
Spirit; as it was predicted that the Messiah would be, and as it was
appropriate he should be, [Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002);
[Isa 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). Compare [Luk
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018); Notes, [Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034).

\(3\) the Holy Spirit bore witness to his Messiahship, after his
ascension, by descending, according to his promise, on his apostles, and
by accompanying the message which they delivered with saving power to
thousands in Jerusalem, Acts 2.

\(4\) he still bears the same testimony on every revival of religion,
and in the conversion of every individual who becomes a Christian,
convincing them that Jesus is the Son of God. Compare [Joh
16:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014).

\(5\) he does it in the hearts of all true Christians, for "no man can
say that Jesus is Lord but by the Holy Ghost," [Co1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003). See the notes at that passage.

The Spirit of God has thus always borne witness to the fact that Jesus
is the Christ, and he will continue to do it to the end of time,
convincing yet countless millions that he was sent from God to redeem
and save lost people.

And the water - See the notes at [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006). That is, the baptism of Jesus,
and the scenes which occurred when he was baptized, furnished evidence
that he was the Messiah. This was done in these ways:

\(1\) It was proper that the Messiah should be baptized when he entered
on his work, and perhaps it was expected; and the fact that he was
baptized showed that he had "in fact" entered on his work as Redeemer.
See the notes at [Mat 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015).

\(2\) an undoubted attestation was then furnished to the fact that he
was "the Son of God," by the descent of the Holy Spirit in the form of a
dove, and by the voice that addressed him from heaven, [Mat
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016).

\(3\) his baptism with water was an emblem of the purity of his own
character, and of the nature of his religion.

\(4\) perhaps it may be implied here, also, that water used in baptism
now bears witness to the same thing,

\(a\) as it is the ordinance appointed by the Saviour;

\(b\) as it keeps up his religion in the world;

\(c\) as it is a public symbol of the purity of his religion;

\(d\) and as, in every case where it is administered, it is connected
with the public expression of a belief that Jesus is the Son of God.

And the blood - There is undoubted allusion here to the blood shed on
the cross; and the meaning is, that that blood bore witness also to the
fact that he was the Son of God. This it did in the following respects:

\(1\) The shedding of the blood showed that he was truly dead - that his
work was complete - that he died in "reality," and not in "appearance"
only. See the notes at [Joh 19:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034).

\(2\) the remarkable circumstances that attended the shedding of this
blood - the darkened sun, the earthquake, the rending of the veil of the
temple - showed in a manner that convinced even the Roman centurion that
he was the Son of God. See the notes at [Mat
27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054).

\(3\) the fact that an "atonement" was thus made for sin was an
important "witness" for the Saviour, showing that he had done that which
the Son of God only could do, by disclosing a way by which the sinner
may be pardoned, and the polluted soul be made pure.

\(4\) perhaps, also, there may be here an allusion to the Lord's Supper,
as designed to set forth the shedding of this blood; and the apostle may
mean to have it implied that the representation of the shedding of the
blood in this ordinance is intended to keep up the conviction that Jesus
is the Son of God. If so, then the general sense is, that that blood -
however set before the eyes and the hearts of people - on the cross, or
by the representation of its shedding in the Lord's Supper - is a
witness in the world to the truth that Jesus is the Son of God, and to
the nature of his religion. Compare the notes at [Co1
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026).

And these three agree in one - εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσιν eis to hen eisin. They
agree in one thing; they bear on one and the same point, to wit, the
fact that Jesus is the Son of God. All are appointed by God as witnesses
of this fact; and all harmonize in the testimony which is borne. The
apostle does not say that there are no other witnesses to the same
thing; nor does he even say that these are the most important or
decisive which have been furnished; but he says that these are important
witnesses, and are entirely harmonious in their testimony.

[1 John 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 5:9</span></span>

If we receive the witness of men - As we are accustomed to do, and as we
must do in courts of justice, and in the ordinary daily transactions of
life. We are constantly acting on the belief that what others say is
true; that what the members of our families, and our neighbors say, is
true; that what is reported by travelers is true; that what we read in
books, and what is sworn to in courts of justice, is true. We could not
get along a single day if we did not act on this belief; nor are we
accustomed to call it in question, unless we have reason to suspect that
it is false. The mind is so made that it must credit the testimony borne
by others; and if this should cease even for a single day, the affairs
of the world would come to a pause.

The witness of God is greater - Is more worthy of belief; as God is more
true, and wise, and good than people. People may be deceived, and may
undesignedly bear witness to that which is not true - God never can be;
men may, for sinister and base purposes, intend to deceive - God never
can; people may act from partial observation, from rumors unworthy of
credence - God never can; people may desire to excite admiration by the
marvelous - God never can; people have deceived - God never has; and
though, from these causes, there are many instances where we are not
certain that the testimony borne by people is true, yet we are always
certain that that which is borne by God is not false. The only question
on which the mind ever hesitates is, whether we actually have his
testimony, or certainly know what he bears witness to; when that is
ascertained, the human mind is so made that it cannot believe that God
would deliberately deceive a world. See the notes at [Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018). Compare [Tit
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002).

For this is the witness of God ... - The testimony above referred to -
that borne by the Spirit, and the water, and the blood. Who that saw his
baptism, and heard the voice from heaven, [Mat
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016), could doubt that he was the
Son of God? Who that saw his death on the cross, and that witnessed the
amazing scenes which occurred there, could fail to join with the Roman
centurion in saying that this was the Son of God? Who that has felt the
influences of the Eternal Spirit on his heart, ever doubted that Jesus
was the Son of God? Compare the notes at [Co1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003). Any one of these is sufficient
to convince the soul of this; all combined bear on the same point, and
confirm it from age to age.

[1 John 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 5:10</span></span>

He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself - The
evidence that Jesus is the Son of God. Compare the notes at [Rom
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016). This cannot refer to any
distinct and immediate "revelation" of that fact, that Jesus is the
Christ, to the soul of the individual, and is not to be understood as
independent of the external evidence of that truth, or as superseding
the necessity of that evidence; but the "witness" here referred to is
the fruit of all the evidence, external and internal, on the heart,
producing this result; that is, there is the deepest conviction of the
truth that Jesus is the Son of God. There is the evidence derived from
the fact that the soul has found peace by believing on him; from the
fact that the troubles and anxieties of the mind on account of sin have
been removed by faith in Christ; from the new views of God and heaven
which have resulted from faith in the Lord Jesus; from the effect of
this in disarming death of its terrors; and from the whole influence of
the gospel on the intellect and the affections - on the heart and the
life. These things constitute a mass of evidence for the truth of the
Christian religion, whose force the believer cannot resist, and make the
sincere Christian ready to sacrifice anything rather than his religion;
ready to go to the stake rather than to renounce his Saviour. Compare
the notes at [Pe1 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015).

He that believeth not God hath made him a liar - Compare the notes at
[Jo1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010).

Because he believeth not the record ... - The idea is, that in various
ways - at his baptism, at his death, by the influences of the Holy
Spirit, by the miracles of Jesus, etc. - God had become a "witness" that
the Lord Jesus was sent by him as a Saviour, and that to doubt or deny
this partook of the same character as doubting or denying any other
testimony; that is, it was practically charging him who bore the
testimony with falsehood.

[1 John 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 5:11</span></span>

And this is the record - This is the sum, or the amount, of the
testimony (μαρτυρία marturia) which God has given respecting him.

That God hath given to us eternal life - Has provided, through the
Saviour, the means of obtaining eternal life. See the notes at [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024); [Joh
17:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002).

And this life is in his Son - Is treasured up in him, or is to be
obtained through him. See the [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004); [Joh
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025); [Joh
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006) notes; [Col
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003) note.

[1 John 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo1 5:12</span></span>

He that hath the Son, hath life - See the notes at [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024). John evidently designs to refer
to that passage in the verse before us, and to state a principle laid
down by the Saviour himself. This is the sense of all the important
testimony that had ever been borne by God on the subject of salvation,
that he who believes in the Lord Jesus already has the elements of
eternal life in his soul, and will certainly obtain salvation. Compare
the notes at [Joh 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003).

And he that hath not the Son of God, hath not life - He that does not
believe on him will not attain to eternal life. See the [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036) note; [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016) note.

[1 John 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jo1 5:13</span></span>

These things have I written unto you - The things in this Epistle
respecting the testimony borne to the Lord Jesus.

That believe on the name of the Son of God - To believe on his name, is
to believe on himself - the word "name" often being used to denote the
person. See the notes at [Mat 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019).

That ye may know that ye have eternal life - That you may see the
evidence that eternal life has been provided, and that you may be able,
by self-examination, to determine whether you possess it. Compare the
notes at [Joh 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031).

And that ye may believe ... - That you may continue to believe, or may
persevere in believing. He was assured that they actually did believe on
him then; but he was desirous of so setting before them the nature of
religion, that they would continue to exercise faith in him. It is often
one of the most important duties of ministers of the gospel, to present
to real Christians such views of the nature, the claims, the evidences,
and the hopes of religion, as shall be adapted to secure their
perseverance in the faith. In the human heart, even when converted,
there is such a proneness to unbelief; the religious affections so
easily become cold; there are so many cares pertaining to the world that
are suited to distract the mind; there are so many allurements of sin to
draw the affections away from the Saviour; that there is need of being
constantly reminded of the nature of religion, in order that the heart
may not be wholly estranged from the Saviour. No small part of
preaching, therefore, must consist of the re-statement of arguments with
which the mind has been before fully convinced; of motives whose force
has been once felt and acknowledged; and of the grounds of hope and
peace and joy which have already, on former occasions, diffused comfort
through the soul. It is not less important to keep the soul, than it is
to "convert" it; to save it from coldness, and deadness, and formality,
than it was to impart to it the elements of spiritual life at first. It
may be as important to trim a vine, if one would have grapes, as it is
to set it out; to keep a garden from being overrun with weeds in the
summer, as it was to plant it in the spring.

[1 John 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 5:14</span></span>

And this is the confidence that we have in him - Margin, "concerning."
Greek, "toward him," or in respect to him - πρὸς αὐτὸν pros auton. The
confidence referred to here is that which relates to the answer to
prayer. The apostle does not say that this is the only thing in respect
to which there is to be confidence in him, but that it is one which is
worthy of special consideration. The sense is, that one of the effects
of believing on the Lord Jesus [Jo1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#013) is, that we have the assurance
that our prayers will be answered. On the word "confidence," see the
notes at [Jo1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#021); [Jo1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017).

That, if we ask anything according to his will, he heareth us - This is
the proper and the necessary limitation in all prayer. God has not
promised to grant anything that shall be contrary to his will, and it
could not be right that he should do it. We ought not to wish to receive
anything that should be contrary to what he judges to be best. No man
could hope for good who should esteem his own wishes to be a better
guide than the will of God; and it is one of the most desirable of all
arrangements that the promise of any blessing to be obtained by prayer
should be limited and bounded by the will of God. The limitation here,
"according to his will," probably implies the following things:

\(1\) In accordance with what he has "declared" that he is willing to
grant. Here the range is large, for there are many things which we know
to be in accordance with his will, if they are sought in a proper manner
- as the forgiveness of sins, the sanctification of the soul, [Th1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003), comfort in trial, the needful
supply of our wants, grace that we may do our duty, wisdom to direct and
guide us, [Jam 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005), deliverance from
the evils which beset us, the influences of his Spirit to promote the
cause of religion in the world, and our final salvation. Here is a range
of subjects of petition that may gratify the largest wishes of prayer.

\(2\) the expression, "according to his will," must limit the answer to
prayer to what "he" sees to be best for us. Of that we are not always
good judges. We never perceive it as clearly as our Maker does, and in
many things we might be wholly mistaken. Certainly we ought not to
desire to be permitted to ask anything which "God" would judge not to be
for our good.

\(3\) the expression must limit the petition to what it will be
"consistent" for God to bestow upon us. We cannot expect that he will
work a miracle in answer to our prayers; we cannot ask him to bestow
blessings in violation of any of the laws which he has ordained, or in
any other way than that which he has appointed. It is better that the
particular blessing should be withheld from us, than that the laws which
he has appointed should be disregarded. It is better that an idle man
should not have a harvest, though he should pray for it, than that God
should violate the laws by which he has determined to bestow such favors
as a reward of industry, and work a special miracle in answer to a lazy
man's prayers.

\(4\) the expression, "according to his will," must limit the promise to
what will be for the good of the whole. God presides over the universe:
and though in him there is an infinite fulness, and he regards the wants
of every individual throughout his immense empire, yet the interests of
the whole, as well as of the individual, are to be consulted and
regarded. In a family, it is conceivable that a child might ask for some
favor whose bestowment would interfere materially with the rights of
others, or be inconsistent with the good of the whole, and in such a
case a just father would of course withhold it. With these necessary
limitations the range of the promise in prayer is ample; and, with these
limitations, it is true beyond a question that he does hear and answer
prayer.

[1 John 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jo1 5:15</span></span>

And if we know that he hear us - That is, if we are assured of this as a
true doctrine, then, even though we may not "see" immediately that the
prayer is answered, we may have the utmost confidence that it is not
disregarded, and that it will be answered in the way best adapted to
promote our good. The specific thing that we asked may not indeed be
granted, (compare [Luk 22:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#042); [Co2
12:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008)), but the prayer will not be
disregarded, and the thing which is most for our good will be bestowed
upon us. The "argument" here is derived from the faithfulness of God;
from the assurance which we feel that when he has promised to hear us,
there will be, sooner or later, a real answer to the prayer.

We know that we have the petitions ... - That is, evidently, we now that
we "shall" have them, or that the prayer will be answered. It cannot
mean that we already have the precise thing for which we prayed, or that
will be a real answer to the prayer, for

\(a\) the prayer may relate to something future, as protection on a
journey, or a harvest, or restoration to health, or the safe return of a
son from a voyage at sea, or the salvation of our souls - all of which
are "future," and which cannot be expected to be granted at once; and,

\(b\) the answer to prayer is sometimes delayed, though ultimately
granted. There may be reasons why the answer should be deferred, and the
promise is not that it shall be immediate. The "delay" may arise from
such causes as these:

\(1\) To try our faith, and see whether the blessing is earnestly
desired.

\(2\) perhaps it could not be at once answered without a miracle.

\(3\) it might not be consistent with the divine arrangements respecting
others to grant it to us at once.

\(4\) our own condition may not be such that it would be best to answer
it at once.

We may need further trial, further chastisement, before the affliction,
for example, shall be removed; and the answer to the prayer may be
delayed for months or years. Yet, in the meantime, we may have the
firmest assurance that the prayer is heard, and that it will be answered
in the way and at the period when God shall see it to be best.

[1 John 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jo1 5:16</span></span>

If a man see his brother sin a sin ... - From the general assurance that
God hears prayer, the apostle turns to a particular case in which it may
be benevolently and effectually employed, in rescuing a brother from
death. There has been great diversity of opinion in regard to the
meaning of this passage, and the views of expositors of the New
Testament are by no means settled as to its true sense. It does not
comport with the design of these notes to examine the opinions which
have been held in detail. A bare reference, however, to some of them
will show the difficulty of determining with certainty what the passage
means, and the impropriety of any very great confidence in one's own
judgment in the case. Among these opinions are the following. Some have
supposed that the sin against the Holy Spirit is intended; some that the
phrase denotes any great and enormous sin, as murder, idolatry,
adultery; some that it denotes some sin that was punishable by death by
the laws of Moses; some that it denotes a sin that subjected the
offender to excommunication from the synagogue or the church; some that
it refers to sins which brought fatal disease upon the offender, as in
the case of those who abused the Lord's Supper at Corinth, (see the
notes at [Co1 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030)); some that it
refers to crimes committed against the laws, for which the offender was
sentenced to death, meaning that when the charge alleged was false, and
the condemnation unjust, they ought to pray for the one who was
condemned to death, and that he would be spared; but that when the
offence was one which had been really committed, and the offender
deserved to die, they ought not to pray for him, or, in other words,
that by "the sin unto death," offences against the civil law are
referred to, which the magistrate had no power to pardon, and the
punishment of which he could not commute; and by the "sin not unto
death," offences are referred to which might be pardoned, and when the
punishment might be commuted; some that it refers to sins "before" and
"after" baptism, the former of which might be pardoned, but the latter
of which might not be; and some, and perhaps this is the common opinion
among the Roman Catholics, that it refers to sins that might or might
not be pardoned after death, thus referring to the doctrine of
purgatory.

These various opinions may be seen stated more at length in Rosenmuller,
Lucke, Pool (Synopsis,) and Clarke, "in loc." To go into an examination
of all these opinions would require a volume by itself, and all that can
be done here is to furnish what seems to me to be the fair exposition of
the passage. The word "brother" may refer either to a member of the
church, whether of the particular church to which one was attached or to
another, or it may be used in the larger sense which is common as
denoting a fellow-man, a member of the great family of mankind. There is
nothing in the word which necessarily limits it to one in the church;
there is nothing in the connection, or in the reason assigned, why what
is said should be limited to such an one. The "duty" here enjoined would
be the same whether the person referred to was in the church or not; for
it is our duty to pray for those who sin, and to seek the salvation of
those whom we see to be going astray, and to be in danger of ruin,
wherever they are, or whoever they may be. At the same time, the correct
interpretation of the passage does not depend on determining whether the
word "brother" refers to one who is a professed Christian or not.

A sin which is not unto death - The great question in the interpretation
of the whole passage is, what is meant by the "sin unto death." The
Greek (ἁμαρτία πρὸς θάνατον hamartia pros thanaton) would mean properly
a sin which "tends" to death; which would "terminate" in death; of which
death was the penalty, or would be the result, unless it were arrested;
a sin which, if it had its own course, would terminate thus, as we
should speak of a disease "unto death." Compare the notes at [Joh
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#004). The word "death" is used in
three significations in the New Testament, and as employed here might,
so far as the word is concerned, be applied in any one of those senses.
It is used to denote:

\(a\) literally, the death of the body;

\(b\) spiritual death, or death "in trespasses and sin," [Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001);

\(c\) the "second death," death in the world of woe and despair.

If the sin here mentioned refers to "temporal" death, it means such a
sin that temporal death must inevitably follow, either by the disease
which it has produced, or by a judicial sentence where there was no hope
of pardon or of a commutation of the punishment; if it refers to death
in the future world, the second death, then it means such a sin as is
unpardonable. That this last is the reference here seems to me to be
probable, if not clear, from the following considerations:

\(1\) There is such a sin referred to in the New Testament, a sin for
which there is forgiveness "neither in this life nor the life to come."
See the notes at [Mat 12:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031).
Compare [Mar 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029). If there is such a
sin, there is no impropriety in supposing that John would refer to it
here.

\(2\) this is the "obvious" interpretation. It is that which would occur
to the mass of the readers of the New Testament, and which it is
presumed they do adopt; and this, in general, is one of the best means
of ascertaining the sense of a passage in the Bible.

\(3\) the other significations attached to the word "death," would be
quite inappropriate here.

\(a\) It cannot mean "unto spiritual death," that is, to a continuance
in sin, for how could that be known? and if such a case occurred, why
would it be improper to pray for it? Besides, the phrase "a sin unto
spiritual death," or "unto continuance in sin," is one that is
unmeaning.

\(b\) It cannot be shown to refer to a disease that should be unto
death, miraculously inflicted on account of sin, because, if such cases
occurred, they were very rare, and even if a disease came upon a man
miraculously in consequence of sin, it could not be certainly known
whether it was, or was not, unto death. All who were visited in this way
did not certainly die. Compare [Co1
5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004), with [Co2
2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006). See also [Co1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030).

\(c\) It cannot be shown that it refers to the case of those who were
condenmed by the civil magistrate to death, and for whom there was no
hope of reprieve or pardon, for it is not certain that there were such
cases; and if there were, and the person condemned were innocent, there
was every reason to pray that God would interpose and save them, even
when there was no hope from man; and if they were guilty, and deserved
to die, there was no reason why they should not pray that the sin might
be forgiven, and that they might be prepared to die, unless it were a
case where the sin was unpardonable. It seems probable, therefore, to
me, that the reference here is to the sin against the Holy Spirit, and
that John means here to illustrate the duty and the power of prayer, by
showing that for any sin short of that, however aggravated, it was their
duty to pray that a brother might be forgiven. Though it might not be
easy to determine what was the unpardonable sin, and John does not say
that those to whom he wrote could determine that with certainty, yet
there were many sins which were manifestly not of that aggravated
character, and for those sins it was proper to pray.

There was clearly but one sin that was unpardonable - "there is a sin
unto death;" there might be many which were not of this description, and
in relation to them there was ample scope for the exercise of the prayer
of faith. The same thing is true now. It is not easy to define the
unpardonable sin, and it is impossible for us to determine in any case
with absolute certainty that a man has committed it. But there are
multitudes of sins which people commit, which upon no proper
interpretation of the passages respecting the sin which "hath never
forgiveness," can come under the description of that sin, and for which
it is proper, therefore, to pray that they may be pardoned. We know of
cases enough where sin "may" be forgiven; and, without allowing the mind
to be disturbed about the question respecting the unpardonable sin, it
is our duty to bear such cases on our hearts before God, and to plead
with him that our erring brethren may be saved.

He shall ask - That is, he shall pray that the offender may be brought
to true repentance, and may be saved.

And he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death - That is,
God shall give life, and he shall be saved from the eternal death to
which he was exposed. This, it is said, would be given to him who offers
the prayer; that is, his prayer would be the means of saving the
offending brother. What a motive is this to prayer! How faithful and
constant should we be in pleading for our fellow-sinners, that we may be
instrumental in saving their souls! What joy will await those in heaven
who shall see there many who were rescued from ruin in answer to their
prayers! Compare the notes at [Jam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015), [Jam
5:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019).

There is a sin unto death - A sin which is of such a character that it
throws the offender beyond the reach of mercy, and which is not to be
pardoned. See [Mar 3:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#028). The
apostle does not here say what that sin is; nor how they might know what
it is; nor even that in any case they could determine that it had been
committed. He merely says that there is such a sin, and that he does not
design that his remark about the efficacy of prayer should be understood
as extending to that.

I do not say that he shall pray for it - "I do not intend that my remark
shall be extended to all sin, or mean to affirm that all possible forms
of guilt are the proper subjects of prayer, for I am aware that there is
one sin which is an exception, and my remark is not to be applied to
that." He does not say that this sin was of common occurrence: or that
they could know when it had been committed; or even that a case could
ever occur in which they could determine that; he merely says that in
respect to that sin he did not say that prayer should be offered. It is
indeed implied in a most delicate way that it would not be proper to
pray for the forgiveness of such a sin, but he does not say that a case
would ever happen in which they would know certainly that the sin had
been committed. There were instances in the times of the prophets in
which the sin of the people became so universal and so aggravated, that
they were forbidden to pray for them.

[Isa 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011), "then said the Lord unto
me, Pray not for this people for their good;" [Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001), "Then said the Lord unto me,
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward
this people; cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth." Compare
the notes at [Isa 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015). But these were
cases in which the prophets were directly instructed by God not to pray
for a people. We have no such instruction; and it may be said now with
truth, that as we can never be certain respecting anyone that he has
committed the unpardonable sin, there is no one for whom we may not with
propriety pray. There may be those who are so far gone in sin that there
may seem to be little, or almost no ground of hope. They may have cast
off all the restraints of religion, of morality, of decency; they may
disregard all the counsels of parents and friends; they may be
sceptical, sensual, profane; they may be the companions of infidels and
of mockers; they may have forsaken the sanctuary, and learned to despise
the sabbath; they may have been professors of religion, and now may have
renounced the faith of the gospel altogether, but still, while there is
life it is our duty to pray for them, "if peradventure God will give
them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth," [Ti2
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025).

"All things are possible with God;" and he has reclaimed offenders more
hardened, probably, than any that we have known, and has demonstrated
that there is no form of depravity which he has not the power to subdue.
Let us remember the cases of Manasseh, of Saul of Tarsus, of Augustine,
of Bunyan, of Newton, of tens of thousands who have been reclaimed from
the vilest forms of iniquity, and then let us never despair of the
conversion of any, in answer to prayer, who may have gone astray, as
long as they are in this world of probation and of hope. Let no parent
despair who has an abandoned son; let no wife cease to pray who has a
dissipated husband. How many a prodigal son has come back to fill with
happiness an aged parent's heart! How many a dissipated husband has been
reformed to give joy again to the wife of his youth, and to make a
paradise again of his miserable home!

[1 John 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jo1 5:17</span></span>

All unrighteousness is sin ... - This seems to be thrown in to guard
what he had just said, and there is "one" great and enormous sin, a sin
which could not be forgiven. But he says also that there are many other
forms and degrees of sin, sin for which prayer may be made. Everything,
he says, which is unrighteous - ἀδικία adikia - everything which does
not conform to the holy law of God, and which is not right in the view
of that law, is to be regarded as sin; but we are not to suppose that
all sin of that kind is of such a character that it cannot possibly be
forgiven. There are many who commit sin who we may hope will be
recovered, and for them it is proper to pray. Deeply affected as we may
be in view of the fact that there is a sin which can never be pardoned,
and much as we may pity one who has been guilty of such a sin, yet we
should not hastily conclude in any case that it has been committed, and
should bear constantly in mind that while there is one such sin, there
are multitudes that may be pardoned, and that for them it is our duty
unceasingly to pray.

[1 John 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 5:18</span></span>

We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not - Is not habitually
and characteristically a sinner; does not ultimately and finally sin and
perish; cannot, therefore, commit the unpardonable sin. Though he may
fall into sin, and grieve his brethren, yet we are never to cease to
pray for a true Christian: we are never to feel that he has committed
the sin which has never forgiveness, and that he has thrown himself
beyond the reach of our prayers. This passage, in its connection, is a
full proof that a true Christian "will" never commit the unpardonable
sin, and, therefore, is a proof that he will never fall from grace.
Compare the notes at [Heb 6:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004); [Heb
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026). On the meaning of the assertion
here made, that "whosoever is born of God sinneth not," see the notes at
[Jo1 3:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#006).

Keepeth himself - It is not said that he does it by his own strength,
but he will put forth his best efforts to keep himself from sin, and by
divine assistance he will be able to accomplish it. Compare the [Jo1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003) note; [Jde
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#021) note.

And that wicked one toucheth him not - The great enemy of all good is
repelled in his assaults, and he is kept from falling into his snares.
The word "toucheth" (ἅπτεται haptetai) is used here in the sense of harm
or injure.

[1 John 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jo1 5:19</span></span>

And we know that we are of God - We who are Christians. The apostle
supposed that true Christians might have so clear evidence on that
subject as to leave no doubt on their own minds that they were the
children of God. Compare [Jo1 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014);
[Ti2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012).

And the whole world - The term "world" here evidently means not the
material world, but the people who dwell on the earth, including all
idolaters, and all sinners of every grade and kind.

Lieth in wickedness - "In the wicked one," or under the power of the
wicked one - ἐν τῷ πονηρῷ en tō ponērō. It is true that the word πονηρῷ
ponērō may be used here in the neuter gender, as our translators have
rendered it, meaning "in that which is evil," or in "wickedness;" but it
may be in the masculine gender, meaning "the wicked one;" and then the
sense would be that the whole world is under his control or dominion.
That this is the meaning of the apostle seems to be clear, because:

\(1\) the corresponding phrase, [Jo1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020), ἐν τῷ ἀληθινῷ en tō alēthinō,
"in him that is true," is evidently to be construed in the masculine,
referring to God the Saviour, and meaning "him that is true," and not
that we are "in truth."

\(2\) it makes better sense to say that the world lies under the control
of the wicked one, than to say that it lies "in wickedness."

\(3\) this accords better with the other representations in the Bible,
and the usuage of the word elsewhere. Compare [Jo1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013), "Ye have overcome the "wicked"
one;" [Jo1 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014), "ye have overcome the
"wicked" one;" [Jo1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012), "who was of
that "wicked" one." See also the notes at [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004), on the expression "the god of
this world;" [Joh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031), where he is
called "the prince of this world;" and [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002), where he is called "the prince of
the power of the air." In all these passages it is supposed that Satan
has control over the world, especially the pagan world. Compare [Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012); [Co1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020). In regard to the fact that the
pagan world was pervaded by wickedness, see the notes at [Rom
1:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021).

\(4\) it may be added, that this interpretation is adopted by the most
eminent critics and commentators. It is that of Calvin, Beza, Benson,
Macknight, Bloomfield, Piscator, Lucke, etc. The word "lieth" here
(κεῖται keitai) means, properly, to lie; to be laid; to recline; to be
situated, etc. It seems here to refer to the "passive" and "torpid"
state of a wicked world under the dominion of the prince of evil, as
acquiescing in his reign; making no resistance; not even struggling to
be free. It lies thus as a beast that is subdued, a body that is dead,
or anything that is wholly passive, quiet, and inert. There is no
energy; no effort to throw off the reign; no resistance; no struggling.
The dominion is complete, and body and soul, individuals and nations,
are entirely subject to his will. This striking expression will not
unaptly now describe the condition of the pagan world, or of sinners in
general. There would seem to be no government under which people are so
little restive, and against which they have so little disposition to
rebel, as that of Satan. Compare [Ti2
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#026).

[1 John 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jo1 5:20</span></span>

And we know that the Son of God is come - We know this by the evidence
that John had referred to in this Epistle, [Jo1
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001); [Jo1
5:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006).

And hath given us an understanding - Not an "understanding" considered
as a faculty of the mind, for religion gives us no new faculties; but he
has so instructed us that we do understand the great truths referred to.
Compare the notes at [Luk 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045). All
the correct knowledge which we have of God and his government, is to be
traced directly or indirectly to the great Prophet whom God has sent
into the world, [Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004), [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018); [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012); [Joh
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#005); [Heb
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001); [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027).

That we may know him that is true - That is, the true God. See the notes
at [Joh 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003).

And we are in him that is true - That is, we are united to him; we
belong to him; we are his friends. This idea is often expressed in the
Scriptures by being "in him." It denotes a most intimate union, as if we
were one with him - or were a part of him - as the branch is in the
vine, [Joh 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004), [Joh
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006). The Greek construction is the
same as that applied to "the wicked one," [Jo1
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019), (ἐν τῷ ἀληθινᾧ en tō alēthinō.)

This is the true God - o There has been much difference of opinion in
regard to this important passage; whether it refers to the Lord Jesus
Christ, the immediate antecedent, or to a more remote antecedent -
referring to God, as such. The question is of importance in its bearing
on the doctrine of the divinity of the Saviour; for if it refers to him,
it furnishes an unequivocal declaration that he is divine. The question
is, whether John "meant" that it should be referred to him? Without
going into an extended examination of the passage, the following
considerations seem to me to make it morally certain that by the phrase
"this is the true God," etc., he did refer to the Lord Jesus Christ.

\(1\) the grammatical construction favors it. Christ is the immediate
antecedent of the pronoun "this" - οὗτος houtos. This would be regarded
as the obvious and certain construction so far as the grammar is
concerned, unless there were something in the thing affirmed which led
us to seek some more remote and less obvious antecedent. No doubt would
have been ever entertained on this point, if it had not been for the
reluctance to admit that the Lord Jesus is the true God. If the
assertion had been that "this is the true Messiah;" or that "this is the
Son of God;" or that "this is he who was born of the Virgin Mary," there
would have been no difficulty in the construction. I admit that his
argument is not absolutely decisive; for cases do occur where a pronoun
refers, not to the immediate antecedent, but to one more remote; but
cases of that kind depend on the ground of necessity, and can be applied
only when it would be a clear violation of the sense of the author to
refer it to the immediate antecedent.

\(2\) this construction seems to be demanded by the adjunct which John
has assigned to the phrase "the true God" - "eternal life." This is an
expression which John would be likely to apply to the Lord Jesus,
considered as "life," and the "source of life," and not to God as such.
"How familiar is this language with John, as applied to Christ! "In him
(i. e. Christ) was life, and the life was the light of people - giving
life to the world - the bread of life - my words are spirit and life - I
am the way, and the truth, and the life. This life (Christ) was
manifested, and we have "seen it," and do testify to you, and declare
the eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested to us,"
[Jo1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002)." - Prof. Stuart's Letters to
Dr. Channing, p. 83. There is no instance in the writings of John, in
which the appellation life, and "eternal" life is bestowed upon the
Father, to designate him as the author of spiritual and eternal life;
and as this occurs so frequently in John's writings as applied to
Christ, the laws of exegesis require that both the phrase "the true
God," and "eternal life," should be applied to him.

\(3\) if it refers to God as such, or to the word "true" - τὸν ἀληθινόν
(Θεὸν) ton alēthinon (Theon) it would be mere tautology, or a mere
truism. The rendering would then be, "That we may know the true God, and
we are in the true God: this is the true God, and eternal life." Can we
believe that an inspired man would affirm gravely, and with so much
solemnity, and as if it were a truth of so much magnitude, that the true
God is the true God?

\(4\) this interpretation accords with what we are sure John would
affirm respecting the Lord Jesus Christ. Can there be any doubt that he
who said, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God;" that he who said, "all things were made by him, and
without him was not anything made that was made;" that he who recorded
the declaration of the Saviour, "I and my Father are one," and the
declaration of Thomas, "my Lord and my God," would apply to him the
appellation "the true God!"

\(5\) if John did not mean to affirm this, he has made use of an
expression which was liable to be misunderstood, and which, as facts
have shown, would be misconstrued by the great portion of those who
might read what he had written; and, moreover, an expression that would
lead to the very sin against which he endeavors to guard in the next
verse - the sin of substituting a creature in the place of God, and
rendering to another the honor due to him. The language which he uses is
just such as, according to its natural interpretation, would lead people
to worship one as the true God who is not the true God, unless the Lord
Jesus be divine. For these reasons, it seems to me that the fair
interpretation of this passage demands that it should be understood as
referring to the Lord Jesus Christ. If so, it is a direct assertion of
his divinity, for there could be no higher proof of it than to affirm
that he is the true God.

And eternal life - Having "life in himself," [Joh
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026), and the source and fountain of
life to the soul. No more frequent appellation, perhaps, is given to the
Saviour by John, than that he is life, and the source of life. Compare
[Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004); [Joh
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026), [Joh
5:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#040); [Joh
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010); [Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033), [Joh
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035), [Joh
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#048), [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051), [Joh
6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053), [Joh
6:63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063); [Joh
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025); [Joh
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006); [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031); [Jo1
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001); [Jo1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#012).

[1 John 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jo1 5:21</span></span>

Little children - This is a favorite mode of address with John, (see the
notes at [Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)), and it was proper
to use it in giving his parting counsel; embracing, in fact, all that he
had to say - that they should keep themselves from idols, and suffer
nothing to alienate their affections from the true God. His great object
had been to lead them to the knowledge and love of God, and all his
counsels would be practically followed, if, amidst the temptations of
idolatry, and the allurements of sin, nothing were allowed to estrange
their hearts from him.

Keep yourselves from idols - From worshipping them; from all that would
imply communion with them or their devotees. Compare the notes at [Co1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#014). The word rendered "idols" here
(εἰδώλων eidōlōn) means, properly, an image, specter, shade - as of the
dead; then any image or figure which would represent anything,
particularly anything invisible; and hence anything designed to
represent God, and that was set up with a view to be acknowledged as
representing him, or to bring, him, or his perfections, more vividly
before the mind. The word is applicable to idol-gods - pagan deities,
[Co1 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004), [Co1
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007); [Co1
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#019); [Rom
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#022); [Co2
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016); [Th1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009); but it would, also, be applicable
to any "image" designed to represent the true God, and through or by
which the true God was to be adored. The essential things in the word
seem to be:

\(a\) an image or representation of the Deity, and,

\(b\) the making of that an object of adoration instead of the true God.

Since one of these things would be likely to lead to the other, both are
forbidden in the prohibitions of idolatry, [Exo
20:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004). This would forbid all attempts
to represent God by paintings or statuary; all idol-worship, or worship
of pagan gods; all images and pictures that would be substituted in the
place of God as objects of devotion, or that might transfer the homage
from God to the image; and all giving of those affections to other
beings or objects which are due to God. why the apostle closed this
Epistle with this injunction he has not stated, and it may not be easy
to determine. It may have been for such reasons as these:

\(1\) Those to whom he wrote were surrounded by idolaters, and there was
danger that they might fall into the prevailing sin, or in some way so
act as to be understood to lend their sanction to idolatry.

\(2\) in a world full of alluring objects, there was danger then, as
there is at all times, that the affections should be fixed on other
objects than the supreme God, and that what is due to him should be
withheld.

It may be added, in the conclusion of the exposition of this Epistle,
that the same caution is as needful for us as it was for those to whom
John wrote. We are not in danger, indeed, of bowing down to idols, or of
engaging in the grosser forms of idol-worship. But we may be in no less
danger than they to whom John wrote were, of substituting other things
in our affections in the place of the true God, and of devoting to them
the time and the affection which are due to him. Our children it is
possible to love with such an attachment as shall effectually exclude
the true God from the heart. The world - "its wealth, and pleasures, and
honors - we may love with a degree of attachment such as even an
idolater would hardly shew to his idol-gods; and all the time which he
would take in performing his devotions in an idol-temple, we may devote
with equal fervor to the service of the world. There is practical
idolatry all over the world; in nominally Christian lands as well as
among the pagan; in families that acknowledge no God but wealth and
fashion; in the hearts of multitudes of individuals who would scorn the
thought of worshipping at a pagan altar; and it is even to be found in
the heart of many a one who professes to be acquainted with the true
God, and to be an heir of heaven. God should have the supreme place in
our affections. The love of everything else should be held in strict
subordination to the love of him.

He should reign in our hearts; be acknowledged in our closets, our
families, and in the place of public worship; be submitted to at all
times as having a right to command and control us; be obeyed in all the
expressions of his will, by his word, by his providence, and by his
Spirit; be so loved that we shall be willing to part without a complaint
with the dearest object of affection when he takes it from us; and so
that, with joy and triumph, we shall welcome his messenger, "the angel
of death," when he shall come to summon us into his presence. To all who
may read these illustrations of the Epistle of the "beloved disciple,"
may God grant this inestimable blessing and honor. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John Introduction](jo2000)

</div>
