<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 John Index](jo3)  
  [Previous](jo3000)  [Next](jde000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001)

[3 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo3 1:1</span></span>

This brief Epistle, written to a Christian whose name was Gaius, of whom
nothing more is known (compare the notes at [Jo3
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001)), and in respect to which the time
and place of writing it are equally unknown, embraces the following
subjects:

I. The address, with an expression of tender attachment, and an earnest
wish for his welfare and happiness, [Jo3
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001).

II\. A commendation of his character and doings, as the writer had
learned it from some brethren who had visited him particularly;

\(a\) for his attachment to the truth, and,

\(b\) for his kindness shown to the members of his own church, and to
strangers who had gone forth to some work of charity, [Jo3
1:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003).

III\. The writer then adverts to the fact that he had written upon this
subject to the church, commending these strangers to their attention,
but that Diotrephes would not acknowledge his authority, or receive
those whom he introduced to them. This conduct, he said, demanded
rebuke; and he says that when he himself came, he would take proper
measures to assert his own authority, and show to him and to the church
the duty of receiving Christian brethren commended to them from abroad,
[Jo3 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009).

IV\. He exhorts Gaius to persevere in that which was good - in a life of
love and kindness, in an imitation of the benevolent God, [Jo3
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#011).

V. Of another person - Demetrius - who, it would seem, had been
associated with Gaius in the honorable course which he had pursued, in
opposition to what the church had done, he also speaks in terms of
commendation, and says that the same honorable testimony had been borne
of him which had been of Gaius, [Jo3
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#012).

VI\. As in the second Epistle, he says, in the close, that there were
many things which he would be glad to say to him, but there were reasons
why they should not be set down "with ink and pen," but he hoped soon to
confer with him freely on those subjects face to face, and the Epistle
is closed by kind salutations, [Jo3
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#013).

The occasion upon which the Epistle was written is no further known than
appears from the Epistle itself. From this, the following facts are all
that can now be ascertained:

\(1\) That Gaius was a Christian man, and evidently a member of the
church, but of what church is unknown.

\(2\) that there were certain persons known to the writer of the
Epistle, and who either lived where he did, or who had been commended to
him by others who proposed to travel to the place where Gaius lived.
Their particular object is not known, further than that it is said [Jo3
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#007) that they "went for his name's
sake;" that is, in the cause of religion. It further appears that they
had resolved not to be dependent upon the pagan for their support, but
wished the favor and friendship of the church - perhaps designing to
preach to the pagan, and yet apprehending that if they desired their
maintenance from them, it would be charged on them that they were
mercenary in their ends.

\(3\) in these circumstances, and with this view, the author of this
Epistle wrote to the church, commending these brethren to their kind and
fraternal regards.

\(4\) this recommendation, so far as appears, would have been
successful, had it not been for one man, Diotrephes, who had so much
influence, and who made such violent opposition, that the church refused
to receive them, and they became dependent upon private charity. The
ground of the opposition of Diotrephes is not fully stated, but it seems
to have arisen from two sources:

\(a\) a desire to rule in the church; and,

\(b\) a particular opposition to the writer of this Epistle, and a
denial of any obligation to recognize his instructions or commendations
as binding. The idea seems to have been that the church was entirely
independent, and might receive or reject any whom it pleased, though
they were commended to them by an apostle.

\(5\) in these circumstances, Gaius, as an individual, and against the
action of the church, received and hospitably entertained these
strangers, and aided them in the prosecution of their work. In this
office of hospitality another member of the church, Demetrius, also
shared; and to commend them for this work, particularly Gaius, at whose
house probably they were entertained, is the design of this Epistle.

\(6\) after having returned to the writer of this Epistle, who had
formerly commended them to the church, and having borne honorable
testimony to the hospitality of Gaius, it would seem that they resolved
to repeat their journey for the same purpose, and that the writer of the
Epistle commended them now to the renewed hospitality of Gaius. On this
occasion, probably, they bore this Epistle to him. See the notes at [Jo3
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#006). Nothing more is known of
Diotrephes than is here specified. Erasmus and Bede supposed that he was
the author of a new sect; but of this there is no evidence, and if he
had been, it is probable that John would have cautioned Gaius against
his influence. Many have supposed that he was a self-appointed "Bishop"
or "Pastor" in the church where he resided; but there is no evidence of
this, and, since John wrote to "the church," commending the strangers to
"them," this would seem to be hardly probable. Compare [Rev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001), [Rev
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008),[Rev
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012), [Rev
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018); [Rev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001), [Rev
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007),[Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014). Others have supposed that he was
a deacon, and had charge of the funds of the church, and that he refused
to furnish to these strangers the aid out of the public treasury which
they needed, and that by so doing he hindered them in the prosecution of
their object. But all this is mere conjecture, and it is now impossible
to ascertain what office he held, if he held any. That he was a man of
influence is apparent; that he was proud, ambitious, and desirous of
ruling, is equally clear; and that he prevailed upon the church not to
receive the strangers commended to them by the apostle is equally
manifest.

Of the rank and standing of Demetrius nothing more is known. Benson
supposes that he was the bearer of this letter, and that he had gone
with the brethren referred to in order to preach to the Gentiles. But it
seems more probable that he was a member of the church to which Gaius
belonged, and that he had concurred with him in rendering aid to the
strangers who had been rejected by the influence of Diotrephes. If he
had gone with these strangers, and had carried this letter, it would
have been noticed, and it would have been in accordance with the
apostolic custom, that he should have been commended to the favorable
attentions of Gaius. In regard to the authenticity and the canonical
authority of this Epistle, see the introduction at the beginning of the
Second Epistle.

The elder - See the notes at [Jo2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001).

Unto the well-beloved Gaius - Three persons of this name are elsewhere
mentioned in the New Testament - Gaius, whom Paul in [Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023) calls "his host," and whom he
says [Co1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#015) he baptized, residing
at Corinth, (see the notes at [Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023)); Gaius of Macedonia, one of
Paul's companions in travel, who was arrested by an excited mob at
Ephesus, [Act 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029); and Gaius of
Derbe, who went with Paul and Timothy into Asia, [Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004). Whether either of these persons
is referred to here, cannot with certainty be determined. If it were any
of them it was probably the last mentioned - Gaius of Derbe. There is no
objection to the supposition that he was the one unless it is from the
fact that this Epistle was probably written many years after the
transaction mentioned in [Act 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004),
and the probability that Gaius might not have lived so long. The name
was not an uncommon one, and it cannot be determined now who he was, or
where he lived. Whether he had any office in the church is unknown, but
he seems to have been a man of wealth and influence. The word translated
"well-beloved," means simply "beloved." It shows that he was a personal
friend of the writer of this Epistle.

Whom I love in the truth - Margin, "or truly." See the notes at [Jo2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001).

[3 John 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo3 1:2</span></span>

Beloved, I wish above all things - Margin, "pray." The word used here
commonly means in the New Testament to pray; but it is also employed to
express a strong and earnest desire for anything, [Act
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#029); [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003); [Co2
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009). This is probably all that is
implied here. The phrase rendered "above all things" - περὶ πάντων peri
pantōn - would be more correctly rendered here "concerning, or in
respect to all things;" and the idea is, that John wished earnestly that
"in all respects" he might have the same kind of prosperity which his
soul had. The common translation "above all things" would seem to mean
that John valued health and outward prosperity more than he did anything
else; that he wished that more than his usefulness or salvation. This
cannot be the meaning, and is not demanded by the proper interpretation
of the original. See this shown by Lucke, in loc. The sense is, "In
every respect, I wish that it may go as well with you as it does with
your soul; that in your worldly prosperity, your comfort, and your
bodily health, you may be as prosperous as you are in your religion."
This is the reverse of the wish which we are commonly constrained to
express for our friends; for such is usually the comparative want of
prosperity and advancement in their spiritual interests, that it is an
expression of benevolence to desire that they might prosper in that
respect as much as they do in others.

That thou mayest prosper - εὐοδοῦσθαι euodousthai. This word occurs in
the New Testament only in the following places: [Rom
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010), rendered "have a prosperous
journey;" [Co1 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002), rendered "hath
prospered;" and in the passage before us. It means, properly, "to lead
in a good way; to prosper one's journey;" and then to make prosperous;
to give success to; to be prospered. It would apply here to any plan or
purpose entertained. It would include success in business, happiness in
domestic relations, or prosperity in any of the engagements and
transactions in which a Christian might lawfully engage. It shows that
it is right to wish that our friends may have success in the works of
their hands and their plans of life.

And be in health - To enjoy bodily health. It is not necessary to to
suppose, in order to a correct interpretation of this, that Gaius was at
that time suffering from bodily indisposition, though perhaps it is most
natural to suppose that, as John makes the wish for his health so
prominent. But it is common, in all circumstances, to wish for the
health and prosperity of our friends; and it is as proper as it is
common, if we do not give that a degree of prominence above the welfare
of the soul.

Even as thy soul prospereth - John had learned, it would seem, from the
"brethren" who had come to him, [Jo3
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003), that Gaius was living as became a
Christian; that he was advancing in the knowledge of the truth, and was
exemplary in the duties of the Christian life; and he prays that in all
other respects he might be prospered as much as he was in that. It is
not very common that a man is more prospered in his spiritual interests
than he is in his other interests, or that we can, in our wishes for the
welfare of our friends, make the prosperity of the soul, and the
practice and enjoyment of religion, the standard of our wishes in regard
to other things. It argues a high state of piety when we can, as the
expression of our highest desire for the welfare of our friends, express
the hope that they may be in all respects as much prospered as they are
in their spiritual concerns.

[3 John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo3 1:3</span></span>

For I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came - Who these were is not
certainly known. They may have been members of the same church with
Gaius, who, for some reason, had visited the writer of this Epistle; or
they may have been the "brethren" who had gone from him with a letter of
commendation to the church, [Jo3 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009),
and had been rejected by the church through the influence of Diotrephes,
and who, after having been hospitably entertained by Gaius, had again
returned to the writer of this Epistle. In that case, they would of
course bear honorable testimony to the kindness which they had received
from Gaius, and to his Christian character.

And testified of the truth that is in thee - That you adhere steadfastly
to the truth, notwithstanding the fact that errors abound, and that
there are many false teachers in the world.

Even as thou walkest in the truth - Livest in accordance with the truth.
The writer had made the same remark of the children of Cyria, to whom
the second Epistle was directed. See the notes at [Jo2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#004).

[3 John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo3 1:4</span></span>

I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth - That
they adhere steadfastly to the truth, and that they live in accordance
with it. This is such language as would be used by an aged apostle when
speaking of those who had been converted by his instrumentality, and who
looked up to him as a father; and we may, therefore, infer that Gaius
had been converted under the ministry of John, and that he was probably
a much younger man than he was. John, the aged apostle, says that he had
no higher happiness than to learn, respecting those who regarded him as
their spiritual father, that they were steadfast in their adherence to
the doctrines of religion. The same thing may be:

\(a\) of all the ministers of the gospel, that their highest comfort is
found in the fact that those to whom they minister, whether still under
their care or removed from them, persevere in a steadfast attachment to
the true doctrines of religion, and live accordingly; and,

\(b\) of all Christian parents respecting their own children. the
highest joy that a Christian parent can have is to know that his
children, whether at home or abroad, adhere to the truths of religion,
and live in accordance with the requirements of the gospel of Christ.

If a child wished to confer the highest possible happiness upon his
parents when with them, it would be by becoming a decided Christian; if,
when abroad, in foreign lands or his own, he wished to convey
intelligence to them that would most thrill their hearts with joy, it
would be to announce to them that he had given his heart to God. There
is no joy in a family like that when children are converted; there is no
news that comes from abroad that diffuses so much happiness through the
domestic circle as the intelligence that a child is truly converted to
the Saviour. There is nothing that would give more peace to the dying
pillow of the Christian parent, than to be able to leave the world with
the assurance that his children would always walk in truth.

[3 John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo3 1:5</span></span>

Beloved, thou doest faithfully - In the previous verses the writer had
commended Gaius for his attachment to truth, and his general correctness
in his Christian life. He now speaks more particularly of his acts of
generous hospitality, and says that he had fully, in that respect, done
his duty as a Christian.

Whatsoever thou doest - In all your contact with them, and in all your
conduct toward them. The particular thing which led to this remark was
his hospitality; but the testimony respecting his general conduct had
been such as to justify this commendation.

To the brethren - Probably to Christians who were well known to him -
perhaps referring to Christians in his own church.

And to strangers - Such as had gone to the church of which he was a
member with a letter of commendation from John. Compare the [Rom
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013) note, and [Heb
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002) note.

[3 John 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo3 1:6</span></span>

Which have borne witness of thy charity before the church - It would
seem that they had returned to John, and borne honorable testimony to
the love manifested to them by Gaius. Before what church they had borne
this testimony is unknown. Perhaps it was the church in Ephesus.

Whom if thou bring forward on their journey - οὕς προπέμψας hous
propempsas. "Whom bringing forward, or having brought forward." The word
refers to aid rendered to them in their journey, in facilitating their
travels, either by personally accompanying them, by furnishing them the
means of prosecuting their journey, or by hospitably entertaining them.
Gaius probably aided them in every way in which it was practicable. It
has been made a question whether this refer, to the fact that he had
thus aided them in some visit which they had made to the church where
Gaius was, or to a visit which they purposed to make. The Greek would
seem to favor the latter construction, and yet it would appear from the
Epistle, that the "brethren and strangers" actually had been with him
that they had been rejected by the church through the influence of
Diotrephes, and had been thrown upon the hospitality of Gaius, and that
they had returned, and had borne honorable testimony to his hospitality.
These views can be reconciled by supposing, as Lucke does, that having
been once on their travels, and having shared the hospitality of Gaius,
they were purposing to visit that region again, and that John, praising
him for his former hospitality, commends them again to him, stating the
reason [Jo3 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009) why he did not, in
accordance with the usual custom, recommend them to the care of the
church. They had now gone out [Jo3 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#007)
on the same errand upon which they had formerly gone, and they had now
equal claims to the hospitality of the friends of religion.

After a godly sort - Margin, as in Greek, "worthy of God." The meaning
is, As becomes those who serve God; or as becomes those who are
professors of his religion.

Thou shalt do well - You will do what religion requires in these
circumstances.

[3 John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo3 1:7</span></span>

Because that for his name's sake - The word "his" here refers to God;
and the idea is, that they had undertaken this journey not on their own
account, but in the cause of religion.

They went forth - Or, "they have gone forth" - ἐξῆλθον exēlthon -
referring to the journey which they had then undertaken; not to the
former one.

Taking nothing of the Gentiles - The term "Gentile" embraced all who
were not "Jews," and it is evident that these persons went forth
particularly to labor among the pagan. When they went, they resolved, it
seems, to receive no part of their support from them, but to depend upon
the aid of their Christian brethren, and, hence, they were at first
commended to the church of which Gaius and Diotrephes were members, and
on this second excursion were commended particularly to Gaius. Why they,
resolved to take nothing of the Gentiles is not stated, but it was
doubtless from prudential considerations, lest it should hinder their
success among them, and expose them to the charge of being actuated by a
mercenary spirit. There were circumstances in the early propagation of
Christianity which made it proper, in order to avoid this reproach, to
preach the gospel "without charge," those to whom it is preached to
contribute to its maintenance, and that it is the right of those who
preach to expect and receive a support. On this subject, see the 1 Cor.
9 notes, particularly [Jo1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#015), [Jo1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#018) notes.

[3 John 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo3 1:8</span></span>

We therefore ought to receive such - All of us ought hospitably to
entertain and help such persons. The work in which they are engaged is
one of pure benevolence. They have no selfish aims and ends in it. They
do not even look for the supplies of their own needs among the people to
whom they go to minister; and we ought, therefore, to help them in their
work, and to contribute to their support. Doubtless, the apostle meant
to urge this duty particularly upon Gaius; but, in order to show that he
recognized the obligation himself, he uses the term "we," and speaks of
it as a duty binding on all Christians.

That we might be fellow-helpers to the truth - All Christians cannot go
forth to preach the gospel, but all may contribute something to the
support of those who do; and in this case they would have a joint
participation in the work of spreading the truth. The same reasoning
which was applicable to that case, is also applicable now in regard to
the duty of supporting those who go forth to preach the gospel to the
destitute.

[3 John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo3 1:9</span></span>

I wrote unto the church - That is on the former occasion when they went
forth. At that time, John naturally commended them to the kind
attentions of the church, not doubting but that aid would be rendered
them in prosecuting their benevolent work among the Gentiles. The
Epistle which was written on that occasion is now lost, and its contents
cannot now be ascertained. It was, probably, however, a letter of mere
commendation, perhaps stating the object which these brethren had in
view, and soliciting the aid of the church. The Latin Vulgate renders
this: "scripsissem forsan ecclesiae, "I would have written, perhaps, to
the church, but Diotrephes," etc. Macknight also renders this, "I would
have written," supposing the sense to be, that John would have commended
them to the whole church rather than to a private member, if he had not
been aware of the influence and opposition of Diotrephes. The Syriac
version also adopts the same rendering. Several manuscripts also, of
later date, introduced a particle, (αν an,) by which the same rendering
would be demanded in the Greek, though that reading is not sustained by
good authority. Against this mode of rendering the passage, the reasons
seem to me to be clear.

\(1\) as already remarked, the reading in the Greek which would require
it is not sustained by good authority.

\(2\) the fair and obvious interpretation of the Greek word used by the
apostle, (ἔγραψα egrapsa,) without that particle, is, I "wrote" -
implying that it had been already done.

\(3\) it is more probable that John had written to the church on some
former occasion, and that his recommendation had been rejected by the
influence of Diotrephes, than that he would be deterred by the
apprehension that his recommendation would be rejected.

It seems to me, therefore, that the fair interpretation of this passage
is, that these brethren had gone forth on some former occasion,
commended by John to the church, and had been rejected by the influence
of Diotrephes, and that now he commends them to Gains, by whom they had
been formerly entertained, and asks him to renew his hospitality to
them.

But Diotrephes, who loveth to have the pre-eminence among them,
receiveth us not - Does not admit our authority, or would not comply
with any such recommendation. The idea is, that he rejected his
interference in the matter, and was not disposed to acknowledge him in
any way. Of Diotrephes, nothing more is known than is here specified.
Compare the analysis of the Epistle. If he was an officer in the church
- a pastor, a ruling elder, a deacon, a vestry-man, a warden, or a
private individual - we have no means of ascertaining. The presumption,
from the phrase "who loveth to have the pre-eminence," would rather seem
to be that he was an aspiring man, arrogating rights which he did not
have, and assuming authority to which he was not entitled by virtue of
any office. Still he might have held an office, and might have arrogated
authority, as many have done, beyond what properly belonged to it.

The single word rendered "who loveth to have the pre-eminence,"
φιλοπρωτεύων philoprōteuōn, occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It
means simply, "who loves to be first" - meaning that he loved to be at
the head of all things, to rule, to lord it over others. It is clearly
supposed here, that the church would have complied with the request of
the writer if it had not been for this man. What were the alleged
grounds for the course which he constrained the church to take, we are
not informed; the real ground, the apostle says, was his desire to rule.
There may have been at the bottom of it some secret dislike of John, or
some private grudge; but the alleged ground may have been, that the
church was independent, and that it should reject all foreign
interference; or that the church was unable to support those men; or
that the work in which they were engaged was one of doubtful propriety.

Whatever was the cause, the case furnishes an illustration of the bad
influence of one ambitious and arrogant man in a church. It is often in
the power of one such man to bring a whole church under his control, and
effectually to embarrass all its movements, and to prevent all the good
which it would otherwise accomplish. When it is said, "but Diotrephes
receiveth us not," the reference is doubtless to John, and the meaning
is, either that he did not acknowledge him as an apostle, or that he did
not recognize his right to interfere in the affairs of the church, or
that he did not regard his recommendation of these brethren. The first
of these suppositions is hardly probable; but, though he may have
admitted that he was an apostle, there were perhaps some reasons
operating in this particular case why he prevailed on the church to
reject those who had been thus commended to their hospitality.

[3 John 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo3 1:10</span></span>

Wherefore, if I come - He was evidently expecting soon to make a visit
to Gaius, and to the church, [Jo3
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#014).

I will remember his deeds which he doeth - That is, he would punish his
arrogance and presumption; would take measures that he should be dealt
with in a proper manner. There is no evidence whatever that this is said
in a vindictive or revengeful spirit, or that the writer spoke of it
merely as a personal matter. From anything that can be shown to the
contrary, if it had been a private and personal affair merely, the
matter might have been dropped, and never referred to again. But what
had been done was public. It pertained to the authority of the apostle,
the duty of the church, and the character of the brethren who had been
commended to them. If the letter was written, as is supposed by the aged
John, and his authority had been utterly rejected by the influence of
this one man, then it was proper that that authority should be asserted.
If it was the duty of the church to have received these men, who had
been thus recommended to them, and it had been prevented from doing what
it would otherwise have done, by the influence of one man, then it was
proper that the influence of that man should be restrained, and that the
church should see that he was not to control it. If the feelings and the
character of these brethren had been injured by being rudely thrust out
of the church, and held up as unworthy of public confidence, then it was
proper that their character should be vindicated, and that the author of
the wrong should be dealt with in a suitable manner. No one can show
that this was not all that the apostle proposed to do, or that any
feelings of private vindictiveness entered into his purpose to remember
what Diotrephes had done; and the existence of any such feelings should
not be charged on the apostle without proof. There is no more reason to
suppose this in his case than there was in the case of Paul, in
administering discipline in the church of Corinth, [Co1
5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003), or than there is in any
instance of administering discipline now.

Prating against us - The word "prate," (φλυαρέω phluareō,) occurring
nowhere else in the New Testament, means to "overflow with talk," (Greek
φλύω phluō, Latin: "fluo," flow;) to talk much without weight, or to
little purpose; to be loquacious; to trifle; or, to use an expression
common among us, and which accords well with the Greek, to run on in
talk, without connection or sense. The word does not properly imply that
there was malignity or ill-feeling in what was said, but that the talk
was of an idle, foolish, and unpprofitable character. As John here,
however, specifies that there was a bad spirit in the manner in which
Diotrephes expressed himself, the real thing which is implied in the use
of the word here is, that there were much talk of that kind; that he was
addicted to this habit of "running on" against the apostle; and that he
was thus constantly undermining his influence, and injuring his
character.

With malicious words - Greek, "evil words;" words that were fitted to do
injury.

And not content therewith - Not satisfied with venting his private
feelings in talk. Some persons seem to be satisfied with merely talking
against others, and take no other measures to injure them; but
Diotrephes was not. He himself rejected the brethren, and persuaded the
church to do the same thing. Bad as evil talking is, and troublesome as
a man may be who is always "prating" about matters that do not go
according to his mind, yet it would be comparatively well if things
always ended with that, and if the loquacious and the dissatisfied never
took measures openly to wrong others.

Neither doth he himself receive the brethren - Does not himself treat
them as Christian brethren, or with the hospitality which is due to
them. He had not done it on the former visit, and John evidently
supposed that the same thing would occur again.

And forbiddeth them that would - From this it is clear that there were
those in the church who were disposed to receive them in a proper
manner; and from anything that appears, the church, as such, would have
been inclined to do it, if it had not been for the influence of this one
man.

And casteth them out of the church - Compare [Luk
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#022). It has been made a question
whether the reference here is to the members of the church who were
disposed to receive these brethren, or to the brethren themselves.
Lucke, Macknight, and some others, suppose that it refers to those in
the church who were willing to receive them, and whom Diotrephes had
excommunicated on that account. Heumann, Carpzoviius, Rosenmuller,
Bloomfield, and others, suppose that it refers to these strangers, and
that the meaning is, that Diotrephes would not receive them into the
society of Christians, and thus compelled them to go to another place.
That this latter is the correct interpretation seems to me to be
evident, for it was of the treatment which they had received that the
apostle was speaking.

[3 John 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo3 1:11</span></span>

Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good - There
can be no doubt that in this exhortation the writer had Diotrephes
particularly in his eye, and that he means to exhort Gaius not to
imitate his example. He was a man of influence in the church, and though
Gaius had shown that he was disposed to act in an independent manner,
yet it was not improper to exhort him not to be influenced by the
example of any one who did wrong. John wished to excite him to acts of
liberal and generous hospitality.

He that doeth good is of God - He shows that he resembles God, for God
continually does good. See the sentiment explained in the notes at [Jo1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007).

He that doeth evil hath not seen God - See the notes at [Jo1
3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008).

[3 John 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo3 1:12</span></span>

Demetrius hath good report of all men - Little is known of Demetrius.
Lucke supposes that he resided near the place where the author of this
Epistle lived, and was connected with the church there, and was probably
the bearer of this Epistle. It is impossible to determine with certainty
on this point, but there is one circumstance which seems to make it
probable that he was a member of the same church with Gaius, and had
united with him in showing Christian hospitality to these strangers. It
is the use of the phrase "hath good report of all," implying that some
testimony was borne to his character beyond what the writer personally
knew. It is possible, indeed, that the writer would have used this term
respecting him if he lived in the same place with himself, as expressing
the fact that he bore a good character, but it is a phrase which would
be more appropriately used if we suppose that he was a member of the
same church with Gaius, and that John means to say than an honorable
testimony was borne of his character by all those brethren, and by all
others as far as he knew.

And of the truth itself - Not only by men, who might possibly be
deceived in the estimate of character, but by fact. It was not merely a
reputation founded on what "appeared" in his conduct, but in truth and
reality. His deportment, his life, his deeds of benevolence, all
concurred with the testimony which was borne by men to the excellency of
his character. There is, perhaps, particular reference here to his kind
and hospitable treatment of those brethren.

Yea, and we also bear record - John himself had personally known him. He
had evidently visited the place where he resided on some former
occasion, and could now add his own testimony, which no one would call
in question, to his excellent character.

And ye know that our record is true - This is in the manner of John, who
always spoke of himself as having such character for truth that no one
who knew him would call it in question. Every Christian should have such
a character; every man might if he would. Compare the notes at [Joh
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035); [Joh
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024).

[3 John 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jo3 1:13</span></span>

I had many things to write ... - This Epistle closes, as the second
does, with a statement that he had many things to say, but that he
preferred waiting until he should see him rather than put them on paper.
Perhaps there were some things which he wished to say which he would not
like to have exposed to the possibility of being seen by the public eye.

But I will not with ink and pen ... - Notes at [Jo2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012).

[3 John 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo3 1:14</span></span>

But I trust I shall shortly see thee ... - Notes at [Jo2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012).

Our friends salute thee - That is, your friends and mine. This would
seem rather to refer to private friends of John and Gaius than to
Christians as such. They had, doubtless, their warm personal friends in
both places.

Greet the friends by name - That is, each one individually. He
remembered them as individuals, but did not deem it proper to specify
them.

Practical Remarks On 3 John

\(1\) It is proper to desire for our friends all temporal good; to wish
their happiness in every respect, [Jo3
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#002). The welfare of the soul is indeed
the great object, and the first desire in regard to a friend should be
that his salvation may be secured; but in connection with that we may
properly wish them health of body, and success in their lawful
undertakings. It is not common that in their spiritual interests they
are so much more prosperous than they are in other respects, that we can
make that the standard of our wishes in regard to them, but it sometimes
does occur, as in the case of Gaius. In such cases we may indeed rejoice
with a friend, and feel that all will be well with him. But in how few
cases, even among professed Christians, can we (with propriety) make the
prosperity of the soul the standard by which to measure the happiness
which we desire for them in other respects! Doddridge says, "What a
curse would this bring upon many to wish that they might prosper even as
their souls prospered!" Of how much property would they at once be
deprived; how embarrassed would be their affairs; how pale, and wan, and
sickly would they be, if they should be in all respects as they are in
their spiritual interests!

\(2\) it is an unspeakable pleasure to a Christian to learn that his
friends are living and acting as becomes sincere Christians; that they
love what is true, and abound in the duties of hospitality charity, and
benevolence, [Jo3 1:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003). When a friend
learns this of a distant friend; when a pastor learns this of his people
from whom be may be for a time separated; when those who have been
instrumental in converting others learn this of their spiritual
children; when a parent learns it of a son or daughter separated from
him; when a teacher learns it of those who were formerly under his care,
there is no joy that goes more directly to the heart than this - nothing
that fills the soul with more true thankfulness and peace.

\(3\) it is the duty and the privilege of those who love the cause of
religion to go and preach the gospel to those who are destitute,
expecting to receive nothing from them, and doing it as a work of pure
benevolence, [Jo3 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#007). The missionary
spirit existed early in the Christian church, and indeed may be regarded
as the "prevailing" spirit in those times. It has always been the
prevailing spirit when religion has flourished in the church. At such
times there have been many who were willing to leave their own quiet
homes, and the religious privileges connected with a well-organized
church, and to break away from the ties which bind to country and
kindred, and to go among a distant people to publish salvation. In this
cause, and with this spirit, the apostles spent their lives. In this
cause, the "brethren" referred to by John went forth to labor. In this
cause, thousands have labored in former times, and to the fact that they
were "willing" to do it is to be traced all the happy influence of
religion in the world. Our own religious privileges now we owe to the
fact that in former times there were those who were willing to "go forth
taking nothing of the Gentiles," devoting themselves, without hope of
reward or fame, to the business of making known the name of the Saviour
in what were then the dark places of the earth. The same principle is
acted on now in Christian missions, and with the same propriety; and as
we in Christian lands owe the blessings which we enjoy to the fact that
in former times there were those who were willing thus to go forth, so
it will be true that the richest blessings which are to descend upon
India, and Africa, and the islands of the sea, will be traced in future
times to the fact that there are in our age those who are willing to
follow the example of the apostles in going forth to do good to a dying
world.

\(4\) it is our duty to contribute to the support of those who thus go
among the pagan, and to help them in every way in which we can promote
the object which they have in view. So John felt it to be the duty of
the church in regard to those who went forth in his time; and so, when
the church, under the influence of Diotrephes, had refused to do it, he
commended Gaius for performing that duty, [Jo3
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#006), [Jo3
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#008). Now, as then, from the nature of
the case, missionaries to the pagan must go "taking nothing" of those
among whom they labor, and expecting that, for a long time at least,
they will do nothing for their support. They go as strangers. They go to
those who do not believe the truth of the gospel; who are attached to
their own superstitions; who contribute largely to the support of their
own temples, and altars, and priesthood; who are, as yet, incapable of
appreciating the value of a purer religion; who have no desire for it,
and who are disposed to reject it. In many cases, the pagan to whom the
missionary goes are miserably poor, and it is only this religion, which
as yet they are not disposed to receive, that can elevate them to habits
of industry, and furnish them with the means of supporting religious
teachers from abroad. Under these circumstances, no duty is more obvious
than that of contributing to the support of those who go to such places
as Christian missionaries. If the churches value the gospel enough to
send their brethren among the pagan to propagate it. they should value
it enough to minister to their needs while there; if they regard it as
the duty of any of their number to leave their comfortable homes in a
Christian land in order to preach to the pagan, they should feel that
those who go make far greater sacrifices than those who contribute to
their support. they give up all; we give only the small sum, not
diminishing our own comforts, which is necessary to sustain them.

\(5\) for the same reason it is our duty to contribute to the support of
missionaries in the destitute places of our own land, [Jo3
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#008). They often go among a people who
are as destitute, and who will as little appreciate the gospel, and who
are as much prejudiced against it, and who are as poor, as the pagan.
They are as likely to be charged with being actuated by mercenary
motives, if they ask for support, as missionaries among the pagan are.
They often go among people as little able and disposed to build churches
and school-houses as the pagan are. Nothing is more obvious, therefore,
than that those who have the gospel, and who have learned to prize and
value it in some measure is it should be, should contribute to the
support of those who go to convey its blessings to others, until those
to whom they go shall so learn to prize it as to be able and willing to
maintain it. That, under a faithful ministry, and with the Divine
blessing, will not be long; always for the gospel, when it secures a
hold in a community, makes men feel that it confers infinitely more
blessings than it takes away, and that, even in a pecuniary point of
view, it contributes more by far than it takes. What community is more
prospered, or is more rich in all that promotes the temporal welfare of
man, than that where the gospel has the most decided influence?

\(6\) we may see from this Epistle that churches "ought" to be united in
promoting the cause of religion, [Jo3
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#008). They should regard it as a
common cause in which one has as much concern as another, and where each
should feel it a privilege to cooperate with his brethren. One church,
in proportion to its ability, has as much interest in the spread of
Christianity as another, and should feel that it has much responsibility
in doing it. Between different churches there should be that measure of
confidence and love that they will deem it a privilege to help each
other in the common cause, and that one shall be ready to further the
benevolent designs undertaken by another. In every Christian land, and
among the people of every Christian denomination, missionaries of the
gospel should find friends who will be willing to cooperate with them in
advancing the common cause, and who, though they may bear a different
name, and may speak a different language, should cheerfully lend their
aid in spreading the common Christianity.

\(7\) we may see, from this Epistle, the evil of having one troublesome
man in the church, [Jo3 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010). Such a
man, by his talents, his address, his superior learning, his wealth, or
by his arrogance, pride, and self-confidence, may control a church, and
effectually hinder its promoting the work of religion. The church
referred to by the apostle would have done its duty well enough, if it
had not been for one ambitious and worldly man. No one can properly
estimate the evil which one such man can do, nor the calamity which
comes upon a church when such a man places himself at its head. As a man
of wealth, of talents, and of learning, may do great good, if his heart
is right, so may a man similarly endowed do proportionate evil if his
heart is wicked. Yet how often has the spirit which actuated Diotrephes
prevailed in the church! There is nothing that confers so much power on
men as the control in religious matters; and hence, in all ages, proud
and ambitious men have sought dominion over the conscience, and have
sought to bring the sentiments of people on religion to subjection to
their will.

\(8\) there may be circumstances where it is proper - where it is a duty
- to receive those who have been cast out of the church, [Jo3
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#008). The decisions of a church, under
some proud and ambitious partisan leader, are often eminently unjust and
harsh. The most modest, humble, devoted, and zealous men, under a charge
of heresy, or of some slight aberration from the formulas of doctrine,
may be cast out as unworthy to be recognized as ministers of the gospel,
or even as unworthy to have a place at the table of the Lord. Some of
the best men on earth have been thus disowned by the church; and it is
no certain evidence against a man when he is denounced as a heretic, or
disowned as a member, by those who bear the Christian name. If we are
satisfied that a man is a Christian, we should receive him as such,
however he may be regarded by others; nor should we hesitate to help him
forward in his Christian course, or in any way to assist him to do good.

\(9\) finally, let us learn from the examples commended in this brief
Epistle, to do good. Let us follow the example of Gaius - the hospitable
Christian; the large-hearted philanthropist; the friend of the stranger;
the helper of those who were engaged in the cause of the Lord - a man
who opened his heart and his house to welcome them when driven out and
disowned by others. Let us imitate Demetrius, in obtaining a good report
of those who know us; in so living that, if the aged apostle John were
still on earth, we might be worthy of his commendation, and more than
all, of the approbation of that gracious Saviour before whom these good
men have long since gone, and in whose presence we also must soon
appear.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jude Introduction](jde000)

</div>
