<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job008)  [Next](job010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#001)

[Job 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 9:2</span></span>

I know it is so of a truth - Job here refers, undoubtedly, to something
that had been said before; but whether it is to the general strain of
remark, or to some particular expression, may be doubted. Rosenmuller
supposes that he refers to what was said by Eliphaz in [Job
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017); but it seems more probable that
it is to the general position which had been laid down and defended,
that God was just and holy, and that his proceedings were marked with
equity. Job admits this, and proceeds to show that it was a truth quite
as familiar to him as it was to them. The object of his dwelling on it
seems to be to show them that it was no new thing to him, and that he
had some views on that important subject which were well worthy of
attention.

But how should man be just with God? - Margin, "before." The meaning is,
that he could not be regarded as perfectly holy in the sight of God; or
that so holy and pure a being as God must see that man was a sinner, and
regard him as such; see the sentiment explained in the notes at [Job
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017). The question here asked is, in
itself, the most important ever propounded by man - "How shall sinful
man be regarded and treated as righteous by his Maker?" This has been
the great inquiry which has always been before the human mind. Man is
conscious that he is a sinner. He feels that he must be regarded as such
by God. Yet his happiness here and hereafter, his peace and all his
hope, depend on his being treated as if he were righteous, or regarded
as just before God. This inquiry has led to all forms of religion among
people; to all the penances and sacrifices of different systems; to all
the efforts which have been made to devise some system that shall make
it proper for God to treat people as righteous.

The question has never been satisfactorily answered except in the
Christian revelation, where a plan is disclosed by which God "may be
just, and yet the justifier of him that believeth." Through the infinite
merits of the Redeemer, man, though conscious that he is personally a
sinner, may be treated as if he had never sinned; though feeling that he
is guilty, he may consistently be forever treated as if he were just.
The question asked by Job implies that such is the evidence and the
extent of human guilt, that man can never justify himself. This is clear
and indisputable. Man cannot justify himself by the deeds of the law.
Justification, as a work of law, is this: A man is charged, for example,
with the crime of murder. He sets up in defense that he did not kill, or
that if he tools life it was in self-defense, and that he had a right to
do it. Unless the fact of killing be proved, and it be shown that he had
no right to do in the case as he has done, he cannot be condemned, and
the law acquits him. It has no charge against him, and he is just or
justified in the sight of the law. But in this sense man can never be
just before God. He can neither show that the things charged on him by
his Maker were not done, or that being done, he had a right to do them;
and being unable to do this, he must be held to be guilty. He can never
be justified therefore by the law, and it is only by that system which
God has revealed in the gospel, where a conscious sinner may be treated
as if he were righteous through the merits of another, that a man can
ever be regarded as just before God; see [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017), note; [Rom
3:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024), note.

[Job 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 9:3</span></span>

If he will contend with him - That is, if God enters into a controversy
with man. If he chooses to charge crime on him, and to hold him
responsible for his deeds. The language here is taken from courts of
justice, and means that if a trial were instituted, where God should
submit charges, and the matter were left to adjudication, man could not
answer the charges against him; compare the notes at [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001).

He cannot answer him one of a thousand - For one of a thousand of the
sins charged on him. The word "thousand" here is used to denote the
largest number, or all. A man who could not answer for one charge
brought against him out of a thousand, must be held to be guilty; and
the expression here is equivalent to saying that he could not answer him
at all. It may also be implied that God has many charges against man.
His sins are to be reckoned by thousands. They are numerous as his
years, his months, his weeks, his days, his hours, his moments; numerous
as his privileges, his deeds, and his thoughts. For not one of those
sins can he answer. He can give no satisfactory account before an
impartial tribunal for any of them. If so, how deeply guilty is man
before God! How glorious that plan of justification by which he can be
freed from this long list of offences, and treated as though he had not
sinned.

[Job 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 9:4</span></span>

He is wise in heart - Herder renders this,

Even the wise and the powerful,

Who hath withstood him and prospered?

But the more common interpretation is to refer it to God. The meaning of
Job appears to be, that God was a sagacious adversary; that he was able
to manage his cause; that he could meet and refute all objections which
could be urged; and that it would be in vain to engage in a litigation
before him. He so well understood the whole ground of debate, and was so
entirely skilled in the merits of the controversy, and could so
successfully meet all that could be alleged, that it was useless to
attempt to hold an argument with him.

And mighty in strength - He is able to execute all his designs, and to
carry all his purposes into effect. Man is weak and feeble, and it is
hopeless for him to attempt to contend with the Almighty.

Who hath hardened himself against him, and hath prospered? - To harden
oneself, here means to resist or withstand him. It refers to the
firmness or resolution which one is obliged to adopt who opposes
another. Here it means the opposition which man makes to the law and
government of the Most High; and the affirmation is, that no one can
make such opposition who will not be ultimately overcome. God is so
great, so powerful, and so just, that a successful resistance cannot be
made. The arrangements of God will take their course, and man must yield
to his claims and his government, or be prostrated. None can
successfully resist God; and the true policy of man, as well as his
duty, is to yield to him, and be at peace with him.

And hath prospered - Or been successful. He has failed in his
opposition, and been obliged to yield. Prosperity is not found in
opposing God. It is only by falling in with his arrangements and
following his designs. A prosperous voyage is made by falling in with
winds and currents, and not in opposing them; prosperous agriculture is
carried on by coinciding with the favorable seasons of the year, and
taking advantage of the dews, and rains, and sunbeams that God sends,
and not in opposing them; prosperity in regard to health is found in
taking advantage of the means which God gives to secure it, and not in
opposing them. And the sinner in his course has no more chance of
success and prosperity, than a man would have who should make it a point
or principle of life always to sail against tides, and currents, and
head winds; or he who should set at defiance all the laws of husbandry,
and plant on a rock, or in the dead of winter; or he who should feed
himself on poison rather than on nutritious food, and cultivate the
nightshade rather that wheat. The great principle is, that if a man
desires prosperity, he must fall in with the arrangements of God in his
providence and grace; and wisdom is seen in studying these arrangements,
and in yielding to them.

[Job 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 9:5</span></span>

Which removeth the mountains - In order to show how vain it was to
contend with God, Job refers to some exhibitions of his power and
greatness. The "removal of the mountains" here denotes the changes which
occur in earthquakes and other violent convulsions of nature. This
illustration of the power of God is often referred to in the Scriptures;
compare [Jdg 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#005); [Kg1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011); [Psa
65:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#006); [Psa
114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004); [Psa
144:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#005); [Isa
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012); [Jer
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#024).

And they know not - This is evidently a Hebraism, meaning suddenly, or
unexpectedly. He does it, as it were, before they are aware of it. A
similar expression occurs in the Koran, "God overturns them, and they do
not know it;" that is, he does it without their suspecting any such
thing; compare [Psa 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008). "Let
destruction come upon him at unawares," or, as it is in the Hebrew and
in the margin, "which he knoweth not of." Tindal renders this, "He
translatethe the mountaynes or ever they be aware."

Which overturneth them in his anger - As if he were enraged. There could
scarcely be any more terrific exhibition of the wrath of God than the
sudden and tremendous violence of an earthquake.

[Job 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 9:6</span></span>

Which shaketh the earth out of her place - This evidently refers to
violent convulsions of nature, as if the earth were to be taken away.
Objects on the earth's surface become displaced, and convulsion seems to
seize the world. The Septuagint renders this, "who shaketh that which is
under the heavens from its foundations" - ἐκ Θεμελίων ek themeliōn. The
change in the Hebrew would be very slight to authorize this rendering.

And the pillars thereof tremble - In this place the earth is represented
as sustained like a building by pillars or columns. Whether this is a
mere poetic representation, or whether it describes the actual belief of
the speaker in regard to the structure of the earth, it is not easy to
determine. I am inclined to think it is the former, because in another
place where he is speaking of the earth, he presents his views in
another form, and more in acoordance with the truth (see the notes at
[Job 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#007)): and because here the
illustration is evidently taken from the obvious and perceived effects
of an earthquake. It would convulse and agitate the pillars of the most
substantial edifice, and so it seemed to shake the earth, as if its very
supports would fall.

[Job 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 9:7</span></span>

Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not - Schultens supposes that
all this is a description of the deluge - when the mountains were
removed, when the fountains of the deep were broken up, and when the sun
was obscured and seemed not to rise. Others have supposed that it refers
to the fact that the sun is darkened by clouds and tempests, and appears
not to rise and shine upon the earth. Others suppose that the allusion
is to an eclipse; and others, that it is to the power of God, and means
that the rising of the sun depends on him, and that if he should choose
to give the command, the heavenly bodies would rise and give light no
more. It seems probable that the meaning is, that God has power to do
this; that the rising of the sun depends on him; and that he could delay
it, or prevent it, at his pleasure. His power over the sun was shown in
the time of Joshua, when, at his command, it stood still; but it is not
necessary to suppose that there is any reference to this fact here. The
whole meaning of the language is met by the supposition that it refers
to the power of God, and affirms what he could do, or if it refer to any
fact that had been observed, that the allusion is to the darkening of
the sun by an eclipse or a tempest. No argument can be derived,
therefore, from the expression, in regard to the age of the book.

And sealeth up the stars - The word "seal" in the Scriptures (חתם
châtham) is used with considerable latitude of signification. It is
employed in the sense of shutting, closing, making fast - as when
anything was sealed, it was shut up or made fast. The Hebrews often used
a seal, where we would use a lock, and depended on the protection
derived from the belief that one would not break open that which was
sealed, where we are obliged to rely on the security of the lock against
force. If there were honor and honesty among people everywhere, a seal
would be as secure as a lock - as in a virtuous community a sealed
letter is as secure as a merchant's iron "safe." To "seal up the stars,"
means so to shut them up in the heavens, as to prevent their shining; to
hide them from the view. They are concealed, hidden, made close - as the
contents of a letter, a package, or a room are by a seal, indicating
that no one is to examine them, and concealing them from the view. So
God hides from our view the stars by the interposition of clouds.

[Job 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 9:8</span></span>

Which alone spreadeth out the heavens - As an expanse, or a curtain; see
the notes at [Isa 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022).

And treadeth upon the waves of the sea - Margin, "Heights." So it is in
the Hebrew. It means the "high waves;" that is, he walks upon the waves
of the ocean when lifted up by a storm. This is spoken of here as a
proof of the greatness of God; and the meaning of all is, that he is
seen in the storm, in the heaving ocean, when the heavens are black with
tempest, and when the earth is convulsed. It may be added here, that the
Lord Jesus walked amidst the howling winds on the lake, and thus gave
evidence that he was God; [Mat 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025).
"The Egyptian hieroglyphic for what was not possible to be done, was a
man walking on the water." Burder. Dr. Good, and some others, render
this, "on the mountains." But the more correct rendering is given in the
common version. The Hebrew word rendered "waves" (במה bâmâh) indeed
properly means a height, a lofty place, a mountain; but the comparison
of waves with a mountain, is common in all languages. So we speak of
waves "mountain-high," or as high as mountains. So Virgil, Aeneid i.
105,

Insequitur cumulo praeruptus aquae mons.

Similar to this, is the expression occurring in Homer, κύματα ἶσα
ὄρεσσιν kumata isa oressin; and so Apollonius, i. 521 - ἅλὸς ἄκρον
chalos akron. The Septuagint renders it, "who walketh upon the sea as
upon a pavement."

[Job 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 9:9</span></span>

Which maketh Arcturus - This verse, with others of the same description
in the book of Job, is of special importance, as they furnish an
illustration of the views which prevailed among the patriarchs on the
subject of astronomy. There are frequent references to the sciences in
this book (see the Introduction), and there is no source of illustration
of the views which prevailed in the earliest times in regard to the
state of the sciences, so copious as can be found in this poem. The
thoughts of people were early turned to the science of astronomy. Not
only were they led to this by the beauty of the heavens, and by the
instinctive promptings of the human mind to know something about them,
but the attention of the Chaldeans and of the other Oriental nations was
early drawn to them by the fact that they were shepherds, and that they
passed much of their time in the open air at night, watching their
flocks.

Having nothing else to do, and being much awake, they would naturally
contrive to relieve the tediousness of the night by watching the
movements of the stars; and they early gave employment to their talents,
by endeavoring to ascertain the influence which the stars exerted over
the fates of people, and to their imagination, by dividing the heavens
into portions, having a fancied resemblance to certain animals, and by
giving them appropriate names. Hence, arose the arrangement of the stars
into constellations, and the names which they still bear. The Hebrew
word rendered Arcturus, is עשׁ ‛ayı̂sh. The Septuagint renders it,
Πλειάδα Pleiada - the Pleiades. Jerome, Arcturum. The Hebrew word
usually means a moth, [Job 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019); [Job
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028); [Job
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#018). It also denotes the splendid
constellation in the northern hemisphere, which we call Ursa Major, the
Great Bear, Arcturus, or the Wain; compare Niebuhr, Des. of Arabia, p.
114.

The word עשׁ ‛ayı̂sh does not literally mean a bear, but is made by
aphaeresis from the Arabic nas, by the excision of the initial n - as is
common in Arabic; see Bochart, Hieroz. P. II. Lib. I. c. xvi. p. 113,
114. The word in Arabic means a bier, and is the name given to the
constellation which we denominate Ursa Major, "because," says Bochart,
"the four stars, which are a square, are regarded as a bier, on which a
dead body is borne. The three following (the tail of the bear) are the
daughters or sons which attend the funeral as mourners." This name is
often given to this constellation in Arabic. The Arabic name is
Elna'sch, the bier. "The expression," says Ideler, "denotes particularly
the bier on which the dead are borne, and taken in this sense, each of
the two biers in the Ursa Major and Ursa Minor is accompanied by three
mourning-women. The biers and the mourning-women together, are called
Benâtna'sch, literally, daughters of the bier; that is, those who
pertain to the bier."

Untersuchungen uber den Ursprung und die Bedeutung der Sternnamen, S.
419; compare [Job 38:32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032) : "Canst thou
guide Arcturus with his sons?" Schultens regards the word עשׁ ‛ayı̂sh as
synonymous with the Arabic asson, night-vigil, from assa to go about by
night, and supposes this constellation to be so called, because it
always revolves around the pole, and never sets. The situation and
figure of this constellation are well known. It is seen at all times in
the northern part of the heavens, perpetually revolving around the North
Star, and two of its principal stars point to the North Star always. Its
resemblance to a bear, is quite fanciful - as it might be imagined as
well to resemble any other object. The design of this fancy was merely
to assist the memory. The only thing which seems to have suggested it
was its slight resemblance to an animal followed by its young. Thus, the
stars, now known as the "tail," might have been supposed to resemble the
cubs of a bear following their dam.

The comparison of the constellation to a bier, and the movement to a
funeral procession, with the sons or daughters of the deceased following
on in the mourning train, is much more poetical and beautiful. This
constellation is so conspicuous, that it has been an object of interest
in all ages, and has been one of the groups of stars most attentively
observed by navigators, as a guide in sailing. The reason was, probably,
that as it constantly revolved around the North Pole, it could always be
seen in clear weather, and thus the direction in which they were
sailing, could always be told. It has had a great variety of names. The
name Ursa Major, or the Great Bear, is that which is commonly given to
it. It is a remarkable fact, also, that while this name was given to it
in the East a tribe of the American Indians - the Iroquois, also gave
the same name of the Great Bear to it. This is remarkable, because, so
far as known, they had no communication with each other, and because the
name is perfectly arbitrary.

Is this an evidence that the natives of our country, North America,
derived their origin from some of the nations of the East? In some parts
of England the constellation is called "Charles' Wain," or Wagon, from
its fancied resemblance to a waggon, drawn by three horses in a line.
Others call it the Plow. The whole number of visible stars in this
constellation is eighty seven, of which one is of the first, three of
the second, seven of the third, and about twice as many of the fourth
magnitude. The constellations of Ursa Major and Ursa Minor were
represented by the ancients, under the image of a waggon drawn by a team
of horses. This is alluded to by the Greek poet, Aratus, in an address
to the Athenians:

The one called Helix, soon as day retires.

Observed with ease lights up his radiant fires;

The other smaller and with feebler beams,

In a less circle drives his lazy teams:

But more adapted for the sailor's guide,

Whene'er by night he tempts the briny tide.

Among the Egyptians these two constellations are represented by the
figures of bears, instead of waggons. Whence the Hebrew name is derived
is not quite certain; but if it be from the Arabic, it probably means
the same - a bier. There seems no reason to doubt, however, that the
Ursa Major is intended; and that the idea here is, that the greatness of
God is shown by his having made this beautiful constellation.

Orion - The Vulgate renders this Orion, the Septuagint, "Εσπερον
Hesperon, Hesperus - that is, the evening star, Venus. The word כסיל
kesı̂yl, is from כסל kâsal, to be fat or fleshy; to be strong, lusty,
firm; and then to be dull, sluggish, stupid - as fat persons usually
are. Hence, the word כסיל kesı̂yl means a fool, [Psa
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011); [Pro
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#032); [Pro
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#001), It is used here, however, to
denote a constellation, and by most interpreters it is supposed to
denote the constellation Orion, which the Orientals call a giant. "They
appear to have conceived of this constellation under the figure of an
impious giant bound upon the sky." Gesenius. Hence the expression, [Job
38:31](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031); "Canst thou loose the bands of
Orion?" According to the Eastern tradition, this giant was Nimrod, the
founder of Babylon, afterward translated to the skies; see the notes at
[Isa 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010), where it is rendered
constellation. Virgil speaks of it as the Stormy Orion:

Cam subito aseurgons fluctu nimbosus Orion.

Aeneid i. 535.

And again:

Dum pelago desaevit heims, et aquosus Orion.

Aeneid iv. 52.

In another description of Orion by Virgil, it is represented as armed
with gold, or surrounded by a yellow light:

Arcturum, pluviasque Hyadas, geminosque Triones,

Armatumque auro circumspicit Oriona.

Aeneid iii. 516, 517.

According to the fancy of the ancients, Orion was a mighty hunter, the
attendant of Diana, who having offered violence to her was stung to
death by a scorpion which she had provided for that purpose. After his
death he was translated to heaven, and made a constellation. Others say
that he was the son of Neptune and Queen Euryale, a famous Amazonian
huntress; and possessing the disposition of his mother, he became the
greatest hunter in the world, and made a boast that there was no animal
on earth that he could not subdue. To punish this vanity, it is said
that a scorpion sprang out of the earth, and bit his foot, so that he
died, but that at the request of Diana he was placed among the stars,
and directly opposite to the scorpion that caused his death. On the
names given to this constellation in Arabic, and the origin of the name
Orion among the Greeks, see Ideler, Unter. uber den Urs. u. die Bedeut.
der Stern. s. 212-227, 331-336. The name El-dscebbâr, the giant, or
hero, is that which is commonly given to it in Arabic. The constellation
Orion is usually mentioned by the ancients as connected with storms, and
hence, is called nimbosus Orion by Virgil, and tristis Orion by Horace.
The reason of this was, that its rising usually occurred at those
seasons of the year when storms prevailed, and hence, it was supposed to
be their cause - as we connect the rising of the dog-star with the idea
of intense heat.

The situation of Orion is on the equator, midway between the poles of
the heavens. It comes to the meridian about the 23d of January. The
whole number of visible stars in it is seventy-eight, of which two are
of the first magnitude, four of the second, three of the third, and
fifteen of the fourth. It is regarded as the most beautiful of the
constellations, and when it is on the meridian there is then above the
horizon the most magnificent view of the celestial bodies that the
firmament exhibits. On the celestial maps it is represented by the
figure of a man in the attitude of assaulting the Bull, with a sword in
his belt, a huge club in his right hand, and a lion-skin in the left to
serve him for a shield. The principal stars are four, in the form of a
long square or parallelogram, intersected by the "Three Stars" in the
middle called "The Ell and the Yard." The two upper ones are represented
one on each shoulder, and of the two lower ones one is in the left foot,
and the other on the right knee. The position of the constellation may
be seen by anyone by remarking that the "Three Stars" in the belt are
those which point to the Pleiades or seven stars on the one side, and to
the dog star on the other. This constellation is mentioned by Homer, as
it is indeed by most of the Classical writers:

Πληΐάδας θ ̓, Ὑάδος τε, τό τε σθένος Ὠρίωνος.

Plēiadas th', Huadas te, to te sthenos Ōriōnos.

\- Iliad, σ s.

It may furnish an illustration of the vastness of the starry heavens to
remark, that in the sword of the constellation Orion there is a nebula
which is almost visible to the naked eye, which is computed to be 2,200,
000,000, 000,000, 000, or two trillion, two hundred thousand billion
times larger than the sun! Dr. Dick, Chr. Keepsake for 1840, p. 184. If,
then, Job, with his limited views of astronomy, saw in this
constellation an impressive proof of the greatness of the Almighty, how
much more sublime should be our views of God! We see this constellation
not merely as a beautiful object in the sky - a collection of bright and
beautiful gems - but we see it as so vast as to surpass our
comprehension, and behold in it a single nebula, or speck - not quite
visible to the naked eye - that mocks all our powers of conception! It
may be added, that by the aid of a telescope about two thousand stars
have been seen in this constellation.

And Pleiades - The seven stars. The Hebrew word is כימה kı̂ymâh, a heap
or cluster. The name is given to the cluster of stars in the neck of the
constellation Taurus, of which seven are the principal. Six or seven may
be usually seen if the eye is directed toward it; but if the eye be
turned carelessly aside while the attention is fixed on the group, many
more may be seen. For, "it is a very remarkable fact," says Sir John
Herschell, "that the center of the visual organ is by far less sensible
to feeble impressions of light than the exterior portion of the retina."
Ast. p. 398. Telescopes show fifty or sixty large stars there crowded
together into a small space. Rheita affirms that he counted two hundred
stars in this small cluster. In regard to the Pleiades, Ideler makes the
following remarks. "These stars were by the ancients sometimes denoted
by the singular, Πλειὰς Pleias, and sometimes by the plural, Πλειάδες
Pleiades (in metrical composition, Πληΐάδες Plēiades), Pleiades. They
are mentioned by Homer, Iliad, σ s. 486, Odyssey ε e. 272, and by
Hesiod, Ἐργ Erg. 383, 615. Hesiod mentions the cluster as the daughter
of Atlas - Ἀτλαγενεῖς Atlageneis. The name Atlantides, which so often
occurs among the Romans, signifies the same thing. Their mythological
names are Alcyone, Merope, Celaeno, Electra, Sterope or Asterope,
Taygete, and Maia. There is some uncertainty among the ancient writers
from where the name Pleiades is derived. Among most etymologists, the
name has respect to navigation, and the derivation is from ἀπὸ τοῦ πλεῖν
apo tou plein - because the time of navigation commenced with the rising
of the Pleiades in the first part of May, and ended with their setting
in the first part of November. But perhaps the name is derived simply
from πλέος pleos, πλεῖος pleios, full, so that it merely denotes a
condensed assemblage of stars, which Manilius, iv. 523, expresses by
glomerabile sidus. Aratus, v. 257, says that the Pleiades were called
ἑπτάποροι heptaporoi - those which walked in seven paths, although but
six stars can be seen. In a similar sense Ovid, speaking of the
Pleiades, says,

Quae septem dici, sex tamen esse solent.

Fast. iv. 170.

Hipparchus, on the contrary, affirms that in a clear night, when there
is no moon, seven stars can be seen. The difference of these views is
easily explained. The group consists of one star of the third magnitude,
three of the fifth, two of the sixth, and many smaller stars. It
requires a very keen vision to be able to distinguish in the group more
than six stars. Since therefore, among the ancients, it was commonly
believed that there were no more than six, and yet among them. as with
us, the name the seven stars was given to them, the opinion arose that
one star of the seven had been lost. Some supposed that it had been
smitten by lightning, others thai it had united itself to the middle
star in the tail of the Ursa Major, and others gave to the belief a
mythic signification, as is mentioned by Ovid in the place above
referred to. The Romans called the Pleiades Vergiliae, because they
arose in the spring. The Arabians called those stars El-thoreja -
meaning abundant, copious, and answering to the Greek Πλειὰς Pleias,
Pleias. The Asiatic poets Sadi, Hafiz, and others, always mention these
stars as a beautiful rosette, with one brilliant. Sadi, in the
description of a beautiful garden, says "The ground was strewed with
pieces of enamel, and bands of Pleiades appeared to hang on the branches
of the trees." Hafiz says, "The heavens bear up thy poems - the pearly
rosette of the Pleiades as the seal of immortality. Beigel, who has
translated these poets, adds, "In this genuine Oriental spirit must we
understand the words of Job, 'Canst thou bind the brilliant rosettes of
the Pleiades? that is, Who can say that he has placed this collection of
brilliants as a rosette in the sky?" Ideler, Untersuchungen u. den Urs.
u. die Bedeut. der Sternnamen, s. 143-147.

And the chambers of the south - What is the exact idea to be attached to
this expression, it is not easy to say. Probably it means the remote
regions of the south, or the part of the heavens which is not visible to
the inhabitants of the northern hemisphere. The word rendered chambers
means in the Scriptures a private apartment of a dwelling; a part that
is separated from the rest by a curtain; a harem, etc. Hence, it may
mean the abodes of the stars in the south - comparing the heavens with
an immense tent, and regarding it as divided into separate apartments.
It may mean here the stars which are hidden, as it were, in the recesses
of the southern hemisphere, like the private apartments of a house,
which all were not allowed to enter. There are some intimations in the
book of Job that the true structure of the earth was not unknown at that
remote period of the world (compare the notes at [Job
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#007)); and if so, then this may refer
to the constellations in the south which are invisible to an inhabitant
of the northern hemisphere. There is no impropriety, at any rate, in
supposing that those who had traveled into the south had brought reports
of stars and constellations seen there which are invisible to an
inhabitant of northern Arabia.

[Job 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 9:10</span></span>

Which doeth great things - This is almost the sentiment which had been
expressed by Eliphaz; see the notes, [Job
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009). It was evidently a proverb, and
as such was used by both Eliphaz and Job.

[Job 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 9:11</span></span>

Lo, he goeth by me - That is, he passes along - as in the silent
movements of the heavenly bodies. "I see the evidence of his existence.
I can see that God must be there - moving along by me in the orbs of
night and in the march of the constellations, but I cannot see God
himself. He passes by, or rather he passes over me (עלי ‛ālay), as in
the majestic movement of the heavenly bodies over my head." This is, I
think, the idea, and the image is exceedingly poetic and beautiful. The
heavens are seen to move in silent grandeur. The northern constellation
rolls around the pole. The others move on as a marshalled army. They go
in silent and solemn order, and God must be there. But, says Job, I
cannot see him. I can feel that he must be there, and I look out on the
heavens to see him, but my eyes fail, and I cannot behold him. He passes
on, and I see him not. Who has ever looked upon the heavens in the still
night, and seen the silent grandeur of such movements of the heavenly
host, without some such feeling - some emotion of inexpressible awe - as
if he, if I may so express it, COULD ALMOST SEE GOD?

[Job 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 9:12</span></span>

Behold, he taketh away - Property, friends, or life.

Who can hinder him? - Margin, turn him away. Or, rather, "who shall
cause him to restore?" that is, who can bring back what he takes away?
He is so mighty, that what he removes, it is impossible for us to
recover.

Who will say unto him, What doest thou? - A similar expression occurs in
[Dan 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035). The meaning is plain. God
has a right to remove any thing which we possess. Our friends, property,
health, and lives, are his gift, and he has a right to them all. When he
takes them away, he is but taking that which is his own, and which has
been lent to us for a little time, and which he has a right to remove
when it seems good to him. This truth Job fully admits, and in the calm
contemplation of all his losses and his sorrows, he acknowledges that
God had a right to do as he had done; see note, [Job
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021).

[Job 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 9:13</span></span>

If God will not withdraw his anger - That is, if he perseveres in
inflicting punishment. He will not turn aside his displeasure by any
opposition or resistance made to him.

The proud helpers - Margin, Helpers of pride, or, strength. Jerome
renders this, "under whom they who bear up the world bow down." The
Septuagint, not less singularly, "by him the whales (or monsters - κήτος
ketos) which are under heaven, are bowed down." Codurcus renders it,
"aids of pride," and understands by it all the things on which proud men
rely, as wealth, health, rank, talent. So Dr. Good renders it, "the
supports of the proud." The meaning is, probably, that all those things
which contribute to the support of pride, or all those persons who are
allied together to maintain the dominion of pride on the earth, must
sink under the wrath of God. Or it may refer to those who sustain the
pride of state and empire - the men who stand around the thrones of
monarchs, and who contribute, by their talent and power, to uphold the
pomp and magnificence of courts. On the meaning of the word here
rendered pride (רהב rahab), see the notes at [Isa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007).

[Job 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 9:14</span></span>

How much less shall I answer him? - I, who am so feeble, how can I
contend with him? If the most mighty objects in the universe are under
his control; if the constellations are directed by him; if the earth is
shaken, and mountains moved from their places, by his power, and if the
men of most exalted rank are prostrated by him, how can I presume to
contend with God? This is the common view which is given of the passage,
and is evidently that which our translators entertained. But I have
given in the translation what appears to me to be a more literal
version, and to express a better sense - though, I confess, the
translation differs from all that I have seen. According to this, the
sense is simply, that such was the veneration which Job had for the
character of God, that should he attempt to answer him, he would select
his words with the utmost care and attention.

[Job 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 9:15</span></span>

Whom, though I were righteous - That is, if I felt the utmost confidence
that I was righteous, yet, if God judged otherwise, and regarded me as a
sinner, I would not reply to him, but would make supplication to him as
a sinner. I would have so much confidence in him, and would feel that he
was so much better qualified than I am to judge, and that I am so liable
to be deceived, that I would come to him as a sinner, if he judged and
declared me to be one, and would plead for pardon. The meaning is, that
God is a much better judge of our character than we can possibly be, and
that his regarding us as sinners is the highest proof that we are such,
whatever may be our views to the contrary. This shows the extent of the
confidence which Job had in God and is an indication of true piety. And
it is founded in reason as well as in piety. Men often suppose that they
are righteous, and yet they know that God adjudges otherwise, and
regards them as sinners. He offers them pardon as sinners. He threatens
to punish them as sinners. The question is, whether they shall act on
their own feelings and judgment in the case, or on his? Shall they
adhere obstinately to their views, and refuse to yield to God, or shall
they act on the truth of his declarations? Now that Job was right in his
views of the case, may appear from the following considerations.

\(1\) God knows the heart. He cannot be deceived; we may be. In nothing
are we more liable to be deceived than in regard to our own character.
We should, therefore, distrust our own judgment in this case, but we
should never distrust God.

\(2\) God is infinitely benevolent, and will not judge unkindly. He has
no wish to find us sinners; he will have no pleasure in making us out to
be transgressors. A heart of infinite benevolence would prefer to find
all people holy, and would look on every favorable circumstance in the
case with all the kindness which it would deserve. No being would be so
likely to make a favorable decision in our case as the infinitely
benevolent God; none would so delight to find that we were free from the
charge of guilt.

\(3\) God will act on his own views of our character, and not on ours;
and it is prudent and wise, therefore, for us to act on his views now.
He will judge us in the last day according to his estimate of our
character, and not according to the estimate which we may form.

\(4\) At the same time, we cannot but accord with his views of our own
character. Our reason and conscience tell us that we have violated his
laws, and that we have no claim to his mercy. No man can persuade
himself that he is wholly righteous; and being conscious of guilt,
though in the slightest degree, he should make supplication to his
Judge.

[Job 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 9:16</span></span>

If I had called, and he had answered me - It is remarked by Schultens,
that the expressions in these verses are all taken from courts of
justice. If so, the meaning is, that even if Job should call the
Almighty to a judicial action, and he should respond to him, and consent
to submit the great question about his innocence, and about the justice
of the divine dealings with him, to trial, yet that such was the
distance between God and him, that he could not hope successfully to
contend with him in the argument. He would, therefore, prostrate himself
in a suppliant manner, and implore his mercy and compassion - submitting
to him as having all power, and as being a just and righteous Sovereign.

Would I not believe - I cannot believe that he would enter into my
complaint. He deals with me in a manner so severe; he acts toward me so
much as a sovereign, that I have no reason to suppose that he would not
continue to act toward me in the same way still.

[Job 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 9:17</span></span>

For he breaketh me - He is overwhelming me with a tempest; that is, with
the storms of wrath. He shows me no mercy. The idea seems to be, that
God acted toward him not as a judge determining matters by rule of law,
but as a sovereign - determining them by his own will. If it were a
matter of law; if he could come before him as a judge, and maintain his
cause there; if the case could be fairly adjudicated whether he deserved
the calamities that came upon him, he would be willing to enter into
such a trial. But where the matter was determined solely by will, and
God acted as a sovereign, doing as he pleased, and giving no account of
his matters to anyone, then it would be useless to argue the cause. He
would not know what to expect, or understand the principles on which an
adjudication would be made. It is true that God acts as a sovereign, but
he does not act without reference to law. He dispenses his favors and
his judgments as he pleases, but he violates none of the rules of right.
The error of Job was the common error which people commit, that if God
acts as a sovereign, he must of course act regardless of law, and that
it is vain to plead with him or try to please him. But sovereignty is
not necessarily inconsistent with respect for law; and He who presides
with the most absolute power over the universe, is He who is most
directed by the rule of right. In Him sovereignty and law coincide; and
to come to Him as a sovereign, is to come with the assurance that
supreme rectitude will be done.

And multiplieth my wounds without cause - That is, without sufficient
reason. This is in accordance with the views which Job had repeatedly
expressed. The main ground of his complaint was, that his sufferings
were disproportionate to his faults.

[Job 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 9:18</span></span>

He will not suffer me to take my breath; - see the notes at [Job
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#019).

[Job 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 9:19</span></span>

If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong - There has been a considerable
variety in the interpretation of this passage. The meaning seems to be
this. It refers to a judicial contest, and Job is speaking of the effect
if he and God were to come to a trial, and the cause were to be settled
before judges. He is urging reasons why he would have no hope of success
in such a case. He says, therefore, "If the matter pertained only to
strength, or if it were to be determined by strength, lo, he is more
mighty than I am, and I could have no hope of success in such a
controversy: and if the controversy was one of judgment, that is, of
justice or right, I have no one to manage my cause - no one that could
cope with him in the pleadings - no one who could equal him in setting
forth my arguments, or presenting my side of the case. It would,
therefore, be wholly an unequal contest, where I could have no hope of
success; and I am unwilling to engage in such a controversy or trial
with God. My interest, my duty, and the necessity of the case, require
me to submit the case without argument, and I will not attempt to plead
with my Maker." That there was a lack of right feeling in this, must be
apparent to all.

There was evidently the secret belief that God had dealt with him
severely; that he had gone beyond his deserts in indicting pain on him,
and that he was under a necessity of submitting not so much to justice
and right as to mere power and sovereignty. But who has not had
something of this feeling when deeply afflicted? And yet who, when he
has had it, has not felt that it was far from being what it should be?
Our feeling should be, "we deserve all that we suffer, and more than we
have yet endured. God is a sovereign; but He is right. Though he
afflicts us much, and others little, yet it is not because he is unjust,
but because he sees that there is some good reason why we should suffer.
That reason may be seen yet by us, but if not, we should never doubt
that it exists."

Who shall set me a time to plead? - Noyes renders this, "Who shall
summon me to trial?" Dr. Good, "Who should become a witness for me?" The
sense is, "Who would summon witnesses for me? If it was a mere trial of
strength, God is too mighty for me; if it were a question of justice,
who would compel witnesses to come on my side? Who could make them
willing to appear against God, and to bear testimony for me in a
controversy with the Almighty?"

[Job 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 9:20</span></span>

If I justify myself, mine own mouth shall condemn me - That is,
referring still to the form of a judicial trial, if I should undertake
to manage my own cause, I should lay myself open to condemnation even in
my argument on the subject, and should show that I was far from the
perfection which I had undertaken to maintain. By passionate
expressions; by the language of complaint and murmuring; by a want of
suitable reverence; by showing my ignorance of the principles of the
divine government; by arguments unsound and based on false positions; or
by contradictions and self-refutations, I should show that my position
was untenable, and that God was right in charging me with guilt. In some
or in all of these ways Job felt, probably, that in an argument before
God he would be self-condemned, and that even an attempt to justify
himself, or to prove that he was innocent, would prove that he was
guilty. And is it not always so? Did a man ever yet undertake to repel
the charges of guilt brought against him by his Maker, and to prove that
he was innocent, in which he did not himself show the truth of what he
was denying? Did not his false views of God and of his law; his passion,
complaining, and irreverence; his unwillingness to admit the force of
the palpable considerations urged to prove that he was guilty,
demonstrate that he was at heart a sinner, and that he was insubmissive
and rebellious? The very attempt to enter into such an argument against
God, shows that the heart is not right; and the manner in which such an
argument is commonly conducted demonstrates that he who does it is
sinful.

If I say, I am perfect - Should I attempt to maintain such an argument,
the very attempt would prove that my heart is perverse and evil. It
would do this because God had adjudged the contrary, and because such an
effort would show an insubmissive and a proud heart. This passage shows
that Job did not regard himself as a man absolutely free from sin. He
was indeed said [Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001) to be
"perfect and upright;" but this verse proves that that testimony in
regard to him was not inconsistent with his consciousness of guilt. See
the notes at that verse. And is not the claim to absolute perfection in
this world always a proof that the heart is perverse? Does not the very
setting up of such a claim in fact indicate a pride of heart, a
self-satisfaction, and an ignorance of the true state of the soul, which
is full demonstration that the heart is far from being perfect? God
adjudges man to be exceedingly sinful; and if I do not mistake the
meaning of the Scriptures, this is his testimony of every human heart -
totally until renewed - partially ever onward until death. If this be
the account in the Scriptures, then the claim to absolute perfection is
prima facie, if not full proof, that the heart is in some way perverse.
It has come to a different conclusion from that of God. It sets up an
argument against him - and there can be no more certain proof of a lack
of perfection than such an attempt. There is in this verse an energy in
the original which is very feebly conveyed by our translation. It is the
language of strong and decided indignation at the very idea of asserting
that he was perfect. תם אני tâm 'ănı̂y - "perfect I!" or, "I perfect! The
thought is absurd! It can only prove that I am perverse to attempt to
set up any such claim!" Stuhlman renders this,

"However good I may be, I must condemn myself;

However free from guilt, I must call myself evil:"

And explains it as meaning, "God can through the punishments which he
inflicts constrain me to confess, against the clear consciousness of my
innocence, that I am guilty."

[Job 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 9:21</span></span>

Though I were perfect - The same mode of expression occurs here again.
"I perfect! I would not know it, or recognize it. If this were my view,
and God judged otherwise, I would seem to be ignorant of it. I would not
mention it."

Yet would I not know my soul - Or, "I could not know my soul. If I
should advance such a claim, it must be from my ignorance of myself." Is
not this true of all the claims to perfection which have ever been set
up by man? Do they not demonstrate that he is ignorant of his own nature
and character? So clear does this seem to me, that I have no doubt that
Job expressed more than three thousand years ago what will be found true
to the end of time - that if a man advances the claim to absolute
perfection, it is conclusive proof that he does not know his own heart.
A superficial view of ourselves, mingled with pride and vanity, may lead
us to think that we are wholly free from sin. But who can tell what he
would be if placed in other circumstances? Who knows what latent
depravity would be developed if he were thrown into temptations?

I would despise my life - Dr. Good, I think, has well expressed the
sense of this. According to his interpretation, it means that the claim
of perfection would be in fact disowning all the consciousness which he
had of sinfulness; all the arguments and convictions pressed on him by
his reason and conscience, that he was a guilty man. Schultens, however,
has given an interpretation which slightly differs from this, and one
which Rosenmuller prefers. "Although I should be wholly conscious of
innocence, yet that clear consciousness could not sustain me against the
infinite splendor of the divine glory and majesty; but I should be
compelled to appear ignorant of my own soul, and to reprobate, condemn,
and despise my life passed with integrity and virtue." This
interpretation is in accordance with the connection, and may be
sustained by the Hebrew.

[Job 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 9:22</span></span>

This is one thing, therefore I said it - This may mean, "it is all the
same thing. It makes no difference whether a man be righteous or wicked.
God treats them substantially alike; he has one and the same rule on the
subject. Nothing can be argued certainly about the character of a man
from the divine dealings with him here." This was the point in dispute,
this the position that Job maintained - that God did not deal with
people here in strict accordance with their character, but that the
righteous and the wicked in this world were afflicted alike.

He destroyeth the perfect and the wicked - He makes no distinction among
them. That Job was right in this his main position there can be no
doubt; and the wonder is, that his friends did not all see it. But it
required a long time in the course of events, and much observation and
discussion, before this important point was made clear. With our full
views of the state of retribution in the future world, we can have no
doubt on the subject. Heavy and sudden judgments do not necessarily
prove that they who are cut off are especially guilty, and long
prosperity is no evidence that a man is holy. Calamity, by fire and
flood, on a steamboat, or in the pestilence, does not demonstrate the
unusual and eminent wickedness of those who suffer (compare [Luk
13:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001)), nor should those who escape
from such calamities infer that of necessity they are the objects of the
divine favor.

[Job 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 9:23</span></span>

If the scourge slay suddenly - If calamity comes in a sudden and
unexpected manner. Dr. Good, following Reiske, translates this," if he
suddenly slay the oppressor," understanding the word scourge שׁוט shôṭ
as meaning an oppressor, or one whom God employs as a scourge of
nations. But this is contrary to all the ancient versions. The word שׁוט
shôṭ means properly a whip, a scourge (compare the notes at [Job
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#021)), and then calamity or affliction
sent by God upon men. Such is clearly the case here.

He will laugh at the trial of the innocent - That is, he seems to
disregard or to be pleased with their trials. He does not interpose to
rescue them. He seems to look calmly on, and suffers them to be
overwhelmed with others. This is a poetic expression, and cannot mean
that God derides the trials of the innocent, or mocks their sufferings.
It means that he seems to be inattentive to them; he suffers the
righteous and the wicked to be swept away together as if he were
regardless of character.

[Job 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 9:24</span></span>

The earth is given into the hand of the wicked - This is evidently
designed as an illustration of the sentiment that Job was maintaining -
that there was not a distribution of rewards and punishments in this
life according to character. In illustration of this, he says that the
wicked are raised to places of trust and power. They exercise a wide
dominion over the earth, and the world is under their control. Of the
truth of this there can be no doubt. Rulers have been, in general,
eminent for wickedness, and the affairs of nations have thus far been
almost always under the control of those who are strangers to God. At
the present time there is scarcely a pious man on any throne in the
world, and the rulers of even Christian nations are in general eminent
for anything rather than for personal religion.

He covereth the faces of the judges thereof - There has been
considerable variety in the exposition of this expression. Some suppose
that it refers to the wicked, meaning that they cover the faces of the
judges under them so that they connive at and tolerate crime. Others,
that it means that God blinds the eyes of wicked rulers, so that they
connive at crime, and are partial and unjust in their decisions. Others,
that it means that God covers the faces of the judges of the earth with
shame and confusion, that though he admits them to prosperity and honor
for a time, yet that he overwhelms them at length with calamities and
sorrows. Dr. Good supposes it to mean that the earth is given over into
the hands of injustice, and that this hoodwinks the faces of the judges.
The phrase properly means, to hoodwink, to blind, to conceal the face.
It seems to me that the true sense is not expressed by either of the
views above. The parallelism requires us to understand it as meaning
that while the wicked had dominion over the earth, the righteous were in
obscurity, or were not advanced to honor and power. The word "judges,"
therefore, I think, is to be understood of the righteous judges, of
those who are qualified to administer justice. Their face is covered.
They are kept in concealment. The wicked have the sway, and they are
doomed to shame, obscurity, and dishonor. This interpretation accords
with the tenor of the argument, and may be sustained by the Hebrew,
though I have not found it in any of the commentaries which I have
consulted.

If not, where, and who is he - If this is not a just view, who is God?
What are his dealings? Where is he to be seen, and how is he to be
known? Or, it may mean, "if it is not God who does these strange things,
who is it that does them?" Rosenmuller. But I prefer the former
interpretation. "Tell me who and what God is, if this is not a fair and
just account of him. These things in fact are done, and if the agency of
God is not employed in them, who is God? And where is his agency seen?

[Job 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 9:25</span></span>

Now my days are swifter than a post - Than a courier, runner, or racer,
רוּץ rûts. Vulgate, cursore; Septuagint, δρομέως dromeōs, a racer. The
word is not unfrequently applied to the runners or couriers, that
carried royal commands in ancient times. It is applied to the mounted
couriers of the Persians who carried the royal edicts to the distant
provinces, [Est 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#013), [Est
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015); [Est
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#014), and to the body-guard and royal
messengers of Saul and of David, [Sa1
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#017); [Kg2
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#025). The common rate of traveling in
the East is exceedingly slow. The caravans move little more than two
miles an hour. Couriers are however, employed who go either on
dromedaries, on horses, or on foot, and who travel with great rapidity.
Lady Montague says that "after the defeat; at Peterwaradin, they (the
couriers on dromedaries) far outran the fleetest horses, and brought the
first news of the battle at Belgrade." The messengers in Barbary who
carry despatches, it is said, will run one hundred and fifty miles in
twenty-four hours (Harmer's Observa. ii. 200, ed. 1808), and it has been
said that the messengers among the American savages would run an hundred
and twenty miles in the twenty-four hours. In Egypt, it is a common
thing for an Arab on foot to accompany a rider, and to keep up with the
horse when at full gallop, and to do this for a long time without
apparent fatigue. The meaning of Job here is, that his life was short,
and that his days were passing swiftly away, not like the slow caravan,
but like the most fleet messenger compare the note at [Job
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#006).

They see no good - I am not permitted to enjoy happiness. My life is a
life of misery.

[Job 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 9:26</span></span>

They are passed away as the swift ships - Margin, Ships of desire; or
ships of Ebeh. Hebrew אבה אניה 'onı̂yâh 'êbeh. Vulgate, Naves poma
portantes. Septuagint, "Is there any track left by ships in their
passage?" The Chaldee renders it as the Vulgate, "Ships bearing good
fruit;" that is, as such fruit was perishable, haste was required in
order to reach the place of destination. Our translators were evidently
perplexed by the word אבה 'êbeh, as appears by their placing two
different phrases in the margin. "Ships of desire," denotes the value or
desirableness of such ships; and the phrase, "Ships of Ebeh," denotes
their confession of ignorance as to the meaning of the word. Gesenius
explains the word to mean reed, bulrush, or papyrus - from an Arabic use
of the word, and supposes that the reference is to the light vessels
made of the papyrus, which were used on the Nile; see the note at [Isa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002). Such vessels would be
distinguished for the ease with which they might be rowed, and the
rapidity of their motion. Chardin supposes that the reference is to
vessels that were made to go on the Euphrates or the Tigris, and that
were borne along with the rapid current. The supposition of an allusion
to any boat or vessel under full sail, will be in accordance with the
language here, though the probability is, that the reference is to the
light vessels, made of reeds, that might be propelled with so much
fleetness. Sails were frequently used, also, for such vessels.

As the eagle that hasteth to the prey - A striking emblem of rapidity.
Few things can be more rapid than the motion of the eagle, as he darts
upon his victim.

[Job 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 9:27</span></span>

If I say, I will forget my complaint - If I resolve that I will leave
off complaining, and will be more cheerful, I find it all in vain. My
fears and sorrows return, and all my efforts to be cheerful are
ineffectual

I will leave off my heaviness - The word rendered "my heaviness" here
(פני pânam) denotes literally "my face;" and the reference is to the sad
and sorrowful countenance which he had. "If I should lay that aside, and
endeavor to be cheerful."

And comfort myself - The word rendered comfort here (בלג bâlag) in
Arabic means to be bright, to shine forth; and it would here be better
rendered by "brighten up." We have the same expression still when we say
to one who is sad and melancholy, "brighten up; be cheerful." The
meaning is, that Job endeavored to appear pleasant and cheerful, but it
was in vain. His sorrows pressed heavily on him, and weighed down his
spirits in spite of himself, and made him sad.

[Job 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 9:28</span></span>

I am afraid of all my sorrows - My fears return. I dread the continuance
of my griefs, and cannot close my eye to them.

Thou wilt not hold me innocent - God will not remove my sorrows so as to
furnish the evidence that I am innocent. My sufferings continue, and
with them continue all the evidence on which my friends rely that I am a
guilty man. In such a state of things, how can I be otherwise than sad?
He was held to be guilty; he was suffering in such a way as to afford
them the proof that he was so, and how could he be cheerful?

[Job 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 9:29</span></span>

If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain? - The word "if," here
introduced by our translators, greatly obscures the sense. The meaning
evidently is, "I am held to be guilty, and cannot answer to that charge.
God regards me as such, and if I should attempt to meet him on the
charge, it would be a vain attempt; and I must admit its truth. It would
be labor in vain to deny it against one so mighty as he is." This
interpretation accords with the argument in the whole chapter. Job
maintains that it would be in vain to contend with God, and he gives up
the argument in despair. It is quite evident, however, that he does not
do it so much because he is convinced himself, as because he knows that
God is great, and that it would be useless to contend with him. There is
evidently implied all along the feeling that if he was able to cope with
God in the argument, the result would be different. As it is, he submits
- not because he is convinced, but because he is weak; not because he
sees that God is right, but because he sees that he is powerful. How
much submission of this kind is there in the world - submision, not to
right, but to power; submission to God, not because he is seen to be
wise and good, but because he is seen to be almighty, and it is vain to
attempt to oppose him! It is needless to say that such feelings evince
no true submission.

[Job 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 9:30</span></span>

If I wash myself with snow water - If I should make myself as pure as
possible, and should become, in my view, perfectly holy. Snow water, it
seems, was regarded as especially pure. The whiteness of snow itself
perhaps suggested the idea that the water of melted snow was better than
other for purification. Washing the hands formerly was an emblem of
cleansing from guilt. Hence Pilate, when he gave up the Savior to death,
took water and washed his hands before the multitude, and said that he
was innocent of his blood; [Mat 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024).
The expression used here by Job, also is imitated by the Psalmist, to
denote his innocence:

I will wash mine hands in innocency:

So will I compass thine altar, O Lord. [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006).

Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain,

And washed my hands in innocency.

[Psa 73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013).

So in Shakespeare, Richard III:

How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands

Of this most grievous, guilty murder done!

And make my hands never so clean - Or, rather, should I cleanse my hands
with lye, or alkali. The word בור bôr, means properly purity,
cleanliness, pureness; and then it is used to denote that which
cleanses, alkali, lye, or vegetable salt. The ancients made use of this,
mingled with oil, instead of soap, for the purpose of washing, and also
in smelting metals, to make them melt more readily; see the note at [Isa
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025). The Chaldee renders it
accurately, באהלא - in soap. I have no doubt that this is the sense, and
that Job means to say, if he should make use of the purest water and of
soap to cleanse himself, still he would be regarded as impure. God would
throw him at once into the ditch, and he would be covered with moral
filth and defilement again in his sight.

[Job 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 9:31</span></span>

Yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch - God would treat me as if he
should throw me into the gutter, and as if I were wholly defiled and
polluted. The meaning is, God would not admit the proofs which I should
adduce of my innocence, but would overwhelm me with the demonstrations
of my guilt. I doubt not that Job urged this with some degree of
impatience, and with some improper feelings. He felt, evidently, that
God was so great and powerful, that it was vain to contend with him. But
it is true in a higher and more important sense than he seems to have
understood it. After all the efforts which we can make to justify,
vindicate, or purify ourselves, it is in the power of God to overwhelm
us with the consciousness of guilt. He has access to the heart. He can
show us our past sins. He can recall what we have forgotten, and
overwhelm us with the remembrance of our deep depravity. It is in vain,
therefore, for any man to attempt to justify himself before God. After
the most labored argument to prove his own innocence, after all the
confidence which he can repose in his own morality and his own
righteousness, still God can with infinite ease overwhelm him with the
consciousness of guilt. How many people that were once relying on their
own morality for their salvation, have been bowed down with a
consciousness of guilt in a revival of religion! How many who halve been
trusting to their own righteousness have been overwhelmed with deep and
awful conviction, when they have been brought to lie on a bed of death!
Let no man, therefore, rely on his own righteousness, when God accuses
him with being a sinner. Let no one trust to his own morality for
salvation - for soon it will all be seen to be insufficient, and the
soul must appear covered over with the consciousness of guilt at the
awful bar of God.

And mine own clothes shall abhor me - Margin, Make me to be abhorred.
That is, they shall be filthy and offensive - like one who has been
rolled in the mire. God has power to make me seem defiled and loathsome,
notwithstanding all my efforts to cleanse myself.

[Job 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 9:32</span></span>

For he is not a man as I am - He is infinitely superior to me in majesty
and power. The idea is, that the contest would be unequal, and that he
might as well surrender without bringing the matter to an issue. It is
evident that the disposition of Job to yield, was rather because he saw
that God was superior in power than because he saw that he was right,
and that he felt that if he had ability to manage the cause as well as
God could, the matter would not be so much against him as it was then.
That there was no little impropriety of feeling in this, no one can
doubt; but have we never had feelings like this when we have been
afflicted? Have we never submitted to God because we felt that he was
Almighty, and that it was vain to contend with him, rather than because
he was seen to be right? True submission is always accompanied with the
belief that God is RIGHT - whether we can see him to be right or not.

And we should come together in judgment - For trial, to have the case
adjudicated. That is, that we should meet face to face, and have the
cause tried before a superior judge. Noyes.

[Job 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 9:33</span></span>

Neither is there any daysman - Margin, One that should argue, or,
umpire. The word daysman in English means " "an umpire or arbiter, a
mediator." Webster. Why such a man is called a daysman I do not know.
The Hebrew word rendered "daysman" מוכיח môkı̂yach is from יכח yâkach,
not used in the Qal, to be before, in front of; and then to appear, to
be clear, or manifest; and in the Hiphil, to cause to be manifest, to
argue, prove, convince; and then to argue down, to confute, reprove; see
the word used in [Job 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025) : "What
doth your arguing reprove?" It then means to make a cause clear, to
judge, determine, decide, as an arbiter, umpire, judge, [Isa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003); [Gen
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#037). Jerome renders it, "Non est qui
utrumque valeat arguere." The Septuagint, "if there were, or, O that
there were a mediator ὁ μεσίτης ho mesitēs, and a reprover (καί ἐλέγχων
kai elengchōn), and one to hear us both" (καί διακούων ἀναμέτον
ἀυφοτέρων kai diakouōn anameton amphoterōn).

The word as used by Job does not mean mediator, but arbiter, umpire, or
judge; one before whom the cause might be tried, who could lay the hand
of restraint on either party. who could confine the pleadings within
proper bounds, who could preserve the parties within the limits of order
and propriety, and who had power to determine the question at issue. Job
complains that there could be no such tribunal. He feels that God was so
great that the cause could be referred to no other, and that he had no
prospect of success in the unequal contest. It does not appear,
therefore, that he desired a mediator, in the sense in which we
understand that word - one who shall come between us and God, and manage
our cause before him, and be our advocate at his bar. He rather says
that there was no one above God, or no umpire uninterested in the
controversy, before whom the cause could be argued, and who would be
competent to decide the matter in issue between him and his Maker. He
had no hope, therefore, in a cause where one of the parties was to be
the judge, and where that party was omnipotent; and he must give up the
cause in despair.

It is not with strict propriety that this language is ever applied to
the Lord Jesus, the great Mediator between God and man. He is not an
umpire to settle a dispute, in the sense in which Job understood it; he
is not an arbiter, to whom the cause in dispute between man and his
Maker is to be referred; he is not a judge to listen to the arguments of
the respective parties, and to decide the controversy. He is a mediator
between us and God, to make it proper or possible that God should be
reconciled to the guilty, and to propose to man the terms of
reconciliation; to plead our cause before God, and to communicate to us
the favors which he proposes to bestow on man.

That might lay his hand upon us both - It is not improbable that this
may refer to some ancient ceremony in courts where, for some cause, the
umpire or arbiter laid his hand on both the parties. Or, it may mean
merely that the umpire had the power of control over both the parties;
that it was his office to restrain them within proper limits, to check
any improper expressions, and to see that the argument was fairly
conducted on both sides. The meaning of the whole here is, that if there
were such an umpire, Job would be willing to argue the cause. As it was,
it was a hopeless thing, and he could do nothing more than to be silent.
That there was irreverence in this language must be admitted; but it is
language taken from courts of law, and the substance of it is, that Job
could not hope to maintain his cause before one so great and powerful as
God.

[Job 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 9:34</span></span>

Let him take his rod away from me - Let him suspend my sufferings, and
let us come together on equal terms. His terror now is upon me, and I
can do nothing. I am oppressed, and broken down, and crushed under his
hand, and I could not hope to maintain my cause with any degree of
success. If my sufferings were lightened, and I could approach the
question with the rigor of health and the power of reasoning unweakened
by calamity, I could then do justice to the views which I entertain. Now
there would be obvious disparity, while one of the parties has crushed
and enervated the other by the mere exercise of power.

[Job 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">job 9:35</span></span>

Then would I speak, and not fear him - I should then be able to maintain
my cause on equal terms, and with equal advantages.

But it is not so with me - Margin, I am not so with myself. Noyes, "I am
not so at heart." Good, "but not thus could I in my present state."
Literally, "for not thus I with myself." The Syriac renders it, "for
neither am I his adversary." Very various interpretations have been
given of this phrase. The Jews, with Aben Ezra, suppose it means, "for I
am not such as you suppose me to be. You take me to be a guilty man; but
I am innocent, and if I had a fair opportunity for trial, I could show
that I am." Others suppose it to mean, "I am held to be guilty by the
Most High, and am treated accordingly. But I am not so. I am conscious
to myself that I am innocent." It seems to me that Dr. Good has come
nearer the true sense than any other interpreter, and certainly his
exposition accords with the connection. According to this the meaning
is, "I am not able thus to vindicate myself in my present circumstances.
I am oppressed and crushed beneath a lead of calamities. But if these
were removed, and if I had a fair opportunity of trial, then I could so
state my cause as to make it appear to be just."

In this whole chapter, there is evidently much insubmission and improper
feeling. Job submits to power, not to truth and right. He sees and
admits that God is able to overwhelm him, but he does not seem disposed
to admit that he is right in doing it. He supposes that if he had a fair
and full opportunity of trial, he could make his cause good, and that it
would be seen that he did not deserve his heavy calamities. There is
much of this kind of submission to God even among good people. It is
submission because they cannot help it, not because they see the divine
dealings to be right. There is nothing cheerful or confiding about it.
There is often a secret feeling in the heart that the sufferings are
beyond the deserts, and that if the case could be fairly tried, the
dealings of God would be found to be harsh and severe. Let us not blame
Job for his impatience and irreverent language, until we have carefully
examined our own hearts in the times of trial like those which he
endured. Let us not infer that he was worse than other men, until we are
placed in similar circumstances, and are able to manifest better
feelings than he did.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 10](job010)

</div>
