<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job009)  [Next](job011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)

[Job 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 10:1</span></span>

My soul is weary of my life - compare the note at [Job
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#016). The margin here is, Or," cut off
while I live." The meaning in the margin is in accordance with the
interpretation of Schultens. The Chaldee also renders it in a similar
way: אתגזרת נפשי - my soul is cut off. But the more correct
interpretation is that in our common version; and the sense is, that his
soul, that is, that he himself was disgusted with life. It was a weary
burden, and he wished to die.

I will leave my complaint upon myself - Noyes, "I will give myself up to
complaint." Dr. Good, "I will let loose from myself my dark thoughts."
The literal sense is, "I will leave complaint upon myself;" that is, I
will give way to it; I will not restrain it; compare [Job
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#011).

I will speak in the bitterness of my soul - See the notes, [Job
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#011).

[Job 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 10:2</span></span>

I will say unto God, Do not condemn me - Do not hold me to be wicked -
תרשׁיעני אל 'al tarshı̂y‛ēnı̂y. The sense is, "Do not simply hold me to be
wicked, and treat me as such, without showing me the reasons why I am so
regarded." This was the ground of Job's complaint, that God by mere
sovereignty and power held him to be a wicked man, and that he did not
see the reasons why he was so considered and treated. He now desired to
know in what he had offended, and to be made acquainted with the cause
of his sufferings. The idea is, that it was unjust to treat one as
guilty who had no opportunity of knowing the nature of the offence with
which he was charged, or the reason why he was condemned.

[Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 10:3</span></span>

Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress - The sense of this is,
that it could not be with God a matter of personal gratification to
inflict pain wantonly. There must be a reason why he did it. This was
clear to Job, and he was anxious, therefore, to know the reason why he
was treated in this manner. Yet there is evidently here not a little of
the spirit of complaining. There is an insinuation that God was
afflicting him beyond what he deserved; see [Job
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007). The state of his mind appears to
have been this: he is conscious to himself that he is a sincere friend
of God, and he is unwilling to believe that God can wantonly inflict
pain - and yet he has no other way of accounting for it. He is in a sort
driven to this painful conclusion - and he asks with deep feeling,
whether it can be so? Is there no other solution than this? Is there no
way of explaining the fact that he suffers so much, than either the
supposition that he is a hypocrite - which he feels assured he is not;
or that God took a wanton pleasure in inflicting pain - which he was as
little disposed to believe, if he could avoid it? Yet his mind rather
verges to this latter belief, for he seems more disposed to believe that
God was severe than that he himself was a hypocrite and a wicked man.
Neither of these conclusions was necessary. If he had taken a middle
ground, and had adverted to the fact that God might afflict his own
children for their good, the mystery would have been solved. He could
have retained the consciousness of his integrity, and at the same time
his confidence in God.

That thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands - Margin, labor.
That is, despise man, or treat him as if he were of no value. The idea
is, that it would be natural for God to love his own work, and that his
treatment of Job seemed as if he regarded his own workmanship - man - as
of no value.

And shine upon the counsel of the wicked - By giving them health and
prosperity.

[Job 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 10:4</span></span>

Hast thou eyes of flesh? - Eyes like man. Dost thou look upon man with
the same disposition to discern faults; the same uncharitableness and
inclination to construe everything in the severest manner possible,
which characterizes man? Possibly Job may have reference here to the
harsh judgment of his friends, and means to ask whether it could be
possible for God to evince the same feelings in judging of him which
they had done.

[Job 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 10:5</span></span>

Are thy days as the days of man - Does thy life pass on like that of
man? Dost thou expect soon to die, that thou dost pursue me in this
manner, searching out my sins, and afflicting me as if there were no
time to lose? The idea is, that God seemed to press this matter as if he
were soon to cease to exist, and as if there were no time to spare in
accomplishing it. His strokes were unintermitted, as if it were
necessary that the work should be done soon, and as if no respite could
be given for a full and fair development of the real character of the
sufferer. The whole passage [Job
10:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004) expresses the settled
conviction of Job that God could not resemble man; Man was short lived,
fickle, blind; he was incapable, from the brevity of his existence, and
from his imperfections, of judging correctly of the character of others.
But it could not be so with God. He was eternal. He knew the heart. He
saw everything as it was. Why, then, Job asks with deep feeling, did he
deal with him as if he were influenced by the methods of judgment which
were inseparable from the condition of imperfect and dying man?

[Job 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 10:6</span></span>

That thou inquirest after mine iniquity - Art thou governed by hu man
passions and prejudices, that thou dost thus seem to search out every
little obliquity and error? Job here evidently refers to the conduct of
man in strictly marking faults, and in being unwilling to forgive; and
he asks whether it is possible that God could be governed by such
feelings as these.

[Job 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 10:7</span></span>

Thou knowest that I am not wicked - That is, that I am not a hypocrite,
or an impenitent sinner. Job did not claim perfection (see the note at
[Job 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#020)), but he maintained through
all this argument that he was not a wicked man, in the sense in which
his friends regarded him as such, and for the truth of this he could
boldly appeal to God. The margin is, "It is upon thy knowledge." This is
a literal translation of the Hebrew, but the sense is well expressed in
the text. The meaning of the verse is, "Why dost thou thus afflict me,
when thou knowest that I am not wicked? Why am I treated as if I were
the worst of men? Why is occasion thus furnished for my friends to
construct an argument as if I were a man of singular depravity?"

There is none that can deliver out of thine hand - I have no power to
release myself. Job felt hat God had almighty power; and he seems to
have felt that his sufferings were rather the simple exertion of power,
than the exercise of justice. It was this that laid the foundation for
his complaint.

[Job 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 10:8</span></span>

Thine hands have made me - Job proceeds now to state that he had been
made by God, and that he had shown great skill and pains in his
formation. He argues that it would seem like caprice to take such pains,
and to exercise such amazing wisdom and care in forming him, and then,
on a sudden, and without cause, dash his own work to pieces. Who makes a
beautiful vase only to be destroyed? Who moulds a statue from marble
only to break it to pieces? Who builds a splendid edifice only to pull
it down? Who plants a rare and precious flower only to have the pleasure
of plucking it up? The statement in [Job
10:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008), is not only beautiful and
forcible as an argument, but is especially interesting and valuable, as
it may be presumed to embody the views in the patriarchal age about the
formation and the laws of the human frame. No inconsiderable part of the
value of the book of Job, as was remarked in the Introduction, arises
from the incidental notices of the sciences as they prevailed at the
time when it was composed.

If it is the oldest book in the world, it is an invaluable record on
these points. The expression, "thine hands have made me," is in the
margin, "took pains about me." Dr. Good renders it, "have wrought me;"
Noyes, "completely fashioned me;" Rosenmuller explains it to mean, "have
formed me with the highest diligence and care." Schultens renders it,
Manus tuae nervis colligarunt - "thy hands have bound me with nerves or
sinews;" and appeals to the use of the Arabic as authority for this
interpretation. He maintains (De Defectibus hodiernis Ling. Hebr. pp.
142, 144, 151), that the Arabic word atzaba denotes "the body united and
bound in a beautiful form by nerves and tendons;" and that the idea here
is, that God had so constructed the human frame. The Hebrew word used
here (עצב ‛âtsab) means properly to work, form, fashion. The primary
idea, according to Gesenius, is, that of cutting, both wood and stone,
and hence, to cut or carve with a view to the forming of an image. The
verb also has the idea of labor, pain, travail, grief; perhaps from the
labor of cutting or carving a stone or a block of wood. Hence it means,
in the Piel, to form or fashion, with the idea of labor or toil; and the
sense here is undoubtedly, that God had elaborated the bodies of men
with care and skill, like that bestowed on a carved image or statue. The
margin expresses the idea not badly - took pains about me.

And fashioned me - Made me. The Hebrew here means simply to make.

Together round about - סביב יחד yachad sâbı̂yb. Vulgate, totum in
circuitu. Septuagint simply, "made me." Dr. Good, "moulded me compact on
all sides." The word יחד yachad rendered "together," has the notion of
oneness, or union. It may refer to the oneness of the man - the making
of one from the apparently discordant materials, and the compact form in
which the body, though composed of bones, and sinews, and blood-vessels,
is constructed. A similar idea is expressed by Lucretius, as quoted by
Schultens. Lib. iii. 358:

\- Qui coetu, conjugioque

Corporis atque anirnae consistimus uniter apti.

Yet thou dost destroy me - Notwithstanding I am thus made, yet thou art
taking down my frame, as if it were of no consequence, and formed with
no care.

[Job 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 10:9</span></span>

Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay - There is
evident allusion here to the creation of man, and to the fact that he
was moulded from the dust of the earth - a fact which would be preserved
by tradition; see [Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007). The fact
that God had moulded the human form as the potter moulds the clay, is
one that is often referred to in the Scriptures; compare [Rom
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020). The object of Job in this is,
probably, to recall the fact that God, out of clay, had formed the noble
structure, man, and to ask whether it was his intention to reduce that
structure again to its former worthless condition - to destroy its
beauty, and to efface the remembrance of his workmanship? Was it
becoming God thus to blot out every memorial of his own power and skill
in moulding the human frame?

[Job 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 10:10</span></span>

Hast thou not poured me out as milk? - The whole image in this verse and
the following, is designed to fur nish an illustration of the origin and
growth of the human frame. The Note of Dr. Good may be transcribed, as
furnishing an illustration of what may have possibly been the meaning of
Job. "The whole of the simile is highly correct and beautiful, and has
not been neglected by the best poets of Greece and Rome. From the
well-tempered or mingled milk of the chyle, every individual atom of
every individual organ in the human frame, the most compact and
consolidated, as well as the soft and pliable, is perpetually supplied
and renewed, through the medium of a system of lacteals or milk-vessels,
as they are usually called in anatomy, from the nature of this common
chyle or milk which they circulate. Into the delicate stomach of the
infant it is introduced in the form of milk; but even in the adult it
must be reduced to some such form, whatever be the substance he feed
upon, by the conjoint action of the stomach and other chylifactive
organs, before it can become the basis of animal nutriment.

It then circulates through the system, and either continues fluid as
milk in its simple state, or is rendered solid as milk is in its caseous
or cheese-state, according to the nature of the organ which it supplies
with its vital current." True as this is, however, as a matter of
physiology, now well understood, a doubt may arise whether Job was
acquainted with the method thus described, in which man is sustained.
The idea of Job is, that God was the author of the human frame, and that
that frame was so formed as to evince his wonderful and incomprehensible
wisdom. A consultation of the works on physiology, which explain the
facts about the formation and the growth of the human body, will show
that there are few things which more strikingly evince the wisdom of God
than the formation of the human frame, alike at its origin, and in every
stage of its development. It is a subject, however, which cannot, with
propriety, be pursued in a work of this kind.

[Job 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 10:11</span></span>

Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh - This refers, undoubtedly, to
the formation of man in his foetal existence, and is designed to denote
that the whole organization of the human frame was to be traced to God.
Grotius remarks that this is the order in which the infant is formed -
that the skin appears first, then the flesh, then the harder parts of
the frame. On this subject, the reader may consult Dunglison's
Physiology, vol. ii. p. 340ff.

And hast fenced me - Margin, Hedged. Literally, Hast covered me. The
sense is plain. God had formed him as he was, and to him he owed his
life, and all that he had. Job asks with the deepest interest whether
God would take down a frame formed in this manner, and reduce it again
to dust? Would it not be more for his honor to preserve it still - at
least to the common limit of human life?

[Job 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 10:12</span></span>

Thy visitation hath preserved my spirit - Thy constant care; thy
watchful providence; thy superintendence. The word rendered visitation
(פקדה peqûddâh) means properly the mustering of an army, the care that
is manifested in looking after those who are enlisted; and then denotes
care, vigilance, providence, custody, watch. The idea is, that God had
watched over him and preserved him, and that to his constant vigilance
he owed the preservation of his life.

[Job 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 10:13</span></span>

And these things hast thou hid in thine heart - This may either refer to
the arrangements by which God had made him, or to the calamities which
he had brought upon him. Most expositors suppose that the latter is
intended. Such is the opinion of Rosenmuller, Good, Noyes, and Scott.
According to this the idea is, that God had purposed in his heart to
bring these calamities upon him. They were a part of his counsel and
design. To hide in the heart, or to lay up in the heart, is a phrase
expressive of a secret purpose. I see no reason to confine it, however,
to the calamities which Job had experienced. It may refer to all the
plans and doings of the Most High, to which Job had just referred. All
his acts in the creation and preservation of man, were a part of his
secret counsel, He had formed the plan in his heart, and was now
executing it in the various dispensations of his providence.

I know that this is with thee - That all this is a part of thy purpose.
It has its origin in thee, and is according to thy counsel. This is the
language of piety, recognizing the great truth that all things are in
accordance with the purposes of God, or that his plans embrace all
events - a doctrine which Job most assuredly held.

[Job 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 10:14</span></span>

If I sin - The object of this verse and the following is, evidently, to
say that he was wholly perplexed. He did not know how to act. He could
not understand the reason of the divine dealings, and he was wholly
unable to explain them, and hence, he did not know how to act in a
proper manner. It is expressive of a state of mind where the individual
wishes to think and feel right, but where he finds so much to perplex
him, that he does not know what to do. Job was sure that his friends
were not right in the position which they maintained - that he was a
sinner of enormous character, and that his sufferings were proof of
this, and yet he did not know how to answer their arguments. He desired
to have confidence in God, and yet he knew not how to reconcile his
dealings with his sense of right. He felt that he was a friend of God,
and he did not know why he should visit one who had this consciousness
in this distressing and painful manner. His mind was perplexed,
vacillating, embarrassed, and he did not know what to do or say. The
truth in this whole argument was, that he was more often right than his
friends, but that he, in common with them, had embraced some principles
which he was compelled to admit to be true, or which he could not
demonstrate to be false, which gave them greatly the advantage in the
argument, and which they pressed upon him now with overwhelming force.

Then thou markest me - Dost carefully observe every fault. Why he did
this, Job could not see. The same difficulty he expressed in [Job
7:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#017); see the notes at that place.

And wilt not acquit me - Wilt not pardon me. Job did not understand why
God would not do this. It was exceedingly perplexing to him that God
held him to be guilty, and would not pardon him if he had sinned. The
same perplexity he expressed in [Job
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021); see the note at that verse.

[Job 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 10:15</span></span>

If I be wicked, woe unto me - The meaning of this in this connection is,
"I am full of perplexity and sorrow. Whether I am wicked or righteous, I
find no comfort. Whatever is my character, my efforts to be happy are
unavailing, and my mind is full of anguish. Woe follows if I have been
guilty of sin; and if I am not a sinful man, I am equally incapable of
enjoyment. In every way I am doomed to wretchedness." And if I be
righteous, yet will I not lift up my head. That is, with confidence and
cheerfulness. The meaning is, that though he was conscious that he was
not a hypocrite, yet he did not know what to do. God treated him as if
he were wicked, and his friends regarded him as such, and he was
overwhelmed with the perplexities of his situation. He could not lift up
his head with confidence, though he was certain that he was not a sinner
in the sense in which they charged him with being such; and yet since he
was treated by God in a manner so similar to the mode in which the
wicked are treated, he felt ashamed and confounded. Who has not felt the
same thing? Who has not experienced a sense of shame and mortification
at being sick, - a proof of guilt, and an expression of the hatred of
God against sin? Who has not felt humbled that he must die, as the most
vile of the race must die, and that his body must become the "prey of
corruption" and "the banquet of worms," as a demonstration of guilt?
Such humiliation Job experienced. He was treated as if he were the
vilest of sinners. He endured from God sufferings such as they endure.
He was so regarded by his friends. He felt humbled and mortified that he
was brought into this situation, and was ashamed that he could not meet
the arguments of his friends.

I am full of confusion - Shame, ignominy, distress, and perplexity. On
every side there was embarrassment, and he knew not what to do. His
friends regarded him as vile, and he could not but admit that he was so
treated by God.

Therefore see thou mine affliction - The word rendered here "see" (ראה
râ'âh) in the imperative, Rosenmuller, Gesenius, and others suppose
should be regarded as in the infinitive absolute, the finite verb being
understood; "seeing I see my affliction," that is, I certainly see it.
So the Chaldee and the Syriac render it, and this agrees better with the
connection of the passage. "I see the depth of my affliction. I cannot
hide it from myself. I see, and must admit, that God treats me as if I
were a sinner, and I am greatly perplexed and embarrassed by that fact.
My mind is in confusion, and I know not what to say."

[Job 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 10:16</span></span>

For it increaseth - Our translators understand this as meaning that the
calamities of Job, so far from becoming less, were constantly
increasing, and thus augmenting his perplexity and embarrassment. But a
somewhat different explanation is given to it by many interpreters. The
word rendered "increaseth" (גאה gâ'âh) means properly, to lift up, to
lift up oneself, to rise; and Gesenius supposes that it refers here to
"the head," and that the meaning is, "if it lift up itself (sc. my
head), thou huntest me as a lion." It cannot be denied that the notion
of pride, elation, haughtiness, is usually connected with the use of the
word, but it is not necessary here to depart from the common
interpretation, meaning that the increase of his affliction greatly
augmented his perplexity. Jerome, however, readers it, "and on account
of pride, thou dost seize me as a lioness." The idea is, "my affliction,
as it were, exalts itself, or, becomes more and more prominent." This is
a better interpretation than to refer it to the raising up of his head.

Thou huntest me as a fierce lion - On the meaning of the word here
rendered "fierce lion" שׁחל shachal, see the notes at [Job
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#010). The sense here is, that God
hunted or followed him as a fierce lion pursued his prey.

And again thou showest thyself marvelous - Or rather, "thou turnest, and
art wonderful toward me." The meaning is, that he did not at once spring
upon his prey and then leave it, but he came back as if it had not been
put to death when first seized, as if a lion should come back and
torture his victim again. The meaning of the phrase "shewest thyself
marvelous" is, that the dealings of God toward him were wonderful. They
were wholly incomprehensible. He had no means of finding out the reasons
of his doings. On the word used here, compare the notes at [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006).

[Job 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 10:17</span></span>

Thou renewest thy witnesses against me - Margin, "that is, plagues." The
Hebrew is, "thy witnesses" - עדיך ‛ēdeykā. So the Vulgate. The
Septuagint is, "renewing against me my examination," τὴν ἐξέτασίν μου
tēn ecetasin mou. Rabbi Levi supposes that the plague of the leprosy is
intended. But the true meaning seems to be, that God sent upon him
calamities which were regarded by his friends as "proofs" or "witnesses"
that he was wicked, the public and solemn attestation of God, as they
supposed, to the truth that he was eminently a bad man. New proofs of
this kind were constantly occurring in his augmenting and protracted
sorrows, and he could not answer the arguments which were brought from
them by his friends.

Changes and war are against me - Or rather, are "with me," עמי ‛ı̂my.
There were with him such reverses of condition as laid the foundation
for the argument which they had urged with so much pertinacity and force
that he was punished by God. The word rendered "changes" (חליפה
chălı̂yphâh) means properly "changes," or exchanges, and is applied to
garments, [Kg2 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#005), [Kg2
5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#022). It may be used also of
soldiers keeping watch until they are relieved by a succeeding guard;
see the note at [Job 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014). Here it is
not improbably employed in the sense of a succession of attacks made on
him. One succeeds another, as if platoon after platoon, to use the
modern terms, or phalanx after phalanx, should come up against him. As
soon as one had discharged its arrows, another succeeded in its place;
or as soon as one became ex hausted, it was followed by a fresh recruit.
All this Job could not endure. The succession wearied him, and he could
not bear it. Dr. Good supposes that the word refers to the skirmishes by
which a battle is usually introduced, in which two armies attempt to
gall each other before they are engaged. But the true idea, as it seems
to me, is, that afflictions succeeded each other as soldiers on a watch,
or in a battle, relieve each other. When one set is exhausted on duty,
it is succeeded by another. Or, when in battle one company has
discharged its weapons, or is exhausted, it is succeeded by those who
are brought fresh into the field. The word rendered "war" (צבא tsâbâ')
properly means an army or a host; see the note at [Job
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001). Here it means that a whole host
had rushed upon him. Not only had he been galled by the succession, the
relief-guard of calamities, the attacks which had followed each other
from an advanced guard, or from scouts sent out to skirmish, but the
whole army was upon him. A whole host of calamities came rushing upon
him alone, and he could not endure them.

[Job 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 10:18</span></span>

Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth - See the notes at [Job
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#011).

[Job 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 10:19</span></span>

I should have been carried from the womb to the grave - See the notes at
[Job 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#016).

[Job 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 10:20</span></span>

Are not my days few? - My life is short, and hastens to a close. Let not
then my afflictions be continued to the last moment of life, but let
thine hand be removed, that I may enjoy some rest before I go hence, to
return no more. This is an address to God, and the meaning is, that as
life was necessarily so short, he asked to be permitted to enjoy some
comfort before he should go to the land of darkness and of death;
compare the note at [Job 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021). A
somewhat similar expression occurs in [Psa
39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013) :

O spare me, that I may recover strength,

Before I go hence, and be no more.

[Job 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 10:21</span></span>

Before I go - from where "I shall not return." To the grave, to the land
of shades, to

"That undiscovered country, from whose bourne

No traveler returns."

To the land of darkness - This passage is important as furnishing an
illustration of what was early understood about the regions of the dead.
The essential idea here is that it was a land of darkness, of total and
absolute night. This idea Job presents in a great variety of forms and
phrases. He amplifies it, and uses apparently all the epithets which he
can command to represent the utter and entire darkness of the place. The
place referred to is not the grave, but the region beyond, the abode of
departed spirits, the Hades of the ancients; and the idea here is, that
it is a place where not a clear ray of light ever shines. That this was
a common opinion of the ancients in regard to the world of departed
spirits, is well known. Virgil thus speaks of those gloomy regions:

Oii, quibusimperium est animarum, umbraeque silentes,

Et Chaos, et Phlegethon, loca nocte tacentia late,

Sit mihi fas audita loqui; slt numine vestro

Pandere res alta terra et caligine mersas.

Ibant obscuri sola sub nocte per umbram,

Perque domos Ditis vacuas, et inania regna:

Quale per incertam lunam sub luce maligna

Est iter in silvis: ubi coelum condidit umbra

Jupiter, et rebus nox abstulit atra colorem

Aeneid vi. 259ff

A similar view of Hades was held by the Greeks. Thus, Theognis, 1007:

Ὠς μάκαρ εὐδυίμων τε και ὄλβιος, ὅστις ἄπειρος

Ἄθλων, εἰς ἥ δου δῶμα μέλαν κατέβη.

Hōs makar eudaimōn te kai olbios, hostis apeiros

Athlōn eis h' dou dōma melan katebē.

There is nowhere to be found, however, a description which for intensity
and emphasis of expression surpasses this of Job.

Shadow of death - See this phrase explained in the note at [Job
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005).

[Job 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 10:22</span></span>

A land of darkness - The word used here (עיפה ‛êyphâh) is different from
that rendered "darkness" השׁך chôshek in the previous verse. That is the
common word to denote darkness; this seldom occurs. It is derived from
עוּף ‛ûph, to fly; and then to cover as with wings; and hence, the noun
means that which is shaded or dark; [Amo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013); compare [Job
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013); [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022); [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001).

As darkness itself - This is still another word אפל 'ôphel though in our
common version but one term is used. We have not the means in our
language of marking different degrees of obscurity with the accuracy
with which the Hebrews did it. The word used here אפל 'ôphel denotes a
THICK darkness - such as exists when the sun is set - from אפל 'aphêl,
to go down, to set. It is poetic, and is used to denote intense and deep
darkness; see [Job 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#006).

And of the shadow of death - I would prefer reading this as connected
with the previous word - "the deep darkness of the shadow of death." The
Hebrew will bear this, and indeed it is the obvious construction.

Without any order - The word rendered order (סדרים sedārı̂ym) is in the
plural. It is from סדר, obsolete, to place in a row or order, to
arrange. The meaning is, that everything was mingled together as in
chaos, and all was confusion. Milton has used similar language:

\- "A vast immeasurable abyss."

\- "dark, wasteful, wild."

Ovid uses similar language in speaking of chaos: "Unus chaos, rudis
indigestaque moles."

And where the light is as darkness - This is a very striking and graphic
expression. It means that there is no pure and clear light. Even all the
light that shines there is dark, sombre, gloomy - like the little light
of a total eclipse, which seems to be darkness itself, and which only
serves to render the darkness more distressing. Compare Milton:

"A dungeon horrible on all sides round,

As one great furnace flamed, yet from those flames

No light; but rather darkness visible

Served only to discover sights of woe."

Par. Lost, 1.

The Hebrew here literally is, "And it shines forth (יתפע yatopha‛) as
darkness:" that is, the very shining of the light there, if there is
any, is like darkness! Such was the view of Job of the abodes of the
dead - even of the pious dead. No wonder he shrank back from it, and
wished to live. Such is the prospect of the grave to man, until
Christianity comes and reveals a brighter world beyond the grave - a
world that is all light. That darkness is now scattered. A clear light
shines even around the grave, and beyond there is a world where all is
light, and where "there is no night," and where all is one bright
eternal day; [Rev 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023); [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005). O had Job been favored with
these views of heaven, he would not have thus feared to die!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 11](job011)

</div>
