<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job029)  [Next](job031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)

[Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 30:1</span></span>

But now they that are younger than I - Margin, "of fewer days." It is
not probable that Job here refers to his three friends. It is not
possible to determine their age with accuracy, but in [Job
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010), they claim that there were with
them old and very aged men, much older than the father of Job. Though
that place may possibly refer not to themselves but to those who held
the same opinions with them, yet none of those who engaged in the
discussion, except Ehhu [Job 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#006), are
represented as young men. They were the contemporaries of Job; men who
are ranked as his friends; and men who showed that they had had
oppoptunities for long and careful observation. The reference here,
therefore, is to the fact that while, in the days of his prosperity,
even the aged and the honorable rose up to do him reverence, now he was
the object of contempt even by the young and the worthless. The
Orientals would feel this much. It was among the chief virtues with them
to show respect to the aged, and their sensibilites were especially keen
in regard to any indignity shown to them by the young.

Whose fathers I would have disdained - Who are the children of the
lowest and most degraded of the community. How deep the calamity to be
so fallen as to be the subject of derision by such men!

To have set with the dogs of my flock - To have associated with my dogs
in guarding my flock. That is, they were held in less esteem than his
dogs. This was the lowest conceivable point of debasement. The Orientals
had no language that would express greater contempt of anyone than to
call him a dog; compare [Deu 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018);
[Sa1 17:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#043); [Sa1
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014); [Sa2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#008); [Sa2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#008); [Sa2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009); [Kg2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#013); Note [Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003).

[Job 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 30:2</span></span>

Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me - There has
been much difference of opinion respecting the meaning of this passage.
The general sense is clear. Job means to describe those who were reduced
by poverty and want, and who were without respectability or home, and
who had no power in any way to affect him. He states that they were so
abject and worthless as not to be worth his attention; but even this
fact is intended to show how low he was himself reduced, since even the
most degraded ranks in life did not show any respect to one who had been
honored by princes. The Vulgate renders this, "The strength - virtus -
of whose hands is to me as nothing, and they are regarded as unworthy of
life." The Septuagint, "And the strength of their hands what is it to
me? Upon whom perfection - συντέλεια sunteleia - has perished."
Coverdale, "The power and strength of their hands might do me no good,
and as for their age, it is spent and passed away without any profit."
The literal translation is, "Even the strength of their hands, what is
it to me?" The meaning is, that their power was not worth regarding.
They were abject, feeble, and reduced by hunger - poor emaciated
creatures, who could do him neither good nor evil. Yet this fact did not
make him feel less the indignity of being treated by such vagrants with
scorn.

In whom old age was perished - Or, rather, in whom vigor, or the power
of accomplishing, anything, has ceased. The word כלח kelach, means
"completion," or the act or power of finishing or completing anything.
Then it denotes old age - age as "finished" or "completed;" [Job
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026). Here it means the maturity or
vigor which would enable a man to complete or accomplish anything, and
the idea is, that in these persons this had utterly perished. Reduced by
hunger and want, they had no power of effecting anything, and were
unworthy of regard. The word used here occurs only in this book in
Hebrew [Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026); [Job
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#002), but is common in Arabic; where
it refers to the "wrinkles," the "wanness," and the "austere aspect" of
the countenance, especially in age. See "Castell's Lex."

[Job 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 30:3</span></span>

For want and famine - By hunger and poverty their strength is wholly
exhausted, and they are among the miserable outcasts of society. In
order to show the depth to which he himself was sunk in public
estimation, Job goes into a description of the state of these miserable
wretches, and says that he was treated with contempt by the very scum of
society, by those who were reduced to the most abject wretchedness, and
who wandered in the deserts, subsisting on roots, without clothing,
shelter, or home, and who were chased away by the respectable portion of
the community as if they were thieves and robbers. The description is
one of great power, and presents a sad picture of his own condition.

They were solitary - Margin, or, "dark as the night." Hebrew גלמוד
galmûd. This word properly means "hard," and is applied to a dry, stony,
barren soil. In Arabic it means a hard rock. "Umbreit." In [Job
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#007), it is applied to a night in which
none are born. Here it seems to denote a countenance, dry, hard,
emaciated with hunger. Jerome renders it, "steriles." The Septuagint,
ἄγονος agonos - "sterile." Prof. Lee, "Hardly beset." The meaning is,
that they were greatly reduced - or dried up - by hunger and want. So
Umbreit renders it, "gantz ausgedorrt - altogether dried up."

Fleeing into the wilderness - Into the desert or lonely wastes. That is,
they "fled" there to obtain, on what the desert produced, a scanty
subsistence. Such is the usual explanation of the word rendered "flee" -
ערק ‛âraq. But the Vulgate, the Syriac, and the Arabic, render it
"gnawinq," and this is followed by Umbreit, Noyes, Schultens, and Good.
According to this the meaning is, that they were "gnawers of the
desert;" that is, that they lived by gnawing the roots and shrubs which
they found in the desert. This idea is much more expressive, and agrees
with the connection. The word occurs in Hebrew only in this verse and in
[Job 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017), where it is rendered "My
sinews," but which may more appropriately be rendered "My gnawing
pains." In the Syriac and Arabic the word means to "gnaw," or "corrode,"
as the leading signification, and as the sense of the word cannot be
determined by its usage in the Hebrew, it is better to depend on the
ancient versions, and on its use in the cognate languages. According to
this, the idea is, that they picked up a scanty subsistence as they
could find it, by gnawing roots and shrubs in the deserts.

In the former time - Margin, "yesternight." The Hebrew word (אמשׁ
'emesh) means properly last night; the latter part of the preceding day,
and then it is used to denote night or darkness in general. Gesenius
supposes that this refers to "the night of desolation," the pathless
desert being strikingly compared by the Orientals with darkness.
According to this, the idea is not that they had gone but yesterday into
the desert, but that they went into the shades and solitudes of the
wilderness, far from the homes of men. The sense then is, "They fled
into the night of desolate wastes."

Desolate and waste - In Hebrew the same word occurs in different forms,
designed to give emphasis, and to describe the gloom and solitariness of
the desert in the most impressive manner. We should express the same
idea by saying that they hid themselves in the "shades" of the
wilderness.

[Job 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 30:4</span></span>

Who cut up mallows - For the purpose of eating. Mallows are common
medicinal plants, famous for their emollient or softening properties,
and the size and brilliancy of their flowers. It is not probable,
however, that Job referred to what we commonly understand by the word
mallows. It has been commonly supposed that he meant a species of plant,
called by the Greeks Hallimus, a sunfish plant, or "salt wort," growing
commonly in the deserts and poor land, and eaten as a salad. The Vulgate
renders it simply "herbas;" the Septuagint, ἄλιμα alima. The Hebrew
word, according to Umbreit, means a common salad of a saltish taste,
whose young leaves being cooked, constituted food for the poorer
classes. The Hebrew word מלוח mallûach is from מלח mâlach, "salt," and
properly refers to a marine plant or vegetable.

By the bushes - Or among the bushes; that is, that which grew among the
bushes of the desert. They wandered about in the desert that they might
obtain this very humble fare.

And juniper-roots - The word here rendered "juniper" רתם rethem, occurs
only in this place, and in [Kg1
19:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004); [Psa
120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004). In each place it is rendered
"juniper." In 1 Kings it is mentioned as the tree under which Elijah sat
down when he fled into the wilderness for his life; In [Psa
120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004), it is mentioned as a material
for making coals. "Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper."
It is rendered "juniper" by Jerome, and by the rabbis. The verb (רתם
râqab) occurs in [Mic 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013), where it
is rendered "bind," and means to bind on, to make fast; and probably the
plant here referred to received its name in some way from the notion of
"binding" - perhaps because its long, flexible, and slender twigs were
used for binding, or for "withes." There is no evidence, however, that
the "juniper" is in any case intended. It denotes a species of "broom -
spartium junceum" of Linn., which grows abundantly in the deserts of
Arabia. It is the "Genista raetam" of Forskal. "Flora" Egypt. Arab. p.
214.

It has small variegated blossoms, and grows in the water-courses of the
Wadys. Dr. Robinson (Bibl. Researches, i. 299) says, "The Retem is the
largest and most conspicuous shrub of these de sects, growing thickly in
the water-courses and valleys. Our Arabs always selected the place of
encampment (if possible) in a place where it grew, in order to be
sheltered by it at night from the wind; and, during the day, when they
often went on in advance of the camels, we found them not unfrequently
sitting or sleeping under a bush of Retem, to protect them from the sun.
It was in this very desert, a day's journey from Beersheba, that the
prophet Elijah lay down and slept beneath the same shrub. The roots are
very bitter, and are regarded by the Arabs as yielding the best
charcoal. The Hebrew name רתם rethem, is the same as the present Arabic
name." Burckhardt remarks, that he found several Bedouins in the Wady
Genne collecting brushwood, which they burned into charcoal for the
Egyptian market, and adds that they preferred for this purpose the thick
roots of the shrub Rethem, which grew there in abundance. Travels in
Syria, p. 483. It could have been only those who were reduced to the
utmost penury and want that could have made use of the roots of this
shrub for food, and this is doubtless the idea which Job means to
convey. It is said to have been occasionally used for food by the poor.
See Gesenius, Lex.; Umbreit in loc., and Schultens. A description of the
condition of the poor, remarkably similar to this, occurs in Lucan, Lib.
vii.;

\- Cernit miserabile vulgus

In pecudum cecidisse cibos, et carpere dumos

Et morsu spoliare nemus.

Biddulph (in the collection of Voyages from the Library of the Earl of
Oxford, p. 807), says he had seen many poor people in Syria gather
mallows and clover, and when he had asked them what they designed to do
with it, they answered that it was for food. They cooked and ate them.
Herodotus, viii. 115, says, that the army of Xerxes, after their defeat,
when they had consumed all the grain of the inhabitants in Thessaly,
"fed on the natural produce of the earth, stripping wild and cultivated
trees alike of their bark and leaves, to such an extremity of famine
were they come."

[Job 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 30:5</span></span>

They were driven forth from among men - As vagabonds and outcasts. They
were regarded as unfit to live among the civilized and the orderly, and
were expelled as nuisances.

(They cried after them as after a thief.) - The inhabitants of the place
where they lived drove them out with a loud outcry, as if they were
thieves and robbers. A class of persons are here described who were mere
vagrants and plunderers, and who were not allowed to dwell in civilized
society, and it was one of the highest aggravations of the calamities of
Job, that he was now treated with derision by such outcasts.

[Job 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 30:6</span></span>

To dwell in the cliffs of the valleys - The word here rendered "cliffs"
(ערוץ ‛ârûts) denotes rather "horror," or something "horrid," and the
sense here is, that they dwelt in "the horrer of valleys;" that is, in
horrid valleys. The idea is that of deep and frightful glens, where wild
beasts ranged, far from the abodes of men, and surrounded by frightful
wastes. The word rendered "valleys" (נחל nachal) means properly a brook,
stream, water-course - what is now called a wady; a place where the
winter torrents run, but which is usually dry in summer; see the notes
at [Job 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#015).

In caves of the earth - Margin, as in Hebrew "holes." Septuagint "Whose
houses are - πρῶγλαι πετρῶν trōglai petrōn - caverns of the rocks;" that
is, who are "Troglodytes." Caves furnished a natural dwelling for the
poor and the outcast, and it is well known that it was not uncommon in
Egypt, and in the deserts of Arabia, to occupy such caves as a
habitation; see Diod. Sic. Lib. iii. xiv. and Strabo, Lib. 16,

And in the rocks - The caverns of the rocks. Dr. Richardson found a
large number of such dwellings in the vicinity of Thebes, many of which
were large and beautifully formed and sculptured with many curious
devices. Mr. Rich, also, saw a large number of such caves not far from
Mousal. Residence in Koordistan, vol. ii. p. 94.

[Job 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 30:7</span></span>

Among the bushes - Coverdale, "Upon the dry heath went they about
crying." The Hebrew word is the same which occurs in [Job
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004), and means bushes in general.
They were heard in the shrubbery that grew in the desert.

They brayed - ינהקו yinâhaqû. The Vulgate renders this, "They were
concealed." The Septuagint, "Amidst sweet sounds they cry out." Noyes,
"They utter their cries." The Hebrew word properly means to "bray." It
occurs only here and in [Job 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005),
where it is applied to the ass. The sense here is, that the voices of
this vagrant and wretched multitude was heard in the desert like the
braying of asses.

Under the nettles - Dr. Good, "Under the briers." Prof. Lee, "Beneath
the broom-pea." Noyes, "Under the thorns." The Hebrew word חרול chârûl,
occurs only here and in [Zep 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009), and
[Pro 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#031), in each of which places it
is rendered "nettles." It is probably derived from חרל = חרר, to burn,
to glow, and is given to nettles from the burning or prickling sensation
which they produce. Either the word nettles, thistles, or thorns, would
sufficiently answer to its derivation. It does not occur in the Arabic.
Castell. Umbreit renders it, "unter Dornen - under thorns."

They were gathered together - Vulgate, "They accounted it a delicacy to
be in a thorn-hedge." The word used here (ספח sâphach) means "to add;"
and then to be added or assembled together. The idea is, that they were
huddled together quite promiscuously in the wild-growing bushes of the
desert. They had no home; no separate habitation. This description is
interesting, not only as denoting the depth to which Job had been
reduced when he was the object of contempt by such vagrants, but as
illustrative of a state of society existing then.

[Job 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 30:8</span></span>

They were children of fools - The word rendered "fools" נבל nâbâl,
means,

\(1\) stupid, foolish; and

\(2\) abandoned, impious; compare [Sa1
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#003), [Sa1
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#025).

Here it means the worthless, the refuse of society, the abandoned. They
had no respectable parentage. Umbreit, "A brood of infamy." Coverdale,
"Children of fools and villains."

Children of base men - Margin, as in Hebrew, "men of no name." They were
men of no reputation; whose ancestors had in no way been distinguished;
possibly meaning, also, that they herded together as beasts without even
a name.

They were viler than the earth - Gesenius renders this, "They are
frightened out of the land." The Hebrew word (כאה) means "to chide, to
upbraid," and then in the niphal "to be chidden away," or "to be driven
off." The sense is, as an impious and low-born race they were driven out
of the land.

[Job 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 30:9</span></span>

And now am I their song - See [Job
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006); compare [Psa
69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012), "I was the song of the
drunkards;" [Lam 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014), "I was a
derision to all my people, and their song all the day." The sense is,
that they made Job and his calamities the subject of low jesting, and
treated him with contempt. His name and sufferings would be introduced
into their scurrilous songs to give them pith and point, and to show how
much they despised him now.

Yea, I am their by-word - See the notes at [Job
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006).

[Job 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 30:10</span></span>

They abhor me - Hebrew, They regard me as abominable.

They flee far from me - Even such an impious and low born race now will
have nothing to do with me. They would consider it no honor to be
associated with me, but keep as far from me as possible.

And spare not to spit in my face - Margin, "withhold not spittle from."
Noyes renders this "Before my face;" and so Luther Wemyss, Umbreit, and
Prof. Lee. The Hebrew may mean either to spit in the face, or to spit
"in the presence" of anyone. It is quite immaterial which interpretation
is adopted, since in the view of Orientals the one was considered about
the same as the other. In their notions of courtesy and urbanity, he
commits an insult of the same kind who spits in the presence of another
which he would if he spit on him. Are they not right? Should it not be
so considered every where? Yet how different their views from the more
refined notions of the civilized Occidentals! In America, more than in
any other land, are offences of this kind frequent and gross. Of nothing
do foreigners complain of us more, or with more justice; and much as we
boast of our intelligence and refinement, we should gain much if in this
respect we would sit down at the feet of a Bedouin Arab, and incorporate
his views into our maxims of politeness.

[Job 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 30:11</span></span>

Because he hath loosed my cord - According to this translation, the
reference here is to God, and the sense is, that the reason why he was
thus derided and contemned by such a worthless race was, that God had
unloosened his cord. That is, God had rendered him incapable of
vindicating himself, or of inflicting punishment. The figure, according
to this interpretation, is taken from a bow, and Job means to say that
his bow was relaxed, his vigor was gone, and they now felt that they
might insult him with impunity. But instead of the usual reading in the
Hebrew text יתרי yithriy - "my nerve," another reading יתרוּ yithriv -
"his nerve," is found in the qeri (margin). This reading has been
adopted in the text by Jahn, and is regarded as genuine by Rosenmuller,
Umbreit, and Noyes. According to this, the meaning is, that the
worthless rabble that now treated him with so much contempt, had relaxed
all restraint, and they who had hitherto been under some curb, now
rushed upon him in the most unbridled manner. They had cast off all
restraint arising from respect to his rank, standing, moral worth, and
the dread of his power, and now treated him with every kind of
indignity.

And afflicted me - By the disrespect and contempt which they have
evinced.

They have also let loose the bridle before me - That is, they have cast
off all restraint - repeating the idea in the first member of the verse.

[Job 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 30:12</span></span>

Upon my right hand rise the youth - The right hand is the place of
honor, and therefore it was felt to be a greater insult that they should
occupy even that place. The word rendered "youth" (פרחח pirchach) occurs
nowhere else in the Hebrew Scriptures. It is probably from פרח pârach,
"to sprout, germinate, blossom"; and hence, would mean "a progeny," and
would be probably applied to beasts. It is rendered by Jerome,
"calamities;" by the Septuagint, "Upon the right hand of the progeny, or
brood (βλαστοῦ blastou), they rise," where Schleusner conjectures that
βλαστοι\_ blastoi should be read, "On the right hand rise a brood or
progeny." Umbreit renders it, "eine Brut ... a brood." So Rosenmuller,
Noyes, and Schultens. The idea then is, that this rabble rose up, even
on his right hand, as a brood of wild animals - a mere rabble that
impeded his way.

They push away my feet - Instead of giving place for me, they jostle and
crowd me from my path. Once the aged and the honorable rose and stood in
my presence, and the youth retired at my coming, but now this worthless
rabble crowds along with me, jostles me in my goings, and shows me no
manner of respect; compare [Job 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#008).

And they raise up against me the ways of their destruction - They raise
up against me destructive ways, or ways that tend to destroy me. The
figure is taken from an advancing army, that casts up ramparts and other
means of attack designed for the destruction of a besieged city. They
were, in like manner, constantly making advances against Job, and
pressing on him in a manner that was designed to destroy him.

[Job 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 30:13</span></span>

They mar my path - They break up all my plans. Perhaps here, also, the
image is taken from war, and Job may represent himself as on a line of
march, and he says that this rabble comes and breaks up his path
altogether. They break down the bridges, and tear up the way, so that it
is impossible to pass along. His plans of life were embarrassed by them,
and they were to him a perpetual annoyance.

They set forward my calamity - Luther renders this part of the verse,
"It was so easy for them to injure me, that they needed no help." The
literal translation of the Hebrew here would be, "they profit for my
ruin;" that is, they bring as it were profit to my ruin; they help it
on; they promote it. A similar expression occurs in [Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015), "I was but a little displeased,
and they helped forward the afliction;" that is, they aided in urging it
forward. The idea here is, that they hastened his fall. Instead of
assisting him in any way, they contributed all they could to bring him
down to the dust.

They have no helper - Very various interpretations have been given of
this phrase. It may mean, that they had done this alone, without the aid
of others; or that they were persons who were held in abhorrence, and
whom no one would assist; or that they were worthless and abandoned
persons. Schultens has shown that the phrase, "one who has no helper,"
is proverbial among the Arabs, and denotes a worthless person, or one of
the lowest class. In proof of this, he quotes the Hamasa, which he thus
translates, Videmus vos ignobiles, pauperes, quibus nullus ex reliquis
hominibus adjutor. See, also, other similar expressions quoted by him
from Arabic writings. The idea here then is, probably, that they were so
worthless and abandoned that no one would help them - an expression
denoting the utmost degradation.

[Job 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 30:14</span></span>

They came upon me as a wide breaking-in of waters - The Hebrew here is
simply, "Like a wide breach they came," and the reference may be, not to
an inundation, as our translators supposed, but to an irruption made by
a foe through a breach made in a wall. When such a wall fell, or when a
breach was made in it, the besieging army would pour in in a tumultuous
manner, and cut down all before them; compare [Isa
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#013). This seems to be the idea here.
The enemies of Job poured in upon him as if a breach was made in a wall.
Formerly they were restrained by his rank and office, as a besieging
army was by lofty walls; but now all these restraints were broken down,
and they poured in upon him like a tumultuous army.

In the desolation they rolled themselves upon me - Among the ruins they
rolled tumultuous along; or they came pitching and tumbling in with the
ruins of the wall. The image is taken from the act of sacking a city,
where the besieging army, having made a breach in the wall, would seem
to come tumbling into the heart of the city with the ruins of the wall.
No time would be wasted, but they would follow suddenly and tumultuously
upon the breach, and roll tumultuously along. The Chaldee renders this
as if it referred to the rolling and tumultuous waves of the sea, and
the Hebrew would admit of such a construction, but the above seems
better to accord with the image which Job would be likely to use.

[Job 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 30:15</span></span>

Terrors are turned upon me - As if they were all turned upon him, or
made to converge toward him. Everything suited to produce terror seemed
to have a direction given it toward him. Umbreit, and some others,
however, suppose that God is here referred to, and that the meaning is,"
God is turned against me terrors drive as a storm against me." The
Hebrew will bear either construction; but it is more emphatic and
impressive to suppose it means that everything adapted to produce terror
seemed to be turned against him.

They pursue my soul as the wind - Margin, my principal one. The word
"they" here, refers to the terrors. In the original text, the word תרדף
tirâdaph agrees with בלהה ballâhâh, terrors understood, for this word is
often used as a collective noun, and with a singular verb, or it may
agree with אהת כל - "each one of the terrors persecutes me." There is
more difficulty about the word rendered "soul" in the text, and
"principal one" in the margin - נדיבה nedı̂ybâh. It properly means
willingness, voluntariness, spontaneity; then a free-will offering, a
voluntary sacrifice; then largeness, abundance. Rosenmuller renders it,
"My vigor." Noyes, "My prosperity," and so Coverdale. Jerome, "My
desire," and the Septuagint, "My hope passes away as the wind."
Schultens translates it, "They persecute my generous spirit as the
wind." It seems probable that the word refers to a generous, noble
nature; to a large and liberal soul, evincing its magnanimity in acts of
generosity and hospitality; and the idea seems to be, that his enemies
rushed against that generous nature like a tempest. They wholly
disregarded it, and a nature most generous and noble was exposed to the
fury of the storm.

And my welfare - Hebrew my salvation; or my safety.

As a cloud - As a cloud vanishes and wholly disappears.

[Job 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 30:16</span></span>

And now my soul is poured out upon me - So in [Psa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004), "I pour out my soul in me." We
say that one is dissolved in grief. The language is derived from the
fact that the soul in grief seems to lose all firmness or consistence.
The Arabs style a fearful person, one who has a watery heart, or whose
heart melts away like water. Noyes.

[Job 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 30:17</span></span>

My bones are pierced in me - The bones are often represented in the
Scriptures as the seat of acute pain; [Psa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002); [Psa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014); [Psa
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010); [Psa
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003); [Psa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#010); [Pro
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030); compare [Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011). The meaning here is, that he
had had shooting or piercing pains in the night, which disturbed and
prevented his rest. It is mentioned as a special aggravation of his
sufferings that they were "in the night" - a time when we expect repose.

And my sinews take no rest - See the word here rendered sinews explained
in the note at ver. 3. The word literally means gnawers, and hence, the
teeth. The Vulgate renders it, qui me comedunt, non dormiunt, "they who
devour me do not slumber." The Septuagint, νευρά μον neura mou - my
sinews, or arteries. Schleusner. Luther, "They who gnaw me." Coverdale,
Sinews. I see no reason to doubt that the teeth or the jaws are meant,
and that Job refers to the violent pain in the tooth, among the acutest
pains to which the body is subject. The idea is, that every part of the
body was diseased and filled with pain.

[Job 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 30:18</span></span>

By the great force of my disease - The words "of my disease" are not in
the Hebrew. The usual interpretation of the passage is, that in
consequence of the foul and offensive nature of his malady, his garment
had become discolored or defiled - changed from being white and clear to
filthiness and offensiveness. Some have understood it as referring to
the skin, and as denoting that it was so affected with the leprosy, that
he could scarcely be recognized. Umbreit supposes it to mean, "Through
the omnipotence of God has my white robe of honor been changed into a
narrow garment of grief" - trauerkleid. Dr. Good renders it, "From the
abundance of the acrimony;" that is, of the fierce or acrimonious humor,
"it is changed into a garment for me." Coverdale, "With all their power
have they changed my garment, and girded me therewith, as it were with a
coat." Prof. Lee, "With much violence doth my clothing bind me."

According to Schultens, it means, "My affliction puts itself on in the
form of my clothing;" and the whole passage, that without and within,
from the head to the feet, he was entirely diseased. His affliction was
his outer garment, and it was his inner garment - his mantle and his
tunic. The Hebrew is difficult. The phrase rendered "by the great
force," means, literally, "by the multitude of strength" - and may refer
to the strength of disease, or to the strength of God, or to the force
with which his garment girded him. The word rendered "is changed" -
יתחפשׂ yitchâphaś, is from חפשׂ châphaś, to seek, to search after in the
Qal; in the Hithpael, the form used here, to let oneself be sought; to
hide oneself; to disguise one's self; [Kg1
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#038). According to this, it would
mean that his garment was disquised; that is, its appearance was changed
by the force of his disease. Gesenius. Jerome renders it, "In their
multitude, my garment is consumed; the Septuagint, "With great force he
took hold of my garment." Of these various interpretations, it is
impossible to determine which is the correct one. The prevailing
interpretation seems to be, that by the strength of his disease his
garment was changed in its appearance, so as to become offensive, and
yet this is a somewhat feeble sense to give to the passage. Perhaps the
explanation of Schultens is the best, "By the greatness of power, pain
or disease has become my garment; it girds me about like the mouth of my
tunic." He has shown, by a great variety of instances, that it is common
in Arabic poetry to compare pain, sickness, anxiety, etc., to clothing.

It bindeth me about as the collar of my coat - The collar of my tunic,
or under garment. This was made like a shirt, to be gathered around the
neck, and the idea is, that his disease fitted close to him, and was
gathered close around him.

[Job 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 30:19</span></span>

He hath cast me into the mire - That is, God has done it. In this book
the name of God is often understood where the speaker seems to avoid it,
in order that it may not be needlessly repeated. On the meaning of the
expression here, see the notes at [Job
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#031).

And I am become like dust and ashes - Either in appearance, or I am
regarded as being as worthless as the mire of the streets. Rosenmuller
supposes it means, "I am more like a mass of inanimate matter than a
living man."

[Job 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 30:20</span></span>

I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear me - This was a complaint which
Job often made, that he could not get the ear of God; that his prayer
was not regarded, and that he could not get his cause before him;
compare [Job 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003), [Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019) ff, and [Job
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#009).

I stand up - Standing was a common posture of prayer among the ancients;
see [Heb 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021); [Kg1
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#014), [Kg1
8:55](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#055); [Neh
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#002). The meaning is, that when Job
stood up to pray, God did not regard his prayer.

[Job 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 30:21</span></span>

Thou art become cruel to me - Margin, turned to be. This language,
applied to God, seems to be harsh and irreverent, and it may well be
inquired whether the word cruel does not express an idea which Job did
not intend. The Hebrew word אכזר 'akzâr, is from an obsolete root כזר -
not found in Hebrew. The Arabic root, nearly the same as this, means to
break with violence; to rout as an enemy; then to be enraged. In the
Syriac, the primary idea is, that of a soldier, and thence it may refer
to such acts of violence as a soldier commonly commits. The word occurs
in Hebrew in the following places, and is translated in the following
manner. It is rendered "cruel" in [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033); [Job
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#021); [Pro
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#009); [Pro
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#017); [Pro
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#010); [Pro
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#011); [Pro
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004); [Isa
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#009); [Jer
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023); [Jer
50:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#042); [Jer
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014); and fierce in [Job
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#010). Jerome renders it, mutatus mihi
in crudelem - "thou art changed so as to become cruel to me;" the
Septuagint renders it, ἀνελεημόως aneleēmonōs - unmerciful; Luther, Du
bist mir verwandelt in einem Grausamen - "thou art changed to me into a
cruel one;" and so Umbreit, Noyes, and translators generally. Perhaps
the word fierce, severe or harsh, would express the idea; still it must
be admitted that Job, in the severity of his sufferings, is often
betrayed into language which cannot be a model for us, and which we
cannot vindicate.

With thy strong hand - Margin, the strength. So the Hebrew. The hand is
the instrument by which we accomplish anything; and hence, anything
which God does is traced to his hand.

Thou opposest thyselph against me - - תשׂטמני tiśâṭamēniy. The word שׂטם
śâṭam, means to lie in wait for anyone; to lay snares; to set a trap;
see [Job 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#009), where the same word
occurs, and where it is rendered "who hateth me," but where it would be
better rendered he pursues, or persecutes me. The meaning is, that God
had become his adversary, or had set himself against him. There was a
severity in his dealings with him as if he had become a foe.

[Job 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 30:22</span></span>

Thou liftest me up to the wind - The sense here is, that he was lifted
up as stubble is by a tempest, and driven mercilessly along. The figure
of riding upon the wind or the whirlwind, is common in Oriental writers,
and indeed elsewhere. So Milton says,

"They ride the air in whirlwind."

So Addison, speaking of the angel that executes the commands of the
Almighty, says,

"Rides in the whirlwind, and directs the storm."

Coverdale renders this verse, "In times past thou didst set me up on
high, as it were above the wind, but now hast thou given me a very sore
fall." Rosenmuller thinks that the image here is not taken from straw or
chaff that is driven by the wind, but that the meaning of Job is, that
he is lifted up and borne aloft like a cloud. But the image of chaff or
straw taken up by the whirlwind and driven about, seems best to accord
with the scope of the passage. The idea is, that the tempest of calamity
had swept everything away, and had driven him about as a worthless
object, until he was wasted away and ruined. It is possible that Job
refers in this passage to the sand-storm which occurs sometimes in the
deserts of Arabia. The following description of such a storm by Mr.
Bruce (vol. 4:pp. 553, 554), will furnish an illustration of the force
and sublimity of the passage. It is copied from Taylor's Fragments, in
Calmet's Dictionary, vol. 3:235: "On the fourteenth," says Bruce, "at
seven in the morning, we left Assa Nagga, our course being due north. At
one o'clock we alighted among some acacia trees at Waadiel Halboub,
having gone twenty-one miles. We were here at once surprised and
terrified by a sight, surely one of the most magnificent in the world.
In that vast expanse of desert from west and to northwest of us, we saw
a number of prodigious pillars of sand at different distances, at times
moving with qreat celerity, at others stalking on with a majestic
slowness; at intervals we thought they were coming in a very few minutes
to overwhelm us, and small quantities of sand did actually more than
once reach us. Again they would retreat so as to be almost out of sight
- their tops reaching to the very clouds. There the tops often separated
from the bodies; and these, once disjoined, dispersed in the air, and
did not appear more.

Sometimes they were broken near the middle, as if struck with a large
cannon shot. About noon they began to advance with considerable
swiftness upon us, the wind being very strong at north. Eleven of them
ranged alongside of us about the distance of three miles. The greatest
diameter of the largest appeared to me at that distance as if it would
measure two feet. They retired from us with a wind at southeast, leaving
an im pression upon my mind to which I can give no name, though surely
one ingredient in it was fear, with a considerable deal of wonder and
astonishment. It was in vain to think of flying; the swiftest horse, or
fastest sailing ship, could be of no use to carry us out of this danger,
and the full persuasion of this riveted me as if to the spot where I
stood, and let the camels gain on me so much in my state of lameness,
that it was with some difficulty I could overtake them.

"The whole of our company were much disheartened, except Idris, and
imagined that they were advancing into whirlwinds of moving sand, from
which they should never be able to extricate themselves; but before four
o'clock in the afternoon these phantoms of the plain had all of them
fallen to the ground and disappeared. In the evening we came to Waadi
Dimokea, where we passed the night, much disheartened, and our fear more
increased, when we found, upon wakening in the morning, that one side
was perfectly buried in the sand that the wind had blown above us in the
night.

"The sun shining through the pillars, which were thicker, and contained
more sand, apparently, than any of the preceding days, seemed to give
those nearest us an appearance as if spotted with stars of gold. I do
not think at any time they seemed to be nearer than two miles. The most
remarkable circumstance was, that the sand seemed to keep in that vast
circular space, surrounded by the Nile on our left, in going round by
Chaigie toward Dougola, and seldom was observed much to the eastward of
a meridian, passing along the Nile through the Magizan, before it takes
that turn; whereas the simoom was always on the opposite side of our
course, coming upon us from the southeast.

"The same appearance of moving pillars of sand presented themselves to
us this day in form and disposition like those we had seen at Waadi
Halboub, only they seemed to be more in number, and less in size. They
came several times in a direction close upon us, that is, I believe,
within less than two miles. They began, immediately after sunrise, like
a thick wood, and almost darkened the sun; his rays shining through them
for near an hour, gave them an appearance of pillars of fire."

"If my conjecture," says Taylor, "be admissible, we now see a
magnificence in this imagery, not apparent before: we see how Job's
dignity might be exalted in the air; might rise to great grandeur,
importance, and even terror, in the sight of beholders; might ride upon
the wind, which bears it about, causing it to advance or to recede; and,
after all, when the wind diminishes, might disperse, dissipate, melt
this pillar of sand into the undistinguished level of the desert. This
comparison seems to be precisely adapted to the mind of an Arab; who
must have seen, or have been informed of, similar phenomena in the
countries around him."

And dissolvest my substance - Margin, or wisdom. The word rendered
"dissolvest," means to melt, to flow down, and then to cause to melt, to
cause to pine away and perish; [Isa
64:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#007). It is applied to a host or army
that appears to melt away; [Sa1 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#016).
It is also applied to one who seems to melt away with fear and terror;
[Exo 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#015); [Jos
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009), [Jos
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#024). Here the meaning probably is,
that God caused Job to melt away, as it were, with terrors and alarms.
He was like one caught up in a whirlwind, and driven along with the
storm, and who, in such circumstances, would be dissolved with fear. The
word rendered "substance" (תשׁיה tûshı̂yâh) has been very variously
interpreted. The word, as it is written in the text, means help,
deliverance, purpose, enterprise, counsel, or understanding; see [Job
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012); [Job
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013); [Job
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#006). But by some, and among others.
Gesenius, Umbreit, and Noyes, it is supposed that it should be read as a
verb, תשוה from שוה - to fear. According to this, the meaning is, "thou
terrifiest me." This agrees better with the connection; is more abrupt
and emphatic, and is probably the true interpretation.

[Job 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 30:23</span></span>

For I know that thou wilt bring me to death - This is the language of
despair. Occasionally Job seems to have had an assurance that his
calamities would pass by, and that God would show himself to be his
friend on earth (compare the notes at [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)), and at other times he utters
the language of despair. Such would be commonly the case with a good man
afflicted as he was, and agitated with alternate hopes and fears. We are
not to set these expressions down as contradictions. All that
inspiration is responsible for, is the fair record of his feelings; and
that he should have alternate hopes and fears is in entire accordance
with what occurs when we are afflicted. Here the view of his sorrows
appears to have been so overwhelming, that he says he knew they must
terminate in death. The phrase "to death" means to the house of the
dead, or to the place where the dead are. Umbreit.

And to the house appointed for all living - The grave; compare [Heb
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027). That house or home is
"appointed" for all. It is not a matter of chance that we come there,
but it is because the Great Arbiter of life has so ordained. What an
affecting consideration it should be, that such a house is designated
for all! A house so dark, so gloomy, so solitary, so repulsive! For all
that sit on thrones; for all that move in the halls of music and
pleasure; for all that roll along in splendid carriages; for all the
beautiful, the happy, the vigorous, the manly; for all in the marts of
business, in the low scenes of dissipation, and in the sanctuary of God;
for every one who is young, and every one who is aged, this is the home!
Here they come at last; and here they lie down in the narrow bed! God's
hand will bring them all there; and there will they lie until his voice
summons them to judgment!

[Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 30:24</span></span>

Howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave - Margin, heap. In
our common version this verse conveys no very clear idea, and it is
quite evident that our translators despaired of giving it a consistent
sense, and attempted merely to translate it literally. The verse has
been rendered by every expositor almost in his own way; and though
almost no two of them agree, yet it is remarkable that the versions
given are all beautiful, and furnish a sense that agrees well with the
scope of the passage. The Vulgate renders it, "But not to their
consumption wilt thou send forth their hand; and if they fall, thou wilt
save them." The Septuagint," For O that I could lay violent hands on
myself, or beseech another, and he would do it for me Luther renders it,
"Yet he shall not stretch out the hand to the charnelhouse, and they
shall not cry before his destruction." Noyes:

"When he stretcheth out his hand, prayer

availeth nothing,

When he bringeth destruction, vain is the

Cry for help."

Umbreit renders it:

Nur mog' er nicht an den zerstorten HaufenHand anlegen!

Oder mussen jene selbst in ihremTode schreien?

"Only if he would not lay his hand upon theHeaps of the destroyed!

Or must these also cry out in their death?"

According to this interpretation, Job speaks here in bitter irony. "I
would gladly die," says he, "if God would only suffer me to be quiet
when I am dead." He would be willing that the edifice of the body should
be taken down, provided the ruins might rest in peace. Rosenmuller gives
the same sense as that expressed by Noyes. Amidst this variety of
interpretation, it is by no means easy to determine on the true meaning
of the passage. The principal difficulty in the exposition lies in the
word בעי be‛ı̂y, rendered in the text "in the grave," and in the margin
"heap." If that word is compounded of the preposition ב be and עי ‛ı̂y,
it means literally, "in ruins, or in rubbish" - for so the word עי ‛ı̂y
is used in [Mic 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006); [Jer
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018); [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012); [Psa
79:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001); [Neh
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#002), [Neh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#010). But Gesenius supposes it to be a
single word, from the obsolete root בעה, Chaldee בעא, "to pray, to
petition"; and according to this the meaning is, "Yea, prayer is nought
when he stretches out his hand; and in his (God's) destruction, their
cry availeth not."

Prof. Lee understands the word (בעי be‛ı̂y) in the same sense, but gives
a somewhat different meaning to the whole passage. According to him the
meaning is, "Nevertheless, upon prayer thou wilt not lay thine hand;
surely, when he destroyeth, in this alone there is safety." Schultens
accords very nearly in the sentiment expressed by Umbreit, and renders
it, "Yet not even in the tomb would he relax his hand, if in its
destruction an alleviation were there." This sentiment is very strong,
and borders on impiety, and should not be adopted if it is possible to
avoid it. It looks as if Job felt that God was disposed to pursue his
animosity even into the regions of the dead, and that he would have
pleasure in carrying on the work of destruction and affliction in the
ruins of the grave. After the most careful examination which I have been
able to give of this difficult passage, it seems probable to me that the
following is the correct sense.

Job means to state a general and important principle - that there was
rest in the grave. He said he knew that God would bring him down there,
but that would be a state of repose. The hand of God producing pain,
would not reach there, nor would the sorrows experienced in this world
be felt there, provided there had been a praying life. Notwithstanding
all his afflictions, therefore, and his certain conviction that he would
die, he had unwavering confidence in God. Agreeably to this, the
following paraphrase will convey the true sense. "I know that he will
bring me to the grave. Nevertheless (אך 'ak), over the ruins (בעי be‛ı̂y)
- of my body, the ruins in the grave - "he will not stretch out his
hand" - to afflict me there or to pursue those who lie there with
calamity and judgment; if in his destruction (בפידו bepı̂ydô) - in the
destruction or desolation which God brings upon people - among them (להן
lâhên) - among those who are thus consigned to the ruins of the grave -
there is prayer (שׁוע shûa‛); if there has been supplication offered to
him, or a cry for mercy has gone up before him." This paraphrase
embraces every word of the original; saves the necessity of attempting
to change the text, as has been often done, and gives a meaning which
accords with the scope of the passage, and with the uniform belief of
Job, that God would ultimately vindicate him, and show that he himself
was right in his government.

[Job 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 30:25</span></span>

Did not I weep ... - Job here appeals to his former life, and says that
it had been a characteristic of his life to manifest compassion to the
afflicted and the poor. His object in doing this is, evidently, to show
how remarkable it was that he was so much afflicted. "Did I deserve,"
the sense is, "such a hard lot? Has it been brought on me by my own
fault, or as a punishment for a life where no compassion was shown to
others?" So far from it, he says, that his whole life had been
distinguished for tender compassion for those in distress and want.

In trouble - Margin, as in Hebrew, hard of day. So we say, "a man has a
hard time of it," or has a hard lot.

[Job 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 30:26</span></span>

When I looked for good - When I supposed that respect would be shown me;
or when I looked forward to an honored old age. I expected to be made
happy and prosperous through life, as the result of my uprightness and
benevolence; but, instead of that, calamity came and swept all my
comforts away. He experienced the instability which most people are
called to experience, and the divine dealings with him showed that no
reliance could be placed on confident plans of happiness in this life.

[Job 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 30:27</span></span>

My bowels boiled - Or rather, My bowels boil - for he refers to his
present circumstances, and not to the past. It is clear that by this
phrase he designs to describe deep affliction. The bowels, in the
Scriptures, are represented as the seat of the affections. By this is
meant the upper bowels, or the region of the heart and the lungs. The
reason is, that deep emotions of the mind are felt there. The heart
beats quick; or it is heavy and pained; or it seems to melt within us in
the exercise of pity or compassion; compare the notes at [Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011). The idea here is, that the seat
of sorrow and of grief was affected by his calamities. Nor was the
feeling slight. His emotions he compared with agitated, boiling water.
It is possible that there is an allusion here to the inflammatory nature
of his disease, producing internal heat and pain; but it is more
probable that he refers to the mental anguish which he endured.

The days of affliction prevented me - literally, "have anticipated me" -
for so the word prevent was formerly used, and so it is uniformly used
in the Bible; see the notes at [Job
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#012); compare [Psa
59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010); lxxix. 8; [Psa
88:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#013); [Psa
119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148); [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015). There is in the Hebrew word (קדם
qâdam) the idea that days of anguish came in an unexpected manner, or
that they anticipated the fulfillment of his plans. All his schemes and
hopes of life had been anticipated by these overwhelming sorrows.

[Job 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 30:28</span></span>

I went mourning - Or rather, "I go," in the present tense, for he is now
referring to his present calamities, and not to what was past. The word
rendered "mourning," however (קדר qâdar), means here rather to be dark,
dingy, tanned. It literally means to be foul or turbid, like a torrent,
[Job 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#016); then to go about in filthy
garments, as they do who mourn, [Job
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#011); [Jer
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002); then to be dusky, or of a dark
color, or to become dark. Thus, it is applied to the sun and moon
becoming dark in an eclipse, or when covered with clouds, [Jer
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#028); [Joe
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010); [Joe
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#015); [Mic
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#006). Here it refers to the fact that,
by the mere force of his disease, his skin had become dark and swarthy,
though he had not been exposed to the burning rays of the sun. The wrath
of God had burned upon him, and he had become black under it. Jerome,
however, renders it moerens, mourning. The Septuagint, "I go groaning
(στένων stenōn) without restraint, or limit" - ἄνευ φιμοῦ aneu fimou.
The Chaldee translates it אוכם, "black."

Without the sun - Without being exposed to the sun; or without the
agency of the sun. Though not exposed, he had become as dark as if he
had been a day-laborer exposed to a burning sun.

I stood up - Or, I stand up.

And cried in the congregation - I utter my cries in the congregation, or
when surrounded by the assembled people. Once I stood up to counsel
them, and they hung upon my lips for advice; now I stand up only to weep
over my accumulated calamities. This indicates the great change which
had come upon him, and the depth of his sorrows. A man will weep readily
in private; but he will be slow to do it, if he can avoid it, when
surrounded by a multitude.

[Job 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 30:29</span></span>

I am a brother to dragons - That is, my loud complaints and cries
resemble the doleful screams of wild animals, or of the most frightful
monsters. The word "brother" is often used in this sense, to denote
similarity in any respect. The word "dragons" here (תנין tannı̂yn),
denotes properly a sea-monster, a great fish, a crocodile; or the
fancied animal with wings called a dragon; see the notes at [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022). Gesenius, Umbreit, and Noyes,
render this word here jackals - an animal between a dog and a fox, or a
wolf and a fox; an animal that abounds in deserts and solitudes, and
that makes a doleful cry in the night. So the Syriac renders it an
animal resembling a dog; a wild dog. Castell. This idea agrees with the
scope of the passage better than the common reference to a sea-monster
or a crocodile. "The Deeb, or Jackal," says Shaw, "is of a darker color
than the fox, and about the same bigness. It yelps every night about the
gardens and villages, feeding upon roots, fruit, and carrion." Travels,
p. 247, Ed. Oxford, 1738. That some wild animal, distinguished for a
mournful noise, or howl, is meant, is evident; and the passage better
agrees with the description of a jackal than the hissing of a serpent or
the noise of the crocodile. Bochart supposes that the allusion is to
dragons, because they erect their heads, and their jaws are drawn open,
and they seem to be complaining against God on account of their humble
and miserable condition. Taylor (Concord.) supposes it means jackals or
thoes, and refers to the following places where the word may be so used;
[Psa 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#019); [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022); [Isa
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#013); [Isa
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007); [Isa
43:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#020); [Jer
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#011); [Jer
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022); [Jer
49:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#033); [Jer
51:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#037); [Lam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003); [Mic
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008); [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003).

And a companion to owls - Margin, ostriches. The word companion here is
used in a sense similar to brother in the other member of the
parallelism, to denote resemblance. The Hebrew, here rendered owls, is,
literally, daughters of answering, or clamor - יענה בנות benôth ya‛ănâh.
The name is given on account of the plaintive and mournful cry which is
made. Bochart. Gesenius supposes, however, that it is on account of its
greediness and gluttony. The name "daughters of the ostrich." denotes
properly the female ostrich. The phrase is, however, put for the ostrich
of both sexes in many places; see Gesenius on the word יענה ya‛ănâh;
compare the notes at [Isa 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021). For a
full examination of the meaning of the phrase, see Bochart, Hieroz. P.
ii. L. 2. cap. xiv. pp. 218-231; see also [Job
39:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013). There can be little doubt
that the ostrich is here intended, and Job means to say that his
mourning resembled the doleful noise made by the ostrich in the lonely
desert. Shaw, in his Travels, says that during the night "they (the
ostriches) make very doleful and hideous noises; which would sometimes
be like the roaring of a lion; at other times it would bear a nearer
resemblance to the hoarser voice of other quadrupeds, particularly of
the bull and the ox. I have often heard them groan as if they were in
the greatest agonies."

[Job 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 30:30</span></span>

My skin is black upon me; - see [Job
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028). It had become black by the
force of the disease.

My bones are burnt with heat - The bones, in the Scriptures, are often
represented as the seat of pain. The disease of Job seems to have
pervaded the whole body. If it was the elephantiasis (see the notes at
[Job 2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007)), these effects would be
naturally produced.

[Job 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 30:31</span></span>

My harp also is turned to mourning - What formerly gave cheerful sounds,
now gives only notes of plaintiveness and lamentation. The harp was
probably an instrument originally designed to give sounds of joy. For a
description of it, see the notes at [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012).

And my organ - The form of what is here called the organ, is not
certainly known. The word עגב ‛ûgâb is doubtless from עגב ‛âgab, "to
breathe, to blow"; and most probably the instrument hero intended was
the pipe. For a description of it, see the notes at [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). This instrument, also, was
played, as would appear, on joyous occasions, but Job now says that it
was turned to grief. All that had been joyous with him had fled. His
honor was taken away; his friends were gone; they who had treated him
with reverence now stood at a distance, or treated him with contempt;
his health was departed, and his former appearance, indicating a station
of affluence, was changed for the dark complexion produced by disease,
and the instruments of joyousness now gave forth only notes of sorrow.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 31](job031)

</div>
