<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job016)  [Next](job018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)

[Job 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 17:1</span></span>

My breath is corrupt - Margin or "spirit is spent." The idea is, that
his vital powers were nearly extinct; his breath failed; his power was
weakened, and he was ready to die. This is connected with the previous
chapter, and should not have been separated from it. There was no
necessity of making a new chapter here, and we have one of those
unfortunate breaks in the middle of a paragraph, and almost of a
sentence, which are too common in the Scriptures.

The graves are ready for me - The Hebrew is plural, but why so used I
know not. The Vulgate is singular - sepulchrum. The Septuagint renders
it, "I pray for a tomb (singular, ταφῆς taphēs), but I cannot obtain
it." Possibly the meaning is, "I am about to be united "to the graves,"
or "to tombs."" Schultens remarks that the plural form is common in
Arabic poetry, as well as in poetry in general.

[Job 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 17:2</span></span>

And doth not mine eye continue in their provocation? - Margin "lodge."
This is the meaning of the Hebrew word used here - נלן tālan. It
properly denotes to pass the night or to lodge in a place, as
distinguished from a permanent residence. The idea here seems to be,
that his eye "rested" on their provocations. It remained fixed on them.
It was not a mere glance, a passing notice, but was such a view as
resulted from a careful observation. It was not such a view as a
traveler would obtain by passing hastily by, but it was such as one
would obtain who had encamped for a time, and had an opportunity of
looking around him with care, and seeing things as they were. Thus
explained, there is much poetic beauty in the passage. The Vulgate,
however, renders it, "I have not sinned, and mine eye remains in
bitterness." The Septuagint, "I supplicate in distress - κάμνων kamnōn -
yet what have I done? Strangers came, and stole my substance: who is the
man?" The simple meaning is, that Job had a calm view of their
wickedness, and that he could not be deceived.

[Job 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 17:3</span></span>

Lay down now - This is evidently an address to God - a repetition of the
wish which he had so often expressed, that he might be permitted to
bring his cause directly before him; see [Job
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003). The whole passage here is
obscure, because we are in a great measure ignorant of the ancient
practices in courts of law, and of the ancient forms of trial. The
general sense seems to be, that Job desires the Deity to enter into a
judicial investigation, and to give him a "pledge" - or, as we should
say, a "bond," or "security" - that he would not avail himself of his
almighty power, but would place him on an equality in the trial, and
allow him to plead his cause on equal terms; see the notes at [Job
13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#020). The phrase "lay down now"
means, lay down a pledge, or something of that kind; and may have
referred to some ancient custom of giving security on going to trial,
that no advantage would be taken, or that the parties would abide by the
decision in the case.

Put me in a surety with thee - The word used here (ערבני ‛ârabı̂yn) is
from ערב ‛ârab, to mix, mingle; to exchange, to barter and then to
become surety for anyone - that is, to "exchange" places with him, or to
stand in his place; [Gen 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#009); [Gen
44:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#032). Here the idea seems to be, that
Job wished the Deity to give him some pledge or security that justice
would be done, or that he would not take advantage of his power and
majesty to overawe him. Or, as has been remarked, it may refer to some
custom of furnishing security on a voluntary trial or arbitration, that
the award of the referees would be observed. I think it most probable
that this is the idea. The controversy here was to be voluntary. In a
voluntary trial, or an arbitration, there is a necessity of some
security by the parties that the decision shall be submitted to - a
pledge to each other that they will abide by it. Such a pledge Job
desired in this case. All this is language taken from courts, and should
not be pressed too much, nor should Job be hastily charged with
irreverence. Having once suggested the idea of a "trial" of the cause,
it was natural for him to use the language which was commonly employed
in reference to such trials; and these expressions are to be regarded as
thrown in for the sake of "keeping," or verisimilitude.

Who is he that will strike hands with me? - Striking hands then, as now,
seems to have been one mode of confirming an agreement, or ratifying a
compact. The idea here is," Who is there that will be surety to me for
thee?" that is, for the faithful observance of right and justice. There
is an appearance of irreverence in this language, but it arises from
carrying out the ideas pertaining to a form of trial in a court. In
entering into "sureties," it was usual to unite hands; see [Pro
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001) :

My son, if thou be surety for thy friend,

If thou hast stricken thy hand with a stranger.

So [Pro 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#018) :

A man void of understanding striketh hands,

And becometh surety in the presence of his friend

Compare [Pro 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#015); [Pro
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#026). The same custom prevailed in
the times of Homer and of Virgil. Thus, Homer (Iliad, β b. 341) says:

Ποῦ δὴ -

\- δεξιαὶ ἦς ἐπέπιθμεν -

Pou de4 -

\- dexiai hēs epepithmen -

And so Virgil (Aeneid 4:597) says;

\- en dextra fidesque.

[Job 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 17:4</span></span>

For thou hast hid their heart from understanding - That is, the heart of
his professed friends. Job says that they were blind and perverse, and
indisposed to render him justice; and he therefore pleads that he may
carry his cause directly before God. He attributes their want of
understanding to the agency of God in accordance with the doctrine which
prevailed in early times, and which is so often expressed in the
Scriptures, that God is the source of light and truth, and that when
people are blinded it is in accordance with his wise purposes; see [Isa
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009). It is "because" they were thus
blind and perverse, that he asks the privilege of carrying the cause at
once up to God - and who could blame him for such a desire?

Therefore thou shalt not exalt them - By the honor of deciding a case
like this, or by the reputation of wisdom. The name of sage or "wise"
man was among the most valued in those times; but Job says that that
would not be awarded to his friends. God would not exalt or honor people
thus devoid of wisdom.

[Job 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 17:5</span></span>

He that speaketh flattery to his friends - Noyes renders this, "He that
delivers up his friend as a prey, the eyes of his children shall fail."
So Wemyss, "He who delivers up his friends to plunder." Dr. Good, "He
that rebuketh his friends with mildness, even the eyes of his children
shall be accomplished." The Septuagint, "He announces evil for his
portion; his eyes fail over his sons." The Vulgate, "He promises spoil
to his companions, and the eyes of his sons fail." The word rendered
"flattery" (חלק chêleq) properly means "that which is smooth,
smoothness" (from חלק châlaq to be smooth); and thence it denotes "a
lot" or "portion," because "a smooth stone" was anciently used to cast
lots in dividing spoils; [Deu 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#008).
Here it is synonymous with plunder or spoil; and the idea is, that he
who betrayeth his friends to the spoil or to the spoiler, the eyes of
his children shall fail. The meaning in this connection is, that the
friends of Job had acted as one would who should announce the residence
of his neighbors to robbers, that they might come and plunder them.
Instead of defending him, they had acted the part of a traitor.
Schultens says that this verse is "a Gordian knot;" and most
commentators regard it as such; but the above seems to give a clear and
consistent meaning. It is evidently a proverb, and is designed to bear
on the professed friends of Job, and to show that they had acted a
fraudulent part toward him. In [Job
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#004), he had said that God had hid
their heart from understanding, and that wisdom had failed them. He
"here" says that in addition to a want of wisdom, they were like a man
who should betray his neighbors to robbers.

Even the eyes of his children shall fail - He shall be punished. To do
this is a crime, and great calamity shall come upon him, represented by
the failure of the eyes of his children. Calamity is not unfrequently
expressed by the loss of the eyes; see [Pro
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017).

[Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 17:6</span></span>

He hath also - That is, God has done this.

Also a by-word - A proverb (משׁל mâshâl); a term of reproach, ridicule,
or scorn. lie has exposed me to derision.

And aforetime - Margin "before them." The margin is the correct
translation of the Hebrew, פנים pânı̂ym. It means, in their presence, or
in their view.

I was as a tabret - This is an unhappy translation. The true meaning
is," I am become their "abhorrence," or am to them an object of
contempt." Vulgate, "I am an exampie ("exemplum") to them." Septuagint,
"I am become a laughter (γέλως gelōs) to them." The Chaldee renders it,
"Thou hast placed me for a proverb to the people, and I shall be Gehenna
(גיהנם gayhı̂nnôm) to them." The Hebrew word תפת tôpheth - or "Tophet,"
is the name which is often given in the Scriptures to the valley of
Hinnom - the place where children were sacrificed to Moloch; see the
notes at [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022). But there is no
evidence or probability that the word was so used in the time of Job. It
is never used in the Scriptures in the sense of a "tabret," that is a
tabor or small drum; though the word תף toph is thus used; see the notes
at [Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). The word used here is
derived, probably, from the obsolete verb תיף typ - "to spit out;" and
then to spit out with contempt. The verb is so used in Chaldee.
"Castell." The meaning of the word probably still lives in the Arabic,
The Arabic word means to spit out with contempt; and the various forms
of the nouns derived from the verb are applied to anything detested, or
detestable; to the parings of the nails; to an abandoned woman; to a
dog, etc. See "Castell" on this word. I have no doubt that is the sense
here, and that we have here a word whose true signification is to be
sought in the Arabic; and that Job means to say that he was treated as
the most loathsome and execrable object.

[Job 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 17:7</span></span>

Mine eye is dim by reason of sorrow - Schultens supposes that this
refers to his external appearance in general, as being worn down,
exhausted, "defaced" by his many troubles; but it seems rather to mean
that his eyes failed on account of weeping.

And all my members are as a shadow - "I am a mere skeleton, I am
exhausted and emaciated by my sufferings." It is common to speak of
persons who are emaciated by sickness or famine as mere shadows. Thus,
Livy (L. 21:40) says, Effigies, imo, "umbrce hominum;" fame, frigore,
illuvie, squalore enecti, contusi, debilitati inter saxa rupesque. So
Aeschylus calls Oedipus - Οἰδίπου σκιαν Oidipou skian - the shadow of
Oedipus.

[Job 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 17:8</span></span>

Upright men shall be astonished at this - At the course of events in
regard to me. They will be amazed that God has suffered a holy man to be
plunged into such calamities, and to be treated in this manner by his
friends. The fact at which he supposes they would be so much astonished
was, that the good were afflicted in this manner, and that no relief was
furnished.

And the innocent shall stir up himself - Shall rouse himself, or assume
vigor to resist the wicked.

The hypocrite - The wicked - alluding probably to his professed friends.
The idea of hypocrisy which the sentence conveys arises from the fact,
that they professed to be "his" friends, and had proved to be false; and
that they had professed to be the friends of God, and yet had uttered
sentiments inconsistent with any right views of him. He now says, that
that could not go unnoticed. The world would be aroused at so remarkable
a state of things, and a just public indignation would be the result.

[Job 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 17:9</span></span>

The righteous also shall hold on his way - The meaning of this verse is
plain; but the connection is not so apparent. It seems to me that it
refers to "Job himself," and is a declaration that "he," a righteous
man, who had been so grievously calumniated, would hold on his way, and
become stronger and stronger, while "they" would sink in the public
esteem, and be compelled to abandon their position. It is the expression
of a confident assurance that "he" would be more and more confirmed in
his integrity, and would become stronger and stronger in God. Though Job
intended, probably, that this should be applied to himself, yet he has
expressed it in a general manner, and indeed the whole passage has a
proverbial cast; and it shows that even then it was the settled belief
that the righteous would persevere. As an expression of the early faith
of the pious in one of the now settled doctrines of Christianity, "the
perseverance of the saints," this doctrine is invaluable. It shows that
that doctrine has traveled down from the earliest ages. It was one of
the elementary doctrines of religion in the earliest times. It became a
proverb; and was admitted among the undisputed maxims of the wise and
good, and it was such a sentiment as was just adapted to the
circumstances of Job - a much tried and persecuted man. He was in all
the danger of apostasy to which the pious are usually exposed; he was
tempted to forsake his confidence in God; he was afflicted for reasons
which he could not comprehend; he was without an earthly friend to
sustain him, and he seemed to be forsaken by God himself; yet he had the
fullest conviction that he would be enabled to persevere. The great
principle was settled, that if there was true religion in the heart, it
would abide; that if the path of righteousness had been entered, he who
trod it would keep on his way.

And he that hath clean hands - The innocent; the friend of God; the man
of pure life; see the notes at [Job
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030); compare [Psa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004). "Clean hands" here, are designed
to denote a pure and holy life. Among the ancients they were regarded as
indicative of purity of heart. Porphyry remarks (de antro Nympharum)
that in the "mysteries," those who were initiated were accustomed to
wash their hands with honey instead of water, as a pledge that they
would preserve themselves from every impure and unholy thing; see
Burder, in Rosenmuller's Alte u. neue Morgenland, in loc.

Shall be stronger and stronger - Margin, as in Hebrew add strength. He
shall advance in the strength of his attachment to God. This is true.
The man of pure and blameless life shall become more and more
established in virtue; more confirmed in his principles; more convinced
of the value and the truth of religion. Piety, like everything else,
becomes stronger by exercise. The man who speaks truth only, becomes
more and more attached to truth; the principle of benevolence is
strengthened by being practiced; honesty, the more it is exhibited,
becomes more the settled rule of the life; and he who prays, delights
more and more in his appoaches to God. The tendency of religion in the
heart is to grow stronger and stronger; and God intends that he who has
once loved him, shall continue to love him forever.

[Job 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 17:10</span></span>

But as for you all, do you return - This may mean, either, "return to
the debate;" or, "return from your unjust and uncharitable opinion
concerning me." The former seems to accord best with the scope of the
passage. Tindal renders it, "Get you hence." Dr. Good, "Get ye hence,
and begone, I pray." Wemyss, "Repeat your discourses as often as you
may, I do not find a wise man among you." It is doubtful, however,
whether the Hebrew will bear this construction.

For I cannot find one wise man among you - Perhaps the idea here is, "I
have not yet found one wise man among you, and you are invited,
therefore, to renew the argument. Hitherto you have said nothing that
indicates wisdom. Try again, and see if you can say anything now that
shall deserve attention." If this is the meaning, it shows that Job was
willing to hear all that they had to say, and to give them credit for
wisdom, if they ever evinced any.

[Job 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 17:11</span></span>

My days are past - "I am about to die." Job relapses again into sadness
- as he often does. A sense of his miserable condition comes over him
like a cloud, and he feels that he must die.

My purposes are broken off - All my plans fail, and my schemes of life
come to an end. No matter what they could say now, it was all over with
him, and he must die; compare [Isa
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#012) :

"My habitation is taken away, and is removed from me

Like a shepherd's tent;

My life is cut off as by a weaver

Who severeth the web from the loom;

Between the morning and the night thou wilt make an end of me."

Even the thoughts of my heart - Margin, possessions. Noyes, "treasures."
Dr. Good, "resolves." Dr. Stock, "the tenants of my heart." Vulgate,
"torquen'es cor meum." Septuagint, τὰ ἄρθρα τῆς καρδίας μου ta arthra
tēs kardias mou - the strings of my heart. The Hebrew word (מורשׁ
môrâsh) means properly possession (from ירשׁ yârash, to inherit); and
the word here means the dear possessions of his heart; his cherished
plans and schemes; the delights of his soul - the purposes which he had
hoped to accomplish. All these were now to be broken on by death. This
is to man one of the most trying things in death. All his plans must be
arrested. His projects of ambition and gain, of pleasure and of fame, of
professional eminence and of learning, all are arrested midway. The
farmer is compelled to leave his plow in the furrow; the mechanic, his
work unfinished; the lawyer, his brief half prepared; the student, his
books lying open; the man who is building a palace, leaves it
incomplete; and he who is seeking a crown, is taken away when it seemed
just within his grasp. How many unfinished plans are caused by death
every day! How many unfinished books, sermons, houses, does it make! How
many schemes of wickedness and of benevolence, of fraud and of kindness,
of gain and of mercy, are daily broken in upon by death! Soon, reader,
all your plans and mine will be ended - mine, perhaps, before these
lines meet your eye; yours soon afterward. God grant that our purposes
of life may be such that we shall be willing to have them broken in upon
- all so subordinate to the GREAT PLAN of being prepared for heaven,
that we may cheerfully surrender them at any moment, at the call of the
Master summoning us into his awful presence!

[Job 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 17:12</span></span>

They change - The word "they" in this place, some understand as
referring to his friends; others, to his thoughts. Rosenmuller supposes
it is to be taken impersonally, and that the meaning is, "night is
become day to me." Wemyss translates it, "night is assigned me for day."
So Dr. Good renders it. The meaning may be, that the night was to him as
the day. He had no rest. The period when he had formerly sought repose,
was now made like the day, and all was alike gloom and sadness.

The light is short because of darkness - Margin, near. The meaning is,
probably, "even the day has lost its usual brilliancy and cheerfulness,
and has become gloomy and sad. It seems to be like night. Neither night
nor day is natural to me; the one is restless and full of cares like the
usual employments of day, and the other is gloomy, or almost night,
where there is no comfort and peace. Day brings to me none of its usual
enjoyments. It is short, gloomy, sad, and hastens away, and a
distressing and restless night soon comes on."

[Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 17:13</span></span>

If I wait - Or more accurately, "truly I expect that the grave will be
my home." The word rendered "if" (אם 'ı̂m) is often used in such a sense.
The meaning is, "I look certainly to the grave as my home. I have made
up my mind to it, and have no other expectation."

The grave - Hebrew שׁאול she'ôl. It may mean here either the grave, or
the region of departed spirits, to which he expected soon to descend.

Mine house - My home; my permanent abode.

I have made my bed - I am certain of making my bed there. I shall soon
lie down there.

In the darkness - In the grave, or in the dark world to which it leads;
see the notes at [Job 10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021).

[Job 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 17:14</span></span>

I have said - Margin, cried, or called. The sense is, "I say," or "I
thus address the grave."

To corruption - The word used here (שׁחת shachath) means properly a pit,
or pit-fall, [Psa 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015); [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015); a cistern, or a ditch, [Job
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#031); or the sepulchre, or grave, [Psa
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009); [Job
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018), [Job
33:30](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#030). The Septuagint renders it here
by θανάτον thanaton - death. Jerome (Vulgate), putredini dixi. According
to Gesenius (Lex), the word never has the sense of corruption.
Schultens, however, Rosenmuller, and others, understand it in the sense
of corruption or putrefaction. This accords, certainly, with the other
hemistich, and better constitutes a parallelism with the "worm" than the
word "grave" would. It seems probable that this is the sense here; and
if the proper meaning of the word is a pit, or the grave, it here
denotes the grave, as containing a dead and moulderling body.

Thou art my father - "I am nearly allied to it. I sustain to it a
relation like that of a child to a father." The idea seems to be that of
family likeness; and the object is to present the most striking and
impressive view of his sad and sorrowful condition. He was so diseased,
so wretched, so full of sores and of corruption (see [Job
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#005)), that he might be said to be the
child of one mouldering in the grave, and was kindred to a family in the
tomb!

To the worm - The worm that feeds upon the dead. He belonged to that sad
family where the body was putrifying, and where it was covered with
worms; see the notes at [Isa 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011).

My mother - I am so nearly allied to the worms, that the connection may
be compared to that between a mother and her son.

And my sister - "The sister here is mentioned rather than the brother,
because the noun rendered worm in the Hebrew, is in the feminine
gender." Rosenmuller. The sense of the whole is, that Job felt that he
belonged to the grave. He was destined to corruption. He was soon to lie
down with the dead. His acquaintance and kindred were there. So corrupt
was his body, so afflicted and diseased, that he seemed to belong to the
family of the putrifying, and of those covered with worms! What an
impressive description; and yet how true is it of all! The most vigorous
frame, the most beautiful and graceful form, the most brilliant
complexion, has a near relationship to the worm, and will soon belong to
the mouldering family beneath the ground! Christian reader! such are
you; such am I. Well, let it be so. Let us not repine. Be the grave our
home; be the mouldering people there our parents, and brothers, and
sisters. Be our alliance with the worms. There is a brighter scene
beyond - a world where we shall be kindred with the angels, and ranked
among the sons of God. In that world we shall be clothed with immortal
youth, and shall know corruption no more. Then our eyes will shine with
undiminished brilliancy forever; our cheeks glow with immortal health;
our hearts beat with the pulsations of eternal life. Then our hands
shall be feeble and our knees totter with disease or age no more; and
then the current of health and joy shall flow on through our veins
forever and eye! Allied now to worms we are, but we are allied to the
angels too; the grave is to be our home, but so also is heaven; the worm
is our brother, but so also is the Son of God! Such is man; such are his
prospects here, such his hopes and destiny in the world to come. He dies
here, but he lives in glory and honor hereafter forever.

Shall man, O God of light and life,

For ever moulder in the grave?

Canst thou forget thy glorious work,

Thy promise and thy power to save?

Shall life revisit dying worms,

And spread the joyful insects' wing;

And O shall man awake no more,

To see thy face, thy name to sing?

Faith sees the bright, eternal doors,

Unfold to make her children way;

They shall be clothed with endless life,

And shine in everlasting day.

The trump shall sound, the dead shall wake,

From the cold tomb the slumberers spring;

Through heaven with joy these myriads rise,

And hail their Savior and their King.

Dr. Dwight

[Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 17:15</span></span>

And where is now my hope? - What hope have I of life? What possibility
is there of my escape from death?

Who shall see it? - That is, who will see any hopes that I may now
cherish fulfilled. If I cherish any, they will be disappointed, and no
one will see them accomplished.

[Job 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 17:16</span></span>

They shall go down - That is, my hopes shall go down. All the
expectations that I have cherished of life and happiness, will descend
there with me. We have a similar expression when we say, that a man "has
buried his hopes in the grave," when he loses an only son.

To the bars of the pit - "Bars of Sheol" - שׁאול בד bad she'ôl. Vulgate,
"Profoundest deep." Septuagint, εἰς ᾅδην eis hadēn - to Hades. Sheol, or
Hades, was supposed to be under the earth. Its entrance was by the grave
as a gate that led to it. It was protected by bars - as prisons are - so
that those who entered there could not escape; see the notes at [Isa
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009). It was a dark, gloomy dwelling,
far away from light, and from the comforts which people enjoy in this
life; see [Job 10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021). To that dark
world Job expected soon to descend; and though he did not regard that as
properly a place of punishment, yet it was not a place of positive joy.
It was a gloomy and wretched world - the land of darkness and of the
shadow of death; and he looked to the certainty of going there not with
joy, but with anguish and distress of heart. Had Job been favored with
the clear and elevated views of heaven which we have in the Christian
revelation, death to him would have lost its gloom.

We wonder, often, that so good a man expressed such a dread of death,
and that he did not look more calmly into the future world. But to do
him justice, we should place ourselves in his situation. We should lay
aside all that is cheerful and glad in the views of heaven which
Christianity has given us. We should look upon the future world as the
shadow of death; a land of gloom and spectres; a place beneath the
ground - dark, chilly, repulsive; and we shall cease to wonder at the
expressions of even so good a man at the prospect of death. When we look
at him, we should remember with thankfulness the different views which
we have of the future world, and the source to which we owe them. To us,
if we are pious in any measure as Job was, death is the avenue, not to a
world of gloom, but to a world of light and glory. It opens into heaven.
There is no gloom, no darkness, no sorrow. There all are happy; and
there all that is mysterious in this life is made plain - all that is
sad is succeeded by eternal joy. These views we owe to that gospel which
has brought life and immortality to light; and when we think of death
and the future world, when from the midst of woes and sorrows we are
compelled to look out on eternity, let us rejoice that we are not
constrained to look forward with the sad forebodings of the Sage of Uz,
but that we may think of the grave cheered by the strong consolations of
Christian hope of the glorious resurrection.

When our rest together is in the dust - The rest of me and my hopes. My
hopes and myself will expire together.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 18](job018)

</div>
