<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joel Index](joe)  
  [Previous](joe000)  [Next](joe002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001)

[Joel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 1:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord that came to Joel - Joel, like Hosea, mentions the
name of his father only, and then is silent about his extraction, his
tribe, his family. He leaves even the time when he lived, to be guessed
at. He would be known only, as the instrument of God. "The word of the
Lord came to" him (see the note at [Hos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)), and he willed simply to be the
voice which uttered it. He was "content to live under the eyes of God,
and, as to people, to be known only in what concerned their salvation."
But this he declares absolutely, that the Word of God came to him; in
order that we may give faith to his prophecy, being well assured that
what he predicted, would come to pass. So the Saviour Himself says, ""My
words shall not pass away" [Mat 24:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035).
For truth admits of nothing false, and what God saith, will certainly
be. For "He confirmeth the word of His servant, and performeth the
counsel of His messengers" [Isa 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026).
The prophet claimeth belief then, as speaking not out of his own heart,
but out of the mouth of the Lord speaking in the Spirit." Joel
signifies, "The Lord is God." It owns that God who had revealed Himself,
is alone the God. The prophet's name itself, embodied the truth, which,
after the miraculous answer to Elijah's prayer, all the people
confessed, "The Lord He is the God, The Lord He is the God." Pethuel
signifies, "persuaded of God." The addition of his father's name
distinguished the prophet from others of that name, as the son of
Samuel, of king Uzziah, and others.

[Joel 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joe 1:2</span></span>

Hear this, ye old men - By reason of their age they had known and heard
much; they had heard from their fathers, and their father's fathers,
much which they had not known themselves. Among the people of the east,
memories of past times were handed down from generation to generation,
for periods, which to us would seem incredible. Israel was commanded, so
to transmit the vivid memories of the miracles of God. The prophet
appeals "to the old men, to hear," and, (lest, anything should seem to
have escaped them) to the whole people of the land, to give their whole
attention to this thing, which he was about to tell them, and then,
reviewing all the evils which each had ever heard to have been inflicted
by God upon their forefathers, to say whether this thing had happened in
their days or in the days of their fathers.

[Joel 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joe 1:3</span></span>

Tell ye your children of it - In the order of God's goodness, generation
was to declare to generation the wonders of His love. "He established a
testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which He commanded
our fathers that they should make them known to their children, that the
generation to come might know them, the children which should be born,
who should arise and declare them to their children that they might ...
not forget the works of God" [Psa
78:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#005). This tradition of thankful
memories God, as the Psalmist says, enforced in the law; "Take heed to
thyself, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, but
teach them thy sons and thy sons' sons" ([Deu
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009); add [Deu
6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006); [Deu
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#019)). This was the end of the
memorial acts of the ritual, that their sons might inquire the meaning
of them, the fathers tell them God's wonders [Deu
6:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020). Now contrariwise, they are,
generation to generation, to tell concerning it, this message of
unheard-of woe and judgment. The memory of God's deeds of love should
have stirred them to gratitude; now He transmits to them memories of
woe, that they might entreat God against them, and break off the sins
which entail them.

[Joel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joe 1:4</span></span>

That which the palmerworm hath left, hath the locust eaten - The
creatures here spoken of are different kinds of locusts, so named from
their number or voracity. We, who are free from this scourge of God,
know them only by the generic name of locusts. But the law mentions
several sorts of locusts, each after its kind, which might be eaten . In
fact, above eighty different kinds of locusts have been observed , some
of which are twice as large as that which is the ordinary scourge of God
. Slight as they are in themselves, they are mighty in God's Hand;
beautiful and gorgeous as they are, floating in the sun's rays , they
are a scourge, including other plagues, famine, and often, pestilence.

Of the four kinds, here named by the prophet, that rendered "locust" is
so called from its multitude, (from where Jeremiah says "they are more
numerous than the locust" See [Jdg
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#005); [Jdg
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#012); [Psa
105:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#034); [Nah
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015). It is a proverb in Arabic
also)), and is, probably, the creature which desolates whole regions of
Asia and Africa. The rest are named from their voracity, the "gnawer,"
"licker," "consumer," but they are, beyond doubt, distinct kinds of that
destroyer. And this is the characteristic of the prophet's threatening,
that he foretells a succession of destroyers, each more fatal than the
preceding; and that, not according to the order of nature. For in all
the observations which have been made of the locusts, even when
successive flights have desolated the same land, they have always been
successive clouds of the same creature.

Over and above the fact, then, that locusts are a heavy chastisement
from God, these words of Joel form a sort of sacred proverb. They are
the epitome of his whole prophecy. It is "this" which he had called the
old men to hear, and to say whether they had known anything like "this;"
that scourge came after scourge, judgment after judgment, until man
yielded or perished. The visitation of locusts was one of the
punishments threatened in the law, "Thou shall carry much seed out into
the field, and shalt gather but little in, for the locust shall consume
it" [Deu 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#038). It was one of God's
ordinary punishments for sin, in that country, like famine, or
pestilence, or blight, or mildew, or murrain, or (in this) potato
disease. Solomon, accordingly, at the dedication of the temple mentions
the locust among the other plagues, which he then solemnly entreated God
to remove, when individuals or the whole people should spread forth
their hands in penitence toward that house [Kg1
8:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#037).

But the characteristic of "this" prophecy is the successiveness of the
judgments, each in itself, desolating, and the later following quick
upon the earlier, and completing their destructiveness. The judgments of
God are linked together by an invisible chain, each drawing on the
other; yet, at each link of the lengthening chain, allowing space and
time for repentance to break it through. So in the plagues of Egypt,
God, "executing His judgments upon them by little and little, gave them
time for repentance" (Wisd. 12:10); yet, when Pharaoh hardened his
heart, each followed on the other, until he perished in the Red Sea. In
like way God said, "him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu
slay; and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay"
[Kg1 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#017). So, in the Revelation, the
"trumpets" are sounded [Rev 8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001);
Rev. 9; [Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015), and "the vials of
the wrath of God are poured out upon the earth, one after the other"
Rev. 16. Actual locusts were very likely one of the scourges intended by
the prophet. They certainly were not the whole; but pictured others
fiercer, more desolating, more overwhelming. The proverbial dress gained
and fixed people's attention on the truth, which, if it had been
presented to the people nakedly, they might have turned from. Yet as, in
God's wisdom, what is said generally, is often fulfilled specially, so
here there were four great invaders which in succession wasted Judah;
the Assyrian, Chaldaean, Macedonian and Roman.

Morally, also, four chief passions desolate successively the human
heart. : "For what is designated by the "palmerworm," which creeps with
all its body on the ground, except it be lust, which so pollutes the
heart which it possesses, that it cannot rise up to the love of heavenly
purity? What is expressed by the "locust," which flies by leaps, except
vain glory which exalts itself with empty presumptions? What is typified
by the "cankerworm," almost the whole of whose body is gathered into its
belly, except gluttony in eating? What but anger is indicated by mildew,
which burns as it touches? What the "palmerworm" then "hath left the
locust heath eaten," because, when the sin of lust has retired from the
mind, vain glory often succeeds. For since it is not now subdued by the
love of the flesh, it boasts of itself, as if it were holy through its
chastity. "And that which the locust hath left, the cankerworm hath
eaten," because when vain glory, which came, as it were, from holiness,
is resisted, either the appetite, or some ambitious desires are indulged
in too immoderately. For the mind which knows not God, is led the more
fiercely to any object of ambition, in proportion as it is not
restrained by any love of human praise. "That which the cankerworm hath
left," the mildew consumes, because when the gluttony of the belly is
restrained by abstinence, the impatience of anger holds fiercer sway,
which, like mildew, eats up the harvest by burning it, because the flame
of impatience withers the fruit of virtue. When then some vices succeed
to others, one plague devours the field of the mind, while another
leaves it."

[Joel 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joe 1:5</span></span>

Awake, ye drunkards, and weep - All sin stupefies the sinner. All
intoxicate the mind, bribe and pervert the judgment, dull the
conscience, blind the soul and make it insensible to its own ills. All
the passions, anger, vain glory, ambition, avarice and the rest are a
spiritual drunkenness, inebriating the soul, as strong drink doth the
body. : "They are called drunkards, who, confused with the love of this
world, feel not the ills which they suffer. What then is meant by,
"Awake, ye drunkards and weep," but, 'shake off the sleep of your
insensibility, and oppose by watchful lamentations the many plagues of
sins, which succeed one to the other in the devastation of your
hearts?'" God arouse those who will be aroused, by withdrawing from them
the pleasures wherein they offended Him. Awake, the prophet cries, from
the sottish slumber of your drunkenness; awake to weep and howl, at
least when your feverish enjoyments are dashed from your lips. Weeping
for things temporal may awaken to the fear of losing things eternal.

[Joel 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joe 1:6</span></span>

For a nation is come up upon my land - He calls this scourge of God a
"nation," giving them the title most used in Holy Scripture, of pagan
nations. The like term, "people, folk," is used of the "ants" and the
"conies" [Pro 30:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#025), for the wisdom
with which God teaches them to act. Here it is used, in order to include
at once, the irrational invader, guided by a Reason above its own, and
the pagan conqueror. This enemy, he says, is "come up" (for the land as
being God's land, was exalted in dignity, above other lands,) "upon My
land," i. e. "the Lord's land" [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003), hitherto owned protected as God's
land, a land which, Moses said to them, "the Lord thy God careth for;
the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of
the year even unto the end of the year" [Deu
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#012). Now it was to be bared of God's
protection, and to be trampled upon by a pagan foe.

Strong and without number - The figure is still from the locust, whose
numbers are wholly countless by man. Travelers sometimes use likenesses
to express their number, as clouds darkening the sun (see the note at
[Joe 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010)) or discharging flakes of
snow ; some grave writers give it up, as hopeless. : "Their multitude is
incredible, whereby they cover the earth and fill the air; they take
away the brightness of the sun. I say again, the thing is incredible to
one who has not seen them." "It would not be a thing to be believed, if
one had not seen it." "On another day, it was beyond belief: they
occupied a space of eight leagues (about 24 English miles). I do not
mention the multitude of those without wings, because it is incredible."
: "When we were in the Seignory of Abrigima, in a place called Aquate,
there came such a multitude of locusts, as cannot be said. They began to
arrive one day about terce (nine) and until night they cease not to
arrive; and when they arrived, they bestowed themselves. On the next day
at the hour of prime they began to depart, and at mid-day there was not
one, and there remained not a leaf on the trees. At this instant others
began to come, and staved like the others to the next day at the same
hour; and these left not a stick with its bark, nor a green herb, and
thus did they five days one after another; and the people said that they
were the sons, who went to seek their fathers, and they took the road
toward the others which had no wings. After they were gone, we knew the
breadth which they had occupied, and saw the destruction which they had
made, it exceeded three leagues (nine miles) wherein there remained no
bark on the trees."

Another writes of South Africa ; "Of the innumerable multitudes of the
incomplete insect or larva of the locusts, which at this time infested
this part of Africa, no adequate idea could be conceived without having
witnessed them. For the space of ten miles on each side of the Sea-Cow
river, and eighty or ninety miles in length, an area of 16, or 1800
square miles, the whole surface might literally be said to be covered
with them. The water of the river was scarcely visible on account of the
dead carcasses which floated on the surface, drowned in the attempt to
come at the weeds which grew in it." : "The present year is the third of
their continuance, and their increase has far exceeded that of a
geometrical progression whose whole ratio is a million." A writer of
reputation says of a "column of locusts" in India ; "It extended, we
were informed, 500 miles, and so compact was it when on the wing, that,
like an eclipse, it completely hid the sun; so that no shadow was cast
by any object, and some lofty tombs, not more than 200 yards distant,
were rendered quite invisible."

In one single neighborhood, even in Germany, it was once calculated that
near 17,000,000 of their eggs were collected and destroyed . Even Volney
writes of those in Syria , "the quantity of these insects is a thing
incredible to anyone who has not seen it himself; the ground is covered
with them for several leagues." "The steppes," says Clarke , an
incredulous traveler, "were entirely covered by their bodies, and their
numbers falling resembled flakes of snow, carried obliquely by the wind,
and spreading thick mists over the sun. Myriads fell over the carriage,
the horses, the drivers. The Tartars told us, that persons had been
suffocated by a fall of locusts on the "steppes." It was now the season,
they added, in which they began to diminish." : "It was incredible, that
their breadth was eight leagues."

Strong - The locust is remarkable for its long flights. "Its strength of
limbs is amazing; when pressed down by the hand on the table, it has
almost power to move the fingers" .

Whose teeth are the teeth of a lion - The teeth of the locust are said
to be "harder than stone." : "They appear to be created for a scourge;
since to strength incredible for so small a creature, they add saw-like
teeth admirably calculated to "eat up all the herbs in the land."" Some
near the Senegal, are described as "quite brown, of the thickness and
length of a finger, and armed with two jaws, toothed like a saw, and
very powerful." The prophet ascribes to them the sharp or prominent
eye-teeth of the lion and lioness, combining strength with number. The
ideal of this scourge of God is completed by blending numbers, in which
creatures so small only could exist together, with the strength of the
fiercest. : "Weak and short-lived is man, yet when God is angered
against a sinful people, what mighty power does He allow to man against
it!" "And what more cruel than those who endeavor to slay souls, turning
them from the Infinite and Eternal Good, and so dragging them to the
everlasting torments of Hell?"

[Joel 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joe 1:7</span></span>

He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree - This describes an
extremity of desolation. The locusts at first attack all which is green
and succulent; when this has been consumed, then they attack the bark of
trees. : "When they have devoured all other vegetables, they attack the
trees, consuming first the leaves, then the bark." : "A day or two after
one of these bodies were in motion, others were already hatched to glean
after them, gnawing off the young branches and the very bark of such
trees as had escaped before with the loss only of their fruit and
foliage." : "They carried desolation wherever they passed. After having
consumed herbage, fruit, leaves of trees, they attacked even their young
shoots and their bark. Even the reeds, wherewith the huts were thatched,
though quite dry, were not spared." : "Everything in the country was
devoured; the bark of figs, pomegranates, and oranges, bitter hard and
corrosive, escaped not their voracity." The effects of this wasting last
on for many years .

He hath made it clean bare - o: "It is sufficient, if these terrible
columns stop half an hour on a spot, for everything growing on it,
vines, olive trees, and grain, to be entirely destroyed. After they have
passed, nothing remains but the large branches, and the roots which,
being under ground, have escaped their voracity." : "After eating up the
corn, they fell upon the vines, the pulse, the willows and even the
hemp, notwithstanding its great bitterness." : "They are particularly
injurious to the palm trees; these they strip of every leaf and green
particle, the trees remaining like skeletons with bare branches." : "The
bushes were eaten quite bare, though the animals could not have been
long on the spot. They sat by hundreds on a bush gnawing the rind and
the woody fibres."

The branches thereof are made white - o: "The country did not seem to be
burnt, but to be much covered with snow, through the whiteness of the
trees and the dryness of the herbs. It pleased God that the fresh crops
were already gathered in."

The "vine" is the well-known symbol of God's people [Psa
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008), [Psa
80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014); [Sol
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#013), [Sol
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015); [Hos
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001); [Isa
5:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001); [Isa
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002); the fig too, by reason of its
sweetness, is an emblem of His Church and of each soul in her, bringing
forth the fruit of grace [Hos 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010);
[Mat 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019); [Luk
13:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#006). When then God says, "he hath
laid My vine waste," He suggests to us, that He is not speaking chiefly
of the visible tree, but of that which it represents. The locusts,
accordingly, are not chiefly the insects, which bark the actual trees,
but every enemy which wastes the heritage of God, which He calls by
those names. His vineyard, the Jewish people, was outwardly and
repeatedly desolated by the Chaldaens, Antiochus Epiphanes, and
afterward by the Romans. The vineyard, which the Jews had, was, (as
Jesus foretold,) let out to other farmers when they had killed Him; and,
thenceforth, is the Christian Church, and, subordinately each soul in
her. : "Pagan and heretical Emperors and heresiarchs wasted often the
Church of Christ. antichrist shall waste it. They who have wasted her
are countless. For the Psalmist says, "They who hate me without a cause
are more than the hair's of my head" [Psa
69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004).

: "The nation which cometh up against the soul, are the princes of this
world and of darkness and spiritual wickedness in high places, whose
teeth are the teeth of a lion, of whom the Apostle Peter saith, "Our
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about seeking whom he
may devour" [Pe1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008). If we give way
to this nation, so that they should come up in us, immediately they will
make our vineyard where we were accustomed to make "wine to gladden the
heart of man" [Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015), a desert,
and bark or break our fig tree, that we should no more have in us those
most sweet gifts of the Holy Spirit. Nor is it enough for that nation to
destroy the vineyard and break the fig tree, unless it also destroy
whatever there is of life in it, so that, its whole freshness being
consumed. the switches remain white and dead, and that be fulfilled in
us, "If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the
dry?" [Luk 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031). : "The Church, at
least apart of it, is turned into a desert, deprived of spiritual goods,
when the faithful are led, by consent to sin, to forsake God. "The fig
tree is barked," when the soul which once abounded with sweetest goods
and fruits of the Holy Spirit, hath those goods lessened or cut off.
Such are they who, having "begun in the Spirit" [Gal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003), are perfected by the flesh."

" By spirits lying in wait, the vineyard of God is made a desert, when
the soul, replenished with fruits, is wasted with longing for the praise
of people. That "people barks" the "fig tree" of God, in that, carrying
away the misguided soul to a thirst for applause, in proportion as it
draws her on to ostentation, it strips her of the covering of humility.
"Making it clean bare, it despoils it," in that, so long as it lies
hidden in its goodness, it is, as it were, clothed with a covering of
its own, which protects it. But when the mind longs that which it has
done should be seen by others, it is as though "the fig tree despoiled"
had lost the bark that covered it. And so, as it follows, "The branches
thereof are made white;" in that his works, displayed to the eyes of
people, have a bright show; a name for sanctity is gotten, when good
actions are published. But as, upon the bark being removed, the branches
of the fig tree wither, so observe that the deeds of the arrogant,
paraded before human eyes, wither through the very act of socking to
please. Therefore the mind which is betrayed through boastfulness is
rightly called a fig tree barked, in that it is at once fair to the eye,
as being seen, and within a little of withering, as being bared of the
covering of the bark. Within, then, must our deeds be laid up, if we
look to a reward of our deeds from Him who seeth within."

[Joel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joe 1:8</span></span>

Lament like a virgin - The prophet addresses the congregation of Israel,
as one espoused to God ; "'Lament thou,' daughter of Zion," or the like.
He bids her lament, with the bitterest of sorrows, as one who, in her
virgin years, was just knit into one with the husband of her youth, and
then at once was, by God's judgment, on the very day of her espousal,
ere yet she ceased to be a virgin, parted by death. The mourning which
God commands is not one of conventional or becoming mourning, but that
of one who has put away all joy from her, and takes the rough garment of
penitence, girding the haircloth upon her, enveloping and embracing, and
therewith, wearing the whole frame. The haircloth was a coarse, rough,
formless, garment, girt close round the waist, afflictive to the flesh,
while it expressed the sorrow of the soul. God regarded as a virgin, the
people which He had made holy to Himself [Jer
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002).

He so regards the soul which He has regenerated and sanctified. The
people, by their idolatry, lost Him who was a Husband to them; the soul,
by inordinate affections, is parted from its God. : "God Almighty was
the Husband of the synagogue, having espoused it to Himself in the
patriarchs and at the giving of the law. So long as she did not, through
idolatry and other heavy sins, depart from God, she was a spouse in the
integrity of mind, in knowledge, in love and worship of the true God." :
"The Church is a Virgin; Christ her Husband. By prevailing sins, the
order, condition, splendor, worship of the Church, are, through
negligence, concupiscence, avarice, irreverence, worsened, deformed,
obscured." "The soul is a virgin by its creation in nature; a virgin by
privilege of grace; a virgin also by hope of glory. Inordinate desire
maketh the soul a harlot; manly penitence restoreth to her chastity;
wise innocence, virginity. For the soul recovereth a sort of chastity,
when through thirst for righteousness, she undertakes the pain and fear
of penitence; still she is not as yet raised to the eminence of
innocence. - In the first state she is exposed to concupiscence; in the
second, she doth works of repentance; in the third, bewailing her
Husband, she is filled with the longing for righteousness; in the
fourth, she is gladdened by virgin embraces and the kiss of Wisdom. For
Christ is the Husband of her youth, the Betrother of her virginity. But
since she parted from Him to evil concupiscence, she is monished to
return to Him by sorrow and the works and garb of repentance." : "So
should every Christian weep who has lost Baptismal grace, or has fallen
back after repentance, and, deprived of the pure embrace of the heavenly
Bridegroom, embraced instead these earthly things which are as dunghills
[Lam 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#005), having been brought up in
scarlet, and being in honor, had no understanding [Psa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012), [Psa
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020). Whence it is written, "let
tears run down like a river day and night; give thyself no rest" [Lam
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#018). Such was he who said; rivers of
waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not Thy law" [Psa
119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136).

[Joel 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joe 1:9</span></span>

The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off - The meat offering
and drink offering were part of every sacrifice. If the materials for
these, the grain and wine, ceased, through locusts or drought or the
wastings of war, the sacrifice must become mangled and imperfect. The
priests were to mourn for the defects of the sacrifice; they lost also
their own subsistence, since the altar was, to them, in place of all
other inheritance. The meat and drink offerings were emblems of the
materials of the holy eucharist, by which Malachi foretold that, when
God had rejected the offering of the Jews, there should be a "pure
offering" among the pagan [Joe 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#011).
When then holy communions become rare, the meat and drink offering are
literally cut off from the house of the Lord, and those who are indeed
priests, the ministers of the Lord, should mourn. Joel foretells that,
however love should wax cold, there should ever be such. He forsees and
foretells at once, the failure, and the grief of the priests. Nor is it
an idle regret which he foretells, but a mourning unto their God. :
"Both meat offering and drink offering hath perished from the house of
God, not in actual substance but as to reverence, because, amid the
prevailing iniquity there is scarcely found in the Church, who should
duly celebrate, or receive the sacraments."

[Joel 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joe 1:10</span></span>

The field is wasted, the land mourneth - As, when God pours out His
blessings of nature, all nature seems to smile and be glad, and as the
Psalmist says, "to shout for joy and sing" [Psa
65:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#013), so when He withholds them, it
seems to mourn, and, by its mourning, to reproach the insensibility of
man. Oil is the emblem of the abundant graces and gifts of the Holy
Spirit, and of the light and devotion of soul given by Him, and
spiritual gladness, and overflowing, all-mantling charity.

[Joel 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joe 1:11</span></span>

Be ye ashamed, O ye farmers - The prophet dwells on and expands the
description of the troubles which he had foretold, setting before their
eyes the picture of one universal dessolation. For the details of sorrow
most touch the heart, and he wished to move them to repentance. He
pictures them to themselves; some standing aghast and ashamed of the
fruitlessness of their toil others giving way to bursts of sorrow, and
all things around waste and dried. Nothing was exempt. Wheat and barley,
widespread as they were (and the barley in those countries, "more
fertile" than the wheat,) perished utterly. The rich juice of the vine,
the luscious sweetness of the fig the succulence of the ever-green
pomegranate, the majesty of the palm tree, the fragrance of the eastern
apple, exempted them not. All, fruitbearing or barren, were dried up,
for joy itself, and every source of joy was dried up from the sons of
men.

All these suggest a spiritual meaning. For we know of a spiritual
harvest, souls born to God, and a spiritual vineyard, the Church of God;
and spiritual farmers and vinedressers, those whom God sends. The trees,
with their various fruits were emblems of the faithful, adorned with the
various gifts and graces of the Spirit. All well-nigh were dried up.
Wasted without, in act and deed, the sap of the Spirit ceased within;
the true laborers, those who were jealous for the vineyard of the Lord
of hosts were ashamed and grieved. : "Husbandmen" and "vinedressers,"
are priests and preachers; "farmers" as instructors in morals,
"vinedressers" for that joy in things eternal, which they infuse into
the minds of the bearers. "Husbandmen," as instructing the soul to deeds
of righteousness; vinedressers, as exciting the minds of hearers to the
love of wisdom. Or, "farmers," in that by their doctrine they uproot
earthly deeds and desires; "vinedressers," as holding forth spiritual
gifts." "The vine is the richness of divine knowledge; the fig the
sweetness of contemplation and the joyousness in things eternal." The
pomegranate, with its manifold grains contained under its one bark, may
designate the variety and harmony of graces, disposed in their beautiful
order. "The palm, rising above the world." : "Well is the life of the
righteous likened to a palm, in that the palm below is rough to the
touch, and in a manner enveloped in dry bark, but above it is adorned
with fruit, fair even to the eye; below it is compressed by the
enfoldings of its bark; above, it is spread nut in amplitude of
beautiful greenness. For so is the life of the elect, despised below,
beautiful above. Down below, it is, as it were, enfolded in many barks,
in that it is straitened by innumerable afflictions. But on high it is
expanded into a foliage, as it were, of beautiful greenness by the
amplitude of the rewarding."

[Joel 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joe 1:12</span></span>

Because joy is withered away - o: "There are four sorts of joy, a joy in
iniquity, a joy in vanity, a joy of charity, a joy of felicity. Of the
first we read, "Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the forwardness
of the wicked [Pro 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#014). Of the
second, "They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
organ" [Job 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012). Of the third, "Let
the saints be joyful in glory" [Psa
149:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#005). Of the fourth, "Blessed are
they that dwell in Thy house; they will be still praising Thee" [Psa
84:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004). The joy of charity and the joy
of felicity "wither from the sons of men," when the virtues aforesaid
failing, there being neither knowledge of the truth nor love of virtue,
no reward succeedeth, either in this life or that to come."

Having thus pictured the coming woe, he calls all to repentance and
mourning, and those first, who were to call others. God Himself
appointed these afflictive means, and here He "gives to the priest a
model for penitence and a way of entreating mercy." : "He invites the
priests first to repentance through whose negligence chiefly the
practice of holiness, the strictness of discipline, the form of
doctrine, the whole aspect of the Church was sunk in irreverence. Whence
the people also perished, hurrying along the various haunts of sin.
Whence Jeremiah says, "The kings of the earth and all the inhabitants of
the world would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy
should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. For the sins of her
prophets and the iniquities of her priests that have shed the blood of
the just in the midst of her, they have wandered as blind men in the
streets, they have polluted themselves with blood [Lam
4:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#013).

[Joel 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joe 1:13</span></span>

Gird yourselves - that is, with haircloth, as is elsewhere expressed
[Isa 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012); [Jer
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#008); [Jer
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#026). The outward affliction is an
expression of the inward grief, and itself excites to further grief.
This their garment of affliction and penitence, they were not to put off
day and night. Their wonted duty was to "offer up sacrifice for their
own sins and the sins of the people" [Heb
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027), and to entreat God for them.
This their office the prophet calls them to discharge day and night; to
"come" into the court of the temple, and there, where God showed Himself
in majesty and mercy, "lie all night" prostrate before God, not at ease,
but in sackcloth. He calls to them in the Name of his God, "Ye ministers
of my God;" of Him, to whom, whosoever forsook Him, he himself was
faithful. : "The prophets called the God of all, their own God, being
united to Him by singular love and reverential obedience, so that they
could say, "God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever" [Psa
73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026). He calls Him, further, "their"
God, (your God) in order to remind them of His special favor to them,
and their duty to Him who allowed them to call Him "their" God.

[Joel 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joe 1:14</span></span>

Sanctify ye a fast - He does not say only, "proclaim," or "appoint a
fast," but "sanctify it." Hallow the act of abstinence, seasoning it
with devotion and with acts meet for repentance. For fasting is not
accepted by God, unless done in charity and obedience to His commands. :
"Sanctify" it, i. e., make it an offering to God, and as it were a
sacrifice, a holy and blameless fast." : "To sanctify a fast is to
exhibit abstinence of the flesh, meet toward God, with other good. Let
anger cease, strife be lulled. For in vain is the flesh worn, if the
mind is not held in from evil passions, inasmuch as the Lord saith by
the prophet, "Lo! in the day of your fast you find your pleasures" [Isa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003). The fast which the Lord
approveth, is that which lifteth up to Him hands full of almsdeeds,
which is passed with brotherly love, which is seasoned by piety. What
thou substractest from thyself, bestow on another, that thy needy
neighbor's flesh may be recruited by means of that which thou deniest to
thine own."

Call a solemn assembly - Fasting without devotion is an image of famine.
At other times "the solemn assembly" was for festival-joy. Such was the
last day of the feast of the Passover [Deu
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#008) and of tabernacles [Lev
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036); [Num
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#035); [Ch2
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#009); [Neh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#018). No servile work was to be done
thereon. It was then to be consecrated to thanksgving, but now to sorrow
and supplication. : "The prophet commands that all should be called and
gathered into the Temple, that so the prayer might be the rather heard,
the more they were who offered it. Wherefore the Apostle besought his
disciples to pray for him, that so what was asked might be obtained the
more readily through the intercession of many."

Gather the elders - Age was, by God's appointment [Lev
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#032), held in great reverence among
the Hebrews. When first God sent Moses and Aaron to His people in Egypt,
He bade them collect the elders of the people ([Exo
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#016); [Exo
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#029), compare [Deu
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#028)) to declare to them their own
mission from God; through them He conveyed the ordinance of the Passover
to the whole congregation [Exo 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003),
[Exo 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021); in their presence was the
first miracle of bringing water from the rock performed ([Exo
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005), add [Exo
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#012)); then He commanded Moses to
choose seventy of them, to appear before Him before He gave the law [Exo
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001), [Exo
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#009); then to bear Moses' own burden
in hearing the causes of the people, bestowing His spirit upon them
([Num 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016) ff). The elders of each
city were clothed with judicial authority [Deu
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#012); [Deu
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#015); [Deu
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#007). In the expiation of an uncertain
murder, the elders of the city represented the whole city [Deu
21:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#003); in the offerings for the
congregation, the elders of the congregation represented the whole [Lev
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#015); [Lev
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001).

So then, here also, they are summoned, chief of all, that "the authority
and example of their grey hairs might move the young to repentance." :
"Their age, near to death and ripened in grace, makes them more apt for
the fear and worship of God." All however, "priests, elders," and the
"inhabitants," or "people of the land" [Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018), were to form one band, and were,
with one heart and voice, to cry unto God; and that "in the house of
God." For so Solomon had prayed, that God would "in heaven His dwelling
place, hear whatever prayer and supplication" might there be "made by
any man or by all His people Israel" [Kg1
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#039); and God had promised in turn, "I
have hallowed this house which thou hast built, to put My name there for
ever, and Mine eyes and Mine heart shall be there perpetually" [Kg1
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#003). God has given to united prayer a
power over Himself, and "prayer overcometh God" . The prophet calls God
"your" God, showing how ready He was to hear; but he adds, "cry unto the
Lord;" for it is not a listless prayer, but a loud earnest cry, which
reacheth to the throne of God.

[Joel 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joe 1:15</span></span>

Alas for the day! for the Day of the Lord is at hand - The judgment of
God, then, which they were to deprecate, was still to come. : "All times
and all days are God's. Yet they are said to be our days, in which God
leaves us to our own freedom, to do as we will," and which we may use to
repent and turn to Him. "Whence Christ saith, 'O Jerusalem - if thou
hadst known in this thy day the things which belong unto thy peace' [Luk
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042). That time, on the contrary, is
said to be God's Day, in which He doth any new, rare, or special thing,
such as is the Day of Judgment or vengeance." All judgment in time is an
image of the Judgment for eternity. "The Day of the Lord" is, then, each
"day of vengeance in which God doth to man according to His will and
just judgment, inflicting the punishment which he deserves, as man did
to Him in his day, manifoldly dishonoring Him, according to his own
perverse will." That Day "is at hand;" suddenly to come. Speed then must
be used to prevent it. Prevented it may be by speedy repentance before
it comes; but when it does come, there will be no avoiding it, for

As a destruction from the Almighty shall it come - The name "the
Almighty" or "God Almighty" is but seldom used in Holy Scripture. God
revealed Himself by this Name to Abraham, when renewing to him the
promise which was beyond nature, that he should be a father of many
nations, when he and Sarah were old and well stricken in age. He said, I
am God Almighty; walk before Me and be thou perfect [Gen
17:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001), [Gen
17:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#016); [Gen
18:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010); [Rom
4:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017). God Almighty uses it again of
Himself in renewing the blessing to Jacob [Gen
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011); and Isaac and Jacob use it in
blessing in His Name [Gen 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003); [Gen
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014); [Gen
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#003); [Gen
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025). It is not used as a mere name
of God, but always in reference to His might, as in the book of Job
which treats chiefly of His power . In His days of judgment God
manifests Himself as the All-mighty and All-just. Hence, in the New
Testament, it occurs almost exclusively in the Revelations, which reveal
His judgments to come . Here the words form a sort of terrible proverb,
from where they are adopted from Joel by the prophet Isaiah [Isa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006). The word "destruction, שׁד
shôd," is formed from the same root as "Almighty, שׁדי shadday. It shall
come as might from the Mighty." Only, the word "might" is always used of
"might" put forth to destroy, a "mighty destruction." He says then, in
fact, that that Day shall come, like might put forth by the Almighty
Himself; to destroy His enemies, irresistible, inevitable, unendurable,
overwhelming the sinner.

[Joel 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joe 1:16</span></span>

Is not the meat cut off before our eyes? - The prophet exhibits the
immediate judgment, as if it were already fullilled in act. He sets it
in detail before their eyes. "When the fruits of the earth were now
ripe, the grain now calling for the reaper, and the grapes fully ripe
and desiring to be pressed out, they were taken away, when set before
their eyes for them to enjoy." Yea, "joy and gladness from the house of
our God." The joy in the abundance of the harvest was expressed in one
universal thanksgiving to God, by fathers of families, sons, daughters,
menservants, maidservants, with the priest and Levite. All this was to
be cut off together. The courts of God's house were to be desolate and
silent, or joy and gladness were to be turned into sorrow and wailing.

: "So it befell those who rejected and insulted Christ. "The Bread of
life Which came down from heaven and gave life to the world [Joh
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#048), [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051), the grain of wheat, which fell
into the ground and died, and brought forth much fruit" [Joh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024), that spiritual "wine" which
knoweth how to "gladden the heart of man," was already in a manner
before their eyes. But when they ceased not to insult Him in unbelief,
He, as it were, disappeared from their eyes, and they lost all spiritual
sustenance. All share in all good is gone from them. "Joy and gladness"
have also gone "from the House" which they had. For they are given up to
desolation, and "abide without king or prince or sacrifice" [Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004). Again, the Lord said, "Man, shall
not live by bread alone, but by every word which cometh forth out of the
Mouth of God" [Mat 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004). The word of
God then is food. This hath been taken away from the Jews, for they
understood not the writings of Moses, but "to this day the veil is upon
their heart" [Co2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015). For they hate
the oracles of Christ. All spiritual food is perished, not in itself but
to "them." To them, it is as though it were not. But the Lord Himself
imparts to these who believe in Him a right to all exuberance of joy in
the good tilings from above. For it is written, "The Lord will not
suffer the soul of the righteous to famish; but He thrusts away the
desire of the wicked" [Pro 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003).

[Joel 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joe 1:17</span></span>

The seed is rotten under the clods - Not only was all to be cut off for
the present, but, with it, all hope for the future. The scattered seed,
as it lay, each under its clod known to God, was dried up, and so
decayed. The garners lay desolate, nay, were allowed to go to ruin, in
hopelessness of any future harvest.

[Joel 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joe 1:18</span></span>

How do the beasts groan! - There is something very pitiable in the cry
of the brute creation, even because they are innocent, yet bear man's
guilt. Their groaning seems to the prophet to be beyond expression. How
vehemently do they "groan! The herds of cattle are perplexed," as
though, like man, they were endued with reason, to debate where to find
their food. Yea, not these only, but the flocks of sheep, which might
find pasture where the herds could not, these too shall bear the
punishment of guilt. They suffered by the guilt of man; and yet so
stupid was man, that he was not so sensible of his own win for which
they suffered, as they of its effect. The beasts cried to God, but even
their cries did not awaken His own people. The prophet cries for them;

[Joel 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joe 1:19</span></span>

O Lord, to Thee will I cry - This is the only hope left, and contains
all hopes. From the Lord was the infliction; in Him is the healing. The
prophet appeals to God by His own Name, the faithful Fulfiller of His
promises, Him who Is, and who had promised to hear all who call upon
Him. Let others call to their idols, if they would, or remain stupid and
forgetful, the prophet would cry unto God, and that earnestly.

For the fire hath devoured the pastures - The gnawing of locusts leaves
things, as though scorched by fire (see the note at [Joe
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#003)); the sun and the east wind scorch
up all green things, as though it had been the actual contact of fire.
Spontaneous combustion frequently follows. The Chaldees wasted all
before them with fire and sword. All these and the like calamities are
included under "the fire," whose desolating is without remedy. What has
been scorched by fire never recovers . "The famine," it is said of
Mosul, "was generally caused by fire spreading in dry weather over
pastures, grass lands, and grain lands, many miles in extent. It burnt
night and day often for a week and sometimes embraced the whole
horizon."

[Joel 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joe 1:20</span></span>

The beasts of the field cry also unto Thee - o: "There is an order in
these distresses. First he points out the insensate things wasted; then
those afflicted, which have sense only; then those endowed with reason;
so that to the order of calamity there may be consorted an order of
pity, sparing first the creature, then the things sentient, then things
rational. The Creator spares the creature; the Ordainer, things
sentient; the Saviour, the rational." Irrational creatures joined with
the prophet in his cry. The beasts of the field cry to God, though they
know it not; it is a cry to God, who compassionates all which suffers.
God makes them, in act, a picture of dependence upon His Providence,
"seeking to It for a removal of their sufferings, and supply of their
needs." So He saith, "the young lions roar after their prey, and seek
their meat from God" [Psa 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021), and,
"He giveth to the beast his food and to the young ravens that cry" [Psa
147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009), and, "Who provideth for the
raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God" [Job
38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041). If the people would not take
instruction from him, he "bids them learn from the beasts of the field
how to behave amid these calamities, that they should cry aloud to God
to remove them."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Chapter 2](joe002)

</div>
