<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh003)  [Next](joh005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)

[John 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 4:1</span></span>

The Lord knew - When Jesus knew. how he knew this we are not informed;
whether by that power of omniscience by which he knew all things, or
whether some person had informed him of it.

How the Pharisees had heard - The Pharisees, here, seem to denote either
the members of the Sanhedrin or those who were in authority. They
claimed the authority to regulate the rites and ceremonies of religion,
and hence they supposed they had a right to inquire into the conduct of
both John and our Lord. They had on a former occasion sent to inquire of
John to know by what authority he had introduced such a rite into the
religion of the Jewish people. See the notes at [Joh
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#025).

More disciples than John - Though many of the Pharisees came to his
baptism Matt. 3, yet those who were in authority were displeased with
the success of John, [Joh 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#025). The
reasons of this were, probably, the severity and justness of his
reproofs [Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007), and the fact that
by drawing many after him he weakened their authority and influence. As
they were displeased with John, so they were with Jesus, who was doing
the same thing on a larger scale - not only making disciples, but
baptizing also without their authority, and drawing away the people
after him.

[John 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 4:2</span></span>

Though Jesus himself baptized not - The reason why Jesus did not baptize
was probably because, if He had baptized, it might have made unhappy
divisions among his followers: those might have considered themselves
most worthy or honored who had been baptized by Him. Compare [Co1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017).

[John 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 4:3</span></span>

He left Judea - The envy and malice of the Pharisees he might have known
were growing so rapidly as to endanger his life. As his time to die had
not yet come, he retired to Galilee, a country farther from Jerusalem,
and much less under their control than Judea. See [Mar
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#022); [Luk
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001). Though he feared not death and
did not shrink from suffering, yet he did not needlessly throw himself
into danger or provoke opposition. He could do as much good in Galilee,
probably, as in Judea, and he therefore withdrew himself from immediate
danger.

[John 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 4:4</span></span>

And he must needs go through Samaria - Samaria was between Judea and
Galilee. The direct and usual way was to pass through Samaria.
Sometimes, however, the Jews took a circuitous route on the east side of
the Jordan. See the notes at [Mat
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022).

[John 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 4:5</span></span>

Sychar - This city stood about eight miles southeast of the city called
Samaria, between Mount Ebal and Mount Gerizim. It was one of the oldest
cities of Palestine, and was formerly known by the name of "Shechem," or
Sichem, [Gen 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018); [Gen
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006). The city was in the tribe of
Ephraim, [Jos 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#021). It was at this
place that Joshua assembled the people before his death, and here they
renewed their covenant with the Lord, Josh. 24. After the death of
Gideon it became a place of idolatrous worship, the people worshipping
Baal-berith, [Jdg 9:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#046). It was
destroyed by Abimelech, who beat down the city and sowed it with salt,
[Jdg 9:45](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#045). It was afterward rebuilt,
and became the residence of Jeroboam, the King of Israel, [Kg1
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#025). It was called by the Romans
"Flavia Neapolis," and this has been corrupted by the Arabs into
"Nablus," its present name. It is still a considerable place, and its
site is remarkably pleasant and productive.

The parcel of ground - The piece of ground; or the land, etc.

That Jacob gave ... - Jacob bought one piece of ground near to Shalem, a
city of Shechem, of the children of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for an
hundred pieces of silver, [Gen 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019).
In this place the bones of Joseph were buried when they were brought up
from Egypt, [Jos 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032). He also gave
to Joseph an additional piece of ground which he took from the hand of
the Amorite by his own valor, "with his sword and his bow," as a portion
above that which was given to his brethren, [Gen
48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022). Possibly these pieces of ground
lay near together, and were a part of the homestead of Jacob. The well
was near to this. There is now, E. Smith mentioned to me in
conversation, a place near this well called Shalem.

[John 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 4:6</span></span>

Jacob's well - This is not mentioned in the Old Testament. It was called
"Jacob's well," probably, either because it was handed down by tradition
that he dug it, or because it was near to the land which he gave to
Joseph. There is still a well a few miles to the east of Nablus, which
is said by the people there to be the same. Eli Smith, missionary to
Syria, stated to me that he had visited this well. It is about 100 feet
deep. It is cut through solid rock of limestone. It is now dry, probably
from having been partly filled with rubbish, or perhaps because the
water has been diverted by earthquakes. The well is covered with a large
stone, which has a hole in the center large enough to admit a man. It is
at the foot of Mount Gerizim, and has a plain on the east.

Sat thus - Jesus was weary, and, being thus weary, sat down on the well.
The word translated "on" here may denote also by - he sat down "by" the
well, or near it.

The sixth hour - About twelve o'clock noon. This was the common time of
the Jewish meal, and this was the reason why his disciples were gone
away to buy food.

[John 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 4:7</span></span>

Of Samaria - Not of the "city" of Samaria, for this was at a distance of
8 miles, but a woman who was a Samaritan, and doubtless from the city of
Sychar.

Give me to drink - This was in the heat of the day, and when Jesus was
weary with his journey. The request was also made that it might give him
occasion to discourse with her on the subject of religion, and in this
instance we have a specimen of the remarkably happy manner in which he
could lead on a conversation so as to introduce the subject of religion.

[John 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 4:8</span></span>

Buy meat - Buy food.

[John 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 4:9</span></span>

No dealings with the Samaritans - For an account of the Samaritans, and
of the differences between them and the Jews, see the notes at [Mat
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005).

[John 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 4:10</span></span>

The gift of God - The word "gift," here denotes "favor." It may refer to
Jesus Himself, as the gift of God to the world, given to save men from
death [Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016); [Co2
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#015), or it may refer to the
opportunity then afforded her of seeking salvation. If thou knewest how
favorable an opportunity God now gives thee to gain a knowledge of
himself, etc.

And who it is ... - If thou knewest that the Messiah was speaking.

Living water - The Jews used the expression "living water" to denote
springs, fountains, or running streams, in opposition to dead and
stagnant water. Jesus here means to denote by it his doctrine, or his
grace and religion, in opposition to the impure and dead notions of the
Jews and the Samaritans. See [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014). This was one of the many
instances in which he took occasion from common topics of conversation
to introduce religious discourse. None ever did it so happily as he did,
but, by studying his example and manner, we may learn also to do it. One
way to acquire the art is to have the mind full of the subject; to make
religion our first and main thing; to carry it with us into all
employments and into all society; to look upon everything in a religious
light, and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak, [Mat
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034).

[John 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 4:11</span></span>

Hast nothing to draw with - It seems that there were no means of drawing
water affixed to the well, as with us. Probably each one took a pail or
pitcher and a cord for the purpose. In traveling this was indispensable.
The woman, seeing that Jesus had no means of drawing water, and not yet
understanding his design, naturally inquired whence he could obtain the
water.

The well is deep - If the same one that is there now, it was about 100
feet deep.

[John 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 4:12</span></span>

Art thou greater? - Art thou wiser, or better able to find water, than
Jacob was? It seems that she supposed that he meant that he could direct
her to some living spring, or to some better well in that region, and
that this implied more knowledge or skill than Jacob had. To find water
and to furnish a good well was doubtless considered a matter of signal
skill and success. It was a subject of great importance in that region.
This shows how ready sinners are to misunderstand the words of Christ,
and to pervert the doctrines of religion. If she had had any proper
anxiety about her soul, she would at least have "suspected" that he
meant to direct her thoughts to spiritual objects.

Our father Jacob - The Samaritans were composed partly of the remnant of
the ten tribes, and partly of people sent from Chaldea; still, they
considered themselves descendants of Jacob.

Which gave us - This was doubtless the tradition, though there is no
evidence that it was true.

And drank thereof ... - This was added in commendation of the water of
the well. A well from which Jacob, and his sons, and cattle had drank
must be pure, and wholesome, and honored, and quite as valuable as any
that Jesus could furnish. People like to commend that which their
ancestors used as superior to anything else. The world over, people love
to speak of that which their ancestors have done, and boast of titles
and honors that have been handed down from them, even if it is nothing
better than existed here - because Jacob's cattle had drunk of the
water.

[John 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 4:13</span></span>

Shall thirst again - Jesus did not directly answer her question, or say
that he was greater than Jacob, but he gave her an answer by which she
might infer that he was. He did not despise or undervalue Jacob or his
gifts; but, however great might be the value of that well, the water
could not altogether remove thirst.

[John 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 4:14</span></span>

The water that I shall give him - Jesus here refers, without doubt, to
his own teaching, his "grace," his "spirit," and to the benefits which
come into the soul that embraces his gospel. It is a striking image, and
especially in Eastern countries, where there are vast deserts, and often
a great want of water. The soul by nature is like such a desert, or like
a traveler wandering through such a desert. It is thirsting for
happiness, and seeking it everywhere, and finds it not. It looks in all
directions and tries all objects, but in vain. Nothing meets its
desires. Though a sinner seeks for joy in wealth and pleasures, yet he
is not satisfied. He still thirsts for more, and seeks still for
happiness in some new enjoyment. To such a weary and unsatisfied sinner
the grace of Christ is "as cold waters to a thirsty soul."

Shall never thirst - He shall be "satisfied" with this, and will not
have a sense of want, a distressing feeling that it is not adapted to
him. He who drinks this will not wish to seek for happiness in other
objects. "Satisfied" with the grace of Christ, he will not desire the
pleasures and amusements of this world. And this will be forever - in
this world and the world to come. "Whosoever" drinketh of this all who
partake of the gospel - shall be "forever" satisfied with its pure and
rich joys.

Shall be in him - The grace of Christ shall be in his heart; or the
principles of religion shall abide with him.

A well of water - There shall be a constant supply, an unfailing
fountain; or religion shall live constantly with him.

Springing up - This is a beautiful image, It shall bubble or spring up
like a fountain. It is not like a stagnant pool - not like a deep well,
but like an ever-living fountain, that flows at all seasons of the year,
in heat and cold, and in all external circumstances of weather, whether
foul or fair, wet or dry. So religion always lives; and, amid all
changes of external circumstances - in heat and cold, hunger and thirst,
prosperity and adversity, life, persecution, contempt, or death - it
still lives on, and refreshes and cheers the soul.

Into everlasting life - It is not temporary, like the supply of our
natural wants; it is not changing in its nature; it is not like a
natural fountain or spring of water, to play a While and then die away,
as all natural springs will at the end of the world. It is eternal in
its nature and supply, and will continue to live on forever. We may
learn here:

1\. that the Christian has a never-failing source of consolation adapted
to all times and circumstances.

2\. that religion has its seat in the heart, and that it should
constantly live there.

3\. that it sheds its blessings on a world of sin, and is manifest by a
continual life of piety, like a constant flowing spring.

4\. that its end is everlasting life. It will continue forever; and
"whosoever drinks of this shall never thirst, but his piety shall be in
his heart a pure fountain "springing up to eternal joy."

[John 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 4:15</span></span>

The woman said ... - It may seem strange that the woman did not yet
understand him, but it shows how slow sinners are to understand the
doctrines of religion.

[John 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 4:16</span></span>

Go call thy husband - We may admire the manner which our Saviour took to
lead her to perceive that he was the Christ. His instructions she did
not understand. He therefore proceeded to show her that he was
acquainted with her life and with her sins. His object, here, was to
lead her to consider her own state and sinfulness - a delicate and yet
pungent way of making her see that she was a sinner. By showing her,
also, that he knew her life, though a stranger to her, he convinced her
that he was qualified to teach her the way to heaven, and thus prepared
her to admit that he was the Messiah, [Joh
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#029).

[John 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 4:17</span></span>

I have no husband - This was said, evidently, to evade the subject.
Perhaps she feared that if she came there with the man that she lived
with, the truth might be exposed. It is not improbable that by this time
she began to suspect that Jesus was a prophet.

Hast well said - Hast said the truth.

[John 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 4:18</span></span>

Hast had five husbands - Who have either died; or who, on account of
your improper conduct, have divorced you; or whom you have left
improperly, without legal divorce. Either of these might have be. en the
case.

Is not thy husband - You are not lawfully married to him. Either she
might have left a former husband without divorce, and thus her marriage
with this man was unlawful, or she was living with him without the form
of marriage, in open guilt.

[John 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 4:19</span></span>

A prophet - One sent from God, and who understood her life. The word
here does not denote one who foretells future events, but one who knew
her heart and life, and who must therefore have come from God. She did
not yet suppose him to be the Messiah, [Joh
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025). Believing him now to be a man
sent from God, she proposed to him a question respecting the proper
place of worship. This point had been long a matter of dispute between
the Samaritans and the Jews. She submitted it to him because she thought
he could settle the question, and perhaps because she wished to divert
the conversation from the unpleasant topic respecting her husbands. The
conversation about her manner of life was a very unpleasant topic to her
- as it is always unpleasant to sinners to talk about their lives and
the necessity of religion - and she was glad to turn the conversation to
something else. Nothing is more common than for sinners to change the
conversation when it begins to bear too hard upon their consciences; and
no way of doing it is more common than to direct it to sonic speculative
inquiry having some sort of connection with religion, as if to show that
they are willing to talk about religion, and do not wish to appear to be
opposed to it. Sinners do not love direct religious conversation, but
many are too well-bred to refuse altogether to talk about it; yet they
choose to converse about some speculative matter, or something
pertaining to the mere "externals" of religion, rather than the
salvation of their own souls. So sinners often now change the
conversation to some inquiry about a preacher, or about some doctrine,
or about building or repairing a place of worship, or about a Sunday
school, in order to seeM to talk about religion, and yet to evade close
and faithful appeals to their own consciences.

[John 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 4:20</span></span>

Our fathers - The Samaritans; perhaps also meaning to intimate that the
patriarchs had done it also. See [Gen
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006); [Gen
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020).

Worshipped - Had a place of worship.

In this mountain - Mount Gerizim, only a little way from Sychar. On this
mountain they had built a temple somewhat similar to the one in
Jerusalem. This was one of the main subjects of controversy between them
and the Jews. The old Samaritan Pentateuch, or five books of Moses, has
the word "Gerizim" instead of "Ebal" in [Deu
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004). On this account, as well as
because the patriarchs are mentioned as having worshipped in Shechem,
they supposed that that was the proper place on which to erect the
temple.

Ye say - Ye Jews.

In Jerusalem - The place where the temple was built. This was built in
accordance with the promise and command of God, [Deu
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005), [Deu
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#011). In building this, David and
Solomon were under the divine direction, [Sa2
7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002), [Sa2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013); [Kg1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#005), [Kg1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#012); [Kg1
8:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#015). As it was contemplated in the
law of Moses that there should be but one place to offer sacrifice and
to hold the great feasts, so it followed that the Samaritans were in
error in supposing that their temple was the place. Accordingly, our
Saviour decided in favor of the Jews, yet in such a manner as to show
the woman that the question was of much less consequence than they
supposed it to be.

[John 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 4:21</span></span>

Believe me - As she had professed to believe that he was a prophet, it
was right to require her to put faith in what he was about to utter. It
also shows the importance of what he was about to say.

The hour cometh - The time is coming, or is near.

When neither in this mountain ... - Hitherto the public solemn worship
of God has been confined to one place. It has been a matter of dispute
whether that place should be Jerusalem or Mount Gerizim. That
controversy is to be of much less importance than you have supposed. The
old dispensation is about to pass away. The special rites of the Jews
are to cease. The worship of God, so long confined to a single place, is
soon to be celebrated everywhere, and with as much acceptance in one
place as in another. He does not say that there would be no worship of
God in that place or in Jerusalem, but that the worship of God would not
be "confined" there. He would be worshipped in other places as well as
there.

[John 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 4:22</span></span>

Ye worship ye know not what - This probably refers to the comparative
ignorance and corruption of the Samaritan worship. Though they received
the five books of Moses, yet they rejected the prophets, and of course
all that the prophets had said respecting the true God. Originally,
also, they had joined the worship of idols to that of the true God. See
[Kg2 17:26-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#026). They had, moreover, no
authority for building their temple and conducting public worship by
sacrifices there. On all these accounts they were acting in an
unauthorized manner. They were not obeying the true God, nor offering
the worship which he had commanded or would approve. Thus, Jesus
indirectly settled the question which she had proposed to him, yet in
such a way as to show her that it was of much less importance than she
had supposed.

We know - We Jews. This they knew because God had commanded it; because
they worshipped in a place appointed by God, and because they did it in
accordance with the direction and teaching of the prophets.

Salvation is of the Jews - They have the true religion and the true form
of worship; and the Messiah, who will bring salvation, is to proceed
from them. See [Luk 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#030); [Luk
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006). Jesus thus affirms that the Jews
had the true form of the worship of God. At the same time he was
sensible how much they had corrupted it, and on various occasions
reproved them for it.

[John 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 4:23</span></span>

But the hour cometh, and now is - The old dispensation is about to pass
away, and the new one to commence. "Already" there is so much light that
God may be worshipped acceptably in any place.

The true worshippers - All who truly and sincerely worship God. They who
do it with the heart, and not merely in form.

In spirit - The word "spirit," here, stands opposed to rites and
ceremonies, and to the pomp of external worship. It refers to the
"mind," the "soul," the "heart." They shall worship God with a sincere
"mind;" with the simple offering of gratitude and prayer; with a desire
to glorify him, and without external pomp and splendor. Spiritual
worship is that where the heart is offered to God, and where we do not
depend on external forms for acceptance.

In truth - Not through the medium of shadows and types, not by means of
sacrifices and bloody offerings, but in the manner represented or
typified by all these, [Heb 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009), [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024). In the true way of direct access
to God through Jesus Christ.

For the Father seeketh ... - Jesus gives two reasons why this kind of
worship should take place. One is that God sought it, or desired it. He
had appointed the old mode, but he did it because he sought to lead the
mind to himself even by those forms, and to prepare the people for the
purer system of the gospel, and now he sought or desired that those who
worshipped him should worship him in that manner. He intimated his will
by Jesus Christ.

[John 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 4:24</span></span>

God is A spirit - This is the second reason why men should worship him
in spirit and in truth. By this is meant that God is without a body;
that he is not material or composed of parts; that he is invisible, in
every place, pure and holy. This is one of the first truths of religion,
and one of the sublimest ever presented to the mind of man. Almost all
nations have had some idea of God as gross or material, but the Bible
declares that he is a pure spirit. As he is such a spirit, he dwells not
in temples made with hands [Act 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#048),
neither is worshipped with men's hands as though he needed anything,
seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things, [Act
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#025). A pure, a holy, a spiritual
worship, therefore, is such as he seeks - the offering of the soul
rather than the formal offering of the body - the homage of the heart
rather than that of the lips.

[John 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 4:25</span></span>

I know that Messias cometh - As the Samaritans acknowledged the five
books of Moses, so they expected, also, the coming of the Messiah.

Which is called Christ - These are probably the words of the evangelist,
as it is not likely that the woman would explain the name on such an
occasion.

Will tell us all things - Jesus had decided the question proposed to him
[Joh 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020) in favor of the Jews. The
woman does not seem to have been satisfied with this answer, and said
that the Messiah would tell them all about this question. Probably she
was expecting that he would soon appear.

[John 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 4:26</span></span>

I that speak onto thee am - he I am the Messiah. This was the first time
that he openly professed it. He did not do it yet to the Jews, for it
would have excited envy and opposition. But nothing could be apprehended
in Samaria; and as the woman seemed reluctant to listen to him as a
prophet, and professed her willingness to listen to the Messiah, he
openly declared that he was the Christ, that by some means he might save
her soul. From this we may learn:

1\. The great wisdom of the Lord Jesus in leading the thoughts along to
the subject of practical personal religion.

2\. His knowledge of the heart and of the life. He must be therefore
divine.

3\. He gave evidence here that he was the Messiah. This was the design
of John in writing this gospel. He has therefore recorded this
narrative, which was omitted by the other evangelists.

4\. We see our duty. It is to seize on all occasions to lead sinners to
the belief that Jesus is the Christ, and to make use of all topics of
conversation to teach them the nature of religion. There never was a
model of so much wisdom in this as the Saviour, and we shall be
successful only as we diligently study his character.

5\. We see the nature of religion. It does not consist merely in
external forms. It is pure, spiritual, active - an ever-bubbling
fountain. It is the worship of a pure and holy God, where the heart is
offered, and where the desires of an humble soul are breathed out; for
salvation.

[John 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 4:27</span></span>

Upon this - At this time.

Marvelled - Wondered. They wondered because the Jews had no contact with
the Samaritans, and they were surprised that Jesus was engaged with her
in conversation.

Yet no man said - No one of the disciples. They had such respect and
reverence for him that they did not dare to ask him the reason of his
conduct, or even to appear to reprove him. We should be confident that
Jesus is right, even if we cannot fully understand all that he does.

[John 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 4:28</span></span>

Left her water-pot - Her mind was greatly excited. She was disturbed,
and hastened to the city in great agitation to make this known. She
seems to have been convinced that he was the Messiah, and went
immediately to make it known to others. Our first business, when we have
found the Saviour, should be to make him known also to others.

[John 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 4:29</span></span>

Is not this the Christ? - Though she probably believed it, yet she
proposed it modestly, lest she should appear to dictate in a case which
was so important, and which demanded so much attention. The evidence on
which she was satisfied that he was the Messiah was that he had told her
all things that she had done - perhaps much more than is here recorded.
The question which she submitted to them was whether this was not
satisfactory proof that he was the Messiah.

[John 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 4:30</span></span>

They went out of the city - The men of the city left it and went to
Jesus, to hear and examine for themselves.

[John 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 4:31</span></span>

Prayed him - Asked him.

[John 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 4:32</span></span>

I have meat to eat - See [Joh 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034).

[John 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 4:33</span></span>

Hath any man brought him ... - This is one of the many instances in
which the disciples were slow to understand the Saviour.

[John 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 4:34</span></span>

My meat ... - Jesus here explains what he said in [Joh
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#032). His great object - the great
design of his life - was to do the will of God. He came to that place
weary and thirsty, and at the usual time of meals, probably hungry; yet
an opportunity of doing good presented itself, and he forgot his fatigue
and hunger, and found comfort and joy in doing good - in seeking to save
a soul. This one great object absorbed all his powers, and made him
forget his weariness and the wants of nature. The mind may be so
absorbed in doing the will of God as to forget all other things. Intent
on this, we may rise above fatigue, and hardship, and want, and bear all
with pleasure in seeing the work of God advance. See [Job
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#012); "I have esteemed the words of
his mouth more than my necesary food." We may learn, also, that the main
business of life is not to avoid fatigue or to seek the supply of our
temporal wants, but to do the will of God. The mere supply of our
temporal necessities, though most people make it an object of their
chief solicitude, is a small consideration in the sight of him who has
just views of the great design of human life.

The will of him that sent me - The will of God in regard to the
salvation of men. See [Joh 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038).

To finish his work - To "complete" or fully to do the work which he has
commanded in regard to the salvation of men. It is his work to provide
salvation, and his to redeem, and his to apply the salvation to the
heart. Jesus came to do it by teaching, by his example, and by his death
as an expiation for sin. And he shows us that "we" should be diligent.
If he was so diligent for our welfare, if he bore fatigue and want to
benefit us, then we should be diligent, also, in regard to our own
salvation, and also in seeking the salvation of others.

[John 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 4:35</span></span>

Say not ye - This seems to have been a proverb. Ye say - that is, men
say.

Four months and ... - The common time from sowing the seed to the
harvest, in Judea, was about "four months." The meaning of this passage
may be thus expressed: "The husbandman, when he sows his seed, is
compelled to wait a considerable period before it produces a crop. He is
encouraged in sowing it; he expects fruit; his labor is lightened by
that expectation; but it is not "immediate" - it is remote. But it is
not so with my preaching. The seed has already sprung up. Scarce was it
sown before it produced an abundant harvest. The gospel was just
preached to a woman, and see how many of the Samaritans come to hear it
also. There is therefore more encouragement to labor in this field than
the farmer has to sow his grain."

Lift up your eyes - See the Samaritans coming to hear the gospel.

They are white - Grain, when ripe, turns from a green to a yellow or
light color, indicating that it is time to reap it. So here were
indications that the gospel was effectual, and that the harvest was to
be gathered in. Hence, we may learn:

1\. that there is as much encouragement to attempt to save souls as the
farmer has to raise a crop.

2\. that the gospel is fitted to make an immediate impression on the
minds of men. We are to expect that it will. We are not to wait to some
future period, as if we could not expect immediate results. This wicked
and ignorant people - little likely, apparently, to be affected - turned
to God, heard the voice of the Saviour, and came in multitudes to him.

3\. We are to expect revivals of religion. Here was one instance of it
under the Saviour's own preaching. Multitudes were excited, moved, and
came to learn the way of life.

4\. We know not how much good may be done by conversation with even a
single individual. This conversation with a woman resulted in a deep
interest felt throughout the city, and in the conversion of many of them
to God. So, a single individual may often be the means, in the hand of
God, of leading many to the cross of Jesus.

5\. What evils may follow from neglecting to do our duty! How easily
might Jesus have alleged, if he had been like many of his professed
disciples, that he was weary, that he was hungry, that it was esteemed
improper to converse with a woman alone, that she was an abandoned
character, and there could be little hope of doing her good! How many
consciences of ministers and Christians would have been satisfied with
reasoning like this? Yet Jesus, in spite of his fatigue and thirst, and
all the difficulties of the case, seriously set about seeking the
conversion of this woman. And behold what a glorious result! The city
was moved, and a great harvest was found ready to be gathered in! "Let
us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap if we
faint not."

[John 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 4:36</span></span>

He that reapeth - He that gathers the harvest, or he who so preaches
that souls are converted to Christ.

Receiveth wages - The laborer in the harvest receives his hire. Jesus
says it shall be thus with those who labor in the ministry - he will not
suffer them to go unrewarded. See [Dan
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003); [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028).

Gathereth fruit unto life eternal - Converts souls, who shall inherit
eternal life. The harvest is not temporary, like gathering grain, but
shall result in eternal life.

That both he that soweth ... - It is a united work. It matters little
whether we sow the seed or whether we reap the harvest. It is part of
the same work, and whatever part we may do, we should rejoice. God gives
the increase, while Paul may plant and Apollos water. The teacher in the
Sunday school, who sows the seed in early life, shall rejoice with the
minister of the gospel who may gather in the harvest, and both join in
giving all the praise to God.

[John 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 4:37</span></span>

That saying - That proverb. This proverb is found in some of the Greek
writers (Grotius). Similar proverbs were in use among the Jews. See [Isa
65:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#021); [Lev
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016); [Mic
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#015).

One soweth ... - One man may preach the gospel, and with little apparent
effect; another, succeeding him, may be crowned with eminent success.
The seed, long buried, may spring up in an abundant harvest.

[John 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 4:38</span></span>

I sent you - In the commission given you to preach the gospel. You have
not labored or toiled in preparing the way for the great harvest which
is now to be gathered in.

Other men laboured -

\(1\) The prophets, who long labored to prepare the way for the coming
of the Messiah.

\(2\) the teachers among the Jews, who have read and explained the law
and taught the people.

\(3\) John the Baptist, who came to prepare the way. And,

\(4\) The Saviour himself, who by his personal ministry taught the
people, and prepared them for the success which was to attend the
preaching of the apostles.

Especially did Jesus lay the foundation for the rapid and extensive
spread of the gospel. "He" saw comparatively little fruit of his
ministry. He confined his labors to Judea, and even there he was
occupied in sowing seed which chiefly sprang up after his death. From
this we may learn:

1\. That the man who is crowned with eminent success has no cause of
"boasting" over others, any more than the man who reaps a field of grain
should boast over the man who sowed it. The labor of both is equally
necessary, and the labor of both would be useless if God did not give
the increase. Compare [Co1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006).

2\. We should not be discouraged if we do not meet with immediate
success. The man that sows is not disheartened because he does not see
the harvest "immediately" spring up. We are to sow our seed in the
morning, and in the evening we are not to withhold our hand, for we know
not whether shall prosper, this or that; and we are to go forth bearing
precious seed, though "weeping," knowing that we shall come again
rejoicing, bearing our sheaves with us, [Ecc
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#004); [Psa
126:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#006).

3\. Every part of the work of the ministry and of teaching men is
needful, and we should rejoice that we are permitted to bear any part,
however humble, in bringing sinners to the knowledge of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, [Co1 12:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#021).

[John 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 4:39</span></span>

And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him, ... - There is
seldom an instance of so remarkable success as this. From a single
conversation, in circumstances, in a place, and with an individual
little likely to be attended with such results, many sinners were
converted; many believed on the testimony of the woman; many more came
to hear, and believed because they heard him themselves. We should never
despair of doing good in the most unpromising circumstances, and we
should seize upon every opportunity to converse with sinners on the
great subject of their souls' salvation.

[John 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 4:43</span></span>

Into Galilee - Into some of the parts of Galilee, though evidently not
into Nazareth, but probably direct to Cana, [Joh
4:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046).

[John 4:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 4:44</span></span>

For Jesus himself testified ... - See the notes at [Mat
13:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#057). The connection of this verse
with the preceding may be thus explained: "Jesus went to Galilee, but
not to Nazareth, for he testified," etc. Or, "Jesus went to Galilee,
'although' he had said that a prophet had no honor in his own country;
yet, because he foreknew that the Galileans would many of them believe
on him, he went at this time."

[John 4:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 4:45</span></span>

Received him - Received him kindly, or as a messenger of God. They had
seen his miracles, and believed on him.

[John 4:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 4:46</span></span>

A certain nobleman - One who was of the royal family, connected by birth
with Herod Antipas; or one of the officers of the court, whether by
birth allied to him or not. It seems that his ordinary residence was at
Capernaum. Capernaum was about a day's journey from Cana, where Jesus
then was.

[John 4:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 4:47</span></span>

He went unto him - Though high in office, yet he did not refuse to go
personally to Jesus to ask his aid. He felt as a father; and believing,
after all that Jesus had done, that he could cure his son, he traveled
to meet him. If men receive benefits of Christ, they must come in the
same manner. The rich and the poor, the high and the low, must come
personally as humble suppliants, and must be willing to bear all the
reproach that may be cast on them for thus coming to him. This man
showed strong faith in being willing thus to go to Jesus, but he erred
in supposing that Jesus could heal only by his being present with his
son.

Would come down - It is probable that the miracles of Jesus heretofore
had been performed only on those who were present with him, and this
nobleman seems to have thought that this was necessary. One design of
Jesus in working this miracle was to show him that this was not
necessary. Hence he did not go down to Capernaum, but healed him where
he was.

[John 4:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 4:48</span></span>

Except ye see signs ... - This was spoken not to the nobleman only, but
to the Galileans generally. The Samaritans had believed without any
miracle. The Galileans, he said, were less disposed to believe him than
even they were; and though he had performed miracles enough to convince
them, yet, unless they continually saw them, they would not believe.

[John 4:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 4:49</span></span>

Come down ... - The earnestness of the nobleman evinces the deep and
tender anxiety of a father. So anxious was he for his son that he was
not willing that Jesus should delay a moment - not even to address the
people. He still seems to have supposed that Jesus had no power to heal
his son except he was present with him.

[John 4:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 4:50</span></span>

Go thy way - This was a kind and tender address. It was designed to
convince him that he could word a miracle though not personally present.

Thy son liveth - Thy son shall recover; or he shall be restored to
health, according to thy request.

The man believed - The manner in which Jesus spoke it, and the assurance
which he gave, convinced the man that he could heal him there as well as
to go to Capernaum to do it. This is an instance of the power of Jesus
to convince the mind, to soothe doubts, to confirm faith, and to meet
our desires. He blesses not always in the manner in which we ask, but he
grants us our main wish. The father wished his son healed by Jesus
"going down" to Capernaum. Jesus healed him, but not in the way in which
he asked it to be done. God will hear our prayers and grant our
requests, but often not in the precise manner in which we ask it. It is
his to judge of the best way of doing us good.

[John 4:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">joh 4:52</span></span>

The seventh hour - About one o'clock in the afternoon.

The same hour - The very time when Jesus spoke.

The fever left him - It seems that it left him suddenly and entirely; so
much so that his friends went to inform the father, and to comfort him,
and also, doubtless, to apprise him that it was not necessary to ask aid
from Jesus. From this miracle we may learn,

1\. That Jesus has an intimate knowledge of all things. He knew the case
of this son - the extent of his disease where he was and thus had power
to heal him.

2\. That Jesus has almighty power. Nothing else could have healed this
child. Nor could it be pretended that he did it by any natural means. He
was far away from him, and the child knew not the source of the power
that healed him. It could not be pretended that there was any collusion
or jugglery. The father came in deep anxiety. The servants saw the cure.
Jesus was at a distance. Everything in the case bears the mark of being
the simple energy of God - put forth with equal ease to heal, whether
far or near. Thus, he can save the sinner.

3\. We see the benevolence of Jesus. Ever ready to aid, to heal, or to
save, he may be called on at all times, and will never be called on in
vain.

[John 4:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">joh 4:53</span></span>

Himself believed - This miracle removed all his doubts, and he became a
real disciple and friend of Jesus.

His whole house - His whole family. We may learn from this,

1\. That sickness or any deep affliction is often the means of great
good. Here the sickness of the son resulted in the faith of all the
family. God often takes away earthly blessings that he may impart rich
spiritual mercies.

2\. The father of a family may be the means of the salvation of his
children. Here the effort of a parent resulted in their conversion to
Christ.

3\. There is great beauty and propriety when sickness thus results in
piety. For that it is sent. God does not willingly grieve or afflict the
children of men; and when afflictions thus terminate, it will be cause
of eternal joy, of ceaseless praise.

4\. There is a special charm when piety thus comes into the families of
the rich. and the noble. It is so unusual: their example and influence
go so far; it overcomes so many temptations, and affords opportunities
of doing so much good, that there is no wonder that the evangelist
selected this instance as one of the effects of the power and of the
preaching of the Lord Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 5](joh005)

</div>
