<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos005)  [Next](jos007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001)

[Joshua 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 6:1</span></span>

This verse is strictly parenthetical. It is inserted to explain the
declaration commenced [Jos 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014), and
interrupted by Joshua's question and obeisance [Jos
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014), but resumed in [Jos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#002).

Straitly shut up - See the margin, i. e., not only shut, but barred and
bolted.

[Joshua 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 6:3</span></span>

The command of the Lord as to the mode in which the fall of Jericho
should be brought about is given in these verses in a condensed form.
Further details (see [Jos 6:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#008), [Jos
6:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#016), etc.), were, no doubt, among
the commands given to Joshua by the Angel.

[Jos 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#004)

Trumpets of ram's horns - Render rather here and in [Jos
6:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#005), [Jos
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#008), etc., "trumpets of jubilee"
(compare [Lev 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010) note). The
instrument is more correctly rendered "cornet" (see [Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009), note). Various attempts have
been made to explain the fall of Jericho by natural causes, as, e. g.,
by the undermining of the walls, or by an earthquake, or by a sudden
assault. But the narrative of this chapter does not afford the slightest
warrant for any such explanations; indeed it is totally inconsistent
with them. It must be taken as it stands; and so taken it intends,
beyond all doubt, to narrate a miracle, or rather a series of miracles.

In the belief that a record is not necessarily unhistorical because it
is miraculous, never perhaps was a miracle more needed than that which
gave Jericho to Joshua. Its lofty walls and well-fenced gates made it
simply impregnable to the Israelites - a nomad people, reared in the
desert, destitute alike of the engines of war for assaulting a fortified
town, and of skill and experience in the use of them if they had had
them. Nothing line a direct interference of the Almighty could in a
week's time give a city like Jericho, thoroughly on its guard and
prepared (compare [Jos 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009) ff and [Jos
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001)), to besiegers situated as were
Joshua and the Israelites.

The fall of Jericho cogently taught the inhabitants of Canaan that the
successes of Israel were not mere human triumphs of man against man, and
that the God of Israel was not as "the gods of the countries." This
lesson some of them at least learned to their salvation, e. g., Rahab
and the Gibeonites. Further, ensuing close upon the miraculous passage
of Jordan, it was impressed on the people, prone ever to be led by the
senses, that the same God who had delivered their fathers out of Egypt
and led them through the Red Sea, was with Joshua no less effectually
than He had been with Moses.

And the details of the orders given by God to Joshua [Jos
6:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#003) illustrate this last point
further. The trumpets employed were not the silver trumpets used for
signalling the marshalling of the host and for other warlike purposes
(compare [Num 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002)), but the curved
horns employed for ushering in the Jubilee and the Sabbatical Year
(Septuagint, σάλπιγγες ἱεραί salpinges hierai: compare the [Lev
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024) note). The trumpets were borne
by priests, and were seven in number; the processions round Jericho were
to be made on seven days, and seven times on the seventh day, thus
laying a stress on the sacred number seven, which was an emhlem more
especially of the work of God. The ark of God also, the seat of His
special presence, was carried round the city. All these particulars were
calculated to set forth symbolically, and in a mode sure to arrest the
attention of the people, the fact that their triumph was wholly due to
the might of the Lord, and to that covenant which made their cause His.

[Joshua 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 6:7</span></span>

He said - The reading in the Hebrew text is "they said." Joshua no doubt
issued his orders through the "officers of the people" (compare [Jos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010)).

Him that is armed - i. e. the warriors generally, not a division only.
"The rereward" [Jos 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#009) was merely a
detachment, and not a substantial portiere of the host; and was told
off, perhaps, from the tribe of Dan (compare the marginal reference) to
close the procession and guard the ark from behind. Thus the order would
be

\(1\) the warriors,

\(2\) the seven priests blowing the cornets,

\(3\) the ark,

\(4\) the rear-guard.

[Joshua 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 6:15</span></span>

On the seventh day - Most probably a Sabbath day. The rising early would
be necessary to give time for encompassing the city seven times. Jericho
appears to have been a city of considerable size and population; and
each passage of the large host round it could hardly have taken less
than an hour and a half. Thus, with the necessary intervals of rest, the
evening would be at hand when Joshua gave the signal to shout [Jos
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#016); and the work of slaughter was
probably commenced just as the hours of the Sabbath were passed.

[Joshua 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 6:17</span></span>

Accursed - Better as in margin, ("devoted" ([Lev
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028) note). In other cases the
inhabitants only of the towns were slain; their cattle and property
became the booty of the victors. But Jericho, as the first Canaanite
city that was captured, was devoted by Israel as first-fruits to God, as
a token that Israel received all the land from Him. Every living thing
was put to death (Rahab and her household excepted) as a sacrifice to
God, and the indestructible goods were [Jos
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#019) brought into the treasury of the
sanctuary.

[Joshua 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 6:23</span></span>

The part of the wall adjoining Rahab's house had not fallen along with
the rest. Rahab and "all that she had," i. e., the persons belonging to
her household, were brought out and "left without the camp of Israel."
These words literally "made to rest outside the camp of Israel" -
indicate that being still in their paganism, they were separated from
the camp of the Lord. This was only for a time. They desired, and
eventually obtained, admission to the covenant of the chosen people of
God [Jos 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#025).

[Joshua 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 6:25</span></span>

Even unto this day - These words are rightly noted as implying that the
narrative was written not long after the occurrences which it records.

[Joshua 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 6:26</span></span>

Adjured - i. e. put an oath upon them; or, perhaps, actually caused them
themselves to take an oath (compare [Mat
26:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063)). The words of the oath have in
the original a rhythmical character which would tend to keep them on the
lips and in the memory of the people.

Buildeth this city - i. e. rebuilds the fortifications. Jericho was at
once occupied by the Benjamites. [Jos
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021), and the natural advantages of
the situation were such that it would not be likely to be left long
desolate. Joshua speaks in the text as a warrior. He lays a ban on the
re-erection of those lofty walls which had bidden defiance to God's
host, and been by God's signal interposition overthrown. Hiel, the
Bethelite, reckless of the prophecy recorded in our text, began and
completed the circumvallation of the city a second time (see the
marginal reference). Hiel did not found a new city but only fortified an
existing one.

He shall lay the foundation thereof in his first-born - i. e. when he
begins this work his eldest son shall die, when he completes it his
youngest shall die (see [Kg1 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034)
note).

This chapter read in the light of the New Testament has indications of a
further import and bearing than such as concerned Joshua and the Jews.
As Joshua, the leader and captain of the Jewish theocracy, is a type of
Christ, so is Jericho to be taken (with all Christian expositors) as a
type of the powers opposed to Christ and His cause. The times which
prepare for the close of God's present dispensation are signified in the
days during which the people obeyed and waited; as the number of those
days, seven, the number of perfection, represents that "fullness of
time," known only to God, at which His dispensation will culminate and
close. Thus the circumstances which lead up to the fall of Jericho are
an acted prophecy, as was that fall itself, which sets forth the
overthrow of all that resists the kingdom of which Christ is the head;
and particularly the day of judgment, in which that overthrow will be
fully and finally accomplished. Paul, in describing that day, seems to
borrow his imagery from this chapter (see [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 7](jos007)

</div>
