<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev012)  [Next](lev014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 13:0</span></span>

Lev. 13-14: The Laws Relating to Leprosy

The leprosy is the most terrible of all the disorders to which the body
of man is subject. There is no disease in which hope of recovery is so
nearly extinguished. From a commencement slight in appearance, with but
little pain or inconvenience, often in its earlier stage insidiously
disappearing and reappearing, it goes on in its strong but sluggish
course, generally in defiance of the efforts of medical skill, until it
reduces the patient to a mutilated cripple with dulled or obliterated
senses, the voice turned to a croak, and with features of ghastly
deformity. When it reaches some vital part it generally occasions what
seem like the symptoms of a distinct disease (most often dysentery), and
so puts an end to the life of the sufferer.

It was an all but universal impression that the leprosy, above all other
diseases, came upon man as an irresistible stroke of superhuman power,
either in the way of punishment for personal sin or of an affliction
with some definite purpose. This natural suggestion was confirmed and
realized upon several occasions in the history of the Israelites. A
stroke of leprosy was the mark of the divine displeasure at the slow
faith of Moses [Exo 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#006), at the
contumacy of Miriam [Num 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#010), at the
dishonesty of Gehazi [Kg2 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#027), and at
the impious presumption of Uzziah [Ch2
26:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#019). One of the denunciations
against Joab, on account of the death of Abner, was that his children
should be lepers [Sa2 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029).

It is now considered by all the best authorities that the Hebrew word
for the disease does not denote the disease which is more properly
called the leprosy (see [Lev 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#012)),
but that which is known to physicians as the elephantiasis: the origin
of which is ascribed to an animal poison generated in or received into
the blood, and accumulated therein probably by a process analogous to
fermentation. This poison primarily affects either the skin, or the
nerves and nervous centers. In this way, two forms of elephantiasis are
distinguished, the "Tuberculated," and the "anaesthetic" or
"non-tuberculated," of which the former is the more common.

Medical skill appears to have been more completely foiled by
elephantiasis than by any other malady. The anaesthetic form alone seems
to be in some degree amenable to remedies and regimen.

The question as to whether elephantiasis is contagious or not, is one of
most unique interests in connection with the Levitical law. Many facts
tend to prove that, as a rule, it was not; but that under certain
circumstances (e. g. when the ulcers are running) contagion might be
developed.

[Leviticus 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 13:2</span></span>

The skin of his flesh - An expression found nowhere but in this chapter.
It probably denotes the cuticle or scarf skin, as distinguished from the
curls or true skin.

Rising ... scab ... bright spot - The Hebrew words are the technical
names applied to the common external signs of incipient elephantiasis.

Like the plague of leprosy - Like a stroke of leprosy.

[Leviticus 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 13:3</span></span>

The hair in the plague is turned white - The sparing growth of very fine
whitish hair on leprous spots in the place of the natural hair, appears
to have been always regarded as a characteristic symptom.

the plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh - Rather The
stroke appears to be deeper than the scarf skin. The bright spot changed
to a brownish color with a metallic or oily luster, and with a
clearly-defined edge. This symptom, along with the whitish hair, at once
decided the case to be one of leprosy.

[Leviticus 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 13:5</span></span>

And the plague spread not - Rather, advance not, so as to show that the
disease is under the cuticle and assuming the symptoms of [Lev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#003).

[Leviticus 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 13:6</span></span>

Somewhat dark - Rather, somewhat dim: that is, if the spot is dying
away.

[Leviticus 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 13:7</span></span>

Seen of the priest for his cleansing - The purport of these words is
doubtful. They probably mean "seen by the priest and pronounced clean,"
and refer to the visit of the suspected leper to the priest at the end
of the second week. But some have taken the words to mean "seen by the
priest with a view to be pronounced clean," and regard the sentence of
the priest as provisional, holding good only until the symptoms may
appear to resume their progress. Compare [Lev
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#035).

[Leviticus 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 13:10</span></span>

If the rising be white - Or, If there be a white rising. The term very
probably denotes the white Bulla or patch of Anaesthetic elephantiasis
when it has re-appeared.

Quick raw flesh in the rising - The margin gives the literal rendering.
The symptom here noted exhibits a more advanced stage of the disease.
The expression might denote an ulcer or open sore with "proud flesh"
appearing in it.

[Leviticus 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 13:12</span></span>

The disease here indicated appears to be that now known as Lepra
commonis, the common White Leprosy, or Dry Tetter. It first shows itself
in reddish pimples, the surface of which becomes white and scaly,
spreading in a circular form until they meet each other and cover large
patches of the body. It scarcely affects the general health, and for the
most part disappears of itself, though it often lasts for years.

From his head even to his foot, wheresoever. the priest looketh - The
first appearance of the Lepra Commonis may take place in any part of the
body, especially, however, at the larger joints of the limbs; but the
spots of elephantiasis are almost always first seen, on those parts
which are habitually exposed, the face, ears and hands.

[Lev 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#014)

Raw flesh - See [Lev 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#010).

[Lev 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#015)

Boil - Probably ulcer. In [Job 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007),
and [Deu 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027), [Deu
28:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#035), it would seem highly probable
that the word expresses the ulcers of elephantiasis.

[Leviticus 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 13:20</span></span>

Lower than the skin - Rather, reaching below the scarf skin.

[Leviticus 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 13:23</span></span>

A burning boil - Rather, the scar of the ulcer; literally, "the burn of
the ulcer."

[Leviticus 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 13:24</span></span>

The sense of this verse is: "Or if there be flesh of which the skin has
been affected by severe inflammation, and the sore of the inflammation
has become a glossy spot, somewhat reddish or white."

[Leviticus 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 13:28</span></span>

"And if the glossy spot continues unchanged and makes no advance in the
skin, and is rather indistinct" (see the note at [Lev
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#006)), "it is the mark of the
inflammation, and the priest shall pronounce him clean, for it is the
(mere) hurt of inflammation."

[Leviticus 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 13:30</span></span>

Scall - As this is the name for another disease not allied to the
leprosy, it would have been better to retain the original word נתק
netheq. It is a true elephantiasis, and is recognized by modern writers
under the name of the Fox mange.

[Leviticus 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 13:31</span></span>

There is no black hair in it More probably, there is no yellow hair in
it.

[Leviticus 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lev 13:37</span></span>

Be in his sight at a stay - Or, Does not alter in appearance.

[Leviticus 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">lev 13:39</span></span>

Freckled spot - If [Lev 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#012) refers
to the Lepra commonis, the Hebrew בהק bôhaq here may denote some kind of
eczema, a skin disease of a somewhat similar external character.

[Lev 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#038), [Lev
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#039) would seem more in their natural
place between [Lev 13:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#017).

[Leviticus 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lev 13:42</span></span>

Sore - Rather, stroke. It is the same word which elsewhere in this and
the next chapter is rendered plague.

[Leviticus 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">lev 13:45</span></span>

The leper was to carry about with him the usual signs of mourning for
the dead. Compare [Lev 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006) and margin
reference.

The leper was a living parable in the world of the sin of which death
was the wages; not the less so because his suffering might have been in
no degree due to his own personal deserts: he bore about with him at
once the deadly fruit and the symbol of the sin of his race. [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005). As his body slowly perished,
first the skin, then the flesh, then the bone, fell to pieces while yet
the animal life survived; he was a terrible picture of the gradual
corruption of the spirit worked by sin.

His head bare - Rather, "his head neglected." See [Lev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006) note.

Unclean, unclean - Compare the margin reference.

[Leviticus 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">lev 13:46</span></span>

Dwell alone - More properly, dwell apart; that is, separated from the
people.

Though thus excluded from general contact with society, it is not likely
that lepers ceased to be objects of sympathy and kindness, such as they
now are in those Christian and Moslem countries in which the leprosy
prevails. That they associated together in the holy land, as they do at
present, is evident from [Kg2 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#003);
[Luk 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#012). It has been conjectured
that a habitation was provided for them outside Jerusalem, on the hill
Gareb (Bezetha), which is mentioned only in [Jer
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039).

Without the camp - Compare the margin reference. A leper polluted
everything in the house which he entered. A separate space used to be
provided for lepers in the synagogues.

[Leviticus 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">lev 13:47</span></span>

The garment - Rather, The clothing, referring to the ordinary dress of
the Israelites in the wilderness; namely,, a linen tunic with a fringe
[Num 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038) and a woolen cloak or
blanket thrown on in colder weather.

[Leviticus 13:48](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">lev 13:48</span></span>

Rather, "And the clothing in which there is a stroke of leprosy, whether
the stroke is in clothing of wool or in clothing of linen; or in yarn
for warp or in yarn for woof, either for linen clothing or for woolen
clothing; or in a skin of leather or in any article made of leather."

[Leviticus 13:51](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">lev 13:51</span></span>

A fretting leprosy - i. e. a malignant or corroding leprosy. What was
the nature of the leprosy in clothing, which produced greenish or
reddish spots, cannot be precisely determined. It was most likely
destructive mildew, perhaps of more than one kind.

[Leviticus 13:56](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">lev 13:56</span></span>

Somewhat dark - Rather, somewhat faint. Compare [Lev
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#006).

[Leviticus 13:57](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">lev 13:57</span></span>

Either - in these verses, should be or. See [Lev
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#047), [Lev
13:49](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#049).

It should be noticed that no religious or symbolic rite is prescribed
for leprosy in clothing. The priest had only to decide whether the
process of decay was at work in the article presented to him and to
pronounce accordingly. Compare the leprosy in houses, Lev. 14:33-53.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 14](lev014)

</div>
