<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk005)  [Next](luk007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 6:0</span></span>

[Luk 6:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001). See this passage
explained in the notes at [Mat
12:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001).

[Luke 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 6:1</span></span>

Second sabbath after the first - See the notes at [Mat
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001). This phrase has given great
perplexity to commentators. A "literal" translation would be, "on the
Sabbath called "second first,"" or second first Sabbath. The word occurs
nowhere else. It is therefore exceedingly difficult of interpretation.
The most natural and easy explanation is that proposed by Scaliger. The
"second day" of the Passover was a great festival, on which the
wave-sheaf was offered, [Lev 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#011).
From "that day" they reckoned "seven weeks," or seven "Sabbaths," to the
day of Pentecost. The "first" Sabbath after that "second day" was called
the "second first," or the first from the second day of the feast. The
"second" Sabbath was called the "second second," or the second Sabbath
from the second day of the feast; the third the "third second," etc.
This day, therefore, on which the Saviour went through the fields, was
the first Sabbath that occurred after the second day of the feast.

Rubbing them in their hands - The word "corn" here means wheat or
barley, and not maize, as in America. They rubbed it in their hands to
separate the grain from the chaff. This was common and allowable. Dr.
Thomson ("The Land and the Book," vol. ii. p. 510, 511) says: "I have
often seen my muleteers, as we passed along the wheat fields, pluck off
ears, rub them in their hands, and eat the grains, unroasted, just as
the apostles are said to have done. This also is allowable. The
Pharisees did not object to the thing itself, only to the time when it
was done. They said it was not lawful to do this on the Sabbath-day. It
was work forbidden by those who, through their traditions, had made man
for the Sabbath, not the Sabbath for man." So Professor Hackett
("Illustrations of Scripture," p. 176, 177) says: "The incident of
plucking the ears of wheat, rubbing out the kernels in their hands, and
eating them [Luk 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001), is one which the
traveler sees often at present who is in Palestine at the time of the
gathering of the harvest. Dr. Robinson relates the following case: 'Our
Arabs were an hungered, and, going into the fields, they plucked the
ears of grain and did eat, rubbing them in their hands. On being
questioned, they said this was an old custom, and no one would speak
against it; they were supposed to be hungry, and it was allowed as a
charity.' The Pharisees complained of the disciples for violating the
Sabbath, and not any rights of property."

[Luke 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 6:8</span></span>

But he knew there thoughts - He knew their thoughts - their dark,
malicious designs - by the question, which they proposed to him, whether
it was lawful to heal on the Sabbath-days (Matthew). In "reply" to their
question, Jesus asked them whether they would not release a "sheep" on
the Sabbath-day if it was fallen into a pit, and also asked "them"
whether it was better to do good than to do evil on that day, implying
that to "omit" to do "good" was, in fact, doing "evil."

[Luke 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 6:11</span></span>

Were filled with madness - Probably,

1\. Because he had shown his "power" to work a miracle.

2\. Because he had shown his power to do it "contrary" to what "they"
thought was right.

3\. Because by doing it he had shown that he was from "God," and that
"they" were therefore "wrong" in their views of the Sabbath. And,

4\. Because he had shown no respect "to their views" of what the law of
God demanded.

Pride, obstinacy, malice, and disappointed self-confidence were "all"
combined, therefore, in producing madness. Nor were they alone. Men are
often enraged because others do good in a way which "they" do not
approve of. God gives success to others; and because he has not
accommodated himself to "their" views of what is right, and done it in
the way which "they" would have prescribed, they are enraged, and filled
with envy at people more successful than themselves.

Communed one with another - Spoke together, or laid a plan.

[Luke 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 6:12</span></span>

And it came to pass in those days - The designation of the time here is
very general. It means "about" the time when the events occurred which
had been just narrated.

He went out into a mountain - Jesus was accustomed to resort to such
places to hold communion with God, [Mar
6:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#046). He did it because it was
retired, free from interruption, and fitted by impressiveness and
grandeur to raise the thoughts to the God that had formed the high hills
and the deep-shaded groves.

And continued all night in prayer to God - There has been a difference
of opinion about this passage, whether it means that he spent the night
in the act of "praying" to God, or in a "place" of prayer. The Jews had
places of prayer, called "oratories," built out of their cities or
towns, where they could retire from the bustle of a city and hold
communion with God. They were built on the banks of rivers (compare [Act
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013)), in groves, or on hills. They
were rude inclosures, made by building a rough wall of stone around a
level piece of ground, and capable of accommodating a small number who
might resort thither to pray. But the more probable opinion is that he
spent the whole night in supplication; for:

1\. This is the obvious meaning of the passage.

2\. The object for which he went out was "to pray."

3\. It was an occasion of great importance. He was about to send out his
apostles - to lay the foundation of his religion - and he therefore set
apart this time especially to seek the divine blessing.

4\. It was no unusual thing for Jesus to spend much time in prayer, and
we are not to wonder that he passed an entire night in supplication. If
it be asked why Jesus should pray "at all" if he was divine, it may be
replied that he was also a "man" - a man subject to the same sufferings
as others, and, "as a man," needing the divine blessing. There was no
more inconsistency in his "praying" than there was in his "eating." Both
were "means" employed for an end, and both were equally consistent with
his being divine. But Jesus was also "Mediator," and as such it was
proper to seek the divine direction and blessing. In "this" case he has
set us an example that we should follow. In great emergencies, when we
have important duties, or are about to encounter special difficulties,
we should seek the divine blessing and direction by "prayer." We should
set apart an unusual portion of time for supplication. Nay, if we pass
the "whole night" in prayer, it should not be charged as enthusiasm. Our
Saviour did it. Men of the world often pass whole nights in plans of
gain or in dissipation, and shall it be esteemed strange that Christians
should spend an equal portion of time in the far more important business
of religion?

[Luke 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 6:13</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001).

[Luke 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 6:17</span></span>

And stood in the plain - It is not affirmed, however, that he stood in
the plain when he delivered the following discourse. There has been some
doubt whether the following discourse is the same as that recorded in
Matt. 5; 6; 7, or whether the Saviour "repeated" the substance of that
discourse, and that Luke recorded it as he repeated it. The reasons
which have led many to suppose that they refer to the same are:

1\. That the beginning and the close are alike.

2\. That the "substance" of each is the same. And,

3\. That "after" the discourse was delivered, both affirm that Jesus
went to Capernaum and healed the servant of the centurion, [Mat
8:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005); [Luk
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#001).

On the other hand, "Matthew" says that the sermon was delivered on the
"mountain" [Mat 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001); it is thought to
be implied that "Luke" affirms that it was in the "plain." Matthew says
that he "sat;" Luke, that he "stood." Yet there is no reason to suppose
that there is a difference in the evangelists. Jesus spent the night on
the mountain in prayer. In the morning he descended into the open plain
and healed many. While there, as Luke says, he "stood" and received
those who came to him, and healed their diseases. There is no
impropriety in supposing that, being pressed by multitudes, he retired
into the mountain again, or to an eminence in the plain, or to the side
of the mountain, where the people might be more conveniently arranged
and seated to hear him. There he "sat," as recorded by Matthew, and
delivered the discourse; for it is to be observed that Luke does "not"
say that he delivered the sermon "on the plain," but only that he
"healed the sick there."

Tyre and Sidon - See the notes at [Mat
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021).

[Luke 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 6:18</span></span>

Vexed - The word "vex" with us means to provoke, or irritate by petty
provocations. Here it means, however, to "afflict," to "torment" -
denoting deep and heavy trials.

Unclean spirits - Demons that were impure and unholy, having a delight
in tormenting, and in inflicting painful and loathsome diseases.

[Luke 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 6:19</span></span>

Virtue - Healing power. See the notes at [Mar
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#030).

[Luke 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 6:20</span></span>

See this passage fully illustrated in the sermon on the mount, in Matt.
5-7.

[Luk 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#021)

That hunger now - Matthew has it, "that hunger and thirst after
righteousness." Matthew has expressed more fully what Luke has briefly,
but there is no contradiction.

[Luk 6:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024)

These verses have been omitted by Matthew. They seem to have been spoken
to the Pharisees.

Who are rich - In this world's goods. They loved them; they had sought
for them; they found their consolation in them. It implies, farther,
that they would not seek or receive consolation from the gospel. They
were proud, and would not seek it; satisfied, and did not desire it;
filled with cares, and had no time or disposition to attend to it. All
the consolation which they had reason to expect they had received. Alas!
how poor and worthless is such consolation, compared with that which the
gospel would give!

Woe unto you that are full! - Not hungry. Satisfied with their wealth,
and not feeling their need of anything better than earthly wealth can
give. Many, alas! are thus "full." They profess to be satisfied. They
desire nothing but wealth, and a sufficiency to satisfy the wants of the
body. They have no anxiety for the riches that shall endure forever.

Ye shall hunger - Your property shall be taken away, or you shall see
that it is of little value; and then you shall see the need of something
better. You shall feel your want and wretchedness, and shall "hunger"
for something to satisfy the desires of a dying, sinful soul.

That laugh now - Are happy, or thoughtless, or joyful, or filled with
levity.

Shall mourn and weep - The time is coming when you shall sorrow deeply.
In sickness, in calamity, in the prospect of death, in the fear of
eternity, your laughter shall be turned into sorrow. "There is" a place
where you cannot laugh, and there you will see the folly of having
passed the "proper time" of preparing for such scenes in levity and
folly. Alas! how many thus spend their youth! and how many weep when it
is too late! God gives them over, and "laughs" at their "calamity," and
mocks when their fear comes, [Pro
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026). To be happy in "such scenes," it
is necessary to be sober, humble, pious in early life. "Then" we need
not weep in the day of calamity; then there will be no terror in death;
then there will be nothing to fear in the grave.

[Luk 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#026)

When all men shall speak well of you - When they shall praise or applaud
you. The people of the world will not praise or applaud "my" doctrine;
they are "opposed" to it, and therefore, if they speak well of "you" and
of "your teachings," it is proof that you do not teach the true
doctrine. If you do "not" do this, then there will be woe upon you. If
men teach false doctrines for true; if they declare that God has spoken
that which he has not spoken, and if they oppose what he "has"
delivered, then heavy punishments will await them.

For so did their fathers - The fathers or ancestors of this people; the
ancient Jews.

To the false prophets - Men who pretended to be of God - who delivered
their "own" doctrines as the truth of God, and who accommodated
themselves to the desires of the people. Of this number were the
prophets of Baal, the false prophets who appeared in the time of
Jeremiah, etc.

[Luk 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027), [Luk
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#028)

See [Mat 5:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044).

[Luk 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#029)

See [Mat 5:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039).

[Luk 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#030)

See [Mat 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042).

[Luk 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#031)

See [Mat 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012).

[Luk 6:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#032)

See [Mat 5:46-48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046).

[Luk 6:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037)

See [Mat 7:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001).

[Luk 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038)

Good measure - They shall give you good measure, or "full" measure.

Pressed down - As figs or grapes might be, and thus many more might be
put into the measure.

Shaken together - To make it more compact, and thus to give more.

Running over - So full that the measure would overflow.

Shall men give - This is said to be the reward of "giving" to the poor
and needy; and the meaning is that the man who is liberal will find
others liberal to him in dealing with them, and when he is also in
circumstances of want. A man who is himself kind to the poor - who has
that "character" established - will find many who are ready to help
"him" abundantly when he is in want. He that is parsimonious, close,
niggardly, will find few or none who will aid him.

Into your bosom - That is, to you. The word "bosom" here has reference
to a custom among Oriental nations of making the bosom or front part of
their garments large, so that articles could be carried in them,
answering the purpose of our pockets. Compare [Exo
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#006); [Pro
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027); [Rut
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#015).

[Luk 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#039)

A parable - A proverb or similitude.

Can the blind lead the blind? - See the notes at [Mat
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014).

[Luk 6:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#040)

The disciple is not ... - The learner is not above his teacher, does not
know more, and must expect to fare no better. This seems to have been
spoken to show them that they were not to expect that their disciples
would go "beyond them" in attainments; that if they were blind, their
followers would be also; and that therefore it was important for them to
understand fully the doctrines of the gospel, and not to be blind
leaders of the blind.

Every one that is perfect - The word rendered "is perfect" means
sometimes to repair or mend, and is thus applied to mending nets, [Mat
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021); [Mar
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#019). Hence, it means to repair or
amend in a moral sense, or to make whole or complete. Here it means,
evidently, "thoroughly instructed" or "informed." The Christian should
be like his Master - holy, harmless, and undefiled, and separate from
sinners. He should copy his example, and grow into the likeness of his
Redeemer. Nor can any other be a Christian.

[Luk 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#041), [Luk
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#042)

See the notes at [Mat 7:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003).

[Luk 6:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#043), [Luk
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#044)

See the notes at [Mat 7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016).

[Luk 6:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#045)

This verse is not found in the sermon on the mount as recorded by
Matthew, but is recorded by him in [Mat
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035). See the notes at that passage.

[Luk 6:46-49](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#046)

See the notes at [Mat 7:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 7](luk007)

</div>
