<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk003)  [Next](luk005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)

[Luke 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 4:1</span></span>

On the temptation of Jesus, see the notes at [Mat
4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001).

[Luk 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#002)

Being forty days tempted - That is, through forty days he was "tried" in
various ways by the devil. The temptations, however, which are recorded
by Matthew and Luke did not take place until the forty days were
finished. See [Mat 4:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002).

He did eat nothing - He was sustained by the power of God during this
season of extraordinary fasting.

[Luk 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013)

Departed for a season - For a time. From this it appears that our
Saviour was "afterward" subjected to temptations by Satan, but no
"particular" temptations are recorded after this. From [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030), it seems that the devil tried
or tempted him in the agony in Gethsemane. Compare the notes at [Heb
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#004). It is more than probable, also,
that Satan did much to excite the Pharisees and Sadducees to endeavor to
"entangle him," and the priests and rulers to oppose him; yet out of all
his temptations God delivered him; and so he will make a way to escape
for "all" that are tempted, and will not suffer them to be tempted above
that which they are able to bear, [Co1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013).

[Luk 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#014)

In the power of the Spirit - By the "influence" or direction of the
Spirit.

A fame - A report. See [Mat 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024).

[Luke 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 4:15</span></span>

Glorified of all - Praised by all; or, all were pleased with his
instructions, and admired his wisdom.

[Luke 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 4:16</span></span>

And, as his custom was, he went ... - From this it appears that the
Saviour regularly attended the service of the synagogue. In that service
the Scriptures of the Old Testament were read, prayers were offered, and
the Word of God was explained. See the notes at [Mat
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023). There was great corruption in
doctrine and practice at that time, but Christ did not on that account
keep away from the place of public worship. From this we may learn:

1\. That it is our duty "regularly" to attend public worship.

2\. That it is better to attend a place of worship which is not entirely
pure, or where just such doctrines are not delivered as we would wish,
than not attend at all.

It is of vast importance that the public worship of God should be
maintained; and it is "our" duty to assist in maintaining it, to show by
our example that we love it, and to win others also to love it. See [Heb
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025). At the same time, this remark
should not be construed as enjoining it as our duty to attend where the
"true" God is not worshipped, or where he is worshipped by pagan rites
and pagan prayers. If, therefore, the Unitarian does not worship the
true God, and if the Roman Catholic worships God in a manner forbidden
and offers homage to the creatures of God, thus being guilty of
idolatry, it cannot be a duty to attend on such a place of worship.

The synagogue - See [Mat 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023).

Stood up for to read - The books of Moses were so divided that they
could be read through in the synagogues once in a year. To these were
added portions out of the prophets, so that no small part of them was
read also once a year. It is not known whether our Saviour read the
lesson which was the regular one for that day, though it might seem
"probable" that he would not depart from the usual custom. Yet, as the
eyes of all were fixed on him; as he deliberately looked out a place;
and as the people were evidently surprised at what he did, it seems to
be intimated that he selected a lesson which was "not" the regular one
for that day. The same ceremonies in regard to conducting public worship
which are here described are observed at Jerusalem by the Jews at the
present time. Professor Hackett ("Illustrations of Scripture," p. 232)
says: "I attended the Jewish worship at Jerusalem, and was struck with
the accordance of the ceremonies with those mentioned in the New
Testament. The sacred roll was brought from the chest or closet where it
was kept; it was handed by an attendant to the reader; a portion of it
was rehearsed; the congregation rose and stood while it was read,
whereas the speaker, as well as the others present, sat during the
delivery of the address which formed a part of the service."

[Luke 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 4:17</span></span>

There was delivered unto him - By the minister of the synagogue, or the
keeper of the sacred books. They were kept in an "ark" or chest, not far
from the pulpit, and the minister gave them to whomsoever he chose, to
read them publicly.

The book - The volume contained the prophecy of Isaiah. It would seem,
from this, that the books were kept separate, and not united into one as
with us.

When he had opened the book - Literally, when he had "unrolled" the
book. Books, among the ancients, were written on parchments or vellum
that is, skins of beasts, and were "rolled" together on two rollers,
beginning at each end, so that while reading they rolled off from one to
the other. Different forms of books were indeed used, but this was the
most common. When used the reader unrolled the manuscript as far as the
place which he wished to find, and kept before him just so much as he
would read. When the roller was done with, it was carefully deposited in
a case.

The place where it was written - [Isa
61:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001).

[Luke 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 4:18</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me - Or, I speak by divine appointment. I
am divinely inspired to speak. There can be no doubt that the passage in
Isaiah had a principal reference to the Messiah. Our Saviour directly
applies it to himself, and it is not easily applicable to any other
prophet. Its first application might have been to the restoration of the
Jews from Babylon; but the language of prophecy is often applicable to
two similar events, and the secondary event is often the most important.
In this case the prophet uses most striking poetic images to depict the
return from Babylon, but the same images also describe the appropriate
work of the Son of God.

Hath anointed me - Anciently kings and prophets and the high priest were
set apart to their work by anointing with oil, [Kg1
19:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#015); [Exo
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#007); [Sa1
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#016), etc. This oil or ointment was
made of various substances, and it was forbidden to imitate it, [Exo
30:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034). Hence, those who were set
apart to the work of God as king, prophet, or priest, were called the
Lord's anointed, [Sa1 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006); [Psa
84:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009); [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001). Hence, the Son of God is called
the "Messiah," a Hebrew word signifying the "Anointed," or the "Christ,"
a Greek word signifying the same thing. And by his being "anointed" is
not meant that he was literally anointed, for he was never set apart in
that manner, but that "God had set him apart" for this work; that "he"
had constituted or appointed him to be the prophet, priest, and king of
his people. See the notes at [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

To preach the gospel to the poor - The English word "gospel" is derived
from two words - "God" or "good," and "spell," an old Saxon word meaning
"history, relation, narration, word, or speech," and the word therefore
means "a good communication" or "message." This corresponds exactly with
the meaning of the Greek word - "a good or joyful message - glad
tidings." By the "poor" are meant all those who are destitute of the
comforts of this life, and who therefore may be more readily disposed to
seek treasures in heaven; all those who are sensible of their sins, or
are poor in spirit [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003); and all
the "miserable" and the afflicted, [Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007). Our Saviour gave it as one proof
that he was the Messiah, or was from God, that he preached to "the
poor," [Mat 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005). The Pharisees and
Sadducees despised the poor; ancient philosophers neglected them; but
the gospel seeks to bless them - to give comfort where it is felt to be
needed, and where it will be received with gratitude. Riches fill the
mind with pride, with self-complacency, and with a feeling that the
gospel is not needed. The poor "feel" their need of some sources of
comfort that the world cannot give, and accordingly our Saviour met with
his greatest success the gospel among the poor; and there also, "since,"
the gospel has shed its richest blessings and its purest joys. It is
also one proof that the gospel is true. If it had been of "men," it
would have sought the rich and mighty; but it pours contempt on all
human greatness, and seeks, like God, to do good to those whom the world
overlooks or despises. See the notes at [Co1
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026).

To heal the brokenhearted - To console those who are deeply afflicted,
or whose hearts are "broken" by external calamities or by a sense of
their sinfulness.

Deliverance to the captives - This is a figure originally applicable to
those who were in captivity in Babylon. They were miserable. To grant
deliverance to "them" and restore them to their country - to grant
deliverance to those who are in prison and restore them to their
families - to give liberty to the slave and restore him to freedom, was
to confer the highest benefit and impart the richest favor. In this
manner the gospel imparts favor. It does not, indeed, "literally" open
the doors of prisons, but it releases the mind captive under sin; it
gives comfort to the prisoner, and it will finally open all prison doors
and break off all the chains of slavery, and, by preventing "crime,"
prevent also the sufferings that are the consequence of crime.

Sight to the blind - This was often literally fulfilled, [Mat
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005); [Joh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#011); [Mat
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#030), etc.

To set at liberty them that are bruised - The word "bruised," here,
evidently has the same "general" signification as "brokenhearted" or the
contrite. It means those who are "pressed down" by great calamity, or
whose hearts are "pressed" or "bruised" by the consciousness of sin. To
set them "at liberty" is the same as to free them from this pressure, or
to give them consolation.

[Luke 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 4:19</span></span>

To peach the acceptable year of the Lord - The time when God is willing
to accept of people, or to receive sinners coming to him. The gospel
assures us that the guilty "may" return, and that God will graciously
receive them. There is, perhaps, here, an allusion to the year of
jubilee - the fiftieth year, when the trumpet was blown, and through the
whole land proclamation was made of the liberty of Hebrew slaves, of the
remission of debts, and of the restoration of possessions to their
original families, [Lev 25:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008). The
phrase "the acceptable year" means the time when it would be acceptable
to God to proclaim such a message, or agreeable to him - to wit, under
the gospel.

[Luke 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 4:20</span></span>

And he closed the book - That is, he rolled it up again. See the notes
at [Luk 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017).

And he gave it again to the minister - That is, to the one in the
synagogue who had charge of the books. The word means "servant," and the
office was not much unlike that of a sexton now. It was his duty, among
other things, to take charge of the books, to hand them to the reader of
the law, and then return them to their place.

And sat down - This was usual in speaking in their synagogues. See the
notes at [Mat 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001).

Were fastened on him - Were intently fixed on him, waiting to see what
explanation he would give of the words.

[Luke 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 4:21</span></span>

This scripture - This writing, or this part of the Scriptures.

Fulfilled - It is coming to pass; the thing originally intended by it is
about to be accomplished.

In your ears - In your "hearing;" or you hear, in my preaching, the
fulfillment of this prophecy. It is probable that he said much "more"
than is here recorded, but Luke has preserved only the "substance" of
his discourse. This was the "amount" or "sum"" of his sermon, or his
explanation of the passage, that it was now receiving its
accomplishment.

[Luke 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 4:22</span></span>

All bare him witness - All were witnesses of the power and truth of what
he said. Their reason and conscience approved of it, and they were
constrained to admit the force and propriety of it, and on this account
they wondered.

They wondered - They were struck with the truth and force of his words;
and especially when they remembered that he was a native of their own
place, and that they had been long acquainted with him, and that he
should "now" claim to be the Messiah, and give so much evidence that he
"was" the Christ.

The gracious words - The words of grace or favor; the kind,
affectionate, and tender exposition of the words, and explanation of the
design of his coming, and the nature of the plan of redemption. It was
so different from the harsh and unfeeling mode of the Pharisees; so
different from all their expectations respecting the Messiah, who they
supposed to be a prince and a bloody conqueror, that they were filled
with astonishment and awe.

[Luke 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 4:23</span></span>

Physician, heal thyself - This proverb was probably in common use at
that time. The meaning is this: Suppose that a man should attempt to
heal another when he was himself diseased in the same manner; it would
be natural to ask him first to cure himself, and thus to render it
manifest that he was worthy of confidence. The connection of this
proverb, here, is this: "You profess to be the Messiah. You have
performed miracles at Capernaum. You profess to be able to deliver us
from our maladies, our sins, our afflictions. Show that you have the
power, that you are worthy of our confidence, by working miracles here,
as you profess to have done at Capernaum." It does not refer, therefore,
to any purification of his own, or imply any reflection on him for
setting up to teach them. It was only a demand that he would show the
proper evidence "by miracles" why they should trust in him, and he
proceeds to show them why he would not give them this evidence.

Whatsoever we have heard done - Whatsoever we have heard that thou hast
done. It would seem, from this, that Christ had before this performed
miracles in Capernaum, though the evangelist has not recorded them.

In Capernaum - Capernaum was on the northwest corner of the Sea of
Tiberias, and was not far from Nazareth. It is not improbable that some
of those who then heard him might have been present and witnessed some
of his miracles at Capernaum. See the notes at [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013).

[Luke 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 4:24</span></span>

No prophet is accepted - Has honor, or is acknowledged as a prophet. See
the notes at [Mat 13:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#057).

[Luke 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 4:25</span></span>

Of a truth - Truly, and therefore worthy of your credit. He calls
attention to two cases where "acknowledged" prophets had so little honor
in their own nation that they bestowed their favors on foreigners. So,
says he, such is the want of faith in my own country, that I shall work
no miracles here, but shall give the evidence of my divine mission to
others.

In Israel - In the land of Israel, or Judea. It was therefore the more
remarkable, since there were so many in his own country whom he might
have helped, that the prophet should have gone to a pagan city and aided
a poor widow there.

The days of Elias - The days of Elijah. See the account of this in 1
Kings 17:8-24.

Three years and six months - From [Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001), [Kg1
18:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#045), it would seem that the rain
fell on the "third year" - that is, at the "end" of the third year after
the rain had ceased to fall at the usual time. There were two seasons of
the year when rains fell in Judea - in October and April, called the
"early" and "latter" rain; consequently there was an interval between
them of six months. To the three years, therefore, when rain was
withheld "at the usual times," are to be added the previous six months,
when no rain fell as a matter of course, and consequently three years
"and six months" elapsed without rain.

A great famine - A great want of food, from long continued and
distressing drought.

[Luke 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 4:26</span></span>

Save unto Sarepta - Sarepta was a town between Tyre and Sidon, near the
Mediterranean Sea. It was not a "Jewish" city, but a Sidonian, and
therefore a "Gentile" town. The word "save" in this verse does not
express the meaning of the original. It would seem to imply that the
city was Jewish. The meaning of the verse is this: "He was sent to none
of the widows in Israel. He was not sent except to Sarepta, to a woman
that was a "Sidonian." Dr. Thomson ("The Land and the Book," vol. i. p.
232-236) regards Sarepta as the modern Sarafend. He says that the ruins
have been frequently dug over for stone to build the barracks at Beirut,
and that the broken columns, marble slabs, sarcophagi, and other ruins
indicate that it was once a flourishing city. A large town was built
there in the time of the Crusades.

[Luke 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 4:27</span></span>

Many lepers - For an account of the leprosy see the notes at [Mat
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001).

Time of Eliseus - Time of Elisha. The word "Eliseus" is the Greek way of
writing the word Elisha, as Elias is of Elijah.

Saving Naaman the Syrian - The account of his cure is contained in 2
Kings 5.

[Luke 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 4:28</span></span>

Filled with wrath - They were enraged, probably, for the following
reasons:

1\. They saw that the cases applied to themselves, because they would
not receive the miraculous evidences of his mission.

2\. That he would direct his attention to others, and not to them.

3\. That the "Gentiles" were objects of compassion with God, and that
God often showed more favor to a "single" Gentile than to multitudes of
Jews in the same circumstances.

4\. That they might be "worse" than the Gentiles. And,

5\. That it was a part of his design to preach the gospel to the
Gentiles, and not confine his labors to them only.

On these accounts their favor was soon turned to wrath, and the whole
transaction shows us:

1\. That popular applause is of little value.

2\. That the slightest circumstances may soon turn the warmest professed
friendship to hatred. And,

3\. That people are exceedingly unreasonable in being unwilling to hear
the truth and profit by it.

[Luke 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 4:29</span></span>

The brow of the hill whereon ... - The region in which Nazareth was is
hilly, though Nazareth was situated "between" two hills, or in a vale
among mountains. The place to which they led the Saviour is still shown,
and is called the "Mount of Precipitation." It is at a short distance to
the south of Nazareth. See the notes at [Mat
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023).

Cast him down - This was the effect of a popular tumult. They had no
legal right to take life on any occasion, and least of all in this
furious and irregular manner. The whole transaction shows:

1\. That the character given of the Galileans elsewhere as being
especially wicked was a just one.

2\. To what extremities the wickedness of the heart will lead people
when it is acted out. And,

3\. That people are opposed to the truth, and that they would do
anything, if not restrained, to manifest their opposition.

[Luke 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 4:30</span></span>

Passing through the midst of, them, went his way - This escape was very
remarkable. It is remarkable that he should escape out of their hands
when their very object was to destroy him, and that he should escape in
so peaceful a manner, without violence or conflict. A similar case is
recorded in [Joh 8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059). There are but
two ways of accounting for this:

1\. That "other Nazarenes," who had not been present in the synagogue,
heard what was doing and came to rescue him, and in the contest that
rose between the two parties Jesus silently escaped.

2\. More probably that Jesus by divine power, by the force of a word or
look, stilled their passions, arrested their purposes, and passed
silently through them. That he "had" such a power over the spirits of
people we learn from the occurrence in Gethsemane, when he said, "I am
he; and they went backward and fell to the ground," [Joh
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006).

[Luke 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 4:31</span></span>

See this explained in the notes at Mark 1:21-39.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 5](luk005)

</div>
