<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk021)  [Next](luk023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001)

[Luke 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 22:1</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 26:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#001).

[Luke 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 22:3</span></span>

Then entered Satan into Judas - It is not necessary to suppose that
Satan entered personally into the body of Judas, but only that he
brought him under his influence; he filled his mind with an evil
passion, and led him on to betray his Master. The particular passion of
which Satan made use was "avarice" - probably the besetting sin of
Judas. To show its exceeding evil and baseness, it is only necessary to
say that when it produced its "appropriate" effect in this case, it led
to the betraying and crucifixion of the Son of God. We may learn, also,
that when Satan "tempts" people, he commonly does it by exciting and
raising to the highest pitch their native passions. He does not make
them act contrary to their nature, but leads them on to "act out" their
proper disposition.

Satan - This word properly means an adversary or an accuser. It is the
name which in the Scriptures is commonly given to the prince or leader
of evil spirits, and is given to him because he is the "accuser or
calumniator" of the righteous (see [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010); compare [Job
1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006)), as well as because he is the
"adversary" of God.

Being of the number of the twelve - One of the twelve apostles. This
greatly aggravated his crime. He should have been bound by most tender
ties to Jesus. He was one of his family - long with him, and, treated by
him with every mark of kindness and confidence; and nothing could more
enhance his guilt than thus to make use of this confidence for the
commission of one of the basest crimes.

[Luke 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 22:4</span></span>

Chief priests and captains - See the notes at [Mat
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014). See the account of the bargain
which Judas made with them explained in the [Mat
26:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014) notes, and [Mar
14:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#010) notes.

Absence of the multitude - The multitude, "the people," were then
favorable to Jesus. He had preached in the temple, and many of them
believed that he was the Messiah. It was a hazardous thing, therefore,
to take him by force, and in their presence, as they might rise and
rescue him. Hence, they sought to take him when "he" was away from the
multitude; and as Judas knew of a place where he could be found "alone,"
they were glad of the opportunity of so easily securing him.

[Luke 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 22:7</span></span>

See this passage explained in the [Mat
26:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017) notes, and [Mar
14:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012) notes.

[Luke 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 22:14</span></span>

When the hour was come - The hour of eating the paschal lamb, which was
in the evening. See the notes at [Mat
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#020).

[Luke 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 22:15</span></span>

With desire I have desired - This is a Hebrew form of expression, and
means "I have greatly desired." The reasons why he desired this we may
suppose to have been:

1\. That, as he was about to leave them, he was desirous once of seeing
them together, and of partaking with them of one of the religious
privileges of the Jewish dispensation. Jesus was "man" as well as God,
and he never undervalued the religious rites of his country, or the
blessings of social and religious contact; and there is no impropriety
in supposing that even he might feel that his human nature might be
prepared by the service of religion for his great and terrible
sufferings.

2\. He doubtless wished to take an opportunity to prepare "them" for his
sufferings, and to impress upon them more fully the certainty that he
was about to leave them, that they might be prepared for it.

3\. We may also suppose that he particularly desired it that he might
institute for "their" use, and for the edification of all Christians,
the supper which is called by his name - "the Lord's Supper." All his
sufferings were the expression of love to his people, and he was
desirous of testifying "always" his regard for their comfort and
welfare.

Before I suffer - Before I die.

[Luke 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 22:16</span></span>

Until it be fulfilled - See the notes at [Mat
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029).

[Luke 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 22:17</span></span>

And he took the cup and gave thanks - This was not the "sacramental"
cup, for that was taken "after" supper, [Luk
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020). This was one of the cups which
were usually taken during the celebration of the Passover, and pertained
to that observance. "After" he had kept this in the usual manner, he
instituted the supper which bears his name, using the bread and wine
which had been prepared for the Passover, and thus ingrafted the Lord's
Supper on the Passover, or superseded the Passover by another ordinance,
which was intended to be perpetual.

[Luke 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 22:19</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 26:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026).

[Luke 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 22:21</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 26:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#021).

[Luke 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 22:24</span></span>

A strife - A contention or debate.

Which of them should be the greatest - The apostles, in common with the
Jews generally, had supposed that the Messiah would come as a temporal
prince, and in the manner of other princes of the earth - of course,
that he would have officers of his government, ministers of state, etc.
Their contention was founded on this expectation, and they were
disputing which of them should be raised to the highest office. They had
before had a similar contention. See [Mat
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001); [Mat
20:20-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020). Nothing can be more
humiliating than that the disciples should have had "such" contentions,
and in such a time and place. That just as Jesus was contemplating his
own death, and laboring to prepare them for it, they should strive and
contend about office and rank, shows how deeply seated is the love of
power; how ambition will find its way into the most secret and sacred
places; and how even the disciples of the meek and lowly Jesus are
sometimes actuated by this most base and wicked feeling.

[Luke 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 22:25</span></span>

The kings of the Gentiles - The kings of the "nations," or of the earth.
They do this, and it is to be expected of them, and it is right. Our
Lord does not mean to say that it was wrong that there should be such
authority, but that "his" kingdom was to be of a different character,
and they were not to expect it there.

Over them - That is, over the "nations."

Are called benefactors - The word "benefactor" is applied to one who
bestows "favor" on another. It was applied to kings by way of
"compliment or flattery." Some of them might have been truly benefactors
of their people, but this was by no means true of "all." Yet it was
applied to all, and especially to the Roman emperors. It is found
applied to them often in the writings of Josephus and Philo.

[Luke 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 22:26</span></span>

But ye shall not be so - Christ here takes occasion to explain the
nature of his kingdom. He assures them that it is established on
different principles from those of the world; that his subjects were not
to expect titles, and power, and offices of pomp in his kingdom. He that
would be most advanced in "his" kingdom would be he that was most
humble; and in order to show them this, he took a towel and girded
himself after the manner of a servant, and washed their feet, to show
them what ought to be their feelings toward each other. See [Joh
13:4-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004).

He that sitteth at meat - The master of the feast, or one of his guests.

But I am among you ... - This was said in connection with his washing
their feet. He "showed" them how they ought to feel and act toward each
other. "They" ought, therefore, not to aim at office and power, but to
be humble, and serve and aid one another.

[Luke 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 22:28</span></span>

My temptations - My trials, my humiliations, and my assaults from the
power of Satan and a wicked world.

[Luke 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 22:29</span></span>

And I appoint unto you a kingdom - He assures them here that they should
"have" a kingdom - their expectations would be realized. They had
continued with him; they had seen how "he" had lived, and to what trials
he had been subjected; they had all along expected a kingdom, and he
assures them that they should not be disappointed.

As my Father ... - They had seen how God had appointed a kingdom to
"him." It was not with pomp, and splendor, and external glory, but it
was in poverty, want, persecution, and trial. So would "he" appoint to
them a kingdom. They should "surely" possess it; but it would be not
with external splendor, but by poverty and toil. The original word
"appoint" has the force of a "covenant" or compact, and means that it
should be "surely" or certainly done, or that he pledged himself to do
it. All Christians must enter into the kingdom of heaven after the
manner of their Lord - through much tribulation; but, though it must be,
as it was with him, by many tears and sorrows, yet they shall surely
reach the place of their rest and the reward of heaven, for it is
secured to them by the covenant pledge and faithfulness of their Lord
and King.

[Luke 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 22:30</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028).

[Luke 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 22:31</span></span>

Simon - Peter. Jesus, foreseeing the danger of Peter, and knowing that
he was about to deny him, took occasion to forewarn him and put him on
his guard, and also to furnish him with a solace when he should be
brought to repentance.

Satan hath desired - Satan is the prince of evil. One of his works is to
try the faith of believers to place temptations and trials in their way,
that they may be tested. Thus God gave Job into his hands, that it might
be seen whether he would be found faithful, or would apostatize. See the
notes at [Job 1:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#007). So Satan desired
to have Peter in his hands, that he might also try him.

May sift you as wheat - Grain was agitated or shaken in a kind of fan or
sieve. The grain remained in the fan, and the chaff and dust were thrown
off. So Christ says that Satan desired to try Peter; to place trials and
temptations before him; "to agitate him" to see whether anything of
faith would remain, or whether all would not be found to be chaff - mere
natural ordor and false professions.

[Luke 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 22:32</span></span>

That thy faith fail not - The word "faith," here, seems to be used in
the sense of religion, or attachment to Christ, and the words "fail not"
mean "utterly fail" or fail altogether - that is, apostatize. It is true
that the "courage" of Peter failed; it is true that he had not that
immediate confidence in Jesus and reliance on him which he had before
had; but the prayer of Jesus was that he might not altogether apostatize
from the faith. God heard Jesus "always" [Joh
11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042); it follows, therefore, that
every prayer which he ever offered was answered; and it follows, as he
asked here for a specific thing, that that thing was granted; and as he
prayed that Peter's faith might not utterly fail, so it follows that
there was no time in which Peter was not really a pious man. Far as he
wandered, and grievously as he sinned, yet he well knew that Jesus was
the Messiah. He "did know" the man; and though his fears overcame him
and led him to aggravated sin, yet the prayer of Christ was prevalent,
and he was brought to true repentance.

When thou art converted - The word "converted" means turned, changed,
recovered. The meaning is, when thou art turned from this sin, when thou
art recovered from this heinous offence, then use "your" experience to
warn and strengthen those who are in danger of like sins. A man may be
"converted or turned" from any sin, or any evil course. He is
"regenerated" but once - at the beginning of his Christian life; he may
be "converted" as often as he falls into sin.

Strengthen thy brethren - Confirm them, warn them, encourage them. They
are in continual danger, also, of sinning. Use your experience to warn
them of their danger, and to comfort and sustain them in their
temptations. And from this we learn:

1\. That one design of permitting Christians to fall into sin is to show
their own weakness and dependence on God; and,

2\. That they who have been overtaken in this manner should make use of
their experience to warn and preserve others from the same path.

The two epistles of Peter, and his whole life, show that "he" was
attentive to this command of Jesus; and in his death he manifested his
deep abhorrence of this act of dreadful guilt in denying his blessed
Lord, by requesting to be crucified with his head downward, as unworthy
to suffer in the same manner that Christ did. Compare the notes at [Joh
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018).

[Luke 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 22:33</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 26:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#033).

[Luke 22:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 22:35</span></span>

When I sent you ... - See the notes at [Mat
10:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009).

Lacked ye ... - Did you want anything? Did not God fully provide for
you? He refers to this to convince them that his words were true; that
their past experience should lead them to put confidence in him and in
God.

[Luke 22:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 22:36</span></span>

But now - The Saviour says the times are changed. "Before," he sent them
out only for a little time. They were in their own country. Their
journeys would be short, and there was no need that they should make
preparation for a long absence, or for encountering great dangers. But
"now" they were to go into the wide world, among strangers, trials,
dangers, and wants. And as the time was near; as he was about to die; as
these dangers pressed on, it was proper that they should make provision
for what was before them.

A purse - See the notes at [Mat 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009).
He intimates that they should "now" take money, as it would be necessary
to provide for their wants in traveling.

Scrip - See the notes at [Mat 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010).

And he that hath no sword - There has been much difficulty in
understanding why Jesus directed his disciples to arm themselves, as if
it was his purpose to make a defense. It is certain that the spirit of
his religion is against the use of the sword, and that it was not his
purpose to defend himself against Judas. But it should be remembered
that these directions about the purse, the scrip, and the sword were not
made with reference to his "being taken" in the garden, but with
reference "to their future life." The time of the trial in Gethsemane
was just at hand; nor was there "time" then, if no other reason existed,
to go and make the purchase. It altogether refers to their future life.
They were going into the midst of dangers. The country was infested with
robbers and wild beasts. It was customary to go armed. He tells them of
those dangers - of the necessity of being prepared in the usual way to
meet them. This, then, is not to be considered as a specific, positive
"command" to procure a sword, but an intimation that great dangers were
before them; that their manner of life would be changed, and that they
would need the provisions "appropriate to that kind of life." The
"common" preparation for that manner of life consisted in money,
provisions, and arms; and he foretells them of that manner of life by
giving them directions commonly understood to be appropriate to it. It
amounts, then, to a "prediction" that they would soon leave the places
which they had been accustomed to, and go into scenes of poverty, want,
and danger, where they would feel the necessity of money, provisions,
and the means of defense. All, therefore, that the passage justifies is:

1\. That it is proper for people to provide beforehand for their wants,
and for ministers and missionaries as well as any others.

2\. That self-defense is lawful.

Men encompassed with danger may lawfully "defend" their lives. It does
not prove that it is lawful to make "offensive" war on a nation or an
individual.

Let him sell his garment - His "mantle" or his outer garment. See the
notes at [Mat 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040). The meaning is,
let him procure one at any expense, even if he is obliged to sell his
clothes for it intimating that the danger would be very great and
pressing.

[Luke 22:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 22:37</span></span>

This that is written - See the notes at [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012).

Was reckoned among the transgressors - Not reckoned as a transgressor,
but "among or with" them - that is, he was treated as transgressors are.
He was put to death in their company, and as he "would have been" if he
had been a transgressor. He was innocent, holy, harmless, and undefiled,
[Heb 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026). God knew this always, and
could not "think" of him, or make him "to be" otherwise than he was; yet
it pleased him to bruise him, and to give him into the hands of people
who did reckon him as a transgressor, and who treated him accordingly.

Have an end - This may either mean, "shall be surely accomplished," or
"they are about to be fulfilled," or "are now fulfilled." The former is
probably the meaning, denoting that "every" prophecy in regard to him
would certainly be accomplished.

[Luke 22:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 22:38</span></span>

Are two swords - The Galileans, it is said, often went armed. The
Essenes did so also. The reason was that the country was full of robbers
and wild beasts, and it was necessary to carry, in their travels, some
means of defense. It seems that the disciples followed the customs of
the country, and had with them some means of defense, though they had
but two swords among the twelve.

It is enough - It is difficult to understand this. Some suppose that it
is spoken "ironically;" as if he had said, "You are bravely armed
indeed, with two swords among twelve men, and to meet such a host!"
Others, that he meant to reprove them for understanding him "literally,"
as if he meant that they were then to procure swords for "immediate"
battle. As if he had said, "This is absurd, or a perversion of my
meaning. I did not intend this, but merely to foretell you of impending
dangers after my death." It is to be observed that he did not say "the
two swords are enough," but "it is enough;" perhaps meaning simply,
enough has been said. Other matters press on, and you will yet
understand what I mean.

[Luke 22:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 22:39</span></span>

See the Mat. 26:30-46 notes; Mark 14:26-42 notes.

[Luk 22:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#043)

Strengthening him - His human nature, to sustain the great burden that
was upon his soul. Some have supposed from this that he was not divine
as well as human; for if he was "God," how could an angel give any
strength or comfort? and why did not the divine nature "alone" sustain
the human? But the fact that he was "divine" does not affect the case at
all. It might be asked with the same propriety, If he was, as all admit,
the friend of God, and beloved of God, and holy, why, if he was a mere
man, did not "God" sustain him alone, without an angel's intervening?
But the objection in neither case would have any force. The "man, Christ
Jesus," was suffering. His human nature was in agony, and it is the
"manner" of God to sustain the afflicted by the intervention of others;
nor was there any more "unfitness" in sustaining the human nature of his
Son in this manner than any other sufferer.

[Luk 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044)

In an agony - See this verse explained in the notes at [Mat
26:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#042).

[Luk 22:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#045)

Sleeping for sorrow - On account of the greatness of their sorrow. See
the notes at [Mat 26:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#040).

[Luke 22:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 22:47</span></span>

See this explained in [Mat 26:48-56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#048).

[Luk 22:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#048)

Betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? - By the "Son of man" was
evidently meant "the Messiah." Judas had had the most satisfactory
evidence of that, and did not doubt it. A kiss was the sign of
affection. By that slight artifice Judas thought to conceal his base
purpose. Jesus with severity reproaches him for it. Every word is
emphatic. "Betrayest" thou - dost thou violate all thy obligations of
fidelity, and deliver thy Master up to death? Betrayest "thou" - thou,
so long with him, so much favored, so sure that this is the Messiah?
Betrayest thou "the Son of man" - the Messiah, the hope of the nations,
the desire of all people, the world's Redeemer? Betrayest thou the Son
of man "with a kiss" - the sign of friendship and affection employed in
a base and wicked purpose, intending to add deceit, disguise, and the
prostitution of a mark of affection to the "crime of treason?" Every
word of this must have gone to the very soul of Judas. Perhaps few
reproofs of crime more resemble the awful searchings of the souls of the
wicked in the day of judgment.

[Luke 22:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">luk 22:54</span></span>

See the notes at Mat. 26:57-75.

[Luke 22:63](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">luk 22:63</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 26:57-68](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#057).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 23](luk023)

</div>
