<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar005)  [Next](mar007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)

[Mark 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 6:1</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
13:54-58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#054).

[Mark 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 6:7</span></span>

And he called unto him the twelve - See the notes at [Mat
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001).

And began to send them forth by two and two - In order that they might
"support" and "encourage" each other in their work. Amid the trials and
opposition with which they would meet, mutual counsel and aid would
greatly lighten their burdens and alleviate their calamities. Mutual
counsel might also contribute to their success, and lead to "united"
plans to advance the kingdom of the Redeemer. Jesus here, as in all the
work of religion, consulted at the same time the "happiness" and the
"usefulness" of his disciples; nor are they ever separated. Whatever
contributes to the "usefulness" of his people produces also their
happiness; or, in other words, the secret of being happy is to be
"useful."

[Mark 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 6:8</span></span>

See these verses fully explained in the notes at [Mat
10:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009). In [Mat
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005) they were commanded not to go
among the Gentiles or Samaritans. Mark omits that direction, perhaps,
because he was writing for the "Gentiles," and the direction might
create unnecessary difficulty or offence. Perhaps he omits it also
because the command was given for a temporary purpose, and was not in
force at the time of his writing.

[Mark 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 6:12</span></span>

Preached that men should repent - See the nature of repentance explained
in notes at [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002). They were now
called upon to repent and reform their lives because sin was evil,
because the Messiah had come to preach forgiveness to the penitent, and
because at "his" presence it was fit that the nation should turn from
its sins and prepare to receive him.

[Mark 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 6:13</span></span>

Cast out many devils - See the notes at [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024).

And anointed with oil ... - Anointing with oil was in common use among
the Jews in cases of sickness. It was supposed to have a mild, soothing,
and alleviating effect on the body. In [Jam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014), the elders of the church, in
connection with prayer, were directed also to anoint the sick with
"oil." See the notes at that passage. It was also used in wounds. See
the notes at [Isa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006). The good
Samaritan poured oil and wine into the wounds of the waylaid Jew, [Luk
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034). Josephus says that, in the last
sickness of Herod, his physicians commanded him to be anointed with oil.
It need not be supposed, however, that the apostles used oil for mere
"medical" purposes. It was used, probably, like the imposition of hands,
or like our Saviour's anointing the eyes of the blind with clay; also as
a sign, in expectation of imparting that aid and comfort from God which
was sought, and which was "represented" by the soothing and gentle
effect of oil.

[Mark 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 6:14</span></span>

See this account of the death of John the Baptist fully explained in the
notes at [Mat 14:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001).

[Mar 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#020)

For Herod feared John - That is, he stood in awe of him on account of
his sanctity, and his boldness and fearlessness in reproving sin.

Knowing that he was a just man and an Holy - A holy, pious, upright,
honest man - a man who would not be afraid of him, or afraid to speak
his real sentiments.

And observed him - Margin, "kept him, or saved him." This does not mean
that he "observed" or obeyed his teachings, but that he kept him in safe
custody in order to preserve him from the machinations of Herodias. He
was willing to show his respect for John, and to secure him from danger,
and even to do "many things" which might indicate respect for him - at
least, to do so much as to guard him from his enemies.

And did many things - But he did not do the thing which was demanded of
him - to break off from his sins. He attempted to make a compromise with
his conscience. He still loved his sins, and did "other" things which he
supposed might be accepted in the place of putting away, as he ought,
the wife of his brother - the polluted and adulterous woman with whom he
lived. Perhaps he treated John kindly, or spoke well of him, or aided
him in his wants, and attempted in this way to silence his rebukes and
destroy his faithfulness. This was probably before John was imprisoned.
So sinners often treat ministers kindly, and do much to make them
comfortable, and hear them gladly, while they are still unwilling to do
the thing which is demanded of them - to repent and believe the gospel.
They expect that their kind attentions will be accepted in the place of
what God demands - repentance and the forsaking of their sins.

[Mark 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 6:30</span></span>

And the apostles gathered themselves together - That is, those whom he
had sent out two and two, [Mar 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#007).
Having traveled around the country, they returned and met the Saviour at
Capernaum.

[Mark 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mar 6:31</span></span>

A desert place - A retired place, across the sea from Capernaum, where
they would be free from interruption.

There were many coming and going - Coming to be healed and retiring, or
coming to hear him preach. It means that they were "thronged," or that
there was a vast multitude attending his preaching.

[Mark 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 6:32</span></span>

See this narrative explained in the notes at [Mat
14:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013).

[Mar 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#032)

By ship - By a boat or a small vessel.

Privately - Without making their plan known. They intended to go
privately. It appears, however, that their intention became known, and
multitudes followed them.

[Mar 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#033)

Afoot thither - On foot to the place where they saw them going.

Out of all cities - All cities or large towns in the neighborhood.

[Mar 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#034)

Much people ...as sheep ... - They had no one to teach them and guide
them. The priests and scribes were proud and corrupt; they despised the
common people and neglected them.

[Mar 6:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#035)

The time is far passed - The day is almost gone. It is drawing near
night.

[Mar 6:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#037)

Two hundred pennyworth of bread - About twenty-eight dollars, or 6
British pounds. See the notes at [Mat
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#016). As the disciples had a common
purse in which they carried their little property, consisting of the
donations of their friends and money to be given to the poor (compare
[Joh 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006); [Mat
26:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#008); [Luk
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003)), it is not improbable that they
had at this time about this sum in their possession. Philip - for it was
he who asked the question [Joh 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#007) -
asked, with a mixture of wonder and agitation, whether they should take
all their little property and spend it on a single meal? And even if we
should, said he, it would not be sufficient to satisfy such a multitude.
It was implied in this that, in his view, they could not provide for
them if they wished to, and that it would be better to send them away
than to attempt it.

[Mar 6:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#040)

In ranks - Literally, in the form of square beds in a garden. By
regularly formed companies.

By hundreds and by fifties - Some companies had a hundred in them, and
some groupings had fifty in them. We do not need to suppose that these
were "exactly" formed or arranged, but that this was approximately the
number. The expression indicates a "multitude." There were so many that
they sat down, by "hundreds" and by "fifties," in separate companies,
upon the green grass.

[Mar 6:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#043)

twelve baskets - Baskets belonging to the disciples, in which they
carried their provisions, or, perhaps, belonging to some of the
multitude.

Fragments - Broken pieces of the bread that remained.

[Mark 6:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mar 6:45</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
14:22-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022).

[Mar 6:52](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#052)

They considered not the miracle of the loaves - They did not remember or
call to mind the "power" which Jesus had shown in feeding the five
thousand by a miracle, and that, having done that, he had power also to
save them from the storm.

Their heart was hardened - Their "mind" was dull to perceive it. This
does not mean that they were "opposed" to Jesus, or that they had what
we denominate "hardness of heart," but simply that they were slow to
perceive his power. They did not quickly learn, as they ought to have
done, that he had all power, and could therefore allay the storm. The
word "heart" is frequently used in this sense. See [Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018), in Greek; [Rom
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021); [Rom
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015); [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006).

[Mar 6:54](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#054)

They knew him - They "recollected" Jesus, because he had been there
before and worked miracles.

[Mar 6:56](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#056)

The border of his garment - Compare the notes at [Mat
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 7](mar007)

</div>
