<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar011)  [Next](mar013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)

[Mark 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 12:1</span></span>

See this parable explained in the notes at [Mat
21:33-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033).

See this parable explained in the notes at [Mat
21:33-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033).

[Mark 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 12:13</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 22:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015).

[Mark 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 12:18</span></span>

See this passage fully explained in the notes at [Mat
22:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023).

[Mar 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#025)

Are as the angels - That is, as the angels in respect to connections and
relations. What those connections and relations may be we know not, but
this passage teaches that the special relation of "marriage" will not
exist. It does not affirm, however, that there will be no recollection
of former marriages, or no recognition of each other as having existed
in this tender relation.

[Mar 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#026)

How in the bush - At the burning bush. See [Exo
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#016). The meaning is, "in that part of
the book of Exodus which contains the account of the burning bush. When
there were no chapters and verses, it was the easiest way of quoting a
book of the Old Testament "by the subject," and in this way it was often
done by the Jews.

[Mark 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 12:28</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 22:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#034).

[Mar 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)

Perceiving that he answered them well - That is, with wisdom, and with a
proper understanding of the law. In this case the opinion of the Saviour
corresponded with that of the Pharisees; and the question which this
scribe put to him now seems to have been one of the very few candid
inquiries of him by the Jews for the purpose of obtaining information.
Jesus answered it in the spirit of kindness, and commended the conduct
of the man.

[Mar 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#029)

Hear, O Israel! - This was said to call the attention of the Jews to the
great importance of the truth about to be proclaimed. See [Deu
6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004).

The Lord our God ... - Literally, "Yahweh, our God, is one Yahweh." The
other nations worshipped many gods, but the God of the Jews was one, and
one only. יהוה Yahweh was undivided; and this great truth it was the
design of the separation of the Jewish people from other nations to keep
in mind. This was the "peculiar" truth which was communicated to the
Jews, and this they were required to keep and remember forever.

[Mar 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#030)

And thou shalt love ... - If Yahweh was the "only" God, then they ought
not to love any other being supremely - then they might not bow down
before any idol. They were required to love God above all other beings
or things, and with all the faculties of their minds. See the notes at
[Mat 22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037).

[Mar 12:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#032)

This answer of the scribe is not found in Matthew.

Is more than all - Is of more importance and value.

Discreetly - Wisely, according to truth.

Not far from the kingdom of God - Thou who dost prefer the "internal" to
the "external" worship of God - who hast so just a view of the
requirements of the law - canst easily become a follower of me, and art
almost fit to be numbered among my disciples. This shows that a proper
understanding of the Old Testament, of its laws and requirements, would
prepare the mind for Christianity, and suit a person at once to embrace
it when presented. One system is grafted on the other, agreeably to [Gal
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024).

And no man after that durst ask him any question - That is, no one of
the scribes, the Pharisees, or the Sadducees durst ask him a question
for the purpose of "tempting" him or entangling him. He had completely
silenced them. It does not appear, however, but that his "disciples"
dared to ask him questions for the purpose of information.

[Mark 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 12:35</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 22:41-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#041).

[Mar 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#037)

The common people heard him gladly - The success of the Saviour in his
preaching was chiefly among the common or the poorer class of people.
The rich and the mighty were too proud to listen to his instructions. So
it is still. The main success of the gospel is there, and there it pours
down its chief blessings. This is not the fault of "the gospel." It
would bless the rich and the mighty as well as the poor, if they came
with like humble hearts. God knows no distinctions of men in conferring
his favors; and wherever there is a poor, contrite, and humble spirit -
be it clothed in rags or in purple - be it on a throne or on a dunghill
- there he confers the blessings of salvation.

[Mark 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mar 12:38</span></span>

In his doctrine - In his "teaching," for so it should be rendered.

Beware of the scribes - Be on your guard. Be cautious about hearing them
or following them.

Scribes - The learned men of the Jewish nation.

Which love to go in long clothing - In long, flowing robes, as
significant of their consequence, leisure, and learning.

Salutations ... - See the notes at [Mat
23:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006).

[Mark 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mar 12:40</span></span>

Which devour widows' houses - Which devour the families of widows, or
the means of supporting their families. This they did under pretence of
counseling them in the knowledge of the law and in the management of
their estates. They took advantage of their ignorance and their
unprotected state, and either extorted large sums for their counsel, or
perverted the property to their own use.

No wonder that our Saviour denounced them! If there is any sin of
special enormity, it is that of taking advantage of the circumstances of
the poor, the needy, and the helpless, to wrong them out of the pittance
on which they depend for the support of their families; and as God is
the friend of the widow and the fatherless, it may be expected that such
will be visited with heavy condemnation.

For a pretence - For show, or "pretending" great devotion.

[Mark 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 12:41</span></span>

Sat over against - Opposite to, in full sight of.

The treasury - This was in the court of the women. See the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). In that court there were fixed
a number of places or coffers, made with a large open mouth in the shape
of a trumpet, for the purpose of receiving the offerings of the people;
and the money thus contributed was devoted to the service of the temple
- to incense, sacrifices, etc.

[Mark 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 12:42</span></span>

Two mites - The word translated "mite" denotes a small coin made of
brass - the smallest in use among the Jews. The precise value cannot now
be easily estimated. It was much less than any coin we have, as the
"farthing" was less than an English farthing. It was in value about
three mills and a half, or one-third of a cent.

[Mark 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mar 12:43</span></span>

This poor widow hath cast more in ... - That is, more in proportion to
her means, and therefore more that was acceptable to God. He does not
mean that this was more in value than all which the others had put in
but it showed more love to the sacred cause, more self-denial, and, of
course, more sincerity in what she did. This is the rule by which God
will reward us. Compare [Co2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012).

[Mark 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mar 12:44</span></span>

Of their abundance - Of their superfluous store. They have given what
they did not "need." They could afford it as well as not, and in doing
it they have shown no self-denial.

She of her want - Of her poverty.

All her living - All that she had to live on. She trusted in God to
supply her wants, and devoted her little property entirely to him. From
this passage we may learn:

1\. That God is pleased with offerings made to him and his cause.

2\. That it is our duty to devote our property to God. We received it
from him, and we shall not employ it in a proper manner unless we feel
that we are stewards, and ask of him what we shall do with it. Jesus
approved the conduct of all who had given money to the treasury.

3\. That the highest evidence of love to the cause of religion is not
the "amount" given, but the amount compared with our means.

4\. That it "may be" proper to give "all" our property to God, and to
depend on his providence for the supply of our wants.

5\. That God does not despise the humblest offering, if made in
sincerity. He loves a cheerful giver.

6\. That there are none who may not in this way show their love to the
cause of religion. There are few, very few students in Sunday Schools
who may not give as much to the cause of religion as this poor widow;
and Jesus would be as ready to approve their offerings as he was hers:
and the time to "begin" to be benevolent and to do good is in early
life, in childhood.

7\. That it is every man's duty to inquire, not how much he gives, but
how much compared with what he has; how much self-denial he practices,
and what is the "motive" with which it is done.

8\. We may remark that few practice self-denial for the purpose of
charity. Most give of their abundance - that is, what they can spare
without feeling it, and many feel that this is the same as throwing it
away. Among all the thousands who give to these objects, how few deny
themselves of one comfort, even the least, that they may advance the
kingdom of Christ!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 13](mar013)

</div>
