<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar008)  [Next](mar010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001)

[Mark 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 9:1</span></span>

Verily I say ... - See the notes at [Mat
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028). This verse properly belongs to
the preceding chapter and the preceding discourse.

[Mark 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 9:2</span></span>

And after six days ... - See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
17:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001).

[Mar 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#003)

No fuller - Rather, no "scourer." The office of the person here
mentioned was to "scour" or "whiten" cloth; not to "full" it, or to
render it thicker.

[Mar 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#006)

He wist not - He "knew not." He was desirous of saying something, and he
knew not what would be proper.

[Mark 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mar 9:11</span></span>

Why say the scribes ... - See the notes at [Mat
17:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010).

[Mark 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 9:14</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
17:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014).

[Mar 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014)

Questioning with them - Debating with the disciples, and attempting to
confound them. This he saw as he came down from the mount. In his
absence they had taken occasion to attempt to perplex and confound his
followers.

[Mar 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#015)

Were greatly amazed - Were astonished and surprised at his sudden
appearance among them.

Saluted him - Received him with the customary marks of affection and
respect. It is probable that this was not by any "formal" manner of
salutation, but by the "rush" of the multitude, and by hailing him as
the Messiah.

[Mar 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#016)

What question ye? - What is the subject of your inquiry or debate with
the disciples?

[Mar 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#017)

A dumb spirit - A spirit which deprived his son of the power of
speaking.

[Mar 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#018)

And wheresoever - In whatever place - at home or abroad, alone or in
public.

He teareth him - He rends, distracts, or throws him into convulsions.

He foameth - At the mouth, like a mad animal. Among us these would all
be considered as marks of violent derangement or madness.

And pineth away - Becomes thin, haggard, and emaciated. This was the
effect of the violence of his struggles, and perhaps of the want of
food.

[Mar 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#022)

If thou canst do any thing - I have brought him to the disciples, and
they could not help him. If thou canst do anything, have compassion.

[Mar 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#023)

If thou canst believe - This was an answer to the request, and there was
a reference in the answer to the "doubt" in the man's mind about the
power of Jesus. "I" can help him. If thou" canst believe," it shall be
done. Jesus here demanded "faith" or confidence in his power of healing.
His design here is to show the man that the difficulty in the case was
not in the want of "power" on his part, but in the want of "faith" in
the man; in other words, to rebuke him for having "doubted" at all
whether he "could" heal him. So he demands faith of every sinner that
comes to him, and none that come without "confidence" in him can obtain
the blessing.

All things are possible to him that believeth - All things can be
effected or accomplished - to wit, by God - in favor of him that
believes, and if thou canst believe, this will be done. God will do
nothing in our favor without faith. It is right that we should have
confidence in him; and if we "have" confidence, it is easy for him to
help us, and he willingly does it. In our weakness, then, we should go
to God our Saviour; and though we have no strength, yet "he" can aid us,
and he will make all things easy for us.

[Mar 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024)

Said with tears - The man felt the implied rebuke in the Saviour's
language; and feeling grieved that he should be thought to be destitute
of faith, and feeling deeply for the welfare of his afflicted son, he
wept. Nothing can be more touching or natural than this. An anxious
father, distressed at the condition of his son, having applied to the
disciples in vain, now coming to the Saviour; and not having full
confidence that he had the proper qualification to be aided, he wept.
Any man would have wept in his condition, nor would the Saviour turn the
weeping suppliant away.

I believe - I have faith. I do put confidence in thee, though I know
that my faith is not as strong as it should be.

Lord - This word here signifies merely "master," or "sir," as it does
often in the New Testament. We have no evidence that he had any
knowledge of the divine nature of the Saviour, and he applied the word,
probably, as he would have done to any other teacher or worker of
miracles.

Help thou mine unbelief - Supply thou the defects of my faith. Give me
strength and grace to put "entire" confidence in thee. Everyone who
comes to the Saviour for help has need of offering this prayer. In our
unbelief and our doubts we need his aid, nor shall we ever put
sufficient reliance on him without his gracious help.

[Mark 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 9:30</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 17:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022).

[Mar 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#031)

Is delivered - Is given to men to make an atonement by his sufferings
and death, and will in due time be taken and killed.

[Mark 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 9:33</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 18:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001).

[Mark 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mar 9:38</span></span>

We saw one ... - There is no improbability in supposing that this might
have been one of the disciples of John, or one of the seventy whom Jesus
had sent out, and who, though he did not "personally" attend on Jesus,
yet had the power of working miracles. There is no evidence that he was
merely an "exorcist," or that he used the name of Jesus merely as a
pretence.

[Mark 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mar 9:39</span></span>

Forbid him not - Do not prevent his doing good. If he can work a miracle
in my name, it is sufficient proof of attachment to me, and he should
not be prevented.

Can lightly speak evil of me - The word here rendered "lightly" means
quickly or "immediately." The meaning of the passage is, that he to whom
God gave the power of working a miracle, by that gave evidence that he
could not be found among the enemies of Jesus. He ought not, therefore,
to be prevented from doing it. There is no reason to think here that
John had any improper designs in opposing the man. He thought that it
was evidence that he could not be right, because he did not join them
and follow the Saviour. Our Lord taught him differently. He opposed no
one who gave evidence that he loved him. Wherever he might be or
whatever his work, yet, if he did it in the name of Jesus and with the
approbation of God, it was evidence sufficient that he was right.
Christians should rejoice in good done by their brethren of any
denomination. There are men calling themselves Christians who seem to
look with doubt and suspicion on all that is done by those who do not
walk with them. They undervalue their labors, and attempt to lessen the
evidences of their success and to diminish their influence. True
likeness to the Saviour would lead us to rejoice in all the good
accomplished. by whomsoever it may be done - to rejoice that the kingdom
of Christ is advanced, whether by a Presbyterian, an Episcopalian, a
Baptist, or a Methodist. Compare [Phi
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018).

[Mark 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 9:41</span></span>

Whosoever shall give you a cup ... - How easy it is to be a Christian!
What is easier than to give a cup of cold water to a thirsty disciple of
Jesus! But it must be in his name - that is, because he "is" a
Christian, and therefore from love "to the Saviour." This is very
different from giving it from a mere motive of common kindness. If done
from love to Christ, it will be rewarded; and hence we learn that the
humblest acts of Christians - the lowest service that is rendered - will
be graciously noticed by Jesus and rewarded. None are so humble in his
kingdom as not to be able to do good, and none so poor that he may not
show attachment to him. The feeblest service will be accepted, and acts
of love that may be forgotten by man, will be remembered by Him, and
rewarded in heaven.

[Mark 9:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 9:42</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 18:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007).
Millstone. See [Mat 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006).

[Mar 9:44-46](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)

Their worm - This figure is taken from [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024). See the notes at that passage.
In describing the great prosperity. of the kingdom of the Messiah,
Isaiah says that the people of God "shall go forth, and look upon the
carcasses of the men who have transgressed against God." Their enemies
would be overcome. They would be slain. The people of God would triumph.
The figure is taken from heaps of the dead slain in battle; and the
prophet says that the number would be so great that their worm - the
worm feeding on the dead - would not die, would live long - as long as
there were carcasses to be devoured; and that the fire which was used to
burn the bodies of the dead would continue long to burn, and would not
be extinguished until they were consumed. The figure, therefore, denotes
great misery, and certain and terrible destruction. In these verses it
is applied to the state beyond the grave, and is intended to denote that
the destruction of the wicked will be awful, widespread, and eternal.

It is not to be supposed that there will be any "real" worm in hell -
perhaps no material fire; nor can it be told what was particularly
intended by the undying worm. There is no authority for applying it, as
is often done, to remorse of conscience, anymore than to any other of
the pains and reflections of hell. It is a mere image of loathsome,
dreadful, and "eternal" suffering. In what that suffering will consist
it is probably beyond the power of any living mortal to imagine. The
word their, in the phrase "their worm," is used merely to keep up the
"image" or "figure." Dead bodies putrefying in that valley would be
overrun with worms, while the "fire" would not be confined to them, but
would spread to other objects kindled by combustibles through all the
valley. It is "not" meant, therefore, that every particular sufferer has
a special worm, or has particular sins that cause remorse of conscience.
That is a truth, but it does not appear that it is intended to be taught
here.

[Mar 9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049)

Every one shall be salted with fire - Perhaps no passage in the New
Testament has given more perplexity to commentators than this, and it
may be impossible now to fix its precise meaning. The common idea
affixed to it has been, that as salt preserves from putrefaction, so
fire, applied to the wicked in hell, will have the property of
preserving them in existence, or they will "be" preserved amid the
sprinkling of fire, to be continually in their sufferings a sacrifice to
the justice of God; but this meaning is not quite satisfactory. Another
opinion has been, that as salt was sprinkled on the victim preparatory
to its being devoted to God (see [Lev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013)), so would "the apostles," by
trials, calamities, etc., represented here by "fire," be prepared as a
sacrifice and offering to God. Probably the passage has no reference at
all to future punishment; and the difficulty of interpreting it has
arisen from supposing it to be connected with the 48th verse, or given
as a "reason" for what is said in "that" verse, rather than considering
it as designed to illustrate the "general design" of the passage. The
main scope of the passage was not to discourse of future punishment;
that is brought in incidentally. The chief object of the passage was -

1\. To teach the apostles that "other men," not "with them," might be
true Christians, [Mar 9:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038).

2\. That they ought to be disposed to look favorably upon the slightest
evidence that they "might be true believers," [Mar
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#041).

3\. That they ought to avoid giving "offence" to such feeble and obscure
Christians, [Mar 9:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#042).

4\. That "everything" calculated to give offence, or to dishonor
religion, should be removed, [Mar
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043). And,

5\. That everything which would endanger their salvation should be
sacrificed; that they should "deny" themselves in every way in order to
obtain eternal life. In this way they would be "preserved" to eternal
life.

The word "fire," here, therefore denotes self-denials, sacrifices,
trials, in keeping ourselves from the gratification of the flesh. As if
he had said, "Look at the sacrifice on the altar. It is an offering to
God, about to be presented to him. It is sprinkled with "salt,
emblematic of purity, of preservation and of fitting it, therefore, for
a sacrifice." So "you" are devoted to God. You are sacrifices, victims,
offerings to him in his service. To make you "acceptable" offerings,
every thing must be done to "preserve" you from sin and to "purify" you.
Self-denials, subduing the lusts, enduring trials, removing offences,
are the proper "preservatives" in the service of God. Doing this, you
will be acceptable offerings and be saved; without this, you will be
"unfit" for his eternal service and will be lost."

[Mar 9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050)

Lost its saltness ... - See the notes at [Mat
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013).

Have salt in yourselves - Have the preserving, purifying principle
always; the principles of denying yourselves, of suppressing pride,
ambition, contention, etc., and thus you will be an acceptable offering
to God.

Have peace - Avoid contention and quarrelling, struggling for places,
honors, and office, and seek each other's welfare, and religion will be
honored and preserved in the world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 10](mar010)

</div>
