<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mal004)  [Next](mat001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Matthew

The word "Gospel" means "good news," or "a joyful message." It commonly
signifies the message itself, but it is here used to denote "the book"
containing the record of the message. The title "saint," given to the
sacred writers of the New Testament, is of Roman Catholic origin, and is
of no authority.

It has been generally believed that Matthew wrote his Gospel in his
native tongue; that is, the language of Palestine. That language was not
pure Hebrew but a mixture of the Hebrew, Chaldaic, and Syriac, commonly
called "Syro-Chaldaic" or "Aramaic." Our Saviour undoubtedly used this
language in his conversation and his disciples would naturally use this
language also, unless there were good reasons why they should write in a
foreign tongue. It is agreed that the remainder of the New Testament was
written in Greek. The reason for this, in preference to the native
language of the writers, was that Greek was the language then generally
spoken and understood throughout the eastern countries conquered by
Alexander the Great, and particularly in Judea, and in the regions where
the apostles first labored.

The Christian fathers, without any exception, assert that Matthew wrote
his Gospel for the use of the Christians in Palestine, and say that it
was written in the Hebrew dialect. It should be remarked, however, that
many modern critics of much eminence do not suppose the evidence that
Matthew wrote in Hebrew to be decisive, and believe that there is
sufficient proof that, like the other writers of the New Testament,
Matthew wrote in Greek. See Lardner's Works, vol. v. p. 308-318, London
edition, 1829.

The Gospel of Matthew exists now, however, only in Greek. The original
Hebrew, or Syro-Chaldaic, if it were written in that language, has been.
designedly laid aside or undesignedly lost. The question, then,
naturally arises, Who is the author of the greek translation which we
possess? And is it to be regarded as of divine authority?

It has been conjectured by some that Matthew himself furnished a Greek
translation of the Hebrew. This conjecture, in itself probable enough,
is destitute, however, of testimony to support it. Athanasius, one of
the early fathers, says that it was translated by "James, the brother of
our Lord according to the flesh." Papias, another of the early fathers,
says that "each one translated it as he was able." If James translated
it, there can be no question about its inspiration and canonical
authority. Nor does it affect the question of its inspiration, even if
we are ignorant of the name of the translator. The proper inquiry is
whether it had such evidence of inspiration as to be satisfactory to the
Church in the times when they were under the direction of the apostles.
None acquainted with ancient history will doubt that it had such
evidence.

Epiphanius says that the Gospel by Matthew was written while Peter and
Paul were preaching at Rome. This was about 63 a.d., about the time of
the destruction of Jerusalem. It is now generally supposed that this
Gospel was written about this time. There is very clear evidence in the
Gospel that it was written before the destruction of Jerusalem. The
destruction of the Holy City is clearly and minutely foretold, but there
is not the slightest intimation in it that these predictions had been
accomplished - a thing which we should naturally expect if the Gospel
was not written until after these calamities came upon the Jews. Compare
[Act 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028). It has been only recently
uniformly regarded as having been written before either of the other
evangelists. Some of late have, however, endeavored to show that the
Gospel by Luke was written first. All testimony, and all ancient
arrangements of the books, are against the opinion; and when such is the
fact, it is of little consequence to attend to other arguments.

In all copies of the New Testament, and in all translations, this Gospel
has been placed first. This, it is probable, would not have been done
had not Matthew published his Gospel before any other was written.

Matthew, the writer of this Gospel, also called Levi, son of Alphaeus,
was a publican (tax-gatherer) under the Romans. See the [Mat
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009) note; [Luk
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#027) note. Of his life and death
little is known with certainty. Socrates, a writer of the 5th century
a.d., says that Matthew went to Ethiopia after the apostles were
scattered abroad from Judea, and he died a martyr in a city called
Nadebbar, but by what kind of death is altogether uncertain. However,
others speak of his preaching and dying in Parthia or Persia, and the
diversity of their accounts seems to show that they are all without good
foundation. See Lardher's Works, vol. v. pp. 296, 297.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 1](mat001)

</div>
