<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat016)  [Next](mat018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)

[Matthew 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 17:1</span></span>

[Mat 17:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001). See also [Mar
9:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#002); [Luk
9:28-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028).

And after six days - That is, six days from the conversation recorded in
the last chapter.

Luke [Luk 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028) says, about an eight
days after. Matthew mentions the six days that intervened between the
day of the conversation and the transfiguration. Luke includes both
those days, and thus reckons eight. Besides, Luke does not pretend to
fix the precise time. He says, "about an eight days after."

Taketh Peter, and James, and John - These three disciples were with him,
also, in the garden of Gethsemane, [Mar
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#033). He designed to prepare them in
an eminent degree for the work of the gospel ministry by the previous
manifestations of his glory, and of his patience in suffering.

Into a high mountain apart - That is, apart from the other disciples. It
is commonly supposed that this was Mount Tabor, a high mountain in
Galilee. The name of the mountain is not, however, mentioned in the New
Testament. Luke adds [Luk 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028) that he
went up there to pray. Our Saviour prayed much. When he did it he chose
to be alone. For this purpose he often ascended mountains or went into
the deserts. There is something in the solitude and deep and awful
stillness of a lofty mountain favorable to devotion.

[Matthew 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 17:2</span></span>

And was transfigured before them - The word "transfigure" means to
change the appearance or form. It does not denote the change of the
substance of a thing, but simply of its appearance. It puts on a new
aspect. What this change was we are expressly told.

1\. His face shone as the sun; that is, with a special brightness. A
similar appearance is described respecting Moses when he came down from
the mount, [Exo 34:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029). See also
[Heb 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003), where Christ is called the
brightness of the glory of God: in the original, the splendor or
shining, like the brightness of the sun.

2\. The second change was that of his garments. They were white as the
light. Mark says, "exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth
could white them." The word "fuller" means, commonly, one who dresses
cloth or fulls it, so as to make it more thick and strong. Here it means
one who bleaches cloth or makes it white; one who cleanses garments when
by wearing they become soiled. Among the Greeks that was a distinct
trade. Luke says, "white and glistering," that is, resplendent, shining,
or a very bright white. There is no evidence here that what is commonly
said of him is true, that his body was so changed as to show what his
glorified body is. His body, so far as the sacred writers inform us,
underwent no change. All this splendor and glory was a change in
appearance only. The Scriptures should be taken just as they are,
without any attempt to affix a meaning to them which the sacred writers
did not intend.

Raiment - Clothing. John may refer to this transfiguration in [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014), as Peter does in [Pe2
1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016).

[Matthew 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 17:3</span></span>

And behold there appeared unto them Moses and Elias - Moses, a
distinguished servant of God, by whom the law was given, and whose
institutions typified the Messiah. It was particularly proper that he
should appear, when his prophecies and types were about to be fulfilled,
and the rites which he had instituted were about to be done away. Elias,
or Elijah, a distinguished prophet, taken to heaven without seeing
death. See [Kg2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011). Elijah had been
honored eminently by being thus translated, and still more by being made
the model of the forerunner of the Messiah, [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005); [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017); [Mat
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014). They appeared "in glory" [Luk
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031); i. e., as they are in heaven
with the glory which the redeemed have there.

Talking with him - Luke [Luk 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031)
informs us that they conversed about "his decease which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem." To redeemed spirits that death was an object
of intense interest. By faith in that death they had been saved; and now
that the Redeemer of mankind was about to die, it is no wonder that this
was the burden of his and their thoughts.

Luke adds [Luk 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#032) that "Peter and
they that were with him were heavy with sleep." It is not improbable
that this was in the night; that Jesus was engaged in prayer; and that
he had permitted his weary followers to compose themselves to rest. It
was after they were awaked that they saw this vision. Probably the
sudden splendor, the bright shining aroused them from sleep.

[Matthew 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 17:4</span></span>

Let us make here three tabernacles - A tabernacle is a tent. It was
made, commonly, by fixing posts into the ground, and stretching on them
cloth fastened by cords. See the notes at [Isa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020). In some instances they were
made of branches of trees a temporary shelter from the sun and rain, not
a permanent dwelling. Peter was rejoiced at the vision and desirous of
continuing it. He proposed, therefore, that they should prolong this
interview and dwell there. Mark adds, "For he wist not (that is, knew
not) what to say, for they were sore afraid." They were frightened,
amazed, and rejoiced; and, in the ecstasy of the moment, Peter proposed
to remain there.

[Matthew 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 17:5</span></span>

A bright cloud overshadowed them - The word "overshadow" here means,
rather, to "be diffused" or "spread" over them. It does not mean that it
made a shade. A cloud was the symbol of the divine presence. Thus, God
went before the Israelites in a cloudy pillar - dark by day and bright
by night [Exo 14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019); he appeared on
Mount Sinai in a cloud bright by fire [Exo
24:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#015); and a cloud, the symbol of
the divine presence - called the Shechinah - dwelt continually in the
most holy place in the temple, [Kg1
8:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010); [Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004); [Eze
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004). When, therefore, the disciples
saw this cloud, they were prepared to hear the word of the Lord.

This is my beloved Son - This was the voice of God. This was the second
time that, in a remarkable manner, God had declared this. See [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017). This was spoken to confirm the
disciples; to make known to them that it was their duty to hear Christ
rather than any other, and to honor him more than Moses and Elijah; and
to strengthen their faith in him when they should go forth to preach the
gospel after he was shamefully put to death. After this, it was
impossible for them to doubt that he was truly the Son of God. See [Pe2
1:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017).

[Matthew 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 17:6</span></span>

They fell on their face - They entered into the cloud, or the cloud
enveloped them, [Luk 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#034). "They were
therefore afraid." They were awed at the presence of God, and prostrated
themselves in solemn adoration on the ground, and their fears were
removed only by the voice of their beloved Master. No man can see God
and live; and it is only the glory of God, as it shines in the face of
Christ (see [Co2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)), that mortals
can bear.

[Matthew 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 17:9</span></span>

Tell the vision to no man - This vision was designed particularly to
confirm them in the truth that he was the Messiah. While he was with
them it was unnecessary that they should relate what they had seen. When
he was crucified they would need this evidence that he was the Christ.
Then they were to use it. There were three witnesses of it as many as
the law required [Deu 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006); [Heb
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028), and the proof that he was the
Messiah was clear. Besides, if they had told it then, it would have
provoked the Jews and endangered his life. His time was not yet come.

Vision - Sight; appearance. What they had seen on the mount.

Charged them - Gave them a commandment.

The sole design of this transfiguration was to convince them that he was
the Christ; that he was greater than the greatest of the prophets; that
he was the Son of God.

Mark adds [Mar 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#010), "they kept that
saying with themselves, questioning one with another what the rising
from the dead should mean." The Pharisees believed that the dead would
rise, and there is no doubt that the disciples believed it; but their
views were not clear, and, in particular, they did not understand what
he meant by his rising from the dead. They do not appear to have
understood, though he had told them [Mar
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#040) that he would rise after three
days.

[Matthew 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 17:10</span></span>

See also [Mar 9:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#011).

Why then say the scribes ... - The disciples appear to have been
satisfied now that he was the Messiah. The transfiguration had taken
away all their doubts, but they recollected that it was a common
doctrine among the Jews that Elijah would appear before the Messiah
came, and they did not then recollect that he had appeared. To this
difficulty the word then refers. "We are satisfied that thou art the
Christ, but Elijah has not yet come, as was expected; what, then, is the
meaning of the common opinions of our learned men, the scribes? Were
they right or wrong in their expectation of Elijah?" See the notes at
[Mat 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014).

[Mat 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011)

Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things - He did not mean
by this that Elijah was yet to come, for he tells them immediately [Mat
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012) that he had come; but he meant
to affirm that it was a true doctrine which the scribes taught, that
Elijah would appear before the coming of the Messiah. To "restore" means
to put into the former situation. See [Mat
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#013). Hence, it means to heal, to
correct, to put in proper order. Here it means that Elijah would put
things in a proper state; he would be the instrument of reforming the
people, or of restoring them, in some measure, to proper notions about
the Messiah and preparing them for his coming. Before the coming of John
their views were erroneous, their expectations were worldly, and their
conduct were exceedingly depraved. He corrected many of their notions
about the Messiah (see Matt. 3), and he was the instrument of an
extensive reformation, and thus restored them, in some degree, to
correct views of their own system and of the Messiah, and to a
preparation for his advent.

[Mat 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012)

Elias is come already - That is, John the Baptist has come, in the
spirit and power of Elias. See [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017).

They have done unto him whatsoever they listed - The word "list" is an
old English word, signifying to choose, to desire, to be inclined. See
[Jdg 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008). It means, here, that they
had done to John as they pleased; that is, they had put him to death,
[Mat 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#010).

Mark adds [Mar 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#012) that Jesus told
them that it was "written of the Son of man that he must suffer many
things, and be set at naught." This was written of him particularly in
[Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001). To be set at naught is
to be esteemed as worthless or as nothing; to be cast out and despised.
No prophecy was ever more strikingly fulfilled. See [Luk
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#011), [Luk
23:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#014). This narrative, with some
additions, is found in Mark 9:14-29, and [Luk
9:37-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#037).

[Matthew 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 17:14</span></span>

And when they were come to the multitude - This took place on the day
following the transfiguration, [Luk
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#037). This multitude was probably
composed of persons who had attended on his ministry, many of whom were
his real disciples. With them, as Mark [Mar
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#015) informs us, were "scribes
questioning with them." That is, they were probably professedly making
inquiries about the Saviour, but really attempting to introduce their
own sentiments, and to draw them off from him. They probably artfully
asked them many questions about his birth, his family, his appearance,
his manner of life, and his instructions, all which were contrary to the
general expectation respecting the Messiah, and they intended,
therefore, to insinuate that such a person could not be the Christ. The
people were persuaded that he was the Messiah. and it would not have
done to have attacked their opinions openly, but they attempted to gain
the same point by sly insinuations. Error is always subtle, and often
puts on the appearance of calm and honest inquiry. Well had he compared
them to leavens, [Mat 16:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#011). The
multitude, seeing Jesus coming down, left the scribes, and ran to meet
him (Mark). They were amazed, probably because they had not expected to
see him there. In their joy at meeting him in this unexpected manner,
they "saluted" him (Mark); that is, probably they prostrated themselves
before him after the manner of salutation in Eastern countries. See the
notes at [Luk 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#004). Jesus, seeing the
scribes and their artful design, reproved them by asking them why they
questioned thus with his disciples, [Mar
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#016). Conscious of their guilt and
their base purpose, they returned no answer.

A certain man kneeling down to him - That is, saluting him, or showing
high regard for him. See the notes at [Luk
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#004). It did not imply religious
homage, but merely high respect and earnest entreaty.

[Matthew 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 17:15</span></span>

Lord, have mercy - The word "Lord" here means "Sir," a title of
civility, not implying divinity.

My son - This was an only son (Luke). He was possessed with a devil.
This calamity was attended with the following symptoms: he was lunatic
(see the notes at [Mat 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024)); he was
sore vexed; that is, he suffered greatly, or was greatly afflicted; he
fell often suddenly, in the manner of persons having epileptic fits; he
was dumb - that is, he was mute except when the seizure was coming upon
him, for Luke says that when the spirit took him he cried suddenly out;
he foamed and gnashed with his teeth, and wasted away, or became poor
and emaciated. Luke [Luk 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#039) adds of
the evil spirit, "it teareth him that he foameth again, and, bruising
him, hardly departeth from him;" that is, scarcely departed from him, or
he had only short intervals of reason, for so the passage in Luke,
"bruising him, hardly departeth from him," should be translated.

[Matthew 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 17:16</span></span>

And I brought him to thy disciples ... - That is, not to the apostles,
for they had power over unclean spirits [Mat
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008), but to others of his followers
who attempted to work miracles. It is probable that many of his
disciples attempted this who were not personal attendants on his
ministry, [Mar 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038).

[Matthew 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 17:17</span></span>

Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation! -
Perverse means that which is twisted or turned from the proper
direction; and is often used of the eyes, when one or both are turned
from their natural position. Applied to a generation or race of people,
it means that they hold opinions turned or perverted from the truth, and
that they were wicked in their conduct. Jesus applied this, probably, to
the Jews, and not to his real disciples.

How long shall I suffer you? - That is, how long shall I bear with you?
How long is it necessary to show such patience and forbearance with your
unbelief and perversity? This was not so much an expression of
impatience or complaint as a reproof for their being so slow to believe
that he was the Messiah, notwithstanding his miracles.

Mark adds [Mar 9:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#020) that when he
that was possessed was brought, the spirit, by a last desperate
struggle, threw him down and tore him, and left him apparently dead. He
adds further, that the case had existed during the whole life of his
son, from a child. This was a case of uncommon obstinacy. The affliction
was fixed and lasting. The disciples, seeing the obstinacy of the case -
seeing that he was a deaf-mute, wasted away, torn, and foaming -
despaired of being able to cure him. They lacked the faith which was
necessary; doubted whether they could cure him, and therefore could not.

The father of the child said [Mar
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#022), "If thou canst do anything, have
compassion on us and help us;" an expression implying a weak faith, a
lingering doubt whether he could restore him. Jesus replied to this, "If
thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth" [Mar
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#023); implying that the difficulty in
the case was not that he could not heal him, but that he had not the
proper kind and degree of faith with which to come to him. That is, this
cure shall be effected if you have faith. Not that his faith would give
Jesus the power to heal him, but it would render it proper that he
should exert that power in his favor. In this way, and in this only, are
all things possible to believers.

The man had faith, [Mar 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024). The
father came, as a father should do, weeping, and praying that his faith
might be increased, so as to make it proper that Jesus should interpose
in his behalf, and save his child.

Help my unbelief, [Mar 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024). This was
an expression of humility. If my faith is defective, supply what is
lacking. Help me to overcome my unbelief. Let not the defect of my faith
be in the way of this blessing.

[Matthew 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 17:18</span></span>

And Jesus rebuked the devil - The word "rebuke" has the combined force
of reproving and commanding. He reproved him for having afflicted the
child, and he commanded him to come out of him. Mark [Mar
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025) has recorded the words which he
used words implying reproof and command: "Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I
charge thee come out of him, and enter no more into him." And the spirit
cried, and with a mighty convulsion came out, leaving the child
apparently dead. Jesus lifted him up by the hand (Mark), and gave him to
his father (Luke).

[Matthew 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 17:19</span></span>

Then came the disciples ... - This inquiry was made in some house to
which they retired near the place where the miracle was performed
(Mark). Jesus told them, in reply, that it was because of their unbelief
that they had not been able to cast him out. They were appalled by the
difficulty of the case and the obstinacy of the disease. Their faith
would not have made it more easy for God to work this miracle, but such
was his will - such the way in which he worked miracles, that he
required faith in those who were the instruments.

[Matthew 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 17:20</span></span>

As a grain of mustard-seed - See the notes at [Mat
13:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031). The mustard-seed was the
smallest of all seeds. It has been supposed by some, therefore, that he
meant to say, If you have the smallest or feeblest faith that is
genuine, you can do all things. The mustard-seed produced the largest of
all herbs. It has been supposed by others, therefore, to mean, If you
have increasing, expanding, enlarged faith, growing and strengthening
from small beginnings, you can perform the most difficult undertaking.
There is a principle of vitality in the grain of seed stretching forward
to great results, which illustrates the nature of faith. Your faith
should be like that. This is probably the true meaning.

Ye shall say unto this mountain ... - Probably he pointed to a mountain
near, to assure them that if they had such faith they might accomplish
the most difficult undertakings - things that at first would appear
impossible.

[Matthew 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 17:21</span></span>

Howbeit, this kind ... - This kind means this kind of devils - this
species of possession. Where they have had long possession where they
produce such painful, fixed, and alarming effects, they can be expelled
only in connection with prayer and fasting.

Goeth not out but by prayer and fasting - That is, in order to work
miracles of this kind to cast out devils in cases so obstinate and
dreadful as this, faith of the highest kind is necessary. That faith is
produced and kept vigorous only by much prayer, and by such abstinence
from food as fits the mind for the highest exercises of religion, and
leaves it free to hold communion with God.

[Matthew 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 17:22</span></span>

See also [Mar 9:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030); [Luk
9:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#043).

And while they abode in Galilee - Galilee, the northern part of
Palestine. See the notes at [Mat 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022).

The Son of man shall be betrayed ... - To betray means to deliver up in
a treacherous manner. This was done by Judas Iscariot, called for that
act the traitor, [Mat 26:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014), [Mat
26:47-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#047). A traitor, or betrayer, is
one who makes use of confidence reposed in him for the purpose of
delivering him up who puts that confidence in him to the hands of
enemies.

[Mat 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#023)

And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again -
See [Mat 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040). Mark and Luke add that
they understood not that saying, and it was hid from them, and they were
afraid to ask him. The reasons of this may have been,

1\. They were strongly attached to him, and were exceedingly sorry
(Matthew) at any intimation that he was soon to leave them. They learned
with great slowness and reluctance, therefore, that he was to be treated
in this manner.

2\. They were not willing to believe it. They knew that he was the
Messiah, but they supposed that he was to be a distinguished prince, and
was to restore the kingdom to Israel, [Act
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006). But to be betrayed into the hands
of his enemies, and be put to death, appeared to them to be frustrating
all these expectations.

3\. Though what he said was plain enough, yet they did not understand
it; they could not see how he could be the Messiah, and yet be put to
death in this manner; nor did they understand it fully until after the
resurrection.

[Matthew 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 17:24</span></span>

And when they were come to Capernaum - See the notes at [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013).

They that received tribute - In the original this is, they who received
the didrachma, or double drachma. The drachma was a Grecian coin worth
about fifteen cents (7 1/2 d.) of British money. The didrachma, or
double drachma, was a silver coin equal to the Attic drachma, and, in
the time of Josephus, equal to the Jewish half shekel, that is, about 30
cents (circa 1880's). This tribute, consisting of the didrachma or
double drachma, was not paid to the Roman government, but to the Jewish
collectors for the use of the temple service. It was permitted in the
law of Moses (see [Exo 30:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011)) that
in numbering the people half a shekel should be received of each man for
the services of religion. This was in addition to the tithes paid by the
whole nation, and seems to have been considered as a voluntary offering.
It was devoted to the purchase of animals for the daily sacrifice, wood,
flour, salt, incense, etc., for the use of the temple.

Doth not your master pay tribute? - This tribute was voluntary, and they
therefore asked him whether he was in the habit of paying taxes for the
support of the temple. Peter replied that it was his custom to pay all
the usual taxes of the nation.

[Mat 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#025)

Jesus prevented him - That is, Jesus commenced speaking before Peter, or
spoke before Peter had told him what he had said. This implies that,
though not present with Peter when he gave the answer, yet Jesus was
acquainted with what he had said.

Prevent - To go before, or precede. It did not mean, as it now does with
us, to hinder or obstruct. See the same use of the word in [Psa
59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010); [Psa
79:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#008); [Psa
88:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#013); [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015); [Psa
119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148).

Of whom do the kings of the earth ... - That is, earthly kings.

Their own children - Their sons; the members of their own family.

Or of strangers? - The word "strangers" does not mean foreigners, but
those that were not their own sons or members of their family. Peter
replied that tribute was collected of those out of their own family.
Jesus answered, Then are the children, or sons of the kings, free; that
is, taxes are not required of them. The meaning of this may be thus
expressed: "Kings do not tax their own sons. This tribute-money is taken
up for the temple service; that is, the service of my Father. I,
therefore, being the Son of God, for whom this is taken up, cannot be
lawfully required to pay this tribute." This argument is based on the
supposition that this was a religious, and not a civil tax. If it had
been the latter, the illustration would not have been pertinent.

[Mat 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027)

Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them - That is, lest they should
think that we despise the temple and its service, and thus provoke
needless opposition; though we are not under obligation to pay it, yet
it is best to pay it to them.

Go to the sea - This was at Capernaum, on the shore of the Sea of
Tiberias.

Thou shalt find a piece of money - In the original, thou shalt find a
stater, a Roman silver coin of the value of four drachmas, or one
shekel, and of course sufficient to pay the tribute for two - himself
and Peter.

In whatever way this is regarded, it is proof that Jesus was possessed
of divine attributes. If he knew that the first fish that came up would
have such a coin in his mouth, it was proof of omniscience. If he
created the coin for the occasion and placed it there, then it was proof
of divine power. The former is the most probable supposition. It is by
no means absurd that a fish should have swallowed a silver coin. Many of
them bite eagerly at anything bright, and would not hesitate, therefore,
at swallowing a piece of money.

Remarks On Matthew 17

1\. It is proper to withdraw from those around us that we may engage in
secret prayer; and it is desirable for every one to have a place where
he may be alone with God, [Mat 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001).
Christ often went into deserts and on mountains that he might be by
himself. This should be done:

\(1\) to avoid the appearance of ostentation.

\(2\) pride is easily excited when we know that others hear us pray.

Everyone should have some place - some closet - to which he may retire
at any time, with the assurance that none sees him but God. See the
notes at [Mat 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006).

2\. In such seasons we shall meet God, [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002). It was in such a season that the
divine favor was uniquely shown to Christ. Then the transfiguration took
place - the brightest manifestation of his glory that ever occurred on
earth. So the clearest and most precious manifestations of the love and
glory of God will be made to us in prayer.

3\. We see the great glory of Christ, [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002). No such favor had been granted
to any prophet before him. We see the regard in which he was held by
Moses and Elias among the greatest of the prophets. We see the honor
which God put on him, exalting him far above them both, [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005). The glory of heaven encompasses
the Lord Jesus, and all its redeemed pay him reverence. In him the
divine nature shines illustriously; and of him and to him the divinity
speaks in glory as the only begotten Son of God.

4\. It is right to have particular affection for some Christians more
than others, at the same time that we should love them all. Christ loved
all his disciples, but he admitted some to special friendship and
favors, [Mat 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001). Some Christians may
be more congenial to us in feeling, age, and education than others; and
it is proper, and may be greatly to our advantage, to admit them among
our special friends.

5\. The death of Jesus is an object of great interest to the redeemed.
Moses and Elias talked of it, [Luk
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031). Angels also desire to look into
this great subject, [Pe1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012). By that
death all the redeemed are saved, and in that death the angels see the
most signal display of the justice and love of God.

6\. Christians should delight to be where God has manifested his glory.
The feeling of Peter was natural, [Mat
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#004). His love of the glorious
presence of Christ and the redeemed was right. He erred only in the
manner of manifesting that love. We should always love the house of
prayer - the sanctuary the place where Christ has manifested himself as
especially glorious and precious to our souls, or unique as our Friend
and Deliverer.

7\. We need not be afraid of the most awful displays of deity if Christ
be with us, [Mat 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#007). Were we alone
we should fear. None could see God and live, for he is a consuming fire,
[Heb 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#029). But with Jesus for our
friend we may go confidently down to death; we may meet him at his awful
bar; we may dwell in the full splendors of his presence to all eternity.

8\. Saints at death are taken to happiness and live now in glory, [Mat
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003). Moses and Elias were not created
anew, but went to heaven as they were. They came from heaven and
returned thither. The spirits of all people live, therefore, in
happiness or woe after the body is dead.

9\. It is not unreasonable to suppose that saints may have some
knowledge of what is done here on earth. Moses and Elias appear to have
been acquainted with the fact that Jesus was about to die at Jerusalem.

10\. The Scriptures will be fulfilled. The fulfillment may take place
when we little know it, or in events that we should not suppose were
intended for a fulfillment, [Mat
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012).

11\. Erroneous teachers will endeavor to draw us away from the truth,
[Mar 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014). They will do it by art, and
caution, and the appearance of calm inquiry. We should always be on our
guard against any teachers appearing to call in question what Christ has
plainly taught us.

12\. Christ, in his word and by his Spirit, is a safe teacher, [Mar
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#015). When people are suggesting
plausible doubts about doctrine, or attempting to unsettle our minds by
cavils and inquiry, we should leave them, and apply by prayer, and by
searching the Bible, to Christ, the great Prophet, who is the way, the
truth, and the life.

13\. Parents should be earnest for the welfare of their children, [Mat
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#015). It is right for them to pray to
God, in times of sickness, that he would heal them. Miracles are not to
be expected, but God only can bless the means which parents use for
their sick and afflicted children.

14\. Parents may do much by faith and prayer for their children. Here
the faith of the parent was the means of saving the life of the child,
[Mat 17:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014). So the faith of parents
- a faith producing diligent instruction, a holy example, and much
prayer, may be the means of saving their souls. God will not, indeed,
save them on account of the faith of the parent, but the holy life of a
father and mother may be the means of training up their children for
heaven.

15\. It is proper to pray to Jesus to increase our faith, [Mar
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024). We may be sensible of our
unbelief may feel that we deserve condemnation, and that we deserve no
favor that is usually bestowed on faith; but we may come to him and
implore of him an increase of faith, and thus obtain the object of our
desires.

16\. Our unbelief hinders our doing much that we might do, [Mat
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020). We shrink from great
difficulties, we fail in great duties, because we do not put confidence
in God, who is able to help us. The proper way to live a life of
religion and peace is to do just what God requires of us, depending on
his grace to aid us.

17\. We see the proper way of increasing our faith, [Mat
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021). It is by much prayer,
self-denial, and fasting. Faith is a plant that never grows in an
uncultivated soil, and is never luxuriant unless it is often exposed to
the beams of the Sun of Righteousness.

18\. It is right to weep and mourn over the death of Jesus, [Mat
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#023). It was a cruel death, and we
should mourn that our best Friend passed through such sufferings. Yet we
should rather mourn that our sins were the cause of such bitter sorrows;
and that, but for our sins, and the sins of the rest of mankind, he
might have been always happy.

"'Twas you, my sins, my cruel sins,

His chief tormentors were;

Each of my crimes became a nail,

And unbelief the spear.

"'Twas you that pulled the vengeance down

Upon his guiltless head.

Break, break, my heart! O burst, mine eyes!

And let my sorrows bleed."

19\. At the same time, we should rejoice that God made his death the
source of the richest blessings that ever descended on mankind. He rose
and brought life and immortality to light, [Mat
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#023).

20\. We should comply with all the requirements of the laws of the land,
if not contrary to the law of God. It is important that governments
should be supported, [Mat 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#025). See
also [Rom 13:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001).

21\. We should also be willing to contribute our just proportion to the
support of the institutions of religion. The tribute which Jesus paid
here by a miracle was for the support of religion in the temple, [Mat
17:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024). He understood of how much
value are the institutions of religion to the welfare of man. He worked
a miracle, therefore, to make a voluntary offering to support it.
Religion promotes the purity, peace, intelligence, and order of the
community, and every man is therefore under obligation to do his part
toward its support. If any man doubts this, he has only to go to the
places where there is no religion among scoffers, and thieves, and
adulterers, and prostitutes, and pick-pockets, and drunkards. No money
is ever lost that goes in any way to suppress these vices and to make
people better.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 18](mat018)

</div>
