<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat023)  [Next](mat025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 24:0</span></span>

Jesus foretells the destruction of the temple as he takes his final
leave of it, and teaches what were the signs of his coming. These
predictions are also recorded in Mark 13; Luke 21:5-38.

[Matthew 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 24:1</span></span>

And Jesus went out - He was going over to the Mount of Olives, [Mat
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003).

The buildings of the temple - The temple itself, with the surrounding
courts, porches, and other edifices. See the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). Mark says that they
particularly pointed out the "stones" of the temple, as well as the
buildings. "In that temple," says Josephus, the Jewish historian, "were
several stones which were 45 cubits in length, 5 in height, and 6 in
breadth;" that is, more than 70 feet long, 10 wide, and 8 high. These
stones, of such enormous size, were principally used in building the
high wall on the east side, from the base to the top of the mountain.
They were also, it is said, beautifully painted with variegated colors.

[Matthew 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 24:2</span></span>

There shall not be left here one stone upon another - At the time this
was spoken, no event was more improbable than this. The temple was vast,
rich, splendid. It was the pride of the nation, and the nation was at
peace. Yet in the short space of 40 years all this was accomplished
exactly. Jerusalem was taken by the Roman armies, under the command of
Titus, 70 a.d. The account of the siege and destruction of the city is
left us by Josephus, a historian of undoubted veracity and singular
fidelity. He was a Jewish priest. In the wars of which he gives an
account, he fell into the hands of the Romans, and remained with them
during the siege and destruction of the city. Being a Jew, he would of
course say nothing designed to confirm the prophecies of Jesus Christ;
yet his whole history appears almost like a running commentary on these
predictions respecting the destruction of the temple. The following
particulars are given on his authority:

After the city was taken, Josephus says that Titus "gave orders that
they should now "demolish the whole city and temple," except three
towers, which he reserved standing. But for the rest of the wall, it was
laid so completely even with the ground by those who "dug it up from the
foundation," that there was nothing left to make those believe who came
hither that it had ever been inhabited." Maimonides, a Jewish writer,
has also recorded that "Terentius Rufus, an officer in the army of
Titus, with a plowshare tore up the foundations of the temple, that the
prophecy might be fulfilled, 'Zion shall be plowed as a field,'" [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012). This was all done by the
direction of divine Providence. Titus was desirous of preserving the
temple, and frequently sent Josephus to the Jews to induce them to
surrender and save the temple and city. But the prediction of the
Saviour had gone forth, and, notwithstanding the wish of the Roman
general, the temple was to be destroyed. The Jews themselves first set
fire to the porticoes of the temple. One of the Roman soldiers, without
any command, threw a burning firebrand into the golden window, and soon
the temple was in flames. Titus gave orders to extinguish the fire; but,
amid the tumult, none of the orders were obeyed. The soldiers pressed to
the temple, and neither fear nor entreaties, nor stripes could restrain
them. Their hatred of the Jews urged them on to the work of destruction,
and thus, says Josephus, the temple was burned against the will of
Caesar. - Jewish Wars, b. 6 chapter 4, section 5-7.

[Matthew 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 24:3</span></span>

He sat upon the Mount of Olives - See the notes at [Mat
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001). From that mount there was a
magnificent view of the whole city.

The disciples came unto him privately - Not all of them, but Peter,
James, John, and Andrew, [Mar 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#003).
The prediction that the temple would be destroyed [Mat
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002) had been made in the presence of
all the apostles. A "part" now came privately to know more particularly
when this would be.

When shall these things be? - There are three questions here:

1\. when those things should take place

2\. what should be the signs of his own coming

3\. what should be the signs that the end of the world was near

To these questions He replies in this and the following chapters. This
He does, not by noticing them distinctly, but by intermingling the
descriptions of the destruction of Jerusalem and of the end of the
world, so that it is sometimes difficult to tell to what particular
subject his remarks apply. The principle on which this combined
description of two events was spoken appears to be, that "they could be
described in the same words," and therefore the accounts are
intermingled. A similar use of language is found in some parts of
Isaiah, where the same language will describe the return from the
Babylonian captivity, and deliverance by the Messiah. See Introduction
to Isaiah, section 7.

Sign of thy coming - Evidence that thou art coming. By what token shall
we know that thou art coming?

[Matthew 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 24:4</span></span>

Take heed ... - Jesus, in reply to their question, first gives them a
caution to beware of deception. They were to be constantly on their
guard, because many would arise to deceive the people.

Many shall come in my name - Not in the name or by the authority of
Jesus, or claiming to be His followers, and to be sent by him, but in
the name of the Messiah, or claiming to be the Messiah.

I am Christ - I am the Messiah. See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). The Messiah was expected at that
time, [Mat 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001). Many would lay,
claims to being the Messiah, and, as He was universally expected,
multitudes would easily be led to believe in them. There is abundant
evidence that this was fully accomplished. Josephus informs us that
there were many who pretended to divine inspiration; who deceived the
people, leading out numbers of them into the desert. "The land," says He
"was overrun with magicians, seducers, and impostors, who drew the
people after them in multitudes into solitudes and deserts, to see I the
signs and miracles which they promised to show by the power of God."
Among these are mentioned particularly Dositheus, the Samaritan, who
affirmed that He was Christ; Simon Magus, who said He appeared among the
Jews as the Son of God; and Theudas, who persuaded many to go with him
to the river Jordan, to see the waters divided. The names of 24 false
Messiahs are recorded as having appeared between the time of the Emperor
Adrian and the year 1682.

[Matthew 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 24:6</span></span>

And ye shall hear of wars ... - It is recorded in the history of Rome
that violent agitations prevailed in the Roman empire previous to the
destruction of Jerusalem. Four emperors, Nero, Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius, suffered violent deaths in the short space of eighteen
months. In consequence of these changes in the government, there were
commotions throughout the empire. Parties were formed, and bloody and
violent wars were the consequence of attachment to particular emperors.
This is the more remarkable, as at the time that the prophecy was made,
the empire was in a state of peace.

Rumours of wars - Wars declared or threatened, but not carried into
execution. Josephus says that Bardanes, and after him Vologeses,
declared war against the Jews, but it was not carried into execution,
Antig. xx. 34. He also says that Vitellius, governor of Syria, declared
war against Aretas, king of Arabia, and wished to lead his army through
Palestine, but the death of Tiberius prevented the war, Antiq. xviii. 5.
3.

The end is not yet - The end of the Jewish economy; the destruction of
Jerusalem will not immediately follow. Be not, therefore, alarmed when
you hear of those commotions. Other signs will warn you when to be
alarmed and seek security.

[Matthew 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 24:7</span></span>

Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom - At
Caesarea the Jews and Syrians contended about the right to the city, and
twenty thousand of the Jews were slain. At this blow the whole nation of
the Jews was exasperated, and carried war and desolation through the
Syrian cities and villages. Sedition and civil war spread throughout
Judea; Italy was also thrown into civil war by the contests between Otho
and Vitellius for the crown.

And there shall be famines - There was a famine foretold by Agabus [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028), which is mentioned by Tacitus,
Suetonius, and Eusebius, and which was so severe in Jerusalem, Josephus
says, that many people perished for want of food, Antiq. xx. 2. Four
times in the reign of Claudius (41-54 a.d.) famine prevailed in Rome,
Palestine, and Greece.

Pestilences - Raging epidemic diseases; the plague, sweeping off
multitudes of people at once. It is commonly the attendant of famine,
and often produced by it. A pestilence is recorded as raging in
Babylonia, 40 a.d. (Josephus, Antiq. xviii. 9. 8); in Italy, 66 a.d.
(Tacitus 16. 13). Both of these took place before the destruction of
Jerusalem.

Earthquakes - In prophetic language, earthquakes sometimes mean
political commotions. Literally, they are tremors or shakings of the
earth, often shaking cities and towns to ruin. The earth opens, and
houses and people sink indiscriminately to destruction. Many of these
are mentioned as preceding the destruction of Jerusalem. Tacitus
mentions one in the reign of Claudius, at Rome, and says that in the
reign of Nero the cities of Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colosse were
overthrown, and the celebrated Pompeii was overwhelmed and almost
destroyed by an earthquake, Annales, 15. 22. Others are mentioned as
occurring at Smyrna, Miletus, Chios, and Samos. Luke adds, "And fearful
sights and great signs shall there be from heaven," [Luk
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#011). Josephus, who had probably
never heard of this prophecy, and who certainly would have done nothing
designedly to show its fulfillment, records the prodigies and signs
which He says preceded the destruction of the city.

A star, says he, resembling a sword, stood over the city, and a comet
that continued a whole year. At the feast of unleavened bread, during
the night, a bright light shone round the altar and the temple, so that
it seemed to be bright day, for half an hour. The eastern gate of the
temple, of solid brass, fastened with strong bolts and bars, and which
had been shut with difficulty by twenty men, opened in the night of its
own accord. A few days after that feast, He says, "Before sunsetting,
chariots and troops of soldiers in their armor were seen running about
among the clouds, and surrounding of cities." A great noise, as of the
sound of a multitude, was heard in the temple, saying, "Let us remove
hence." Four years before the war began, Jesus, the son of Ananus, a
plebeian and a husbandman, came to the feast of the tabernacles when the
city was in peace and prosperity, and began to cry aloud, "A voice from
the east, a voice from the west, a voice from the four winds, a voice
against Jerusalem and the holy house, a voice against the bridegroom and
the brides, and a voice against this whole people!" He was scourged, and
at every stroke of the whip He cried, "Woe, woe to Jerusalem!" This cry,
Josephus says, was continued every day for more than seven years, until
He was killed in the siege of the city, exclaiming, "Woe, woe to myself
also!" - Jewish Wars, b. 6 chapter 9, section 3.

[Matthew 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 24:8</span></span>

The beginning of sorrows - Far heavier calamities are yet to come before
the end.

[Matthew 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 24:9</span></span>

To be afflicted - By persecution, imprisonment, scourging, etc.

"They shall deliver you up to councils" (Mark). To the great council, or
Sanhedrin - for this is the word in the original. See the notes at [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022). This was fulfilled when Peter
and John were brought before the council, [Act
4:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005). Mark further adds [Mar
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#009) that they should be delivered to
synagogues and to prisons to be beaten, and should be brought before
rulers and kings for his name's sake. All this was remarkably fulfilled.
Peter and John were imprisoned [Act
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#003); Paul and Silas were imprisoned
[Act 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#024), and also beaten [Act
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023); Paul was brought before Gallic
[Act 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012), before Felix [Act
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024), and before Agrippa [Act
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#023).

And shall kill you - That is, shall kill some of you. Stephen was stoned
[Act 7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059); James was killed by Herod
[Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002); and, in addition to all
that the sacred writers have told us, the persecution under Nero took
place before the destruction of Jerusalem, in which were put to death,
with many others, Peter and Paul. Most of the apostles, it is believed,
died by persecution.

When they were delivered up, Jesus told them not to premeditate what
they should say, for he would give them a mouth and wisdom which all
their adversaries would not be able to gainsay or resist, [Luk
21:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#014). The fulfillment of this is
recorded in the case of Stephen [Act
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010), and of Paul, who made Felix
"tremble," [Act 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025).

Ye shall be hated of all nations - This was fulfilled then, and has been
in all ages. It was judged to be a crime to be a Christian. Multitudes
for this, and for nothing else, were put to death.

For my name's sake - On account of attachment to me, or because you bear
my "name as Christians."

[Matthew 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 24:10</span></span>

Many shall be offended - See the notes at [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029). Many shall stumble, fall,
apostatize from a profession of religion. Many who "professed" to love
me will then show that they had no "real" attachment to me; and in those
trying times it will be seen that they knew nothing of genuine Christian
love. See [Jo1 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019).

Shall betray one another - Those who thus apostatize from professed
attachment to me will betray others who really love me. This they would
do to secure their own safety, by revealing the names, habitations, or
places of concealment of others.

Shall hate one another - Not that real Christians would do this, but
those who had professed to be such would then show that they were not
his true followers, and would hate one another. Luke adds that they
should be betrayed "by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and
friends," [Luk 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#016). They would break
over the most tender ties to surrender Christians to punishment. So
great would be their hatred of Christianity, that it would overcome all
the natural endearments of kindred and home. This, in the persecutions
of Christians, has often occurred, and nothing shows more fully the deep
and deadly hatred of the human heart to the gospel. Compare the notes at
[Mat 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#021).

[Matthew 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 24:11</span></span>

And many false prophets - Many men pretending to be prophets or
foretellers of future events. This refers not to the false "Messiahs" of
which he had spoken [Mat 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#005), but to
prophets who should appear during the siege of the city. Of them
Josephus says: "The tyrannical zealots who ruled the city suborned "many
false prophets" to declare that aid would be given to the people from
heaven. This was done to prevent them from attempting to desert, and to
inspire confidence in God." - "Jewish Wars," b. 6 chapter 5, section 2,
3.

[Matthew 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 24:12</span></span>

And because iniquity ... - The word "iniquity" here seems to include the
cruelty of the Jews and Romans in their persecutions; the betraying of
Christians by those who professed to be such; and the pernicious errors
of false prophets arid others. The effect of all this would be, that the
ardor of feeling of many Christians would be lessened. The word "wax"
means to "become." It is an old Saxon word, not used now in this sense
except in the Bible. The fear of death, and the deluding influence of
false teachers, would lessen the zeal of many timid and weak professors;
perhaps, also, of many real but feeble Christians.

[Matthew 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 24:13</span></span>

He that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved - The word
"end," here, has by some been thought to mean the destruction of
Jerusalem, or the end of the Jewish economy, and the meaning has been
supposed to be "he that perseveres in bearing these persecutions to the
end of the wars shall be safe. God will protect his people from harm, so
that not a hair of the head shall perish." Others, with more
probability, have referred this to final salvation, and refer the end to
the close of life. "He that bears afflictions and persecutions
faithfully that constantly adheres to his religion, and does not shrink
until death shall be saved, or shall enter heaven." So Luke [Luk
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018) says, "there shall not an hair
of your head perish" - that is, they would be saved. "An hair of the
head," or the smallest part or portion, is a proverbial expression,
denoting the "certainty and completeness" of their salvation. Luke [Luk
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019) adds further: "In your patience
possess ye your souls" - that is, keep your souls "patient;" keep proper
possession of patience as your own. It is a part of religion to teach
it, and in these trying times let it not depart from you.

[Matthew 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 24:14</span></span>

And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world - The
evidence that this was done is to be chiefly derived from the New
Testament, and there it is clear. Thus Paul declares that it was
preached to every creature under heaven [Col
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006), [Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023); that the faith of the Romans was
spoken of throughout the whole world [Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008); that he preached in Arabia [Gal
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017), and at Jerusalem, and round
about unto Illyricum [Rom 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019). We
know also that He traveled through Asia Minor, Greece, and Crete; that
he was in Italy, and probably in Spain and Gaul, [Rom
15:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024). At the same time, the other
apostles were not idle; and there is full proof that within thirty years
after this prophecy was spoken, churches were established in all these
regions.

For a witness unto all nations - This preaching the gospel
indiscriminately to "all" the Gentiles shall be a proof to them, or a
witness, that the division between the Jews and Gentiles was about to be
broken down. Hitherto the blessings of revelation had been confined to
the Jews. They were the special people of God. His messages had been
sent to them only. When, therefore, God sent the gospel to all other
people, it was proof, or "a witness unto them," that the special Jewish
economy was at an end.

Then shall the end come - The end of the Jewish economy; the destruction
of the temple and city.

[Matthew 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 24:15</span></span>

The abomination of desolation - This is a Hebrew expression, meaning an
abominable or hateful destroyer. The Gentiles were all held in
abomination by the Jews, [Act 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028).
The abomination of desolation means the Roman army, and is so explained
by [Luk 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020). The Roman army is
further called the "abomination" on account of the images of the
emperor, and the eagles, carried in front of the legions, and regarded
by the Romans with divine honors.

Spoken of by Daniel the prophet - [Dan
9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026); [Dan
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031); [Dan
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011), see the notes at those
passages.

Standing in the holy place - Mark says, standing where it ought not,"
meaning the same thing. All Jerusalem was esteemed "holy," [Mat
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005). The meaning of this is, when you
see the Roman armies standing in the holy city or encamped around the
temple, or the Roman ensigns or standards in the temple. Josephus
relates that when the city was taken, the Romans brought their idols
into the temple, and placed them over the eastern gate, and sacrificed
to them there, "Jewish Wars," b. 6 chapter 6, section 1.

Whoso readeth ... - This seems to be a remark made by the evangelist to
direct the attention of the reader particularly to the meaning of the
prophecy by Daniel.

[Matthew 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 24:16</span></span>

Then let them ... - Then Christians may know that the end is come, and
should seek a place of safety. Destruction would not only visit the
"city," but would extend to the surrounding part of Judea.

The mountains - The mountains of Palestine abound in caves, a safe
retreat for those who are pursued. In all ages these caves have been the
favorite places of robbers, and they were also resorted to by those in
danger, [Sa1 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006); [Sa1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001); [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013); [Jos
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#016). In those mountains they would
be safe.

[Matthew 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 24:17</span></span>

Him which is on the house-top - The roofs of the houses in Eastern
countries were made flat, so that they were favorable places for walking
and retirement. See the notes at [Mat
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001). The meaning here is, that He
who should be on the house-top when this calamity came upon the city
"should flee without delay;" He should not even take time to secure any
article of apparel from his house. So sudden would be the calamity, that
by attempting to do this He would endanger his life.

[Matthew 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 24:18</span></span>

Return back to take his clothes - His clothes which, in "working," He
had laid aside, or which, in fleeing, he should throw off as an
encumbrance. "Clothes" here means the "outer" garment, commonly laid
aside when men worked or ran. See the notes at [Mat
5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040).

These directions were followed. It is said that the Christians, warned
by these predictions, fled from Jerusalem to Pella, and other places
beyond the Jordan; so that there is not evidence that a single
"Christian" perished in Jerusalem - Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., lib. 3
chapter 6.

[Matthew 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 24:20</span></span>

But pray ye ... - The destruction was certainly coming. It could not be
prevented; yet it was right to pray for a mitigation of the
circumstances, that it might be as mild as possible. So we know that
calamity is before us; sickness, pain, bereavement, and death are in our
path; yet, though we know that these things must come upon us, it is
right to pray that they may come in as mild a manner as may be
consistent with the will of God. We must die, but it is right to pray
that the pains of our dying may be neither long nor severe.

In the winter - On account of the cold, storms, etc. To be turned then
from home, and compelled to take up an abode in caverns, would be a
double calamity.

Neither on the sabbath-day - Long journeys were prohibited by the law on
the Sabbath, [Exo 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#029). The law of
Moses did not mention the distance to which persons might go on the
Sabbath, but most of the Jews maintained that it should not be more than
2000 cubits. Some supposed that it was 7 furlongs, or nearly a mile.
This distance was allowed in order that they might go to their places of
worship. Most of them held that it was not lawful to go further, under
any circumstances of war or affliction. Jesus teaches his disciples to
pray that their flight might not be on the Sabbath, because, if they
should not go farther than a Sabbath-day's journey, they would not be
beyond the reach of danger, and if they did, they would be exposed to
the charge of violating the law. It should be added that it was almost
impracticable to travel in Judea on that day, as the gates of the cities
were usually closed, [Neh 13:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#019).

[Matthew 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 24:21</span></span>

There shall be great tribulation - The word "tribulation" means calamity
or "suffering." Luke [Luk 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024) has
specified in what this tribulation would consist: "They shall fall by
the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations,
and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of
the Gentiles shall be fulfilled." That is, until the time allotted for
the Gentiles "to do it" shall be fully accomplished, or as long as God
is pleased to suffer them to do it.

The first thing mentioned by Luke is, that they should fall "by the edge
of the sword" - that is, would be slain in war, as the sword was then
principally used in war. This was most strikingly fulfilled. Josephus,
in describing it, uses almost the very words of our Saviour. "All the
calamities, says he, which had befallen any nation from the beginning of
the world" were but small in comparison with those of the Jews. - Jewish
Wars, b. i. preface, section 4.

He has given the following account of one part of the massacre when the
city was taken: "And now, rushing into the city, they slew whomsoever
they found, without distinction, and burned the houses and all the
people who had fled into them; and when they entered for the sake of
plunder, they found whole families of dead persons, and houses full of
carcasses destroyed by famine, then they came out with their hands
empty. And though they thus pitied the dead, they had not the same
emotion for the living, but killed all they met, whereby they filled the
lanes with dead bodies. "The whole city ran with blood," insomuch that
many things which were burning were extinguished by the blood." -
"Jewish Wars," b. 6 chapter 8, section 5; chapter 9, section 2, 3. He
adds that in the siege of Jerusalem not fewer than "eleven hundred
thousand" perished (Jewish Wars, b. 6 chapter 9, section 3) - a number
almost half as great as are in the whole city of London. In the adjacent
provinces no fewer than "two hundred and fifty thousand" are reckoned to
have been slain; making in all whose deaths were ascertained the almost
incredible number of "one million three hundred and fifty thousand" who
were put to death.

These were not, indeed, all slain with the sword. Many were crucified.
"Many hundreds," says Josephus ("Jewish Wars," b. v. chapter 11, section
1), "were first whipped, then tormented with various kinds of tortures,
and finally crucified; the Roman soldiers nailing them (out of the wrath
and hatred they bore to the Jews), one after one way and another after
another, to crosses, "by way of jest," until at length the multitude
became so great that room was lacking for crosses, and crosses for the
bodies." So terribly was their imprecation fulfilled - "his blood be on
us and on our children," [Mat 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025).
If it be asked how it was possible for so many people to be slain in a
single city, it is to be remembered that the siege of Jerusalem
commenced during the time of the Passover, when all the males of the
Jews were required to be there, and when it is estimated that more than
"three million" were usually assembled. See Josephus, Jewish Wars, b. 6
chapter 9, section 3, 4.

A horrible instance of the distress of Jerusalem is related by Josephus.
The famine during the siege became so great that they ate what the most
sordid animals refused to touch. A woman of distinguished rank, having
been plundered by the soldiers, in hunger, rage, and despair, killed and
roasted her own babe, and had eaten one half of it before the deed was
discovered. - Jewish Wars, b. 6 chapter 3, section 3, 4. This cruel and
dreadful act was also in fulfillment of prophecy, [Deu
28:53](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#053), [Deu
28:56-57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#056).

Another thing added by Luke [Luk
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024), was, that "they should be led
away captive into all nations." Josephus informs us that the captives
taken during the whole war amounted to "ninety-seven thousand." The tall
and handsome young men Titus reserved for triumph; of the rest, many
were distributed through the Roman provinces to be destroyed by wild
beasts in theaters; many were sent to the works in Egypt; many,
especially those under seventeen years of age, were sold for slaves. -
Jewish Wars, b. vi. chapter 9, section 2, 3.

[Matthew 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 24:22</span></span>

Except those days should be shortened - If the calamities of the siege
should be lengthened out. If famine and war should be suffered to rage.

No flesh be saved - None of the nation would be preserved alive. All the
inhabitants of Judea would perish. The war, famine, and pestilence would
entirely destroy them.

But for the elect's sake - The "elect" here doubtless means
"Christians." See [Pe1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002); [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007); [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004); [Th1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#004). The word "elect" means "to
choose." It is given to Christians because they are "chosen to salvation
through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth," [Pe1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002). It is probable that in Jerusalem
and the adjacent parts of Judea there were many who were true followers
of Christ. On their account - to preserve them alive, and to make them
the instruments of spreading the gospel Jesus said that those days
should not be lengthened out so as to produce their destruction. It is
related by Josephus (Jewish Wars, b. 1 chapter 12, section 1) that Titus
at first resolved to reduce the city by famine. He therefore built a
wall around it to keep any provisions from being carried in, and any of
the people from going out. The Jews, however, drew up their army near
the walls, engaged in battle, and the Romans pursued them, provoked by
their attempts, and broke into the city. The affairs of Rome, also, at
that time demanded the presence of Titus there; and, contrary to his
original intention he pressed the siege and took the city by storm, thus
"shortening" the time that would have been occupied in reducing it by
famine. This was for the benefit of the "elect." So the designs of
wicked people, intended by them for the destruction of the people of
God, are intended by God for the good of his chosen people. See the
notes at [Isa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007).

[Matthew 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 24:23</span></span>

Lo, here is Christ - The Messiah. The Jews expected the Messiah to
deliver them from Roman oppression. In the time of these great
calamities they would anxiously look for him. Many would claim "to be"
the Messiah. Many would follow those who set up that claim. Many would
rejoice to believe that he was come, and would call on others,
Christians with the rest, to follow them.

Believe it not - You have evidence that the Messiah has come, and you
are not to be deceived by the plausible pretensions of others.

[Matthew 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 24:24</span></span>

False Christs - Persons claiming to be the Messiah.

False prophets - Persons claiming to be "the prophet" spoken of by Moses
[Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015); or persons pretending to
declare the way of deliverance from the Romans, and calling the people
to follow them. See [Mat 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#005).

Shall show great signs and wonders - That is, shall pretend to work
miracles. They will so nearly resemble prophets in their miraculous
power as to render it difficult to detect the imposture. Josephus
represents the false Christs and prophets that appeared as "magicians
and sorcerers." He says they led the people out into the deserts, and
promised to work miracles to deliver them, Antiq. b. 20 chapter 8,
section 6.

If it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect - So nearly would
their pretended miracles resemble true miracles as to render it
difficult to detect the imposture; so much so, that if it were possible
they would persuade even true Christians that they were the Messiah. But
that was not possible. His real friends would be too firmly established
in the belief that he was the Christ to be wholly led away by others.
Christians may be sometimes led far astray; they may be in doubt about
some great doctrines of religion; they may be perplexed by the cavils
and cunning craftiness of those who do not love the truth, but they
cannot be entirely deceived and seduced from the Saviour. Our Saviour
says that if this "were possible," it would be done then; but it was not
possible. Compare the notes at [Joh
10:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028).

[Matthew 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 24:25</span></span>

Behold, I have told you before - Mark adds [Mar
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#023), "take ye heed." The reason why
he told them before was that they might be on their guard, and be
prepared for those calamities.

[Matthew 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 24:26</span></span>

Behold, he is in the desert - The Jews had formed the expectation that
the Messiah would appear suddenly from some unexpected quarter; hence,
many would be looking to desert places, expecting that he would come
from them. Accordingly, most of the impostors and pretended prophets led
their people into the deserts.

Go not forth - Do not follow them; they will only deceive you.

In secret chambers - Concealed in some house, or some retired part of
the city. Many would, doubtless, pretend that the Messiah was concealed
there, and, either for the purpose of encouraging or deceiving the
people, would pretend that they had discovered him.

[Matthew 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 24:27</span></span>

For as the lightning cometh out of the east ... - This is not designed
to denote the quarter from which he would come, but the manner. He does
not mean to affirm that the "Son of man" will come from the "east," but
that he will come in a rapid and unexpected manner, like the lightning.
Many would be looking for him in the desert, many in secret places; but
he said it would be useless to be looking in that manner; it was useless
to look to any particular part of the heavens to know where the
lightning would next flash. In a moment it would blaze in an unexpected
part of the heavens, and shine at once to the other part. So rapidly, so
unexpectedly, in so unlooked-for a quarter, would be his coming. See
[Luk 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018); [Zac
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014).

The coming of the Son of man - It has been doubted whether this refers
to the destruction of Jerusalem, or to the coming at the day of
judgment. For the solution of this doubt let it be remarked:

1\. that those two events are the principal scenes in which our Lord
said he would come, either in person or in judgment.

2\. that the destruction of Jerusalem is described as his coming, his
act.

3\. that these events - the judgment of Jerusalem and the final judgment
in many respects greatly resemble each other.

4\. that they "will bear," therefore, to be described in the same
language; and,

5\. therefore, that the same words often include both events, as
properly described by them.

The words had, doubtless, a primary reference to the destruction of
Jerusalem, but they had, at the same time, such an amplitude of meaning
as also to express his coming to judgment. See the introduction to
Isaiah, section 7, (3).

[Matthew 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 24:28</span></span>

Wheresoever ... - The words in this verse are proverbial. Vultures and
eagles easily ascertain where dead bodies are, and hasten to devour
them. So with the Roman army. Jerusalem is like a dead and putrid
corpse. Its life is gone, and it is ready to be devoured. The Roman
armies will find it out, as the vultures do a dead carcass, and will
come around it to devour it. This proverb also teaches a universal
truth. Wherever wicked people are, there will be assembled the
instruments of their chastisement. The providence of God will direct
them there, as the vultures are directed to a dead carcass.

This verse is connected with the preceding by the word "for," implying
that this is a reason for what is said there that the Son of man would
certainly come to destroy the city, and that he would come suddenly. The
meaning is that he would come, by means of the Roman armies, as
"certainly;" as "suddenly," and as unexpectedly as whole flocks of
vultures and eagles, though unseen before, see their prey at a great
distance and suddenly gather in multitudes around it. Travelers in the
deserts of Arabia tell us that they sometimes witness a speck in the
distant sky which for a long time is scarcely visible. At length it
grows larger, it comes nearer, and they at last find that it is a
vulture that has from an immense distance seen a carcass lying on the
sand. So keen is their vision as aptly to represent the Roman armies,
though at an immense distance, spying, as it were, Jerusalem, a putrid
carcass, and hastening in multitudes to destroy it.

[Matthew 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 24:29</span></span>

Immediately after the tribulation of those days - That is, immediately
after these tribulations, events will occur that "may be properly
represented" by the darkening of the sun and moon, and by the stars
falling from heaven. The word rendered "immediately" - εὐθέως eutheōs -
means, properly, "straightway, immediately," [Mat
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#003); [Mat
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#005); [Mar
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#031); [Act
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#010); then "shortly," [Jo3
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#014). This is the meaning here. Such
events would "shortly" or "soon" occur In the fulfillment of the
predictions they would be "the next in order," and would occur "before
long." The term here requires us to admit that, in order to the
fulfillment of the prophecy, it can be shown, or it actually happened,
that things "did" soon occur "after the tribulation of those days" which
would be "properly represented or described" by the images which the
Saviour employs. It is not necessary to show that there could not have
been "a more remote" reference to events lying far in the future, in
which there would be a more complete fulfillment or "filling up" of the
meaning of the words (compare the notes at [Mat
1:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022)); but it is necessary that
there should have been events which would be "properly expressed" by the
language which the Saviour uses, or which would have been in some proper
sense "fulfilled," even if there had not been reference to more remote
events. It will be seen in the exposition that this was actually the
case, and that therefore there was a propriety in saying that these
events would occur "immediately" - that is, "soon, or the next in
order." Compare the notes at [Rev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

Shall the sun be darkened ... - The images used here are not to be taken
literally. They are often employed by the sacred writers to denote "any
great calamities." As the darkening of the sun and moon, and the falling
of the stars, would be an inexpressible calamity, so any great
catastrophe - any overturning of kingdoms or cities, or dethroning of
kings and princes is represented by the darkening of the sun and moon,
and by some terrible convulsion in the elements. Thus the destruction of
Babylon is foretold in similar terms [Isa
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010), and of Tyre [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023). The slaughter in Bozrah and
Idumea is predicted in the same language, [Isa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004). See also [Isa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#003); [Isa
60:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019); [Eze
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#007); [Joe
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#015). To the description in Matthew,
Luke has added [Luk 21:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025), "And
upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the
waves roaring; people's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking
after those things which are coming on the earth." All these are figures
of great and terrible calamities. The roaring of the waves of the sea
denotes great tumult and affliction among the people. "Perplexity" means
doubt, anxiety; not knowing what to do to escape. "Men's hearts should
fail them for fear," or by reason of fear. Their fears would be so great
as to take away their courage and strength.

[Matthew 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 24:30</span></span>

The sign of the Son of man - The "evidence" that he is coming to destroy
the city of Jerusalem. It is not to be denied, however, that this
description is applicable also to his coming at the day of judgment. The
disciples had asked him [Mat 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003) what
should be the sign of his coming, and "of the end of the world." In his
answer he has reference to both events, and his language may be regarded
as descriptive of both. At the destruction of Jerusalem, the sign or
evidence of his coming was found in the fulfillment of these
predictions. At the end of the world, the sign of his coming will be his
personal approach with the glory of his Father and the holy angels, [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016); [Luk
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#027); [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064); [Act
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011).

All the tribes of the earth mourn - That is, either all the "tribes or
people" of the land of Judea shall mourn at the great calamities coming
upon them, or all the nations of the world shall wail when he comes to
judgment. All the wicked shall mourn at the prospect of their doom, [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007). The cause of their wailing at the
day of judgment will be chiefly that they have pierced, killed, rejected
the Saviour, and that they deserve the condemnation that is coming upon
them, [Joh 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037); [Zac
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#012).

And they shall see the Son of man - The Lord Jesus coming to judgment.
Probably this refers more directly to his coming at the last day, though
it may also mean that the "evidence" of his coming to destroy Jerusalem
will then be seen.

In the clouds of heaven - He ascended in a cloud, [Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009). He shall return in like manner,
[Act 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011). "The clouds of heaven"
denote not the clouds in heaven, but the clouds that appear to shut
heaven, or the sky, from our view.

With power - Power, manifest in the destruction of Jerusalem, by the
wonders that preceded it, and by the overturning of the temple and city.
In the day of judgment, power manifest by consuming the material world
[Pe2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007), [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010), [Pe2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012); by raising the dead [Joh
5:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029); [Co1
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052); by changing those who may be
alive when he shall come - that is, making their bodies like those who
have died, and who have been raised up [Th1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017); [Co1
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052); by bringing the affairs of the
world to a close, receiving the righteous to heaven [Mat
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034); [Co1
15:57](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#057), and sending the wicked, however
numerous or however strong, down to hell, [Mat
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041), [Mat
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046); [Joh
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029).

Great glory - The word "glory" here means the visible display of honor
and majesty. This glory will be manifested by the manner of his coming
[Mat 26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064), by the presence of the
angels [Mat 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031), and by the wonders
that shall attend him down the sky.

[Matthew 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 24:31</span></span>

And he shall send his angels - "Angels" signify, literally,
"messengers," [Luk 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#024); [Luk
9:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#052). The word is often applied to
inanimate objects, or to anything that God employs to rescue his people
from danger [Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004); but it most
commonly refers to the race of intelligent beings more exalted than man,
who are employed often in the work of man's rescue from ruin, and aiding
his salvation, [Heb 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014). In either of
these senses it might here refer to deliverance granted to his people in
the calamities of Jerusalem. It is said that there is reason to believe
that not one Christian perished in the destruction of that city, God
having in various ways secured their escape, so that they fled to Pella,
where they lived when the city was destroyed. But the language seems to
refer rather to the end of the world, and, no doubt, its principal
application was intended to be to the gathering of his elect at the day
of judgment:

With a great sound of a trumpet - The Jewish assemblies used to be
called together by the sound of a trumpet, as ours are by bells, [Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009); [Num
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002); [Jdg
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#027). Hence, when they spoke of
convening an assembly, they spoke also of doing it by sounding a
trumpet. Our Saviour, speaking to Jews, used language to which they were
accustomed, and described the assembling of the people at the last day
in language which they were accustomed to use in calling assemblies
together. It is not certain, however, that he meant that this would be
literally so, but it may be designed only to denote the certainty that
the "world would be assembled together." Similar language is often used
when speaking of the judgment, [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016); [Co1
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052). A trump, or trumpet, was a wind
instrument, made at first from the horns of oxen, and afterward of rams'
horns, cut off at the smaller extremity. In some instances it was made
of brass, in the form of a horn. The common trumpet was straight, made
of brass or silver, a cubit in length, the larger extremity shaped so as
to resemble a small bell. In times of peace, in assembling the people,
this was sounded softly. In times of calamity, or war, or any great
commotion, it was sounded loud. Perhaps this was referred to when our
Saviour said, with a great sound of a trumpet.

They shall gather together his elect - Elect. See the notes at [Mat
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022). The word means Christians - the
chosen of God. If this refers to the destruction of Jerusalem, it means,
"God shall send forth his messengers - whatever he may choose to employ
for that purpose: signs, wonders, human messengers, or the angels
themselves - and gather Christians into a place of safety, so that they
shall not be destroyed with the Jews." If it refers to the last
judgment, as it doubtless in a primary or secondary sense does, then it
means that he will send his angels to gather his chosen, his elect,
together from all places, [Mat 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039),
[Mat 13:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041). This shall be done
before the living shall be changed, [Co1
15:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051); [Th1
4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016).

From the four winds - That is, from the four quarters of the globe -
east, west, north, and south. The Jews expressed those quarters by the
winds blowing from them See [Eze 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#009).
See also [Isa 43:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005). "From one end of
heaven, etc." Mark says [Mar 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#027),
from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.
The expression denotes that they shall be gathered from all parts of the
earth where they are scattered. The word "heaven" is used here to denote
the "visible" heavens or the sky, meaning that through "the whole world"
he would gather them. See [Psa 19:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001);
[Deu 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032).

[Matthew 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 24:32</span></span>

Now learn a parable - See the notes at [Mat
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003). The word here means, rather, "an
illustration" make a "comparison," or judge of this as you do respecting
a fig-tree.

Fig-tree - This was spoken on the Mount of Olives, which produced not
only olives, but figs. Possibly one was near when he spoke this.

When his branch ... - When the juices return from the roots into the
branches, and the buds swell and burst, "as if tender," and too feeble
to contain the pressing and expanding leaves when you see that, you
judge that spring and summer are near.

[Matthew 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 24:33</span></span>

So likewise ye ... - In the same manner, when you see what I have
predicted the "signs" around Jerusalem - then know that its destruction
is at hand,

Is near - Luke says [Luk 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028), "your
redemption draweth nigh, and [Luk
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#031) the kingdom of God is nigh at
hand." Your deliverance from the dangers that threaten the city
approaches, and the kingdom of God will be set up in the earth; or your
everlasting redemption from sin and death will come at the day of
judgment, and his eternal kingdom will be established in the heavens.

[Matthew 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 24:34</span></span>

This generation ... - This age; this race of people. A generation is
about 30 or 40 years. The destruction of Jerusalem took place about
forty years after this was spoken. See the notes at [Mat
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028).

Till all these things ... - Until these things shall be accomplished.
Until events shall take place which shall be a fulfillment of these
words, if there were nothing further intended. He does not mean to
exclude the reference to the judgment, but to say that the destruction
of Jerusalem would be such as to make appropriate the words of the
prediction, were there nothing beyond. Compare the notes at [Mat
1:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022). So when "death" was
threatened to Adam, the propriety of the threatening would have been
seen, and the threatening would have been fulfilled, had people suffered
only temporal death. At the same time the threatening had "a fullness of
meaning" that would cover also, and justify, eternal death. Thus the
words of Christ describing the destruction of Jerusalem had a fulness of
signification that would meet also the events of the judgment, and whose
meaning would not be "entirely filled up" until the world was closed.

[Matthew 24:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 24:35</span></span>

Heaven and earth shall pass away ... - You may sooner expect to see the
heaven and earth pass away and return to nothing, than my words to fail.

[Matthew 24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 24:36</span></span>

But of that day and hour - Of the precise time of the fulfillment. The
"general signs" of its approach have been given, as the budding of the
fig-tree is a certain indication that summer is near; but "the precise
time" is not indicated by these things. One part of their inquiry was
[Mat 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003) when those things should be.
He now replies to them by saying that the precise time would not be
foretold. Compare the notes at [Act
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007).

Knoweth no man, no, not the angels - See the notes at [Mar
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032).

[Matthew 24:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 24:37</span></span>

Noe - The Greek way of writing "Noah." See Gen. 6-9. The coming of the
Son of man would be as it was in the days of Noah:

1\. In its being sudden and unexpected, the "precise time" not being
made known, though the "general" indications had been given.

2\. The world would be found as it was then.

[Matthew 24:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 24:38</span></span>

For as in the days ... - The things mentioned here denote attention to
the affairs of this life rather than to what was coming on them. It does
not mean that these things were wrong, but only that such was their
actual employment, and that they were regardless of what was coming upon
them.

[Matthew 24:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 24:39</span></span>

They knew not - That is, they knew not the exact time until it came upon
them. So, says he, it shall be when the Son of man shall come. They
shall not know "the precise time" until he comes, and then they will be
found engaged in the ordinary business of life unconcerned.

[Matthew 24:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 24:40</span></span>

Then shall two be in the field ... - The calamity will come suddenly.
There will be no escape for those whom it overtakes.

One shall be taken - The word "taken" may mean either to be taken away
from the danger - that is, rescued, as Lot was [Luk
17:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#028), or to be taken away "by
death." Probably the latter is the meaning.

[Matthew 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 24:41</span></span>

Two women ... - Grinding in the East was performed, as it is now,
chiefly by hand. The millstones were about 2 feet in diameter and 12
foot in thickness. The lower one was fixed, and the upper one was turned
by a handle or crank. This was done by two persons, who sat opposite to
each other. One took hold of the mill-handle and turned it half-way
round; the other then seized it and completed the revolution. This was
done by women - by servants of the lowest order - and was a very
laborious employment. See [Exo 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#005);
[Job 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#010); [Isa
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#002); [Jdg
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#021). The meaning of this verse is
similar to the former. Of two persons sitting near each other, one shall
be taken and the other. left. The calamity would be sudden, and would
come upon them before they were aware.

[Matthew 24:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 24:42</span></span>

Watch - Be looking for his coming. Be expecting it as near; as a great
event; as coming in an unexpected manner. Watch the signs of his coming,
and be ready.

[Matthew 24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 24:43</span></span>

But know this ... - If a man knew the hour, or "about the hour," when a
robber would come, he would be ready for him. So you know not the exact
hour, but you know it is near, when the Son of man will come. He will
come suddenly, as a thief comes, without giving previous warning, [Th1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002); [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010); [Rev
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003); [Rev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015). "Goodman." See the notes at
[Mat 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#011).

Thief - A robber. A thief, with us, means one who takes goods without
doing violence - secretly, silently. The original word means one who
does it by housebreaking, or by highway violence, [Luk
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030).

Broken up - Broken into either by the doors or windows. See the notes at
[Mat 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019).

In what watch - In which of the four quarters of the night. See the
notes at [Mat 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025).

[Matthew 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 24:44</span></span>

Be ye also ready - Luke [Luk 21:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#036)
says that he charged them to pray always, that they might be accounted
worthy to escape those things - the judgments coming upon the wicked -
and to stand before the Son of man - that is, to stand there approved by
him, or to be admitted to his favor. He also charged them [Luk
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034) to take heed and not to suffer
their hearts to be overcharged with surfeiting, or too much eating, or
drunkenness, or the cares of this life, lest that day should come upon
them unawares; things improper if there were no judgment - especially
mad and wicked when the judgment is near.

[Matthew 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 24:45</span></span>

This passage is, in fact, "a parable," though it is not expressly so
called. The design is to show that his disciples should act as if they
were each moment expecting his return. This he illustrates by the
conduct of a servant who did not expect his master soon to return, who
acted with great impropriety, and who was accordingly punished.

[Mat 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045)

Who, then, is a faithful and wise servant ... - By the conduct of a
faithful and wise servant Jesus intends to denote a faithful Christian,
a servant of God, or a teacher of religion.

Whom his lord - His master.

The word here has no reference to God. It means the "lord" or master of
the servant. Applied to Christian teachers, in the spiritual meaning of
the parable, it refers to "Christ," who has appointed them as teachers,
and who is their Lord and Master, [Joh
13:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013).

Over his household - His family. Christian ministers are the servants of
God appointed over the church, the family of Christ, [Th1
5:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#012); [Co1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005); [Co1
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001); [Co1
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028).

Meat in due season - The word "meat" here means food of all kinds. When
the Bible was translated into English, the word included, as the
original does, all kinds of provisions requisite to support and nourish
life.

In due season - As they need it, or in the accustomed times. This was
the office of a steward. Among the ancients this office was often filled
by a "slave" - one who had shown himself trusty and faithful. The duty
was to have a general superintendence over the affairs of the family.
Applied to Christian ministers, it means that they are to feed the flock
of God, to "minister" to their needs, and to do it as they need it, [Joh
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015); [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028); [Co1
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001).

[Mat 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#047)

Shall make him ruler ... - Shall confirm his appointment over his
household, and, as a reward, shall place him over all his property.

This does not mean that ministers will have a higher rank or office, but
is a circumstance of "the parable" or story, designed to show the effect
of faithfulness. Faithful servants of Christ shall be rewarded. This
will be done by His approbation, and by the rewards of the heavenly
world.

[Mat 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048)

That evil servant - If that servant, so appointed, having this office,
should be evil or wicked.

Say in his heart - Secretly suppose.

Delayeth his coming - Will not return in a long time; or does not return
as soon as was expected, and perhaps may not at all.

[Mat 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#049)

Smite his fellow-servants ... - This is the conduct of a wicked servant,
who, supposing he would not be called to account, and abusing his
authority, gave himself up to oppression, carousing, and debauchery.

It is designed to represent the conduct of ministers who are unfaithful
and overbearing, and who abuse their trust in the church.

[Mat 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#051)

Shall cut him asunder - This kind of punishment was anciently practiced.

Sometimes it was done by the sword. sometimes by saws. It was practiced
among the Chaldeans [Dan 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005); [Dan
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029), and among the Hebrews, [Sa2
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031); [Sa1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033); [Kg1
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#025); [Heb
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037). It was also practiced by the
Egyptians and Romans. It is not, perhaps, here to be taken literally,
but signifies that the wicked servant should be severely punished.

Hypocrites - See the notes at [Mat
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002). They are spoken of here as the
worst of people.

Weeping and gnashing of teeth - See the notes at [Mat
8:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012). The unfaithful and wicked
minister of God, who lives without expectation or fear of judgment,
shall suffer the severest punishment inflicted on sinners in the world
of woe.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 25](mat025)

</div>
