<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat006)  [Next](mat008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)

[Matthew 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 7:1</span></span>

Judge not ... - This command refers to rash, censorious, and unjust
judgment. See [Rom 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001). Luke [Luk
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037) explains it in the sense of
"condemning." Christ does not condemn judging as a magistrate, for that,
when according to justice, is lawful and necessary. Nor does he condemn
our "forming an opinion" of the conduct of others, for it is impossible
"not" to form an opinion of conduct that we know to be evil. But what he
refers to is a habit of forming a judgment hastily, harshly, and without
an allowance for every palliating circumstance, and a habit of
"expressing" such an opinion harshly and unnecessarily when formed. It
rather refers to private judgment than "judicial," and perhaps primarily
to the customs of the scribes and Pharisees.

[Matthew 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 7:2</span></span>

With what judgment ... - This was a proverb among the Jews. It expressed
a truth; and Christ did not hesitate to adopt it as conveying his own
sentiments. It refers no less to the way in which people will judge of
us, than to the rule by which God will judge us. See [Sa2
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#027); [Mar
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#024); [Jam
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013).

Mete - Measure. You shall be judged by the same rule which you apply to
others.

[Matthew 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 7:3</span></span>

And why beholdest thou the mote ... - A mote signifies any "light
substance," as dry chaff, or fine spires of grass or grain. It probably
most usually signified the small "spiculae" or "beards" on a head of
barley or wheat. It is thus placed in opposition to the word "beam."

Beam - The word used here signifies a large piece of squared timber. The
one is an exceedingly small object, the other a large one. The meaning
is, that "we are much more quick and acute to judge of small offences in
others, than of much larger offences in ourselves." Even a very "small"
object in the eye of another we discern much more quickly than a much
larger one in our own; a small fault in our neighbor we see much more
readily than a large one in ourselves. This was also a proverb in
frequent use among the Jews, and the same sentiment was common among the
Greeks, and deserves to be expressed in every language.

[Matthew 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 7:5</span></span>

Thou hypocrite, first cast out ... - Christ directs us to the proper way
of forming an opinion of ethers, and of reproving and correcting them.
By first amending our own faults, or casting the beam out of our eye, we
can "consistently" advance to correct the faults of others. There will
then be no hypocrisy in our conduct. We shall also "see clearly" to do
it. The beam, the thing that obscured our sight, will be removed, and we
shall more clearly discern the "small" object that obscures the sight of
our brother. The sentiment is, that the readiest way to judge of the
imperfections of others is to be free from greater ones ourselves. This
qualifies us for judging, makes us candid and consistent, and enables us
to see things as they are, and to make proper allowances for frailty and
imperfection.

[Matthew 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 7:6</span></span>

Give not that which is holy ... - By some the word "holy" has been
supposed to mean "flesh offered in sacrifice," made holy, or separated
to a sacred use; but it probably means here "anything connected with
religion" - admonition, precept, or doctrine. Pearls are precious stones
found in shell-fish, chiefly in India, in the waters that surround
Ceylon. They are used to denote anything especially precious, [Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004); [Rev
18:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012); [Mat
13:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#045). In this place they are used to
denote the doctrines of the gospel. "Dogs" signify people who spurn,
oppose, and abuse that doctrine; people of special sourness and
malignity of temper, who meet it like growling and quarrelsome curs,
[Phi 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002); [Pe2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022); [Rev
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015). "Swine" denote those who would
trample the precepts underfoot; people of impurity of life; those who
are corrupt, polluted, profane, obscene, and sensual; those who would
not know the value of the gospel, and who would tread it down as swine
would pearls, [Pe2 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022); [Pro
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022). The meaning of this proverb,
then, is, do not offer your doctrine to those violent and abusive people
who would growl and curse you; nor to those especially debased and
profligate who would not perceive its value, would trample it down, and
would abuse you. This verse furnishes a beautiful instance of what has
been called the "introverted parallelism." The usual mode of poetry
among the Hebrews, and a common mode of expression in proverbs and
apothegms, was by the parallelism, where one member of a sentence
answered to another, or expressed substantially the same sense with some
addition or modification. See the Introduction to the Book of Job.
Sometimes this was alternate, and sometimes it was introverted - where
the first and fourth lines would correspond, and the second and third.
This is the case here. The dogs would tear, and not the swine; the swine
would trample the pearls under their feet, and not the dogs. It may be
thus expressed:

Give not that which is holy unto the dogs,

Neither cast ye your pearls before swine,

Lest they (that is, the swine) trample them under their feet,

And turn again (that is, the dogs) and rend you.

[Matthew 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 7:7</span></span>

Ask, and it shall be given you ... - There are here three different
forms presented of seeking the things which we need from God - asking,
'seeking, and knocking. The latter is taken from the act of knocking at
a door for admittance. See [Luk 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#025);
[Rev 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020). The phrases signify to seek
with earnestness, diligence, and perseverance. The promise is, that what
we seek shall be given us. It is of course implied that we seek with a
proper spirit, with humility, sincerity, and perseverance. It is
implied, also, that we ask the things which it may be consistent for God
to give - that is, things which he has promised to give, and which would
be best for us, and most for his own honor, [Jo1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014). Of that God is to be the judge.
And here there is the utmost latitude which a creature can ask. God is
willing to provide for us, to forgive our sins, to save our souls, to
befriend us in trial, to comfort us in death, to extend the gospel
through the world. Man "can" ask no higher things of God; and these he
may ask, assured that he is willing to grant them.

Christ encourages us to do this by the conduct of parents. No parent
turns away his child with that which would be injurious. He would not
give him a stone instead of bread, or a serpent instead of a fish. God
is better and kinder than the most tender earthly parents; and with what
confidence, therefore, may we come as his children, and ask what we
need! Parents, he says, are evil; that is, are imperfect, often partial,
and not unfrequently passionate; but God is free from all this, and
therefore is ready and willing to aid us.

Every one that asketh receiveth - That is, every one that asks aright;
that prays in faith, and in submission to the will of God. He does not
always give the very thing which we ask, but he gives what would be
better. A parent will not always confer the "very thing" which a child
asks, but he will seek the welfare of the child, and give what he thinks
will be most for its good. Paul asked that the thorn from his flesh
might be removed. God did not "literally" grant the request, but told
him that his "grace" should be "sufficient" for him. See the notes at
[Co2 12:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007).

A fish - A fish has some resemblance to a serpent; yet no parent would
attempt to deceive his child in this. So God will not give to us that
which might appear to be of use, but which would be injurious.

[Matthew 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 7:12</span></span>

All things whatsoever ... - This command has been usually called the
"Saviour's golden rule," a name given to it on account of its great
value. All that you "expect" or "desire" of others in similar
circumstances, do to them. Act not from selfishness or injustice, but
put yourself in the place of the other, and ask what you would expect of
him. This would make you impartial, candid, and just. It would destroy
avarice, envy, treachery, unkindness, slander, theft, adultery, and
murder. It has been well said that this law is what the balance-wheel is
to machinery. It would prevent all irregularity of movement in the moral
world, as that does in a steam-engine. It is easily applied, its justice
is seen by all people, and all must acknowledge its force and value.

This is the law and the prophets - That is, this is the sum or substance
of the Old Testament. It is nowhere found in so many words, but if is a
summary expression of all that the law required. The sentiment was in
use among the Jews. Hillel, an ancient Rabbi, said to a man who wished
to become a proselyte, and who asked him to teach him the whole law,
"Whatever is hateful to you, do not do to another." Something of the
same sentiment was found among the ancient Greeks and Romans, and is
found in the writings of Confucius.

[Matthew 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 7:13</span></span>

Enter ye in at the strait gate - Christ here compares the way to life to
an entrance through a gate. The words "straight" and "strait" have very
different meanings. The former means "not crooked;" the latter, "pent
up, narrow, difficult to be entered." This is the word used here, and it
means that the way to heaven is "pent up, narrow, close," and not
obviously entered. The way to death is open, broad, and thronged. The
Saviour here referred probably to ancient cities. They were surrounded
with walls and entered through gates. Some of those, connected with the
great avenues to the city, were broad and admitted a throng; others, for
more private purposes, were narrow, and few would be seen entering them.
So, says Christ, is the path to heaven. It is narrow. It is not "the
great highway" that people tread. Few go there. Here and there one may
be seen - traveling in solitude and singularity. The way to death, on
the other hand, is broad. Multitudes are in it. It is the great highway
in which people go. They fall into it easily and without effort, and go
without thought. If they wish to leave that and go by a narrow gate to
the city, it would require effort and thought. So, says Christ,
"diligence" is needed to enter life. See [Luk
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024). None go of course. All must
strive, to obtain it; and so narrow, unfrequented, and solitary is it,
that few find it. This sentiment has been beautifully versified by
Watts:

"Broad is the road that leads to death,

And thousands walk together there;

But wisdom shows a narrower path,

With here and there a traveler."

[Matthew 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 7:15</span></span>

False prophets - The word prophet originally means one who foretells
future events. As prophets, however, were commonly regarded as public
instructors on the subject of religion, the word came to denote all who
were religious teachers. See the notes at [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006). In this sense it is probably
used here. A false prophet is a teacher of incorrect doctrine, or one
falsely and unjustly laying claims to divine inspiration. It probably
had reference to the false teachers then among the Jews.

Who come in sheep's clothing - The sheep is an emblem of innocence,
sincerity, and harmlessness. To come in sheep's clothing is to assume
the appearance of sanctity and innocence, when the heart is evil.

Ravening wolves - Rapacious; voraciously devouring; hungry even to rage.
Applied to the false teachers, it means that they assumed the appearance
of holiness in order that they might the more readily get the property
of the people. They were full of extortion and excess. See [Mat
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025).

[Matthew 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 7:16</span></span>

Ye shall know them by their fruits - The Saviour gives the proper test
of their character. People do not judge of a tree by its leaves, or
bark, or flowers, but by the fruit which it bears. The flowers may be
beautiful and fragrant, the foliage thick and green; but these are
merely ornamental. It is the "fruit" that is of chief service to man;
and he forms his opinion of the nature and value of the tree by that
fruit. So of pretensions to religion. The profession may be fair; but
the "conduct" - the fruit - is to determine the nature of the
principles.

[Matthew 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 7:17</span></span>

A corrupt tree - The word "corrupt" here does not signify, as our
translation would seem to indicate, that the tree "had been" good, but
had become "vitiated;" but that it was a tree of a useless character, of
a nature that produced nothing beneficial.

[Matthew 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 7:21</span></span>

Not every one that saith ... - The Saviour goes on to say that many, on
the ground of a mere profession such as he had just referred to, would
claim admittance into his kingdom. Many would plead that they had done
miracles, and preached or prophesied much, and on the ground of that
would demand an entrance into heaven. The power of working miracles had
no necessary connection with piety. God may as well, if he chooses, give
the power of raising the dead to a wicked man, as the skill of healing
to a wicked physician. A miracle is a display "of his own power" through
the medium of another. An act of healing the sick is also a display of
"his power" through the agency of another. In neither of these cases is
there any necessary connection with moral character. So of preaching or
prophesying. God may use the agency of a man of talents, though not
pious, to carry forward His purposes. Saving power on the mind is the
work of God, and he may convey it by any agency which he chooses.
Accordingly, many may be found in the day of judgment who may have been
endowed with powers of prophecy or miracle, as Balaam or the magicians
of Egypt; in the same way as many people of distinguished talents may be
found, yet destitute of piety, and who will be shut out of his kingdom.
See [Mat 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021); [Co1
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026); [Co1
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001). In this last place Paul says
that, though he spoke with the tongue of angels, and had the gift of
prophecy, and could remove mountains, and had nor charity or love, all
would be of no avail. See the notes at [Co1
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001).

[Matthew 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 7:22</span></span>

In that day - That is, in the last day, the day of judgment; the time
when the principles of all pretenders to prophecy and piety shall be
tried.

[Matthew 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 7:23</span></span>

Profess unto them - Say unto them; plainly declare.

I never knew you - That is, I never approved of your conduct; never
loved you; never regarded you as my friends. See [Psa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006); [Ti2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019); [Co1
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#003). This proves that, with all their
pretensions, they had never been true followers of Christ. Jesus will
not then say to false prophets and false professors of religion that he
had once known them and then rejected them; that they had been once
Christians and then had fallen away; that they had been pardoned and
then had apostatized but that he had never known them - they had never
been true christians. Whatever might have been their pretended joys,
their raptures, their hopes, their self-confidence, their visions, their
zeal, they had never been regarded by the Saviour as his true friends. I
do not know of a more decided proof that Christians do not fall from
grace than this text. It settles the question; and proves that whatever
else such people had, they never had any true religion. See [Jo1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019).

[Matthew 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 7:24</span></span>

Jesus closes the sermon on the mount by a beautiful comparison,
illustrating the benefit of attending to his words. It was not
sufficient to "hear" them; they must be "obeyed." He compares the man
who should hear and obey him to a man who built his house on a rock.
Palestine was to a considerable extent a land of hills and mountains.
Like other countries of that description, it was subject to sudden and
violent rains. The Jordan, the principal stream, was annually swollen to
a great extent, and became rapid and furious in its course. The streams
which ran among the hills, whose channels might have been dry during
some months of the year, became suddenly swollen with the rain, and
would pour down impetuously into the plains below. Everything in the way
of these torrents would be swept off. Even houses, erected within the
reach of these sudden inundations, and especially if founded on sand or
on any unsolid basis, would not stand before them. The rising, bursting
stream would shake it to its foundation; the rapid torrent would
gradually wash away its base; it would totter and fall. Rocks in that
country were common, and it was easy to secure for their houses a solid
foundation. No comparison could, to a Jew, have been more striking. So
tempests, and storms of affliction and persecution, beat around the
soul. Suddenly, when we think we are in safety, the heavens may be
overcast, the storm may lower, and calamity may beat upon us. In a
moment, health, friends, comforts may be gone. How desirable, then, to
be possessed of something that the tempest cannot reach! Such is an
interest in Christ, reliance on his promises, confidence in his
protection, and a hope of heaven through his blood. Earthly calamities
do not reach these; and, possessed of religion, all the storms and
tempests of life may beat harmlessly around us.

There is another point in this comparison. The house built upon the sand
is beat upon by the floods and rains; its foundation gradually is worn
away; it falls, and is borne down the stream and is destroyed. So falls
the sinner. The floods are wearing away his sandy foundation; and soon
one tremendous storm shall beat upon him, and he and his hopes shall
fall, for ever fall. Out of Christ; perhaps having "heard" his words
from very childhood; perhaps having taught them to others in the Sunday
school; perhaps having been the means of laying the foundation on which
others shall build for heaven, he has laid for himself no foundation,
and soon an eternal tempest shall beat around his naked soul. How great
will be that fall! What will be his emotions when sinking forever in the
flood, and when he realizes that he is destined forever to live and
writhe in the peltings of that ceaseless storm that shall beat when "God
shall rain snares, fire, and a horrible tempest" upon the wicked!

[Matthew 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 7:28</span></span>

His doctrine - His teaching.

As one having authority, and not as the scribes - The scribes were the
learned people and teachers of the Jewish nation, and were principally
Pharisees. They taught chiefly the sentiments of their Rabbis, and the
traditions which had been delivered; they consumed much of their time in
useless disputes and "vain jangling." Jesus was open, plain, grave,
useful, delivering truth as "became" the oracles of God; not spending
his time in trifling disputes and debating questions of no importance,
but confirming his doctrine by miracles and argument; teaching "as
having power," as it is in the original, and not in the vain and foolish
manner of the Jewish doctors. He showed that he had authority to
explain, to enforce, and to "change" the ceremonial laws of the Jews. He
came with authority such as no "man" could have, and it is not
remarkable that his explanations astonished them. From this chapter we
may learn,

1\. The evil of censorious judging, [Mat
7:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001). We cannot see the heart. We
have ourselves possibly greater faults than the persons that we condemn.
They may possibly be of a different kind; but it is nevertheless not
uncommon for persons to he very censorious toward faults in others,
which they have to much greater extent themselves.

2\. We see how we are to treat people who are opposers of the gospel,
[Mat 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006). We are not to present it to
them when we know they will despise it and abuse us. We should, however,
be cautious in forming that opinion of them. Many people may be far more
ready to hear the gospel than we imagine, and a word seasonably and
kindly spoken may be the means of saving them, [Pro
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#011); [Ecc
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#006). We should not meet violent and
wicked opposers of the gospel with a harsh, overbearing, and lordly
spirit - a spirit of dogmatizing and anger; nor should we violate the
laws of social contact under the idea of "faithfulness." Religion gains
nothing by outraging the established laws of social life, [Pe1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008). If people will not hear us when
we speak to them kindly and respectfully, we may be sure they will not
when we abuse them and become angry. We harden them against the truth,
and confirm them in the opinion that religion is of no value. Our
Saviour was always mild and kind, "and in not a single instance did he
do violence to the laws of social intercourse, or fail in the respect
due from one man to another." When with harshness people speak to their
superiors; when they abuse them with unkind words, coarse epithets, and
unfeeling denunciations; when children and youth forget their station,
and speak in harsh, authoritative tones to the aged, they are violating
the very first principles of the gospel - meekness, respect, and love.
Give honor to whom honor is due, and be kind, be courteous.

3\. Christ gives special encouragement to prayer, [Mat
7:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007). Especially his remarks apply
to the young. What child is there that would not go to his parent and
ask him for things which were necessary? What child doubts the
willingness of a kind parent to give what he thinks will be best for
him? But God is more willing to give than the best parent. We need of
"him" gifts of far more importance than we ever can of an earthly
father. None but God can forgive, enlighten, sanctify, and save us. How
strange that many ask favors of an "earthly" parent daily and hourly,
and never ask of the Great Universal Father a single blessing for time
or eternity!

4\. There is danger of losing the soul, [Mat
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013). The way to ruin is broad; the
path to heaven is narrow. People naturally and readily go in the former;
they never go in the latter without design. When we enter on the journey
of life, we naturally fall into the broad and thronged way to ruin. Our
original propensity, our native depravity, our disinclination to God and
religion, lead us to that, and we never leave it without effort. How
much more natural to tread in a way in which multitudes go, than in one
where there are few travelers, and which requires an effort to find it!
And how much danger is there that we shall continue to walk in that way
until it terminates in our ruin! No one is saved without effort. No one
enters on the narrow way without design; no one by following his natural
inclination and propensities. And yet how indisposed we are to effort!
how unwilling to listen to the exhortations which would call us from the
broad path to a narrower and less frequented course! How prone are
people to feel that they are safe if they are with the many, and that
the multitude that attend them constitute a safeguard from danger!

"Encompassed by a throng,

On 'numbers' they depend;

They say so many can't be wrong,

And miss a happy end."

Yet did God ever spare a guilty city because it was large? Did he save
the army of Sennacherib from the destroying angel because it was mighty?
Does he hesitate to cut people down by the plague, the pestilence, and
by famine, because they are numerous? Is he deterred from consigning
people to the grave because they swarm upon the earth, and because a
mighty throng is going to death? So in the way to hell. Not numbers, nor
power, nor might, nor talent will make that way safe; nor will the path
to heaven be a dangerous road because few are seen traveling there. The
Saviour knew and felt that people are in danger; and hence, with much
solemnity, he warned them when he lived, and now warns us, to strive to
enter in at the narrow gate.

5\. Sincerity is necessary in religion, [Mat
7:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015). Profession is of no value
without it. God sees the heart, and the day is near when He will cut
down and destroy all those who do not bring forth the fruits of
righteousness in their lives. If in anything we should be honest and
sincere, surely it should be in the things of religion. God is never
deceived [Gal 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007), and the things of
eternity are of too much consequence, to be lost by deluding ourselves
or others. We may deceive our fellowmen, but we do not deceive our
Maker; and soon He will strip off our thin covering, and show us as we
are to the universe. If anything is of prominent value in religion, it
is "honesty" - honesty to ourselves, to our fellow-men, and to God. Be
willing to know the worst of your case. Be willing to be thought of, by
God and people, "as you are." Assume nothing which you do not possess,
and pretend to nothing which you have not. Judge of yourselves as you do
of others - not by words and promises, but by the life. Judge of
yourselves as you do of trees; not by leaves and flowers, but by the
fruit.

6\. We may learn the importance of building our hopes of heaven on a
firm foundation, [Mat 7:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024). No
other foundation can any man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, [Co1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011). He is the tried
Corner Stone, [Pe1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006); [Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020). On an edifice raised on that
foundation the storms of persecution and calamity will beat in vain.
Hopes thus reared will sustain us in every adversity, will remain
unshaken by the terrors of death, and will secure us from the tempests
of wrath that shall beat upon the guilty. How awful, in the day of
judgment, will it be to have been deceived! How dreadful the shock to
find then that the house has been built on the sand! How dreadful the
emotions, to see our hopes totter on the brink of ruin; to see sand
after sand washed away, and the dwelling reel over the heaving deep, and
fall into the abyss to rise no more! Ruin, awful and eternal ruin,
awaits those who thus deceive themselves, and who trust to a name to
live, while they are dead.

7\. Under what obligations are we for this "Sermon on the Mount!" In all
languages there is not a discourse to be found that can be compared with
it for purity, and truth, and beauty, and dignity. Were there no other
evidence of the divine mission of Christ, this alone would be sufficient
to prove that he was sent from God. Were these doctrines obeyed and
loved, how pure and peaceful would be the world! How would hypocrisy be
abashed and confounded! How would impurity hang its head! How would
peace reign in every family and nation! How would anger and wrath flee!
And how would the race - the lost and benighted tribes of people, the
poor, and needy, and sorrowful - bend themselves before their common
Father, and seek peace and eternal life at the hands of a merciful and
faithful God!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 8](mat008)

</div>
