<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nahum Index](nah)  
  [Previous](mic007)  [Next](nah001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

[Nahum](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">nah 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Nahum

The prophecy of Nahum is both the complement and the counterpart of the
Book of Jonah. When Moses had asked God to show him His glory, and God
had promised to let him see the outskirts of that glory, and to proclaim
the Name of the Lord before him, "the Lord," we are told, "passed by
before him and proclaimed, "The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, longsuffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and
that will by no means clear the guilty" [Exo
34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006). God proclaimed at once His
mercy and His justice. Those wondrous words echo along the whole patch
of the Old Testament. Moses himself [Num
14:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#017), David [Psa
86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015); [Psa
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008); [Psa
145:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#008), other Psalmists [Psa
111:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#004); [Psa
112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004); [Psa
116:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#005), Jeremiah [Jer
32:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018), Daniel [Dan
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#004), Nehemiah [Neh
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017) all pled to God or recounted some
words in thanksgiving. Joel repeated such words as a motive for
repentance [Joe 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013). Upon the
repentance of Nineveh, Jonah had recited to God the bright side of His
declaration of Himself, "I knew that Thou art a gracious God and
merciful, slow to anger and of great goodness" [Jon
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#002), repeating to God His words to
Moses, and adding a change of heart concerning the harm. Nineveh, as
appears from Nahum, had fallen back into the violence of which it had
repented. Nahum then, in reference to that declaration of Jonah, begins
by setting forth the awful side of the attributes of God. First, in a
stately rhythm, which, in the original, reminds us of the gradual
Psalms, he enunciates the solemn threefold declaration of the severity
of God to those who will be His enemies.

A jealous God and Avenger is the Lord:

An Avenger is the Lord, and lord of wrath;

An Avenger is the Lord to His adversaries:

And a Reserver of wrath to His enemies.

[Nah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#002)

Then, Naham too recites that character of mercy recorded by Moses, "The
Lord is slow to anger, and great in power" [Nah
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003). But anger, although slow, comes,
he adds, not the less certainly on the guilty; "and will not at all
clear the guilty" [Nah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003). The
iniquity is full. As a whole, there is no more room for repentance.
Nineveh had had its prophet, and had been spared, and had sunk back into
its old sins. The office of Nahum is to pronounce its sentence. That
sentence is fixed. "There is no healing of thy bruise" [Nah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019). Nothing is said of its ulterior
conversion or restoration. On the contrary, Nahum says, "He will make
the place thereof an utter desolation" [Nah
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008).

The sins of Nineveh spoken of by Nahum are the same as those from which
they had turned at the preaching of Jonah. In Jonah, it is, "the
violence of their hands" [Jon 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#008).
Nahum describes Nineveh as "a dwelling of lions, filled with prey and
with ravin, the feeding-place of young lions, where the lion tore enough
for his whelps" [Nah 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011); "a city
of bloods, full of lies and robbery, from which the prey departeth not"
[Nah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#001).

But, amid this mass of evil, one thing was eminent, in direct antagonism
to God. The character is very special. It is not simply of rebellion
against God, or neglect of Him. It is a direct disputation of His
Sovereignty. Twice the prophet repeats the characteristic expression,
"What will ye devise against the Lord?" "devising evil against the
Lord;" and adds, "counselor of evil" [Nah
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#011). This was exactly the character
of Sennacherib, whose wars, like those of his forefathers, (as appears
from the cuneiform inscriptions . There were religious wars, and
Sennacherib blasphemously compared God to the local deities of the
countries, which his forefathers or himself had destroyed [Isa
36:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018); [Isa
37:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#010). Of this enemy Nahum speaks,
as having "gone forth;" out of thee (Nineveh) hath gone forth [Nah
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#011) one, devising evil against the
Lord, a counselor of Belial. This was past.

Their purpose was inchoate, yet incomplete. God challenges them, "What
will ye devise so vehemently against the Lord?" [Nah
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009). The destruction too is proximate.
The prophet answers for God, "He Himself, by Himself is already making
an utter end" [Nah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009). To Jerusalem
he turns, "And now I will break his yoke from off thee, and will break
his bonds asunder" [Nah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#013). Twice
the prophet mentions the device against God; each time he answers it by
the prediction of the sudden utter destruction of the enemy, while in
the most perfect security. "While they are intertwined as thorns, and
swallowed up as their drink, they are devoured as stubble fully dry"
[Nah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#010); and, "If they are perfect"
[Nah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#012), unimpaired in their
strength, "and thus many, even thus shall they be mown down." Their
destruction was to be, their numbers, complete. With no previous loss,
secure and at ease, a mighty host, in consequence of their prosperity,
all were, at one blow, mown down; "and he (their king, who counseled
against the Lord) shall pass away and perish."

"The abundance of the wool in the fleece is no hindrance to the shears,"
nor of the grass to the sythe, nor of the Assyrian host to the will of
the Lord, After he, the chief, had thus passed away, Nahum foretells
that remarkable death, in connection with the house of his gods; "Out of
the house of thy gods I will cut off the graven image and the molten
image: I will make thy grave" [Nah
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#014). There is no natural construction
of these words, except, "I will make it thy grave" . Judah too was, by
the presence of the Assyrian, hindered from going up to worship at
Jerusalem. The prophet bids to proclaim peace to Jerusalem; "keep thy
feasts - for the wicked shall no more pass through thee." It was then by
the presence of the wicked, that they were now hindered from keeping
their feasts, which could be kept only at Jerusalem.

The prophecy of Nahum coincides then with that of Isaiah, when Hezekiah
prayed against Sennacherib. In the history [Kg2
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#004), [Kg2
19:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#022), and in the prophecy of
Isaiah, the reproach and blasphemy and rage against God are prominent,
as an evil design against God is in Nahum. In Isaiah we have the
messengers sent to blaspheme [Isa
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#004), [Isa
37:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#023); in Nahum, the promise, that
"the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard." Isaiah prophesies
the fruitlessness of his attempt against Jerusalem [Isa
37:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#033); his disgraced return; his
violent death in his own land [Isa
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#007); Nahum prophesies the entire
destruction of his army, his own passing away, his grave. Isaiah, in
Jerusalem, foretells how the spontaneous fruits of the earth shall be
restored to them [Kg2 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#029); [Isa
37:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#030), and so, that they shall have
possession of the open corn-country; Nahum, living probably in the
country, foretells the free access to Jerusalem, and bids them to ([Nah
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015); [Nah
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001) ([Nah
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002) in Hebrew)) keep their feasts, and
perform the vows, which, in their trouble, they had promised to God. He
does not only foretell that they may, but he enjoins them to do it.

The words ([Nah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002) (verse 3 in
Hebrew)), "the emptiers have emptied them out and marred their vine
branches," may relate to the first expedition of Sennacherib, when, Holy
Scripture says, he "came up against all the fenced cities of Judah and
took them," and Hezekiah gave him "thirty talents of gold and 300
talents of silver" [Kg2 18:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013); [Isa
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001). Sennacherib himself says ,
"Hezekiah, king of Judah, who had not submitted to my authority,
forty-six of his principal cities, and fortresses and villages depending
upon them of which I took no account, I captured, and carried away their
spoil. And from these places I captured and carried off as spoil 200,
150 people," etc. This must relate to the first expedition, on account
of the exact correspondence of the tribute in gold, with a variation in
the number of the talents of silver, easily accounted for .

In the first invasion Sennacherib relates that he besieged Jerusalem. :
"Hezekiah himself I shut up in Jerusalem his capital city, like a bird
in a cage, building towers round the city to fence him in, and raising
banks of earth against the gates, so as to prevent escape." It is
perhaps in reference to this, that, in the second invasion, God promises
by Isaiah; "He shall not come into this city, and shall not shoot an
arrow there; and shall not present shield before it, and shall not cast
up bank against it" [Isa 37:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#033). Still,
in this second invasion also, Holy Scripture relates, that "the king of
Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with
a great army" [Isa 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002); [Kg2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017). Perhaps it is in regard to this
second expedition, that God says, "Though I have afflicted thee, I will
affict thee no more" [Nah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#012); i. e.,
this second invasion should not desolate her, like that first. Not that
God absolutely would not again afflict her, but not now. The yoke of the
Assyrian was then broken, until the fresh sins of Manasseh drew down
their own punishment.

Nahum then was a prophet for Judah, or for that remnant of Israel,
which, after the ten tribes were carried captive, became one with Judah,
not in temporal sovereignty, but in the one worship of God. His mention
of Basan, Carmel and Lebanon alone, as places lying under the rebuke of
God, perhaps implies a special interest in Northern Palestine. Judah may
have already become the name for the whole people of God who were left
in their own land, since those of the ten tribes who remained had now no
separate religious or political existence. The idol-center of their
worship was gone into captivity.

The old tradition agrees with this as to the name of the birthplace of
Nahum, "the Elkoshite." "Some think," says Jerome , "that Elcesaeus was
the father of Nahum, and, according to the Hebrew tradition, was also a
prophet; whereas Elcesi is even to this day a little village in Galilee,
small indeed, and scarcely indicating by its ruins the traces of ancient
buildings, yet known to the Jews, and pointed out to me too by my
guide." The name is a genuine Hebrew name, the "El," with which it
begins, being the name of God, which appears in the names of other towns
also as El'ale, Eltolad, Elteke Eltolem. The author of the short-lived
Gnostic heresy of the Elcesaites, called Elkesai, elkasai, elxai,
elxaios, Elkasaios , probably had his name from that same village.
Eusebius mentions Elkese, as the place "whence was Nahum the Elkesaean."
Cyril of Alexandria says, that Elkese was a village somewhere in Judaea.

On the other hand "Alcush," a town in Mosul, is probably a name of
Arabic origin, and is not connected with Nahum by any extant or known
writer, earlier than Masius toward the end of the 16th century , and an
Arabic scribe in 1713 . Neither of these mention the tomb. "The tomb,"
says Layard , "is a simple plaster box, covered with green cloth, and
standing at the upper end of a large chamber. The house containing the
tomb is a modern building. There are no inscriptions, nor fragments of
any antiquity near the place." The place is now reverenced by the Jews,
but in the 12th century Benjamin of Tudela supposed his tomb to be at
Ain Japhata, South of Babylon. Were anything needed to invalidate
statements more than 2000 years after the time of Nahum, it might
suffice that the Jews, who are the authors of this story, maintain that
not Jonah only but Obadiah and Jephthah the Gileadite are also buried at
Mosul .

Nor were the ten tribes placed there, but "in the cities of the Medes"
[Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006). The name Capernaum, "the
village of Nahum," is probably an indication of his residence in
Galilee. There is nothing in his language unique to the Northern tribes.
One very poetic word [Nah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#002); [Jdg
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022), common to him with the song of
Deborah, is not therefore a "provincialism," because it only happens to
occur in the rich, varied, language of two prophets of North Palestine.
Nor does the occurrence of a foreign title interfere with "purity of
diction" . It rather belongs to the vividness of his description.

The conquest of No-Ammon or Thebes and the captivity of its inhabitants,
of which Nahum speaks, must have been by Assyria itself. Certainly it
was not from domestic disturbances ; for Nahum says, that the people
were carried away captive [Nah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#010).
Nor was it from the Ethiopians ; for Nahum speaks of them, as her allies
[Nah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#009). Nor from the Carthaginians ;
for the account of Ammianus , that "when first Carthage was beginning to
expand itself far and wide, the Punic generals, by an unexpected inroad,
subdued the hundred-gated Thebes," is merely a mistaken gloss on a
statement of Diodorus, that "Hanno took Hekatompylos by siege;" a city,
according to Diodorus himself , "in the desert of Libya." Nor was it
from the Scythians ; for Herodotus, who alone speaks of their maraudings
and who manifestly exaggerates them, expressly says, that Psammetichus
induced the Scythians by presents not to enter Egypt ; and a wandering
predatory horde does not besiege or take strongly-fortified towns.

There remain then only the Assyrians. Four successive Assyrian Monarchs
Sargon, his son, grandson and great grandson, Sennacherib, Esarhaddon,
Asshur-bani-pal, from 718 b.c. to about 657 b.c., conquered in Egypt .
The hostility was first provoked by the encouragement given by Sabacho
the Ethiopian (Sab'e in the cuneiform inscriptions, S b k, in Egyptian),
the So of Holy Scripture , to Hoshea to rebel against Shalmaneser [Kg2
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#004). Sargon, who, according to his
own statement, was the king who actually took Samaria , led three
expeditions of his own against Egypt. In the first, Sargon defeated the
Egyptian king in the battle of Raphia ; in the second, in his seventh
year, he boasts that Pharaoh became his tributary ; in a third, which is
placed three years later, Ethiopia submitted to him .

A seal of Sabaco has been found at Koyunjik, which, as has been
conjectured , was probably annexed to a treaty. The capture of Ashdod by
the Tartan of Sargon, recorded by Isaiah [Isa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001), was probably in the second
expedition, when Sargon deposed its king Azuri, substituting his brother
Akhimit : the rebellion of Ashdod probably occasioned the third
expedition, in which as it seems, Isaiah's prophecy was fulfilled, that
Egyptians and Ethiopians, young and old, should be carried captive by
the king of Assyria. The king of Ashdod, Yaman, is related to have fled
to Egypt, which was subject to Merukha or Meroe; and to have been
delivered up by the king of Meroe who himself fled to some unnamed
desert afar, a march of (it is conjectured) months . The king of Meroe,
first, from times the most distant, became tributary. : "His forefathers
had not" in all that period "sent to the kings my ancestors to ask for
peace and to acknowledge the power of Merodach." The fact, that his
magnificent palace, "one of the few remains of external decoration,"
Layard says , "with which we are acquainted in Assyrian architecture,"
"seems" according to Mr. Fergusson, , "at first sight almost purely
Egyptian," implies some lengthened residence in Egypt or some capture of
Egyptian artists.

Of Sennacherib, the son of Sargon, Josephus writes , "Berosus, the
historian of the Chaldee affairs, mentions the king Sennacherib, and
that he reigned over the Assyrians, and that he warred against all Asia
and Egypt, saying as follows." The passage of Berosus itself is missing,
witether Josephus neglected to fill it in, or whether it has been
subsequently lost; but neither Chaldee nor Egyptian writers record
expeditions which were reverses; and although Beresus was a Babylonian,
not an Assyrian, yet the document, which he used, must have been
Assyrian. In the second expedition of Sennacherib, Rabshakeh, in his
message to Hezekiah, says, "Behold thou trustest upon the staff of this
bruised reed, upon Egypt" [Kg2 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#021).
The expression is remarkable. He does not speak of Egypt, as a power,
weak, frail, failing, but, passively, as crushed by another. It is the
same word and image which he uses in his prophecy of our Lord, "a
bruised reed (רצץ קנה qâneh râtsats) shall He not break," i. e., He
shall not break that which is already bruised. The word implies, then,
that the king of Egypt had already received some decided blow before the
second expedition of Sennacherib. The annals of Sennacherib's reign,
still preserved in his inscriptions, break off in the eighth of his
twenty-two years , and do not extend to the time of this second
expedition against Hezekiah . Nor does Holy Scripture say, in what year
this second expedition took place. In this he defeated "the kings of
Egypt and the king of Meroe at Altakou (Elteke) and Tamna (Timnatha)."

Sennacherib's son Esarhaddon appears for the time to have subdued Egypt
and Ethiopia, and to have held them as kingdoms dependent on himself.
"He acquired Egypt and the inner parts of Asia," is the brief statement
of Abydenus (i. e., of Berosus): "He established" (his son relates)
"twenty kings, satraps, governors in Egypt" , among which can be
recognized Necho, (the father of Psammetichus) king of Memphis and Sais;
a king of Tanis, or Zoan (now San); Natho (or, according to another
copy, Sept), Hanes, Sebennytus, Mendes, Bubastis, Siyout or Lycopolis,
Chemmis, Tinis, and No. These were all subordinate kings, for so he
entitles each separately in the list, although he sums up the whole ,
"These are the names of the Kings, Pechahs, Satraps who in Egypt obeyed
my father who begat me." Tearcho or Taracho himself, "king of Egypt and
Ethiopia" , was in like way subject to Esarhaddon. The account of the
revolt, which his son Asshur-bani-pal quelled, implies also a fixed
settlement in Egypt. The 20 kings were involved in the rebellion through
fear of Taracho, but there is notice of other servants of Esarhaddon who
remained faithful and were maltreated by Taraoho .

Asshur-bani-pal says also, that he strengthened his former garrisons .
One expedition of Esarhaddon (probably toward the close of his reign,
since he does not mention it in his own annals which extend over eight
years) is related by his son Asshur-bani-pal . "He defeated Tirhakah in
the lower country, after which, proceeding Southward, he took the city,
where the Ethiopian held his court," and assumed the title , "king of
the kings of Egypt and conqueror of Ethiopia." On another inscription in
a palace built for his son, at Tarbisi, now Sherif-khan, he entitles
himself "king of the kings of Egypt, Pathros, Ethiopia." We do not,
however, find the addition, which appears to recur upon every conquest
of a people not before conquered by Assyria, "which the kings, my
fathers, had not subdued." This addition is so regular, that the absence
of it, in itself, involves a strong probability of a previous conquest
of the country.

The subdual apparently was complete. They revolted at the close of the
reign of Esarhaddon (as his son Asshur-bani-pal relates) from fear of
Taracho rather than from any wish of their own to regain independence.
Asshur-bani-pal accordingly, after the defeat of Taracho, forgave and
restored them . Even the second treacherous revolt was out of fear, lest
Taracho shall return , upon the withdrawal of the Assyrian armies. This
second revolt and perhaps a subsequent revolt of Urdamanie a stepson of
Taracho, who succeeded him, Asshur-bani-pal seems to have subdued by his
lieutenants , without any necessity of marching in person against them.
Thebes was taken and retaken; but does not appear to have offered any
resistance. Taracho, upon his defeat at Memphis, fled to it, and again
abandoned it as he had Memphis, and the army of Asshur-bani-pal made a
massacre in it . Once more it was taken, when it had been recovered by
Urdamanie , and then, if the inscriptions are rightly deciphered,
strange as it is, the carrying off of men and women from it is mentioned
in the midst of that of "great horses and apes." "Silver, gold, metals,
stones, treasures of his palace, dyed garments, berom and linen, great
horses, men, male and female, immense apes - they drew from the midst of
the city, and brought as spoils to Nineveh the city of my dominion, and
kissed my feet."

All of those kings having been conquerors of Egypt, the captivity of No
might equally hav, e taken place under any of them. All of them employed
the policy, which Sargon apparently began, of transporting to a distance
those whom they had conquered . Yet it is, in itself, more probable,
that it was at the earlier than at the later date. It is most in harmony
with the relation of Nahum to Isaiah that, in regard to the conquest of
Thebes also, Nahum refers to the victory over Egypt and Ethiopia
foretold by Isaiah, when Sargon's general, the Tartan, was besieging
Ashdod. The object of Isaiah's prophecy was to undeceive Judah in regard
to its reliance on Egypt and Ethiopia against Assyria, which was their
continual bane, morally, religiously, nationally. But the prophecy goes
beyond any mere defeat in battle, or capture of prisoners. It relates to
conquest within Egypt itself. For Isaiah says, "the king of Assyria
shall lead into captivity Egyptians and Ethiopians, young and old" [Isa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#004). They are not their choice young
men, the flower of their army, but those of advanced age and those in
their first youth, such as are taken captive, only when a population
itself is taken captive, either in a marauding expedition, or in the
capture of a city. The account of the captivity of No exactly
corresponds with this. Nahum says nothing of its permanent subdual, only
of the captivity of its inhabitants. But Esarhaddon apparently did not
carry the Egyptians captive at all . Every fact given in the
Inscriptions looks like a permanent settlement. The establishment of the
20 subordinate kings, in the whole length and breadth of Egypt, implies
the continuance of the previous state of things, with the exception of
that subordination. No itself appears as one of the cities settled
apparently under its native though tributary king .

In regard to the fulfillment of prophecy, they who assume as an axiom,
or petitio principii, that there can be no prophecy of distant events,
have overlooked, that while they think that, by assuming the later date,
they bring Nahum's prophecy of the capture of Nineveh nearer to its
accomplishment, they remove in the same degree Isaiah's prophecy of the
captivity of Egyptians and Ethiopians, young and old, from its
accomplishment. "Young and old" are not the prisoners of a field of
battle; young and old of the Ethiopians would not be in a city of lower
Egypt. If Isaiah's prophecy was not fulfilled under Sargon or
Sennacherib, it must probably have waited for its fulfillment until this
last subdual by Asshurbanipal. For the policy of Esarhaddon and also of
Asshurbanipal, until repeated rebellions wore his patience, was of
settlement, not of deportation. If too the prophecy of Nahum were
brought down to the reign of Asshurbanipal, it would be the more
stupendous.

For the empire was more consolidated. Nahum tells the conqueror, flushed
with his own successes and those of his father, that he had himself no
more inherent power than the city whose people he had carried captive.
Thebes too, like Nineveh, dwelt securely, conquering all, unreached by
any ill, sea-girt, as it were, by the mighty river on which she rested.
She too was strengthened with countless hosts of her own and of allied
people. Yet she fell. Nineveh, the prophet tells her, was no mightier,
in herself. Her river was no stronger defense than that sea of fresh
water, the Nile; her tributaries would disperse or become her enemies.
The prophet holds up to her the vicissitudes of No-amon, as a mirror to
herself. As each death is a renewed witness to man's mortality, so each
marvelous reverse of temporal greatness is a witness to the
precariousness of other human might. No then was an ensample to Nineveh,
although its capture was by the armies of Nineveh. They had been, for
centuries, two rivals for power. But the contrast bad far more force,
when the victory over Egypt was fresh, than after 61 years of alternate
conquest and rebellion.

But, anyhow, the state of Nineveh and its empire, as pictured by Nahum,
is inconsistent with any times of supposed weakness in the reign of its
last king: the state of Judah, with reference to Assyria, corresponds
with that under Sennacherib but with none below. They are these. Assyria
was in its full unimpaired strength [Nah
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#012); [Nah
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012). She still blended those two
characters so rarely combined, but actually united in her and
subsequently in Babylon, of a great merchant and military people. She
had, at once, the prosperity of peace and of war. Lying on a great line
of ancient traffic, which bound together East and West, India with
Phoenicia, and with Europe through Phoenicia, both East and West poured
their treasures into the great capital, which lay as a center between
them, and stretched out its arms, alike to the Indian sea and the
Mediterranean. Nahum can compare its merchants only to that which is
countless by man, the locusts or the stars of heaven [Nah
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#016).

But amid this prosperity of peace, war also was enriching her. Nineveh
was still sending out its messengers (such as was Rabshakeh), the
leviers of its tribute, the demanders of submission. It was still one
vast lion-lair, its lions still gathering in prey from the whole earth
[Nah 2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012), still desolating,
continually, unceasingly, in all directions [Nah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019), and now, especially, devising
evil against God and His people [Nah
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009), [Nah
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#011). Upon that people its yoke
already pressed, for God promises to break it off from them [Nah
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#013); the people was already
afflicted, for God says to it, "Though I have afflicted thee, I will
afflict thee no more" [Nah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#012),
namely, by this invader. The solemn feasts of Judah were hindered
through the presence of ungodly invaders; Belial, the counselor of evil
spoken of under that name, already passing through her. War was around
her, for he promises that one should publish peace upon her mountains
[Nah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015). This was the foreground of
the picture. This was the exact condition of things at Hezekiah's second
invasion, just before the miraculous destruction of his army.
Sennacherib's yoke was heavy, for he had exacted from Hezekiah "three
hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold" [Kg2
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014); Hezekiah had not "two thousand
horsemen" [Kg2 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#023); the "great host"
[Kg2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017) of the Assyrians encircled
Jerusalem. They summoned it to surrender on the terms, that they should
pay a new tribute, and that Sennacherib, whenever it pleased him, should
remove them to Assyria [Kg2 18:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#031).

At no subsequent period were there any events corresponding to this
description. Manasseh was carried captive to Babylon by Esarhaddon; but
probably this was no formidable or resisted invasion, since the book of
Kings passes it over altogether, the Chronicles mention only that the
Assyrian generals took Manasseh prisoner in a thicket ([Ch2
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011), accordingly not in Jerusalem,
and carried him to Babylon. Probably, this took place, in the expedition
of Esarhaddon to the West, when he settled in the cities of Samaria
people of different nations, his captives [Ezr
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002), [Ezr
4:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009). The capture of Manasseh was
then, probably, a mere incident in the history. Since he was taken among
the thickets, he had probably fled, as Zedekiah did afterward, and was
taken in his place of concealment. This was simply personal. No taking
of towns is mentioned, no siege, no terror, no exaction of tribute, no
carrying away into captivity, except of the single Manasseh. The grounds
of his restoration are not mentioned.

The Chronicles mention only the religious aspect of his captivity and
his restoration, his sin and his repentance. But it seems probable that
he was restored by Esarhaddon, upon the same system of policy, on which
he planted subjects of his own in Samaria and the country around Zidon,
built a new town to take the place of Zidon, and joined in the throne of
Edom one, brought up in his own palace. For, when restored, Manasseh was
set at full liberty to fortify Jerusalem [Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014), as Hezekiah had done, and to
put "captains of war in all the cities of Judah" [Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014). This looks as if he was sent
back as a trusted tributary of Esarhaddon, and as a frontier-power
against Egypt. At least, 60 years afterward, we find Josiah, in the like
relation of trust to Nebuchadnezzar, resisting the passage of
Pharaoh-Necho. However, the human cause of his restoration must remain
uncertain. Yet clearly, in their whole history, there is nothing to
correspond to the state of Judaea, as described by Nahum.

A recent critic writes , "Nahum's prophecy must have been occasioned by
an expedition of mighty enemies against Nineveh. The whole prophecy is
grounded on the certain danger, to which Nineveh was given over; only
the way in which this visible danger is conceived of, in connection with
the eternal truths, is here the properly prophetic." Ewald does not
explain how the danger, to which "Nineveh was given over" was certain,
when it did not happen. The explanation must come to this. Nahum
described a siege of Nineveh and its issue, as certain. The description
in itself might be either of an actual siege, before the prophet's eyes,
or of one beheld in the prophet's mind. But obviously no mere man,
endowed with mere human knowledge, would have ventured to predict so
certainly the fall of such a city as Nineveh, unless it was "given over
to certain danger." But according to the axiom received in Ewald's
school, Nahum, equally with all other men, could have had only human
prescience.

Therefore, Nahum, prophesying the issue so confidently, must have
prophesied when Nineveh was so "given over." The a priori axiom of the
school rules its criticism. Meanwhile the admission is incidentally
made, that a prophecy so certain, had it related to distant events, was
what no man, with mere human knowledge, would venture upon. Ewald
accordingly thinks that the prophecy was occasioned by a siege of
Phraortes; which siege Nahum expected to be successful; which however
failed, so that Nahum was mistaken, although the overthrow which he
foretold came to pass afterward! The siege, however, of Nineveh by
Phraortes is a mere romance. Herodotus, who alone attributes to
Phraortes a war with Assyria, has no hint, that he even approached to
Nineveh. He simply relates that Phraortes "subdued Asia, going from one
nation to another, until, leading an army against the Assyrians, he
perished himself, in the second year of his reign, and the greater part
of his army."

It is not necessary to consider the non-natural expositions, by which
the simple descriptions of Nahum were distorted into conformity with
this theory, which has no one fact to support it. Herodotus even dwells
on the good condition of the Assyrian affairs, although isolated from
their revolted allies, and seemingly represents the victory as an easy
one. And, according to Herodotus, whose account is the only one we have,
Phraortes (even if he ever fought with the Ninevites, and Herodotus'
account is not merely the recasting of the history of another Median
Frawartish who, according to the Behistun Inscription, claimed the
throne of Media against Darius, and perished in battle with him ) had
only an unorganized army. Herodotus says of Cyaxares, his son , "He is
said to have been more warlike far than his forefathers, and he first
distributed Asiatics into distinct bands, and separated the spearmen and
archers and horsemen from one another, whereas, before, everything had
alike mixed into one confused mass." Such an undisciplined horde could
have been no formidable enemy for a nation, whom the monuments and their
history exhibit as so warlike and so skilled in war as the Assyrians.

Another critic, , then, seeing the untenableness of this theory,
ventures (as he never hesitated at any paradox) to place the prophet
Nahum, as an eye-witness of the first siege of Cyaxares.

Herodotus states that Cyaxares, the son of Phraortes, twice besieged
Nineveh. First, immediately after his father's death, to avenge it ; the
second, after the end of the Scythian troubles, when he took it . The
capture of Nineveh was in the first year of Nabopolassor 625 b.c. The
accession of Cyaxares, according to Herodotus, was 633 b.c. Eight years
then only elapsed between his first siege and its capture, and, if it be
true, that the siege lasted two years, there was an interval of six
years only. But, at this time, the destruction of Nineveh was no longer
a subject of joy to Judah. Since the captivity of Manasseh, Judah had
had nothing to fear from Assyria; nor do we know of any oppression from
it. Holy Scripture mentions none. The Assyrian monuments speak of
expeditions against Egypt; but there was no temptation to harass Judah,
which stood in the relation of a faithful tributary and an outwork
against Egypt, and which, when Nineveh fell, remained in the same
relation to its conquerors, into whose suzerainty it passed, together
with the other dependencies of Assyria. The relation of Josiah to
Babylon was the continuation of that of Manasseh to Esarhaddon.

The motive of this theory is explained by the words, "With a confidence,
which leaves room for no doubt, Nahum expects a siege and an ultimate
destruction of Nineveh. The security of his tone, nay that he ventures
at all to trope so enormous a revolution of the existing state of
things, must find its explanation in the circumstances of the time, out
of the then condition of the world; but not until Cyaxares reigned in
Media, did things assume an aspect, corresponding to this confidence."
It is well that this writer doffs the courteous language, as to the
"hopes," "expectations," "inferences from God's justice," and brings the
question to the issue, "there is such absolute certainty of tone," that
Nahum must have had either a divine or a human knowledge. He
acknowledges the untenableness of any theory width would account for the
prophecy of Nahum on any human knowledge, before Cyaxares was marching
against the gates of Nineveh. Would human knowledge have sufficed then?
Certainly, from such accounts as we have, Nineveh might still have stood
against Cyaxares and its own rebel and traitorous general, but for an
unforeseen event which man could not bring about, the swelling of its
river.

But, as usual, unbelief fixes itself upon that which is minutest,
ignores what is greatest. There are, in Nahum, three remarkable
predictions.

\(1\) The sudden destruction of Sennacherib's army and his own
remarkable death in the house of his god.

\(2\) The certain, inevitable, capture of Nineveh, and that, not by
capitulation or famine, not even by the siege or assault, which is
painted so vividly, but the river, which was its protection, becoming
the cause of its destruction.

\(3\) Its utter desolation, when captured. The first, people assume to
have been the description of events past; the second, the siege, they
assume to have been present; and that, when truman wisdom could foresee
its issue; the third, they generalize. The first is beyond the reach of
proof now. It was a witness of the Providence and just judgment of God,
to those days, not to our's. A brief survey of the history of the
Assyrian Empire will show, that the second and third predictions were
beyond human knowledge.

The Assyrian Empire dated probably from the ninth century before Christ.
Such, it has been pointed out, is the concurrent result of the
statements of Berosus and Herodotus. Moses, according to the simplest
meaning of his words, spake of the foundation of Nineveh as contemporary
with that of Babylon. "The beginning of the kingdom of Nimrod," he
relates, "was Babel and Erech, and Accad and Calneh, in the land of
Shinar. Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh" [Gen
10:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010). Oppressed probably and
driven forth by Nimrod, Asshur and his Semitic descendants went forth
from the plain of Shinar, the Babylonia of after-ages. Had Moses
intended to express (what some have thought), that Nimrod "went forth
out of that land to Assyria," he would doubtless have used the ordinary
style of connected narrative; "And he went forth thence." He would
probably also have avoided ambiguity, by expressing that Nimrod "went
forth to Asshur" [Gen 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018) using a
form, which he employs a little later. As it is, Moses has used a mode
of speech, by which, in Hebrew, a parenthetical statement would be made,
and he has not used the form, which occurs in every line of Hebrew
narrative to express a continued history. No one indeed would have
doubted that such was the meaning, but that they did not see, how the
mention of Asshur, a son of Shem, came to be anticipated in this account
of the children of Ham. This is no ground for abandoning the simple
construction of the Hebrew. It is but the history, so often repeated in
the changes of the world, that the kingdom of Nimrod was founded on the
expulsion of the former inhabitants. Nimrod began his kingdom; "Asshur
went forth."

It is most probable, from this same brief notice, that Nineveh was, from
the first, that aggregate of cities, which it afterward was. Moses says,
"And he builded Nineveh and Rehoboth-Ir and Calach and Resen, between
Nineveh and Calach; this is that great city" [Gen
10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011). This cannot be understood as
said exclusively of Nineveh; since Nineveh was mentioned first in the
list, of cities, and the mention of the three others had intervened;
and, in the second place where it is named, it is only spoken of
indirectly and subordinately; it is hardly likely to be said of Resen,
of whose unusual size nothing is elsewhere related. It seems more
probable, that it is said of the aggregate of cities, that they formed
together one great city, the very characteristic of Nineveh, as spoken
of in Jonah.

Nineveh itself lay on the Eastern side of the Tigris, opposite to the
present Mosul. In later times, among the Syrian writers, As shur becomes
the name for the country, distinct from Mesopotamia and Babylonia ,
front which it was separated by the Tigris, and bounded on the North by
Mount Niphates.

This distinction, however, does not occur until after the extinction of
the Assyrian empire. On the contrary, in Genesis, Asshur, in one place,
is spoken of as West of the Hiddekel or Tigris, so that it must at that
time have comprised Mesopotamia, if not all on this side of the Tigris,
i. e., Babylonia. In another place, it is the great border-state of
Arabia on the one side, as was Egypt on the other. The sons of Ishmael,
Moses relates, [Gen 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018), dwell from
Havilah unto Shur that is before Egypt, as thou goest to Assyria; i. e.,
they dwelt on the great caraven-route across the Arabian desert from
Egypt to Babylonia. Yet Moses mentions, not Babylon, but Asshur. In
Balaam's prophecy [Num 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#022), Asshur
stands for the great Empire, whose seat was at one time at Nineveh, at
another at Babylon, which should, centuries afterward, carry Israel
captive.

Without entering into the intricacies of Assyrian or Babylonian history
further than is necessary for the immediate object, it seems probable,
that the one or other of the sovereigns of these nations had an
ascendency over the others, according to his personal character and
military energy. Thus, in the time of Abraham, Chedorlaomer king of
Elam, in his expedition against the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, took
with him, as subordinate allies, the kings of Shinar, (or Babylon) and
Ellasar, as well as Tidal king of nations, a king probably of Nomadic
tribes. The expedition was to avenge the rebellion of the petty kings in
the valley of Siddim against Chedorlaomer, after they had been for
twelve years tributary. But, although the expedition closed with the
attack on the live kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboim, and Zoar,
its extent on the East side of the Jordan from Ashteroth Karnaim in
Basan to Elparan (perhaps Elath on the Red Sea), and the defeat of the
giant tribes, the Rephaim, Zuzim, Emim, Horites, the Amalekites and the
Amorites in their several abodes, seems to imply one of those larger
combinations against the aggressions of the East, which we meet with in
later times .

It was no insulated conflict which spread over nearly three degrees of
latitude. But it was the king of Elam, not the king of Babylon or of
Asshur, who led this expedition; and those other kings, according to the
analogy of the expeditions of Eastern monarchs, were probably dependent
on him. It has been observed that the inscriptions of a monarch whose
name partly coincides with that of Chedorlaomer, namely, Kudurmabuk, or
Kudurmapula, show traces of a Persian influence on the Chaldee
characters; but cuneiform decipherers having desponded of identifying
those monarchs , Chedorlaomer appears as yet only so far cOnnected with
Babylon, that its king was a tributary sovereign to him or a vice-king
like those of later times, of whom Sennacherib boasts, "Are not my
princes altogether kings?"

Assyria, at this time, is not mentioned, and so, since we know of its
existence at an earlier period, it probably was independent. Lying far
to the North of any of the nations here mentioned, it, from whatever
cause or however it may have been engaged, took no share in the war.
Subsequently also, down to a date almost contemporary with the Exodus,
it has been observed that the name of Asshur does not appear on the
Babylonian inscriptions, nor does it swell the titles of the king of
Babylon . A little later than the Exodus, however, in the beginning of
the 14th century b.c., Asshur and Egypt were already disputing the
country which lay between them. The account is Egyptian, and so, of
course, only relates the successes of Egypt. Thothmes III, in his
fortieth year, according to Mr. Birch, received tribute from a king of
Nineveh . In another monument of the same monarch, where the line,
following on the name Nineveh, is lost, Thothmes says that he "erected
his tablet in Naharaina (Mesopotamia) for the extension of the frontiers
of Kami" (Egypt). Amenophis III, in the same century, represented
Asiatic captives , with the names of Patens (Padan-Aram), Asuria,
Karukamishi (Carchemish"). "On another column are Saenkar (Shiner),
Naharaina, and the Khita (Hittites)." The mention of these contiguous
nations strengthens the impression that the details of the
interpretation are accurate. All these inscriptions imply that Assyria
was independent of Babylon. In one, it is a co ordinate power; in the
two others, it is a state which had measured its strength with Egypt,
under one of its greatest conquerors, though, according to the Egyptian
account, it had been worsted.

Another account, which has been thought to be the first instance of the
extension of Babylonian authority so far northward, seems to me rather
to imply the ancient self-government of Assyria. : "A record of
Tiglath-pileser I. declares him to have rebuilt a temple in the city of
Asshur, which had been taken down 60 years previously, after it had
lasted for 641 years frp, the date of its first foundation by
Shamas-Iva, son of Ismi-Dagon." Sir H. Rawlinson thinks that it is
probable (although only probable) , that this Ismi-Dagon is a king,
whose name occurs in the brick-legends of Lower Babylonia. Yet the
Ismi-Dagon of the bricks does not bear the title of king of Babylon, but
of king of Niffer only ; "his son," it is noticed, "does not take the
title of king; but of governor of Hur ."

The name Shamas-Iva nowhere occurs in connection with Babylonia, but it
docks recur, at a later period, as the name of an Assyrian Monarch .
Since the names of the Eastern kings so often continue on in the same
kingdom the recurrence of that name, at a later period, makes it even
probable, that Shamas-Iva was a native king. There is absolutely nothing
to connect his father Ismi-Dagon with the Ismi-Dagon king of Niffer,
beyond the name itself, which, being Semitic, may just as well have
belonged to a native king of Nineveh as to a king of Lower Babylonia.
Nay, there is nothing to show that Ismi-Dagon was not an Assyrian
Monarch who reigned at Niffer, for the name of his father is still
unknown; there is no evidence that his father was ever a king, or, if a
king, where he reigned. It seems to me in the last degree precarious to
assume, without further evidence, the identity of the two kings. It has,
further, yet to be shown that Lower Babylonia had, at that time, an
empire, as distinct from its own local sovereignty. We know from Holy
Scripture of Nimrod's kingdom in Shinar, a province distinct from
Elymais, Mesopotamia, Assyria, and probably Chaldaea. In Abraham's time,
1900 b.c., we find again a king of Shinar. Shinar again, it is supposed,
appears in Egyptian inscriptions, in the 14th century, b.c. ; and, if
so, still distinct from Mesopotamia and Assyria. But all this implies a
distinct kingdom, not an empire.

Again, were it ever so true, that Shamas-Iva was a son of a king in
Lower Babylonia, that be built a temple in Kileh-Shergat, as being its
king, and that he was king, as placed there by Ismi-Dagon, this would be
no proof of the continual dependence of Assyria upon Babylonia. England
did not continue a dependency of France, because conquered by William of
Normandy. How was Alexander's empire broken at once! Spain under Charles
the V was under one sovereignty with Austria; Spain with France had,
even of late, alike Bourbon kings. A name would, at most, show an
accidental, not a permanent, connection.

But there is, at present, no evidence implying a continued dependence of
Assyria upon Babylon. Two facts only have been alleged;

1\) that the cuneiform writing of inscriptions at Kileh-Shergat, 40
miles South of Nineveh, has a Babylonian character;

2\) that, on those bricks, four names have been found of inferior
Satraps.

But 1) the Babylonian character of the inscriptions would show a
dependence of civilization, not of empire. Arts flourished early at
Babylon, and so the graven character of the Inscriptions too may have
been curried to the rougher and warlike North. The garment, worked at
Babylon, was, in the 15th century b.c., exported as far as Palestine,
and was, for its beauty, the object of Achan's covetousness [Jos
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021).

2\) In regard to the satraps whose names are found on the bricks of
Kileh-Shergat, it does not appear, that they were tributary to Babylon
at all; they may, as far as it appears, have been simply inferior
officers of the Assyrian empire. Anyhow, the utmost which such a
relation to Babylon would evince, if ever so well established, would be
a temporary dependence of Kileh-Shergat itself, not of Nineveh or the
Assyrian kingdom. Further, the evidence of the duration of the
dependency would, be as limited at its extent. Four satraps would be no
evidence as to this period of 700 years, only a century less than has
elapsed since the Norman conquest. The early existence of an Assyrian
kingdom has been confirmed by recent cuneiform discoveries, which give
the names of 8 Assyrian kings, the earliest of whom is supposed to have
reigned about 3 12 centuries before the Commencement of the Assyrian
Empire .

The "empire," Herodotus says , "Assyria held in Upper Asia for 520
years;" Berosus , "for 526 years." The Cuneiform Inscriptions give much
the same result. Tiglath-pileser , who gives five years' annals of his
own victories, mentions his grandfather's grandfather, the 4th king
before him, as the king who "first organized the country of Assyria,"
who "established the troops of Assyria in authority." The expression,
"established in authority," if it may be pressed, relates to foreign
conquest. If this Tiglath-pileser be the same whom Sennacherib, in the
10th year of his own reign, mentions as having lost his gods to
Merodach-ad-akhi, king of Mesopotamia, 418 years before , then, since
Sennacherib ascended the throne about 703 b.c. , we should have 1112
b.c. for the latter part of the reign of Tiglath-pileser I, and counting
tills and the six preceding reigns at 20 years each , should have about
1252 b.c. for the beginning of the Assyrian empire. It has been
calculated that if the 526 years, assigned by Berosus to his 45 Assyrian
kings, are (as Polyhistor states Berosus to have meant) to be dated back
from the accession of Pul who took tribute from Menahem, and so from
between 770 b.c. and 760 b.c., they carry back the beginning of the
dynasty to about 1290 b.c. If they be counted, (as is perhaps more
probable) from the end of the reign of Pul [Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019), i. e., probably 747 b.c., "the
era of Nabonassar," the Empire would commence about 1273 b.c. Herodotus,
it has been shown , had much the same date in his mind, when he assigned
520 years to the Assyrian empire in upper Asia, dating back from the
revolt of the Medes. For he supposed this revolt to be 179 years
anterior to the death of Cyrus 529 b.c. (and so, 708 b.c.) plus a period
of anarchy before the accession of Deioces. Allowing 30 years for this
period of anarchy, we have 738 b.c. plus 520, i. e., 1258 b.c., for the
date of the commencement of Assyrian empire according to Herodotus.
Thus, the three testimonies would coincide in placing the beginning of
that Empire anyhow between 1258 and 1273 b.c.

But this Empire started up full-grown. It was the concentration of
energy and power, which had before existed. Herodotus' expression is
"rulers of Upper Asia." Tiglath-pileser attributes to his forefather,
that he "organized the country," and "established the armies of Assyria
in authority." The second king of that list takes the title of "ruler
over the people of Bel" , i. e., Babylonia. The 4th boasts to have
reduced "all the lands of the Magian world." Tiglath-pileser I claims to
have conquered large parts of Cappadocia, Syria from Tsukha to
Carchemish, Media and Muzr. According to the inscription at Bavian , he
sustained a reverse, and lost his gods to a king of Mesopotamia, which
gods were recovered by Sennacherib from Babylon. Yet this exception the
more proves that conquest was the rule. For, had there been subsequent
successful invasions of Assyria by Babylonia, the spoils of the 5th
century backward would not have been alone recovered or recorded. If the
deciphering of the Inscriptions is to be trusted, Nineveh was the
capital, even in the days el Tiglath-pileser I. For Sennacherib brought
the gods back, it is said, and put them in their places, i. e., probably
where he himself reigned, at Nineveh. Thence then they were taken in the
reign of Tiglath-pileser. Nineveh then was his capital also.

Of an earlier portion we have as yet but incidental notices; yet the
might of Assyria is attested by the presence of Assyrian names in the
Egyptian dynastic lists, whether the dynasties were themselves Assyrian,
or whether the names came in through matrimonial alliances between two
great nations .

With few exceptions, as far as appears from their own annals (and these
are in the later times confirmed by Holy Scripture), the Assyrian Empire
was, almost whenever we hear of it, one long series of victory and
rapine. It is an exception, if any monarch is peaceful, and content to
"repair the buildings" in his residence, "leaving no evidence of
conquest or greatness." Tiglathi-Nin, father of the warlike
Asshur-i-danipal or Sardanapalus, is mentioned only in his son's
monument , "among his warlike ancestors, who had carried their arms into
the Armenian mountains, and there set up stelae to commemorate their
conquests."

Civil wars there were, and revolutions. Conquerors and dynasties came to
an untimely end; there was parricide, fratricide; but the tide of war
and conquest rolled on. The restless warriors gave no rest. Sardanapalus
terms himself , "the conqueror from the upper passage of the Tigris to
Lebanon and the great sea, who all countries, from the rising of the sun
to the going down thereof, has reduced under his authority." His son,
Shalmanubar or Shalmaneser, in his thirty-five years of reign led, in
person twenty-three military expeditions. 20,000, 16,000, are the
numbers of his enemies left dead upon a field of battle with Benhadad
and Hazael . Cappadocia, Pontus, Armenia, Media, Babylonia, Syria,
Phoenicia , 15 degrees of longitude and 10 of latitude, save where the
desert or the sea gave him nothing to conquer, were the range of his
repeated expeditions.

He circled round Judaea. He thrice defeated Benhadad with his allies (on
several occasions, twelve kings of the Hittites). His own army exceeded
on occasions 100,000 fighting men. Twice he defeated Hazael. Israel
trader Jehu, Tyre, Sidon, 24 kings in Pontus, kings of the Hittites, of
Chaldaea, 27 kings of Persia are among his tributaries ; "the shooting
of his arrows struck terror," he says, "as far as the sea" (Indian
Ocean); "he put up his arrows in their quiver at the sea of the setting
sun." His son Shamesiva apparently subdued Babylonia, and in the West
conquered tribes near Mount Taurus, on the North the countries bordering
on Armenia to the South and East, the Medes beyond Mount Zagros, and
"the Zimri [Jer 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#025) in upper
Luristan." His son Ivalush III or IV received undisturbed tribute from
the kingdoms which his fathers conquered, and ascribes to his god Asshur
the grant of "the kingdom of Babylon to his son."

Thus "Assyria with one hand grasped Babylonia; with the other Philistia
and Edom; she held Media Proper, S. Armenia, possessed all Upper Syria,
including Commagene and Amanus, bore sway over all the whole Syrian
coast from Issus to Gaza, and from the coast to the desert."
Tiglath-pileser II and Shalmaneser are known to us as conquerors from
Holy Scripture . Tiglath-pileser, we are told from the inscriptions,
warred and conquered in Upper Mesopotamia, Armenia, Media, Babylonia,
drove into exile a Babyionian prince, destroyed Damascus, took tribute
from a Hiram king of Tyre, and from a Queen of the Arabs . And so it
continued, until nearly the close of the Monarchy.

The new dynasty which began with Sargon were even greater conquerors
than their predecessors. Sargon, in a reign of seventeen or nineteen
years, defeated the king of Elam, conquered in Iatbour beyond Elam,
reigned from Ras, a dependency on Elam, over Poukoud (Pekod), Phoenicia,
Syria, etc. to the river of Egypt, in the far Media to the rising sun,
in Scythia, Albania, Parthia, Van, Armenia, Colchis, Tubal to the
Moschi: he placed his lieutenants as governors over these countries, and
imposed tribute upon them, as upon Assyrians; he, probably, placed
Merodach-Baladan on the throne of Babylon, and after 12 years displaced
him; he reduced all Chaldaea under his rule; he defeated "Sebech (i. e.,
probably, So), Sultan of Egypt, so that he was heard of no more;" he
received tribute from the Pharaoh of Egypt, from a Queen of Arabia and
from Himyar the Sabaean. To him first the king of Meroe paid tribute. He
finally captured Samaria: he took Gaza, Kharkar, Arpad and Damascus,
Ashdod (which it cost Psammetichus 29 years to reconquer), and Tyre,
(which resisted Nebuchadnezzar for 13 years). He added to the Satrapy of
Parthia, placed a Satrap or Lieutenant over Commagene and Sentaria,
Kharkar, Tel-Garimmi, Gamgoum, Ashdod, and a king of his own choice over
Albania. lie seized 55 walled cities in Armenia, 11, which were held to
be "inaccessible fortresses;" and 62 great cities in Commagene; 34 in
Media; he laid tribute on the "king of the country of rivers."

He removed whole populations at his will; from Samaria, he carried
captive its inhabitants, 27,800, and placed them in "cities of the
Medes" [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006); [Kg2
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#011); he removed those of Commagene
to Elam; all the great men of the Tibareni, and the inhabitants of
unknown cities, to Assyria; Cammanians, whom he had conquered, to
Tel-Garimmi, a capital which he rebuilt; others whom he had vanquished
in the East he placed in Ashdod: again he placed "Assyrians devoted to
his empire" among the Tibareni; inhabitants of cities unknown to us, in
Damascus; Chaldaeans in Commagene , extracted from the Annales de
Philosophie Chretienne T. vi. (5e sêrie). Oppert p. 8, gives as the
meaning of his name, "actual king," "roi de fait." (שׁר־כן shar-kēn)
Sargon himself, if Oppert has translated him rightly, gives as its
meaning, "righteous prince," p. 38). : "The Comukha were removed from
the extreme North to Susiana, and Chaldaeans were brought from the
extreme South to supply their place." "Seven kings of Iatnan, seven days
voyage off in the Western seas, whose names were unknown to the kings"
his "fathers; hearing of" his "deeds, came before" him to Babylon with
"presents:" as did the king of Asmoun, who dwelt in the midst of the
Eastern sea (the Persian gulf). He placed his statue, "writing on it the
glory of Asshur his master," in the capital of Van, in Kikisim
(Circesium) as also in Cyprus, which he does not name, but where it has
been discovered in this century . The Moschian king, with his 3000
towns, who had never submitted to the kings his predecessors, sent his
submission and tribute to him.

Sennacherib, the son of Sargon, says of himself, "Assour, the great
Lord, has conferred on me sovereignty over the peoples; he has extended
my dominion over all those who dwell in the world. From the upper Ocean
of the setting sun to the lower Ocean of the rising sun, I reduced under
my power all who carried aloft their head."

He defeated Merodach Baladan and the king of Elam together ; took in one
expedition , "79 great strong cities of the Chaldaeans anti 820 small
towns;" he took prisoners by hundreds of thousands; 200, 150 in his
first expedition against Hezekiah, from 44 great walled cities which he
took and little villages innumerable ; 208,000 from the Nabathseans anti
Hagarenes : he employed on his great buildings 360,000 men, gathered
from Chaldea and Aramaea, from Cilicia and Armenia ; he conquered
populations in the North, which "had of old not submitted to the kings
my brothers ," annexed them to the prefecture of Arrapachitis and set up
his image ; he received tribute from the governor of Khararat , wasted
the 2 residence cities, 34 smaller cities of Ispahara king of Albania,
joining a part of the territory to Assyria, and calling its city,
Ilhinzas, the city of Sennacherib ;

He reduced countries of "Media, whose names the kings his brothers had
not heard ; he set a king, Toubaal, over the great and little Sidon,
Sarepta, Achzib, Acco, Betzitti, Mahalliba; the kings of Moab, Edom,
Bet-Amman, Avvad, Ashdod, submitted to him ; he deteated an "innumerable
host" of Egyptians at Altakou (Elteke); sons of the king of Egypt fell
into his hands; he captured Ascalon, Bene-Barak, Joppa, Hazor ; put back
at Amgarron (Migron) the expelled king Padi, who had been surrendered to
Hezekiah ; gave portions of the territory of Hezekiah to the kings of
Ashdod, Migron, Gaza ; he drove Merodach-baladan again to Elam, captured
his brothers, wasted his cities, and placed his own oldest son,
Assurnadin, on the throne of Babylon took seven impregnable cities of
the Toukharri, placed like birds' nests on the mountains of Nipour ;
conquered the king of Oukkou in Dayi, among mountains which none of his
ancestors had penetrated; look Oukkou and 33 other cities ; attached
Elam, "crossing" the Persian gulf "in Syrian vessels" ; capturing the
men, and destroying the cities ; in another campaign, he garrisoned,
with prisoner-warriors of his own, cities in Elam which his father had
lost ; destroyed 34 large cities and others innumerable of Elam .

His account of his reign closes with a great defeat of Elam, whom the
escaped Souzoub had hired with the treasures of the temples of Babylon,
and of 17 rebel tribes or cities, at Khalouli, and their entire subdual
. He repelled some Greeks in Cilicia, set up his image there, with a
record of his deeds, and built Tarsus, on the model of Babylon . It has
been noticed, what a "keen appreciation of the merits of a locality" his
selection of its site evinced. The destruction of his army of 185,000
men, at the word of God, might well deter him from again challenging the
Almighty; but we have seen, in the wars of Napoleon I, that such losses
do not break the power of an empire. It was no vain boast of
Sennacherib, that he had "gathered all the earth, and carried captive
the gods of the nations." The boast was true; the application alone was
impious. God owned in him the instrument which He had formed, "the rod
of His anger." He condenmed him, only because "the axe boasted itself
against Him Who hewed therewith." Victorious, except when he fought
against God, and employed by God "to tread down the people as the mire
of the streets" [Isa 10:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005); [Isa
36:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018), Sennacherib was cut off as
God foretold, but left his kingdom to a victorious son.

His son, Esarhaddon, takes titles, yet more lofty titan those of
Sennacherib. He calls himself , "King of Assyria, Vicar of Babylon, King
of the Sumirs and Accads, King of Egypt, Meroe and Cush, who reigned
from sunrising to sun-set, unequalled in the imposition of tributes." In
Armenia, he killed Adrammelech , his half-brother, one of his father's
murderers, who fled to Armenia, probably to dispute thence his father's
crown. In every direction he carried his conquests further than his
powerful father . He speaks of conquests in the far Media , "where none
of the kings, our fathers," had conquered, whose kings bore well-known
Persian names .

They and their subjects were carried off to Assyria. Others, who "had
not conspired against the kings my fathers and the land of Assyria, and
whose territories my fathers had not conquered," submitted voluntarily
in terror, paid tribute and received Assyrian governors. In the West, he
pursued by sea a king of Sidon who rebelled, divided the Syrians in
strange countries, and placed mountaineers, whom his bow had subdued in
the East, with a governor, in a castle of Esarhaddon which he built in
Syria. He warred successfully in Cilicia, Khoubousna, and destroyed 10
large cities of the Tibareni and carried their people captive; trod down
the country of Masnaki, transported rebels of Van; he established on the
Southern shore that son of Merodach-baladan who submitted to him,
removing the brother who trusted in Elam, himself reigned in Babylon ,
where he carried Manasseh [Ch2 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011).

He reconquered "the city of Adoumou (Edom), (the city of the power of
the Arabs,) which Sennacherib had conquered, and carried off its people
to Assyria;" he named as Queen of the Arabs, Tabouya, born in his
palace; put the son of Hazael on his father's throne. An expedition to
"a far country to the bounds of the earth beyond the desert," Bazi
(Buz), reached by traversing 140 farsakhs (?) of sandy desert, then 20
farsakhs (?) of fertile land and a stony region, Khazi (Uz), looks like
an expedition across Arabia, and, if so, was unparalleled except by
Nushirvan. Some of the other names are Arabic. Anyhow, it was a country,
where none of his predecessors had gone; he killed 8 kings, carried off
their subjects and spoils. He conquered the Gomboulou in their marshes.
twelve kings on the coast of Syria whom he recounts by name, (Ba'lou
king of Tyre, Manasseh king of Judah, and those of Edom, Maan, Gaza,
Ascalon, Amgarron, Byblos, Aradus, Ousimouroun, Bet-Ammon, Ashdod) and
10 kings of Yatnan in the sea (Cyprus) - Aegisthus (Ikistonsi), King of
Idalion (Idial), Pythagoras (Pitagoura) K. of Citium (Kitthim), Ki ...,
K. of Salamis (Silhimmi), Ittodagon ("Dagon is with him," Itoudagon), K.
of Paphos (Pappa), Euryalus (lrieli), K. of Soil (Sillou), Damasou, K.
of Curium (Kuri,) Ounagonsou, K. of Limenion (Limini), Roumizu, K. of
Tamassus (Tamizzi,) Damutsi of Amti-Khadasti, Puhali of Aphrodisium
(Oupridissa) , held their rule from him.

The names of the countries, from which he brought those whom he settled
in Samaria, attest alike his strength and the then weakness of two of
the nations, which afterward concurred to overthrow his empire. The
colonists, according to their own letters to Artaxerxes [Ezr
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009), comprehended, among others,
Babylonians; Archevites i. e., inhabitants of Erech, mentioned in
Genesis [Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010), as, together with
Babel, part of the beginning of the kingdom of Nimrod; Susanchites, i.
e., inhabitants of Susiana or Chusistan; Dehavites, Daans in Herodotus ,
one of the wandering Persian tribes, whose name (Taia) still exists;
Elamite's [Isa 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002); [Isa
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006) or the dwellers on the Persian
gulf, bordering on Susiana; Apharsites or the Persians in their original
abode in Paraca, Paraic, now Farsistan. It seems also probable that the
Apharsachites are those more known to us as Sacae or Scythians, whom
Esarhaddon says that he conquered ; and that the Apharsachthites (with
the same word Aphar prefixed) are the Sittaceni on the Caspian. The
Dinaites and the Tarphelites are as yet unidentified, unless the
Tarpetes of the Palus Maeotis near the Sittaceni, or the Tapiri in Media
be a corruption of the name.

The Samaritan settlers add, "And the rest of the nations, whom the great
and noble Asnapper carried captive, and settled in the cities of Samaria
and the rest on this side the river." Under this general term, they
include the Mesopotamian settlers brought from Avvah and Sepharvaim, and
those from Hamath [Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024), probably
wishing to insist to the Persian Monarch on their Persian, Median, or
Babylonian descent. They attest at the same time that their forefathers
were not willingly removed but "transported, carried into exile" [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010), and accordingly that Esarhaddon,
in whose reign they were removed, had power in all these countries. The
condensation also of settlers from twelve nations in so small a space as
the cities of Samaria (analogous as it is to the dispersion of the Jews
over so many provinces of their captors) illustrates the policy of these
transportations, and the strength which they gave to the empire. Nations
were blended together among those foreign to them, with no common bond
except their relation to their conqueror. A check on those around them,
and themselves held in check by them, they had no common home to which
to return, no interest to serve by rebelling. Esarhaddon built 36
temples in Assyria by the labor of foreign slaves, his captives, who
worshiped his gods .

This collection of people of twelve nations in the cities of Samaria
represents moreover one portion only of the conquests of Esarhaddon,
and, for the most part, that furthest from Judaea. For the principle of
the policy was to remove them far from their own land. Ethiopian and
Egyptian captives would be placed, not here from where they could easily
return, but, like Israel in the cities of the Medes, from where they
could find no escape.

The son of Esarhaddon, Asshurbanipal II. , yet further enlarged and
consolidated the conquests of his conquering father. His expeditions
into Egypt have been already dwelt upon; his victories were easy,
complete. Tirhaka, himself a great conqueror, fled into unknown deserts
beyond reach of pursuits. His step-son Urdaminie attempted to recover
his kingdom, was defeated at once, fled and his capital was taken. In
Asia, he took away tim king of Tyre, who offended him; made conquests
beyond Mt. Taurus, where his fathers had never been ; received an
embassy from Gyges; attached to Assyria a tract of Minni or Persarmenia,
took the capital of Minni; took Shushan and Badaca; killed their kings,
united Susiana to Babylonia; subdued anew Edom, Moab, Kedar, the
Nabathaeans; received the submission of the king of Urarda, Ararat .

While Assyria was extended wider than before, its old enemies were more
incorporated with it, or, at least, more subdued; it was more at one
within itself. Egypt, the great rival Empire, had tried to shake off the
yoke, but was subdued; no people in Syria or the valley of the Euphrates
stirred itself; the whole tract within the Taurus, once so rife with
enemies, lay hushed under his rule: hushed were the Hittites,
Hamathites, the Syrians of Damascus, the Tibareni who had once held
their own against his father; war was only at the very extremities, in
Minni or Edom, and that, rather chastisement than war; Babylon was a
tranquil portion of his empire, except during the temporary rebellion of
the brother, whom he had placed over it, and whom he pardoned. His
death, amid the tranquil promotion of literature , when he had no more
enemies to conquer or rebels to chasten, left his empire at the zenith
of its power, some 22 years before its destruction. "Culno" had become,
as Sennacherib boasted [Isa 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009),
"like Carehemish; Hamath like Arpad; Samaria as Damascus." He "had
removed the bounds of the people and gathered all the earth, as one
gathereth eggs, left" [Isa 10:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#013) by
the parent bird, undefended even by its impotent love. There was not a
cloud on the horizon, not a token from where the whirlwind would come.
The bas-reliefs attest, that neither the energy nor the cruelty of the
Assyrians were diminished .

Of those twenty-two years, we have nothing reliable except their close.
There was probably nothing to relate. There would not be anything, if
Asshurbanipal had consolidated his empire, as he seems to have done, and
if his son and successor inherited his father's later tastes, and was
free from the thirst of boundless conquest, which had characterized the
earlier rulers of Assyria. Anyhow, we know nothing authentic. The
invasion of Assyria by Phraortes, which Herodotus relates, is held, on
good grounds, to be a later history of a rebellion against Darius
Hystaspes, adapted to times before the Medes became one nation . There
was no reason why it should not have been recorded, had it taken place,
since it is admitted to have been a total defeat, in which Phraortes
lost his life . The invasion of the Scythians, which is to have stopped
the siege of Nineveh under Cyaxares, was reported in a manifestly
exaggerated form to Herodotus. The 28 years, during which Herodotus
relates the Scythian rule to have lasted , is longer than the whole of
the reign of the last king of Assyria; and yet, according to Herodotus,
is to have been interposed between the two sieges of Cyaxares. And as
its empire gave no sign of decay, so far as we can trace its history
within 22 years before its destruction, so, with the like rapidity, did
the empire rise, which was to destroy it.

The account which Herodotus received, that the Medians had thrown off
the yoke of Assyria before Deioces , is in direct contradiction to the
Assyrian inscriptions. This was, they state, the time, not of the
revolt, but of the conquest of Media. They are confirmed by Holy
Scripture, which says that the Assyrian king (Sargon) placed "in the
cities of the Medes" [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006) his
Israelitish captives. The utmost, which Herodotus ascribes to Deioces
however, is, that he consolidated the six Median tribes and built a
capital, Agbatana . It is an union of wild hordes into one people, held
together for the time by the will of one man and by their weariness of
mutual oppressions. Even according to their accounts, Cyaxares (about
633 b.c., i. e., 8 years before the fall of Nineveh) first organized the
Median army; the Greeks, in the time of Aeschylus, believed Cvaxares to
have been the first of the Median kings ; rebels in Media and Sagartia
claimed the Median throne against Darius, as descended from Cyaxares, as
the founder of the Monarchy .

Further, the subsequent history supports the account of Abydenus against
Herodotus, that not the Medes, but the rebel general of the last Monarch
of Nineveh was, with his Babylonian troops, the chief author of the
destruction of Nineveh. The chief share of the spoil, where no motives
of refined policy intervene, falls to the strongest, who had chief
portion in the victory. "The Medes," says Herodotus, "took Nineveh, and
conquered all Assyria, except the Babylonian portion" . But Babylon was
no spared province, escaping with its independence as a gain. Babylonia,
not Media, succeeded to the Southern and Western dominions of the
Assyrian empire, and the place, where Nineveh had stood, Cyaxares
retaining the North. This was a friendly arrangement, since subsequently
too we find a Babylonian prince in the expedition of Cyaxares against
Asia Minor, and Medians assisting Nebuchadnezzar against the king of
Egypt . Abydenus represents the Babylonians and Medes, as equal , but
exhibits the rebel general, as the author of the attack . "After him
(Sardanapal), Sarac held the empire of Assyria, who, being informed of a
horde of mingled troops which were coming against him from the sea, sent
Busalossor (Nebopalassar) general of his army, to Babylon. But he,
having determined to revolt, betrothed to his son, Nebucbodrossor,
Amuhea, daughter of Asdahag, prince of the Medes, and soon made a rapid
attack on Nineveh. King Sarac, when he knew the whole, set the palace
Evorita on fire. Then Nehuchodrossor, attaining to the empire, encircled
Babylon with strong walls."

The "horde of mingled troops" "from the sea" were probably those same
Susians and Elymaeans, whom the Assyrians had, in successive reigns,
defeated. If the account of Herodotus were true, the father of the
Median Monarch had perished in conflict with Assyria. The grandfather of
the Assyrian Monarch had himself reigned in Babylon. Assyria ruled
Babylon by viceroys to the end. It has been noticed that Nahum mentions
no one enemy who should destroy Nineveh. True, for no one enemy did
destroy her.

Even now its fall is unexplained. The conquests of its Monarchs had not
been the victories of talented individuals. They were a race of
world-wide conquerors. In the whole history, of which we have the
annals, they are always on the aggressive. They exacted tribute where
they willed. The tide of time bore them on in their conquests. Their
latest conquests were the most distant. Egypt, her early rival, had been
subdued by her. The powers, which did destroy her, had no common bond of
interest. They were united, for one reign, not by natural interests,
but, as far as we see, by the ambition of two individuals. These
crushed, at once and for ever, the empire which for so many centuries
had been the ravager of the world. But who could have foreseen such a
combination and such results, save God, in Whose hands are human wills
and the fate of empires?

The fiery empire of conquerors sank like a tropic sun. Its wrath had
burned, unassuaged, "from" (in their own words) "the rising to the
setting sun." No gathering cloud had tempered its heat or allayed its
violence. Just ere it set, in those last hours of its course, it seemed,
as if in its meridian. Its bloodstained disk cast its last glowing rays
on that field of carnage in Susiana; then, without a twilight, it sank
beneath those stormy waves, so strangely raised, at once and for ever.
All, at once, was night. It knew no morrow.

Its fall is inexplicable still. It may have accelerated its own
destruction by concentrating the fierce Chaldees at Babylon. It was
weakened by the revolt of its own general, and with him the defection of
an army. Still, in those days, the city of 1200 towers, each 200 feet
high, its ordinary wall 100 feet high and of such breadth, that three
chariots could drive on it abreast , could not be taken by mounds,
except by some most gigantic army with patience inexhaustible. Famine
could not reduce a city, which, in its 60 miles in circumference,
enclosed, like Babylon, space for much cattle, and which could, within
its walls, grow enough grain for its population of 600,000 [Jon
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011). With its perennial supply of
provision, it might have laughed to scorn a more formidable foe than the
Medes, Elamites and Babylonians, unaccustomed to sieges, except in as
far as any had fought in its armies, while the Ninevites possessed the
hereditary skill of centuries.

Babylon, smaller than Nineveh , was at rest amidst the siege of the more
powerful grandson of Cyaxares. Cyrus could only take it by stratagem;
Darius Hystaspes, by treachery. Then, every Ninevite was a warrior.
Their descendants, the Curds, are still among the fiercest and most
warlike people of Asia. The bas-reliefs, which bear internal evidence of
truth, exhibit a wonderful blending of indomitable strength of will,
recklessness of suffering, inherent physical energy, unimpaired by
self-indulgence. A German writer on art says , "You recognize a strong
thick-set race, of very powerful frame, yet inclined to corpulence, a
very special blending of energy and luxury. The general impression of
the figures, whether men, women or eunuchs, has uniformly something
earnest and imposing." An English writer says still more vividly ; "All
the figures indicate great physical development, animal propensities
very strongly marked, a calm, settled ferocity, a perfect nonchalance
amidst the most terrible scenes; no change of feature takes place,
whether the individual is inflicting or experiencing horrid sufferings.
The pictures are very remarkable as indicating the entire absence of
higher mental and moral qualities: and the exuberance of brutal parts of
man's nature. At the same time, there is not lacking a certain
consciousness of dignity and of inherent power. There is a tranquil
energy and fixed determination, which will not allow the beholder to
feel any contempt of those stern warriors."

How then could it fall? The prophecy of Nahum describes, with terrible
vividness, a siege; the rousing of its king from a torpor of indolence;
"he remembereth his nobles" ([Nah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005)
(6)); the orderly advance, the confused preparations for defense; and
then, when expectation is strung, and we see besiegers and besieged
prepared for the last decisive strife, there is a sudden pause. No human
strength overthrows the city "The gates of the rivers shall be opened,
and the palace shall be dissolved. And it is decreed, she shall be led
away captive" ([Nah 2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006) (7, 8)). Her
captivity follows on the opening of "the gates of the rivers." The
"rivers," ordinarily her strength, were also her weakness. The annals of
Sennacherib relate, how he repaired a palace which had been undermined
by the Tigris. : "The small palace, which was become very ruinous in
every part, because the river Tigris, during 16 years, had undermined
and ravaged it, (I repaired.)" Dionysius, the Jacobite patriarch,
relates how in his own time, 763 a.d. : "the Tigris, overflowing, laid
waste all the towns around it, and especially Mosul" (opposite to
Nineveh). Barhebraeus, in four different years, mentions the destruction
of houses in Bagdad through the overflow of the Tigris .

He mentions also a city-wall, overthrown by an inundation, so that 3,000
men were drowned in their houses . Ives relates : "The Bishop (of
Babylon) remembers that" about 1733 "the Euphrates and Tigris were so
overflown, that the whole country between them appeared as one large
sea. Over all the plain between Bagdad and Hilla, people could pass only
in boats. The water flowed quite up to the glacis, the ditch was full,
the city also overflown, and the foundation of most of the buildings
hurt; 300 houses were entirely destroyed. To prevent as much as
possible" the recurrence of such a calamity, "the Turks now face the
foundation-wall of their houses with a composition of charcoal, ashes,
and Demar (bitumen)." "The river Khosar," also, which would be swollen
by the same causes as the Tigris, "entered the city," says Ainsworth ,
"by an aperture in the walls on the East side, which appears to have
formed part of the original plan and to have been protected by a gateway
and walls, vestiges of which still remain." "The Khausser," says Mr.
Rich , "is generally drawn off for irrigating the cotton-plantations in
the alluvial ground of the river; when it is much overflowed, it
discharges itself into the Tigris above the bridge." : "The Khausser now
(Dec. 1. after "very heavy tropical rain,") discharges itself direct
into the Tigris, and brings an immense body of water." : "After rain, it
becomes an impetuous torrent, overflowing its banks and carrying all
before it." : "The stone-bridge was carried away one night by the
violence of the Khausser, on a sudden inundation." On a lesser swelling
of the river - "the water-wheels were removed" in precaution "and the
bridge of boats opened." Cazwini, the Arabic geographer, speaks of "the
rivers of Nineveh."

Ctesias, being a writer of suspected authority, cannot safely be alleged
in proof of the fulfillment of prophecy. Yet in this case his account,
as it is in exact conformity with the obvious meaning of the prophecy of
Nahum, so it solves a real difficulty, how Nineveh, so defended, could
have fallen. It seems certain that the account of the siege taken from
him by Diodorus, is that of the last siege. It bas been remarked that
the only event of the siege, known from any other source, namely, that
the last Assyrian king; when be had learned the combination of the Medes
and Babylonians against him, set fire to his palace, is related also by
Ctesias. Ctesias has also the same fact, that the Babylonian revolt was
recent; the name of the revolted general in Ctesias, Belisis, is the
latter half of that given to him by Abydenus, , Nebopalassar, omitting
only the name of the god, Nebo. The rest of the history is in itself
probable.

The success of the Assyrian monarch at first against the combined
armies, and the consequent revelry, are that same blending of fierceness
and sensuality which is stamped on all the Assyrian sculptures,
continned to the end. The rest of his relation, which, on account of the
filets of nature, which we know, but which, since they are gathered from
sources so various, Ctesias probably did not know, is, in itself,
probable, accounts for what is unaccounted for, and corresponds with the
words of Nahum. It is , "Sardanapalus, seeing the whole kingdom in the
greatest danger, sent his three sons and two daughters with much wealth
to Paphlagonia to Cotta the Governor, being the best-disposed of his
subjects. He himself sent by messengers to all his subjects for forces,
and prepared what was needed for the siege. He had an oracle handed down
from his forefathers, that no one should take Nineveh, unless the river
first became an enemy to the city.

Conceiving that this never would be, he held to his hopes, purposing to
abide the siege and awaited the armies to be sent by his subjects." "The
rebels, elated by their successes, set themselves to the siege, but on
account of the strength of the walls, could in no wise injure those in
the city." "But these had great abundance of all necessaries through the
foresight of the king. The siege then being prolonged for two years,
they pressed upon it; assaulting the walls and cutting off those therein
from any exit into the country." "In the 3rd year, the river, swollen by
continuous and violent rains, inundated a part of the city and overthrew
20 stadia of the wall. Then the king, thinking that the oracle was
fulfilled, and that the river was plainly an enemy to the city,
despaired of safety. And, not to fall into the enemy's hands, he made an
exceeding great pile in the palace, heaped up there all the gold and
silver and the royal apparel, and having shut up his concubines and
eunuchs in the house formed in the midst of the pile, consumed himself
and all the royalties with them all. The rebels, hearing that
Sardanapalus had perished, possessed themselves of the city, entering by
the broken part of the wall."

Yet Nahum had also prophesied, "the fire shall devour thy bars;"
"fortify thy strong holds, there shall the fire devour thee;" "I will
burn her chariots in the smoke" [Nah
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#013), [Nah
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015); [Nah
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013), and all the ruins of Nineveh
still speak from beneath the earth where they lie interred, that,
overthrown as they have been by some gigantic power, fire consumed them
within. : "The palaces of Khorsabad (Dur Sarjina) and Nimrud shew equal
traces of fire with those of Koyunjik." : "The recent excavations have
strewn that fire was a great instrument in the destruction of the
Nineveh palaces. Calcined alabaster, masses of charred wood and
charcoal, colossal statues split through with the heat, are met with in
parts of the Ninerite mounds, and attest the veracity of prophecy." .
"It is evident from the ruins that Khorsabad and Nimroud were sacked;
and set on fire."

Yet this does not exhaust the fullness of the prophecy. Nahum not only
foretold the destruction of Nineveh, that it should "be empty, void,
waste, there is no healing of thy bruise," but in emphatic words, that
its site also should be a desolation. "With an overrunning flood He
shall make the place thereof (mekomah) a desolation" [Nah
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008). This was then new in the history
of the world. Cities have remained, while empires passed away. Rome,
Constantinople, Athens, Damascus, Alexandria, Venice, abide, although
their political might is extinct. No or Thebes itself survived its
capture by Sargon and a yet later loss of its inhabitants nearly two
centuries, when the more fatal conquest of Cambyses, anti perhaps the
rise of Memphis perpetuated its destruction. Nahum foretells
emphatically as to Nineveh, "He will make the place thereof an utter
consumption." Not only would God destroy the then Nineveh; but the very
place or site thereof should be an utter desolation.

There was, then, no instance of so great a city passing away. Such had
not been Babylonian, Assyrian, Egyptian policy. It had become an
established policy in Sennacherib's time to remove populations, not to
destroy cities. And these two policies were incompatible. For a
conqueror who would remove populations must have, whither to remove
them. Nineveh itself had conquered Babylon and Shushun, and the cities
of the Medes; but had placed her own lieutenants in them. The mere
destruction of such a city as Nineveh was "contrary to experience." Even
later than this, Babylon, notwithstanding its rebellions, was spared by
its first conqueror, and survived to be the grave of its second,
Alexander. Xenophon describes Nineveh under the name of Mespila (of
which Mosul has been supposed to be a corruption) "a wall, void, large,
lying against the city - the basement was of polished stone, full of
shells, its width 50 feet, its height 50 feet. Thereon was built a wall
of brick, its breadth 50 feet, the height 100; the circuit was six
farsangs," i. e., 22 12 miles.

The shell remained; the tumult of life was gone. Its protecting bulwarks
remained; all, which they protected, had disappeared. They had forgotten
already on the spot what it had been or by whom it had perished. : "The
Medes inhabited it formerly. It was said that Media, a kings wife, had
fled thither, when the Medes were losing their power through the
Persians. The Persian king, besieging this city, could not take it,
either by time or force; but Zeus made the inhabitants senseless, and so
it was taken." A little later, Alexander marched over its site to gain
the world, not knowing that a world-empire, like that which he gave his
life to found, was buried under his feet . Gaugamela, near which Darius
lost his empire, must have been close to its site. Yet three centuries,
and history, not its mere neighbors only, had forgotten when it had
perished. Strabo says , "It was effaced immediately after the
destruction of the Syrians." Nearly two centuries later is Lucian's
saying , "Nineveh has perished, and there is no trace left where it once
was." Yet before this time, in the reign of Claudius, the Romans had
built a new Nineveh which they called by his name "Ninive Claudiopolis."
In the 6th century, it is mentioned as a Christian see . Its episcopate
was taken away, probably on account of its decline, early in the 9th
century; and it was united to Mosul . It was still in being at the
beginning of the 14th century . Yet, in the 12th century, as a whole,
"it was desolate, but there were there many villages and castles." This
was not the Nineveh of prophecy; but it too was swept away, and a few
coins alone attest the existence of the Roman city. "The city, and even
the ruins of the city," relates Gibbon of the last victory of Heraclius,
"had long since disappeared; the vacant space afforded a spacious field
for the operation of the two armies." A line of lofty mounds, on the
East of Tigris, long drew but a momentary gaze from the passers-by; a
few cottages surmounted the heaps, which entombed the palaces of kings,
who were the terror of the East; the plow turned up, unheeded, the
bricks, which recorded their deeds; the tide of war swept over it anew;
the summer's sands again filled up "the stupendous mass of brick-work,
occasionally laid bare by the winter rains." The eyes rested on nothing
but "the stern shapeless mound, rising like a hill from the scorched
plain." : "The traveler is at a loss to give any form to the rude heaps,
upon which he is gazing. Those of whose works they are the remains,
unlike the Roman and the Greek, have left no visible traces of their
civilization or of their arts; their influence has long since passed
away. The scene around him is worthy of the ruin he is contemplating;
desolation meets desolation; a feeling of awe succeeds to wonder, for
there is nothing to relieve the mind, to lead to hope, or to tell of
what has gone by. Those huge mounds of Assyria made a deeper impression
upon me, gave rise to more serious thoughts and more earnest reflection,
than the temples of Baalbee and the theaters of Ionia."

In 1827, Buckingham still wrote : "we came in about an hour to the
principal mounds which are thought to mark the site of the ancient
Nineveh. There are four of these mounds, disposed in the form of a
square; and these, as they shew neither bricks, stones, nor other
materials of building, but are in many places overgrown with grass,
resemble the mounds left by entrenchments and fortifications of ancient
Roman camps. The longest of these mounds runs nearly N. and S. and
consists of several ridges of unequal height, the whole appearing to
extend for four or five miles in length. There are three other distinct
mounds, which are all near to the river, and in the direction of East
and West - there are appearances of mounds and ruins extending for
several miles to the southward; and still more distinctly seen to the
Northward of this, though both are less marked than the mounds of the
center.

The space between these is a level plain, over every part of the face of
which, broken pottery, and the other usual debris of ruined cities are
seen scattered about." "Mounds and smaller heaps of ruins were scattered
widely over the plain, sufficient to prove, that the site of the
original city occupied a vast extent." Niebuhr had ridden through
Nineveh unknowingly. : "I did not learn that I was at so remarkable a
spot, until near the river. Then they showed me a village on a great
hill, which they call Nunia, and a mosque, in which the prophet Jonah
was buried. Another hill in this district is called Kalla Nunia, or the
Castle of Nineveh. On that lies a village Koindsjug. At Mosul, where I
dwelt close by the Tigris, they strawed me in addition the walls of
Nineveh, which in my journey through I had not observed, but supposed to
be a set of hills." "It is well-known," begins an account of the recent
discoveries , "that in the neighborhood of Mosul, travelers had observed
some remarkable mounds, resembling small bills, and that Mr. Rich had,
thirty years ago, called attention to one called Koyunjik, in which
fragments of sculpture and pottery had been frequently discovered."

And yet, humanly speaking, even if destroyed, it was probable before
hand, that it would not altogether perish. For a town near its site was
needed for purposes of commerce. Of the two routes of commerce from the
Persian gulf to the North by the Euphrates or by the Tigris, the
Tigris-route was free from the perils of the arid wilderness, through
which the line by the Euphrates passed. If, for the downward course, the
Euphrates itself was navigable, yet the desert presented a difficulty
for caravans returning upward from the Persian gulf. Arrian, who
mentions the two lines of travel, says that Alexander , having crossed
the Euphrates at Thapsacus, chose the less direct line by the Tigris, as
having a better supply of all things, food for his cavalry, and a less
scorching heat.

The mention of Haran (afterward Carrhae) Canneh, and Asshur in Ezekiel,
(in one verse ) seems to indicate the continuation of the same line of
commerce with Tyre, which must have existed from praehistoric times (i.
e., from times of which we have no definite historic account), since
there is no ground to question the statement of the Phoenicians
themselves in Herodotus, that they had come from the Erythraean sea , i.
e., the Persian gulf. The later hindrances to the navigation of the
Tigris by the great dams (probably for irrigation), were of Persian
date; but they could have had no great effect on the actual commerce;
since for the greater part of the upward course on the Tigris line, this
also must, on account of the rapidity of the river, have been by
caravans.

The route was still used in the middle ages . : "The ancient road and
the modern one on the upper Tigris follow, pretty nearly throughout, the
same line, it being determined by the physical necessities of the soil."
In the 16th century , "from the head of the Persian gulf two commercial
lines existed: by one of them goods were carried some way up the
Euphrates, and then by land to Bir, Aleppo, Iskonderun. By the other
they followed the Tigris to Baghdad and were carried by Diyar-Bekr and
Sires to Terabuzum." (But Mosul was necessarily on the way from Baghdad
to Diyar Bekr). Mosul still lies on the line of commerce, from the
Persian gulf, Basrah, Baghdad, Mosul, Mardin, Diyar-Bekr to Iskenderun,
the port of Aleppo , or Trebizond (Tarabuzum ).

It still carries on some commerce with Kurdistan and other provinces
(beside Diyar-Bekr and Baghdad). Col. Chesney, in 1850, advocated the
advantages of extending the line of commerce by British stations at
Diyar-Bekr and Mardin, in addition to and connection with those already
existing at Baghdad and Mosul . There is, in fact, a consent as to this.
Layard writes : "The only impediment between the Syrian coast and the
Tigris and Euphrates in any part of their course, arises from the want
of proper security. The navigation of the Persian gulf is, at all times,
open and safe; and a glance at the map will shew that a line through the
Mediterranean, the port of Suedia, Aleppo, Mosul, Baghdad, Busrah, and
the Indian Ocean to Bombay is as direct as can well be desired.

With those prospects, and with the incalculable advantages, which a
flourishing commerce and a safe and speedy transit through, perhaps, the
richest portions of its dominions would confer upon the Turkish empire,
it would seem that more than Eastern apathy is shown in not taking some
steps, tending to restore security to the country watered by the Tigris
and Euphrates." Ainsworth suggests a still wider commerce, of which
Mosul might be the center. : "With a tranquil state of the surrounding
country, Mosul presents mercantile advantages of no common order. There
are several roads open to Persia, across the mountains; a transit from
five to seven days, and by which, considering the short distance and
good roads from Mosul to Iskenderun, British manufactures might be
distributed into the heart of Persia, in a time and at an expense, which
the line of Trebizond Erzrum and Tabriz, that of Bushire and Baghdad, or
the Russian line of Astrakhan Bakhu and Mazenderan can never rival."

But although marked out by these advantages for continuance, even when
its power was gone, Nineveh was to perish and it perished. Nor ought it
to be alleged, that in other cases too, "if the position of the old
capital was deemed, from political or commercial reasons more
advantageous than any other, the population was settled in its
neighborhood, as at Delhi, not amidst its ruins." For

1\) there was, at the time of Nahum, no experience of the destruction of
any such great city as Nineveh;

2\) In the case of conquest, the capitol of the conquering empire
became, ipso facto, the capital of the whole; but this did not, in
itself, involve the destruction of the former.

Babylon, from having been the winter residence of Cyrus, became the
chief residence of the Persian Emperor at the time of Alexander, and
continued to exist for many centuries, oiler the foundation of Seleucia,
although it ceased to be a great city . And this, notwithstanding its
two rebellions under Darius , and that under Xerxes . There was no
ground of human policy against Nineveh's continuing, such as Mosul
became, anymore than Mosul itself. It existed for some time, as a
Christian See.

The grandeur, energy, power, vividness of Nahum, naturally can be fully
felt only in his own language. The force of his brief prophecy is much
increased by its unity. Nahum had one sentence to pronounce, the
judgments of God upon the power of this world, which had sought to
annihilate the kingdom of God. God, in His then kingdom in Judah, and
the world, were come face to face. What was to be the issue? The entire
final utter overthrow of whatever opposed God. Nahum opens then with the
calm majestic declaration of the majesty of God; Who God is, against
whom they rebelled; the madness of their rebellion, and the extinction
of its chief [Nah 1:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001); then in
detail, what was to come long after that first overthrow, the siege and
capture of Nineveh itself [Nah 2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001);
then, in wider compass, the overthrow of the whole power Nahum 3. It was
to be the first instance, in the history of mankind, of a power so
great, perishing and forever. Nahum's office was not, as Jonah's, to the
people itself. There is then no call to repentance, no gleam of God's
mercy toward them in this life. Nineveh was to perish wholly, as the
habitable world had perished in the time of Noah. The only relief is in
the cessation of so much violence. There is no human joy expressed at
this destruction of the enemy of God and of His people; no sorrow, save
that there can be no sorrow; "who will bemoan her? whence shall I find
comforters for her?" [Nah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#007).

In conformity with this concentration of Nahum's subject, there is
little in outward style or language to connect him with the other
prophets. His opening (as already observed ) bears upon God's
declarations of mercy and judgment; but, Nineveh having filled up the
measure of its iniquites, he had to exhibit the dark side of those
declarations; how much lay in those words, "that will by no means clear
the guilty." : "Jonah and Nahum form connected parts of one moral
history, the remission of God's judgment being illustrated in the one,
the execution of it in the other: the clemency and the just severity of
the divine government being contained in the mixed delineation of the
two books." His evangelic character just gleams through, in the eight
tender words, in which he seems to take breath, as it were; "Tob Yhvh
lemaoz beyomtsarah, veyodeah chose bo," "Good is God (Yhvh), refuge in
day of trouble, and knowing trusters in Him" [Nah
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#007); then again, in the few words,
which I think Isaiah expanded, "Lo on the mountains the feet of a
good-tidings-bearer, peace-proclaimer" [Nah
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001). Else there is only the mingled
tenderness and austereness of truth, which would sympathize with the
human being, but that that object had, by putting off all humanity,
alienated all which is man. "Who will bemoan her? Whence shall I seek
comforters for thee?" Who? and Whence? None had escaped evil from her.
"Upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?"

It is difficult for us, who have to gather up our knowledge of the
sacred language from the fragments which remain, in which also the
number of words forms and idioms, which stand out singly here and there,
seem but so many specimens of lest treasure, to judge with any
certainty, whether any approximation of idiom, which we may observe,
implies any connection between the writers in whom it occurs. Nahum has,
especially in his picture of the capture of Nineveh, so many of those
hapax legomena, consisting often of slight modifications, his language
is so rich and so original, that one the more doubts whether in those
idioms, in which he seems to approximate to other prophets, the
expressions in common do not belong to the common stock of the language;
and that the more, since mostly part of the idiom only coincides, the
rest is different. As for the so-called Aramaisms or other peculiarities
of language which Hitzig would have to be evidences of a later date, and
from some of which others would infer that Nahum lived at Nineveh
itself, "the wish has been father to the thought."

One only solid ground there would be why Nahum should not have written
his prophecy, when, according to all history, it could alone have any
interest for Judah, long before the event itself, namely, if He to whom
all, past and future, are present, could not or did not declare
beforehand things to come . If there be prophecy, the siege of Nineveh
might be as vividly presented to the prophet's mind, as if he saw it
with his bodily eyes .

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 1](nah001)

</div>
