<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2002)  [Next](jo1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 3:0</span></span>

The principal design of this chapter is to demonstrate, in opposition to
the objections of scoffers, that the Lord Jesus will return again to
this world; that the world will be destroyed by fire, and that there
will be a new heaven and a new earth; and to show what effect this
should have on the minds of Christians. The chapter, without any very
exact arrangement by the author, essentially consists of two parts.

I. The argument of the objectors to the doctrine that the Lord Jesus
will return to the world, and that it will be destroyed, [Pe2
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001). In doing this, the apostle [Pe2
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001) calls their attention to the
importance of attending diligently to the things which had been spoken
by the prophets, and to the commands of the apostles, reminding them
that it was to be expected that in the last days there would be scoffers
who would deride the doctrines of religion, and who would maintain that
there was no evidence that what had been predicted would be fulfilled,
[Pe2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003). He then [Pe2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004) adverts to the argument on which
they professed to rely, that there were no signs or indications that
those events were to take place; that there were no natural causes in
operation which could lead to such results; and that the fact of the
stability of the earth since the time of the creation, demonstarted that
the predicted destruction of the world could not occur.

II\. The argument of Peter, in reply to this objection; a strong
affirmation of the truth of the doctrine that the Lord Jesus will
return; that the earth and all which it contains will be burned up; that
there will be a new heaven and a new earth; and the effect which the
prospect of the coming of the Lord Jesus, and of the destruction of the
world by fire, should have on the minds of Christians, [Pe2
3:5-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005).

\(1\) the arguments of Peter, in reply to the objection from the
long-continued stability of the earth, are the following:

\(a\) He refers to the destruction of the old world by the flood - a
fact against which the same objections could have been urged,
beforehand, which are urged against the predicted destruction of the
world by fire, [Pe2 3:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005). With just
as much plausibility it might have been urged then that the earth bad
stood for thousands of years, and that there were no natural causes at
work to produce that change. It might have been asked where the immense
amount of water necessary to drown a world could come from; and perhaps
it might have been argued that God was too "good" to destroy a world by
a flood. Every objection which could be urged to the destruction of the
world by fire, could have been urged to its destruction by water; and
as, in fact, those objections, as the event showed, would have had no
real force, so they should be regarded as having no real force now.

\(b\) No argument against this predicted event can be derived from the
fact that hundreds and thousands of years are suffered to elapse before
the fulfillment of the predictions, [Pe2
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008). What seems long to men is not
long to God. One thousand years with him, in reference to this point,
are as one day. He does not measure time as men do. They soon die; and
if they cannot execute their purpose in a brief period, they cannot at
all. But this cannot apply to God. He has infinite ages in which to
execute his purposes, and therefore no argument can be derived from the
fact that his purposes are long delayed, to prove that he will not
execute them at all.

\(c\) Peter says ([Pe2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015),
following) that the delay which was observed in executing the plans of
God should not be interpreted as a proof that they would never be
accomplished, but as an evidence of his long-suffering and patience;
and, in illustration of this, he refers to the writings of Paul, in
which he says that the same sentiments were advanced. There were indeed,
he says, in those writings, some things which were hard to be
understood; but on this point they were plain.

\(2\) a strong affirmation of the truth of the doctrine, [Pe2
3:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009), [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013). He declares that these events
will certainly occur, and that they should be expected to take place
suddenly, and without any preintimations of their approach - as the
thief comes at night without announcing his coming.

\(3\) the practical suggestions which Peter intersperses in the argument
illustrative of the effect which these considerations should have on the
mind are among the most important parts of the chapter:

\(1\) We should be holy, devout, and serious, [Pe2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011).

\(2\) we should look forward with deep interest to the new heavens and
earth which are to succeed the present, [Pe2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012).

\(3\) we should be diligent and watchful that we may be found on the
return of the Saviour "without spot and blameless," [Pe2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014).

\(4\) we should be cautious that we be not seduced and led away by the
errors which deny these great doctrines, [Pe2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#017); and,

\(5\) We should grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, [Pe2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#018).

[2 Peter 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 3:1</span></span>

This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you - This expression
proves that he had written a former epistle, and that it was addressed
to the same persons as this. Compare Introduction, Section 3.

In both which I stir up your pure minds ... - That is, the main object
of both epistles is the same - to call to your remembrance important
truths which you have before heard, but which you are in danger of
forgetting, or from which you are in danger of being turned away by
prevailing errors. Compare the notes at [Pe2
1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012). The word rendered "pure"
(εἰλικρινής eilikrinēs) occurs only here and in [Phi
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#010), where it is rendered "sincere."
The word properly refers to "that which may be judged of in sunshine;"
then it means "clear, manifest;" and then "sincere, pure" - as that in
which there is no obscurity. The idea here perhaps is, that their minds
were open, frank, candid, sincere, rather than that they were "pure."
The apostle regarded them as "disposed" to see the truth, and yet as
liable to be led astray by the plausible errors of others. Such minds
need to have truths often brought fresh to their remembrance, though
they are truths with which they had before been familiar.

[2 Peter 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 3:2</span></span>

That ye may be mindful of the words - Of the doctrines, the truths; the
prophetic statements. Jude [Jde 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#018)
says that it had been foretold by the apostles, that in the last days
there would be scoffers. Peter refers to the instructions of the
apostles and prophets in general, though evidently designing that his
remarks should bear particularly on the fact that there would be
scoffers.

Which were spoken before by the holy prophets - The predictions of the
prophets before the advent of the Saviour, respecting his character and
work. Peter had before appealed to them [Pe2
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019), as furnishing important
evidence in regard to the truth of the Christian religion, and valuable
instruction in reference to its nature. See the notes at that passage.
Many of the most important doctrines respecting the kingdom of the
Messiah are stated as clearly in the Old Testament as in the New
Testament (compare [Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)), and
the prophecies therefore deserve to be studied as an important part of
divine revelation. It should be added here, however, that when Peter
wrote there was this special reason why he referred to the prophets,
that the canon of the New Testament was not then completed, and he could
not make his appeal to that. To some parts of the writings of Paul he
could and did appeal [Pe2 3:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015), but
probably a very small part of what is now the New Testament was known to
those to whom this epistle was addressed.

And of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Saviour - As
being equally entitled with the prophets to state and enforce the
doctrines and duties of religion. It may be observed, that no man would
have used this language who did not regard himself and his fellow
apostles as inspired, and as on a level with the prophets.

[2 Peter 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 3:3</span></span>

Knowing this first - As among the first and most important things to be
attended to - as one of the predictions which demand your special
regard. Jude [Jde 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#018) says that the
fact that there would be "mockers in the last time," had been
particularly foretold by thom. It is probable that Peter refers to the
same thing, and we may suppose that this was so well understood by all
the apostles that they made it a common subject of preaching.

That there shall come in the last days - In the last dispensation; in
the period during which the affairs of the world shall be wound up. The
apostle does not say that that was the last time in the sense that the
world was about to come to an end; nor is it implied that the period
called "the last day" might not be a very long period, longer in fact
than either of the previous periods of the world. He says that during
that period it had been predicted there would arise those whom he here
calls "scoffers." On the meaning of the phrase "in the last days," as
used in the Scriptures, see the [Act
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017) note; [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002) note; [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) note.

Scoffers - In Jude [Jde 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#018) the same
Greek word is rendered "mockers." The word means those who deride,
reproach, ridicule. There is usually in the word the idea of contempt or
malignity toward an object. Here the sense seems to be that they would
treat with derision or contempt the predictions respecting the advent of
the Saviour, and the end of the world. It would appear probable that
there was a particular or definite class of men referred to; a class who
would hold special opinions, and who would urge plausible objections
against the fulfillment of the predictions respecting the end of the
world, and the second coming of the Saviour - for those are the points
to which Peter particularly refers. It scarcely required inspiration to
foresee that there would be "scoffers" in the general sense of the term
- for they have so abounded in every age, that no one would hazard much
in saying that they would be found at any particular time; but the eye
of the apostle is evidently on a particular class of people, the special
form of whose reproaches would be the ridicule of the doctrines that the
Lord Jesus would return; that there would be a day of judgment; that the
world would be consumed by fire, etc. Tillotson explains this of the
Carpocratians, a large sect of the Gnostics, who denied the resurrection
of the dead, and the future judgment.

Walking after their own lusts - Living in the free indulgence of their
sensual appetites. See the notes at [Pe2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010), [Pe2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012), [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014), [Pe2
2:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018).

[2 Peter 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 3:4</span></span>

And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? - That is, either, Where
is the "fulfillment" of that promise; or, Where are the "indications" or
"signs" that he will come? They evidently meant to imply that the
promise had utterly failed; that there was not the slightest evidence
that it would be accomplished; that they who had believed this were
entirely deluded. It is possible that some of the early Christians, even
in the time of the apostles, had undertaken to fix the time when these
events would occur, as many have done since; and that as that time had
passed by, they inferred that the prediction had utterly failed. But
whether this were so or not, it was easy to allege that the predictions
respecting the second coming of the "Saviour" seemed to imply that the
end of the world was near, and that there were no indications that they
would be fulfilled. The laws of nature were uniform, as they had always
been, and the alleged promises had failed.

For since the fathers fell asleep - Since they "died" - death being
often, in the Scriptures, as elsewhere, represented as sleep. [Joh
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011) note; [Co1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030) note. This reference to the
"fathers," by such scoffers, was probably designed to be ironical and
contemptuous. Perhaps the meaning may be thus expressed: "Those old men,
the prophets, indeed foretold this event. They were much concerned and
troubled about it; and their predictions alarmed others, and filled
their bosoms with dread. They looked out for the signs of the end of the
world, and expected that that day was drawing near. But those good men
have died. They lived to old age, and then died as others; and since
they have departed, the affairs of the world have gone on very much as
they did before. The earth is suffered to have rest, and the laws of
nature operate in the same way that they always did." It seems not
improbable that the immediate reference in the word "fathers" is not to
the prophets of former times, but to aged and pious men of the times of
the apostles, who had dwelt much on this subject, and who had made it a
subject of conversation and of preaching. Those old men, said the seeing
objector, have died like others; and, notwithstanding their confident
predictions, things now move on as they did from the beginning.

All things continue as they were, from the beginning of the creation -
That is, the laws of nature are fixed and settled. The argument here -
for it was doubtless designed to be an argument - is based on the
stability of the laws of nature, and the uniformity of the course of
events. Thus far, all these predictions had failed. Things continued to
go on as they had always done. The sun rose and set; the tides ebbed and
flowed; the seasons followed each other in the usual order; one
generation succeeded another, as had always been the case; and there was
every indication that those laws would continue to operate as they had
always done. This argument for the stability of the earth, and against
the prospect of the fulfillment of the predictions of the Bible, would
have more force with many minds now than it had then, for 1,800 years
(circa 1880's) more have rolled away, and the laws of nature remain the
same. Meantime, the expectations of those who have believed that the
world was coming to an end have been disappointed; the time set for this
by many interpreters of Scripture has passed by; men have looked out in
vain for the coming of the Saviour, and sublunary affairs move on as
they always have done. Still there are no indications of the coming of
the Saviour; and perhaps it would be said that the farther men search,
by the aid of science, into the laws of nature, the more they become
impressed with their stability, and the more firmly they are convinced
of the improbability that the world will be destroyed in the manner in
which it is predicted in the Scriptures that it will be. The specious
and plausible objection arising from this source, the apostle proposes
to meet in the following verses.

[2 Peter 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 3:5</span></span>

For this they willingly are ignorant of - Λαιθάνει γὰρ αὐτοὺς τοῦτο
θέλοντας Laithanei gar autous touto thelontas. There is some
considerable variety in the translation of this passage. In our common
version the Greek word (θέλοντας thelontas) is rendered as if it were an
adverb, or as if it referred to their "ignorance" in regard to the
event; meaning, that while they might have known this fact, they took no
pains to do it, or that they preferred to have its recollection far from
their minds. So Beza and Luther render it. Others, however, take it as
referring to what follows, meaning, "being so minded; being of that
opinion; or affirming." So Bloomfield, Robinson (Lexicon), Mede,
Rosenmuller, etc. According to this interpretation the sense is, "They
who thus will or think; that is, they who hold the opinion that all
things will continue to remain as they were, are ignorant of this fact
that things have not always thus remained; that there has been a
destruction of the world once by water."

The Greek seems rather to demand this interpretation; and then the sense
of the passage will be, "It is concealed or hidden from those who hold
this opinion, that the earth has been once destroyed." It is implied,
whichever interpretation is adopted, that the will was concerned in it;
that they were influenced by that rather than by sober judgment and by
reason; and whether the word refers to their "ignorance," or to their
"holding that opinion," there was obstinacy and perverseness about it.
The "will" has usually more to do in the denial and rejection of the
doctrines of the Bible than the "understanding" has. The argument which
the apostle appeals to in reply to this objection is a simple one. The
adversaries of the doctrine affirmed that the laws of nature had always
remained the same, and they affirmed that they always would. The apostle
denies the fact which they assumed, in the sense in which they affirmed
it, and maintains that those laws have not been so stable and uniform
that the world has never been destroyed by an overwhelming visitation
from God. It has been destroyed by a flood; it may be again by fire.
There was the same improbability that the event would occur, so far as
the argument from the stability of the laws of nature is concerned, in
the one case that there is in the other, and consequently the objection
is of no force.

That by the word of God - By the command of God. "He spoke, and it was
done." Compare [Gen 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006), [Gen
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009); [Psa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009). The idea here is, that
everything depends on his word or will. As the heavens and the earth
were originally made by his command, so by the same command they can be
destroyed.

The heavens were of old - The heavens were formerly made, [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001). The word "heaven" in the
Scriptures sometimes refers to the atmosphere, sometimes to the starry
worlds as they appear above us, and sometimes to the exalted place where
God dwells. Here it is used, doubtless, in the popular signification, as
denoting the heavens as they "appear," embracing the sun, moon, and
stars.

And the earth standing out of the water and in the water - Margin,
"consisting." Greek, συνεστῶσα sunestōsa. The Greek word, when used in
an intransitive sense, means "to stand with," or "together;" then
tropically, "to place together," to constitute, place, bring into
existence - Robinson. The idea which our translators seem to have had
is, that, in the formation of the earth, a part was out of the water,
and a part under the water; and that the former, or the inhabited
portion, became entirely submerged, and that thus the inhabitants
perished. This was not, however, probably the idea of Peter. He
doubtless has reference to the account given in Gen. 1: of the creation
of the earth, in which water performed so important a part. The thought
in his mind seems to have been, that "water" entered materially into the
formation of the earth, and that in its very origin there existed the
means by which it was destroyed afterward.

The word which is rendered "standing" should rather be rendered
"consisting of," or "constituted of;" and the meaning is, that the
creation of the earth was the result of the divine agency acting on the
mass of elements which in Genesis is called "waters," [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002), [Gen
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006), [Gen
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009). There was at first a vast fluid,
an immense unformed collection of materials, called "waters," and from
that the earth arose. The point of time, therefore, in which Peter looks
at the earth here, is not when the mountains, and continents, and
islands, seem to be standing partly out of the water and partly in the
water, but when there was a vast mass of materials called "waters" from
which the earth was formed. The phrase "out of the water" (ἐξ ὕδατος ex
hudatos) refers to the origin of the earth. It was formed "from," or out
of, that mass. The phrase "in the water" (δἰ ὕδατος di' hudatos) more
properly means "through" or "by." It does not mean that the earth stood
in the water in the sense that it was partly submerged; but it means not
only that the earth arose "from" that mass that is called "water" in
Gen. 1, but that that mass called "water" was in fact the grand material
out of which the earth was formed. It was "through" or "by means of"
that vast mass of mingled elements that the earth was made as it was.
Everything arose out of that chaotic mass; through that, or by means of
that, all things were formed, and from the fact that the earth was thus
formed out of the water, or that water entered so essentially into its
formation, there existed causes which ultimately resulted in the deluge.

[2 Peter 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 3:6</span></span>

Whereby - Δι ̓ ὧν Di' hōn. Through which, or by means of which. The
pronoun here is in the plural number, and there has been much difference
of opinion as to what it refers. Some suppose that it refers to the
heavens mentioned in the preceding verse, and to the fact that the
windows of heaven were opened in the deluge (Doddridge), others that the
Greek phrase is taken in the sense of (διὸ dio) "whence." Wetstein
supposes that it refers to the "heavens and the earth." But the most
obvious reference, though the plural number is used, and the word
"water" in the antecedent is in the singular, is to "water." The fact
seems to be that the apostle had the "waters" mentioned in Genesis
prominently in his eye, and meant to describe the effect produced "by"
those waters. He has also twice, in the same sentence, referred to
"water" - "out of the water and in the water." It is evidently to these
"waters" mentioned in Genesis, out of which the world was originally
made, that he refers here. The world was formed from that fluid mass; by
these waters which existed when the earth was made, and out of which it
arose, it was destroyed. The antecedent to the word in the plural number
is rather that which was in the mind of the writer, or that of which he
was thinking, than the word which he had used.

The world that then was ... - Including all its inhabitants. Rosenmuller
supposes that the reference here is to some universal catastrophe which
occurred before the deluge in the time of Noah, and indeed before the
earth was fitted up in its present form, as described by Moses in Gen.
1. It is rendered more than probable, by the researches of geologists in
modern times, that such changes have occurred; but there is no evidence
that Pater was acquainted with them, and his purpose did not require
that he should refer to them. All that his argument demanded was the
fact that the world had been once destroyed, and that therefore there
was no improbability in believing that it would be again. They who
maintained that the prediction that the earth would be destroyed was
improbable, affirmed that there were no signs of such an event; that the
laws of nature were stable and uniform; and that as those laws had been
so long and so uniformly unbroken, it was absurd to believe that such an
event could occur. To meet this, all that was necessary was to show
that, in a case where the same objections substantially might be urged,
it had actually occurred that the world had been destroyed. There was,
in itself considered, as much improbability in believing that the world
could be destroyed by water as that it would be destroyed by fire, and
consequently the objection had no real force. Notwithstanding the
apparent stability of the laws of nature, the world had been once
destroyed; and there is, therefore, no improbability that it may be
again. On the objections which might have been plausibly urged against
the flood, see the notes at [Heb 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007).

[2 Peter 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 3:7</span></span>

But the heavens and the earth which are now - As they now exist. There
is no difficulty here respecting what is meant by the word "earth," but
it is not so easy to determine precisely how much is included in the
word "heavens." It cannot be supposed to mean "heaven" as the place
where God dwells; nor is it necessary to suppose that Peter understood
by the word all that would now be implied in it, as used by a modern
astronomer. The word is doubtless employed in a popular signification,
referring to the "heavens as they appear to the eye;" and the idea is,
that the conflagration would not only destroy the earth, but would
change the heavens as they now appear to us. If, in fact, the earth with
its atmosphere should be subjected to an universal conflagration, all
that is properly implied in what is here said by Peter would occur.

By the same word - Dependent solely on the will of God. He has only to
give command, and all will be destroyed. The laws of nature have no
stability independent of his will, and at his pleasure all things could
be reduced to nothing, as easily as they were made. A single word, a
breath of command, from one Being, a Being over whom we have no control,
would spread universal desolation through the heavens and the earth.
Notwithstanding the laws of nature, as they are called, and the
precision, uniformity, and power with which they operate, the dependence
of the universe on the Creator is as entire as though there were no such
laws, and as though all were conducted by the mere will of the Most
High, irrespective of such laws. In fact, those laws have no efficiency
of their own, but are a mere statement of the way in which God produces
the changes which occur, the methods by which He operates who "works all
in all." At any moment he could suspend them; that is, he could cease to
act, or withdraw his efficiency, and the universe would cease to be.

Are kept in store - Greek, "Are treasured up." The allusion in the Greek
word is to anything that is treasured up, or reserved for future use.
The apostle does not say that this is the only purpose for which the
heavens and the earth are preserved, but that this is one object, or
this is one aspect in which the subject may be viewed. They are like
treasure reserved for future use.

Reserved unto fire - Reserved or kept to be burned up. See the notes at
[Pe2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010). The first mode of
destroying the world was by water, the next will be by fire. That the
world would at some period be destroyed by fire was a common opinion
among the ancient philosophers, especially the Greek Stoics. What was
the foundation of that opinion, or whence it was derived, it is
impossible now to determine; but it is remarkable that it should have
accorded so entirely with the statements of the New Testament. The
authorities in proof that this opinion was entertained may be seen in
Wetstein, in loc. See Seneca, N. Q. iii. 28; Cic. N. D. ii. 46;
Simplicius in Arist. de Coelo i. 9; Eusebius, P. xv. 18. It is quite
remarkable that there have been among the pagan in ancient and modern
times so many opinions that accord with the statements of revelation -
opinions, many of them, which could not have been founded on any
investigations of science among them, and which must, therefore, have
been either the result of conjecture, or handed down by tradition.
Whatever may have been their origin, the fact that such opinions
prevailed and were believed, may be allowed to have some weight in
showing that the statements in the Bible are not improbable.

Against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men - The world was
destroyed by a flood on account of the wickedness of its inhabitants. It
would seem from this passage that it will be destroyed by fire with
reference to the same cause; at least, that its destruction by fire will
involve the perdition of wicked men. It cannot be inferred from this
passage that the world will be as wicked at the general conflagration as
it was in the time of Noah; but the idea in the mind of Peter seems to
have been, that in the destruction of the world by fire the perdition of
the wicked will be involved, or will at that time occur. It also seems
to be implied that the fire will accomplish an important agency in that
destruction, as the water did on the old world. It is not said, in the
passage before us, whether those to be destroyed will be living at that
time, or will be raised up from the dead, nor have we any means of
determining what was the idea of Peter on that point. All that the
passage essentially teaches is, that the world is reserved now with
reference to such a consummation by fire; that is, that there are
elements kept in store that may be enkindled into an universal
conflagration, and that such a conflagration will be attended with the
destruction of the wicked.

[2 Peter 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 3:8</span></span>

But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years - This [Pe2
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008) is the second consideration by
which the apostle meets the objection of scoffers against the doctrine
of the second coming of the Saviour. The objection was, that much time,
and perhaps the time which had been supposed to be set for his coming,
had passed away, and still all things remained as they were. The reply
of the apostle is, that no argument could be drawn from this, for that
which may seem to be a long time to us is a brief period with God. In
the infinity of his own duration there is abundant time to accomplish
his designs, and it can make no difference with him whether they are
accomplished in one day or extended to one thousand years. Man has but a
short time to live, and if he does not accomplish his purposes in a very
brief period, he never will. But it is not so with God. He always lives;
and we cannot therefore infer, because the execution of His purposes
seems to be delayed, that they are abandoned. With Him who always lives
it will be as easy to accomplish them at a far distant period as now. If
it is His pleasure to accomplish them in a single day, He can do it; if
He chooses that the execution shall be deferred to one thousand years,
or that one thousand years shall be consumed in executing them, He has
power to carry them onward through what seems, to us, to be so vast a
duration. The wicked, therefore, cannot infer that they will escape
because their punishment is delayed; nor should the righteous fear that
the divine promises will fail because ages pass away before they are
accomplished. The expression here used, that "one day is with the Lord
as a thousand years, etc.," is common in the Rabbinical writings. See
Wetstein in loc. A similar thought occurs in [Psa
90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004); "For a thousand years in thy
sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the
night."

[2 Peter 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 3:9</span></span>

The Lord is not slack concerning his promise - That is, it should not be
inferred because His promise seems to be long delayed that therefore it
will fail. When people, after a considerable lapse of time, fail to
fulfil their engagements, we infer that it is because they have changed
their plans, or because they have forgotten their promises, or because
they have no ability to perform them, or because there is a lack of
principle which makes them fail, regardless of their obligations. But no
such inference can be drawn from the apparent delay of the fulfillment
of the divine purposes. Whatever may be the reasons why they seem to be
deferred, with God, we may be sure that it is from no such causes as
these.

As some men count slackness - It is probable that the apostle here had
his eye on some professing Christians who had become disheartened and
impatient, and who, from the delay in regard to the coming of the Lord
Jesus, and from the representations of those who denied the truth of the
Christian religion, arguing from that delay that it was false, began to
fear that his promised coming would indeed never occur. To such he says
that it should not be inferred from his delay that he would not return,
but that the delay should be regarded as an evidence of his desire that
men should have space for repentance, and an opportunity to secure their
salvation. See the notes at [Pe2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015).

But is long-suffering to us-ward - Toward us. The delay should be
regarded as a proof of His forbearance, and of His desire that all human
beings should be saved. Every sinner should consider the fact that he is
not cut down in his sins, not as a proof that God will not punish the
wicked, but as a demonstration that He is now forbearing, and is willing
that he should have an ample opportunity to obtain eternal life. No one
should infer that God will not execute His threats, unless he can look
into the most distant parts of a coming eternity, and demonstrate that
there is no suffering appointed for the sinner there; anyone who sins,
and who is spared even for a moment, should regard the respite as only a
proof that God is merciful and forbearing now.

Not willing that any should perish - That is, He does not desire it or
wish it. His nature is benevolent, and He sincerely desires the eternal
happiness of all, and His patience toward sinners "proves" that He is
willing that they should be saved. If He were not willing, it would be
easy for Him to cut them off, and exclude them from hope immediately.
This passage, however, should not be adduced to prove:

\(1\) that sinners never will in fact perish; because:

\(a\) the passage does not refer to what God will do as the final Judge
of mankind, but to what are His feelings and desires now toward men.

\(b\) One may have a sincere desire that others should not perish, and
yet it may be that, in entire consistency with that, they will perish. A
parent has a sincere wish that his children should not be punished, and
yet he himself may be under a moral necessity to punish them. A lawgiver
may have a sincere wish that no one should ever break the laws, or be
punished, and yet he himself may build a prison, and construct a
gallows, and cause the law to be executed in a most rigorous manner. A
judge on the bench may have a sincere desire that no man should be
executed, and that everyone arraigned before him should be found to be
innocent, and yet even he, in entire accordance with that wish, and with
a most benevolent heart, even with tears in his eyes, may pronounce the
sentence of the law.

\(c\) It cannot be inferred that all that the heart of infinite
benevolence would desire will be accomplished by his mere will. It is
evidently as much in accordance with the benevolence of God that no one
should be miserable in this world, as it is that no one should suffer in
the next, since the difficulty is not in the question Where one shall
suffer, but in the fact itself that any should suffer; and it is just as
much in accordance with His nature that all should be happy here, as
that they should be happy hereafter. And yet no man can maintain that
the fact that God is benevolent proves that no one will suffer here. As
little will that fact prove that none will suffer in the world to come.

\(2\) the passage should not be adduced to prove that God has no
purpose, and has formed no plan, in regard to the destruction of the
wicked; because:

\(a\) the word here used has reference rather to His disposition, or to
His nature, than to any act or plan.

\(b\) There is a sense, as is admitted by all, in which He does will the
destruction of the wicked - to wit, if they do not repent - that is, if
they deserve it.

\(c\) Such an act is as inconsistent with His general benevolence as an
eternal purpose in the matter, since His eternal purpose can only have
been to do what He actually does; and if it be consistent with a sincere
desire that sinners should be saved to do this, then it is consistent to
determine beforehand to do it - for to determine beforehand to do what
is in fact right, can only be a lovely trait in the character of anyone.

\(3\) The passage then proves:

\(a\) that God has a sincere desire that people should be saved;

\(b\) that any purpose in regard to the destruction of sinners is not
founded on mere will, or is not arbitrary;

\(c\) that it would be agreeable to the nature of God, and to His
arrangements in the plan of salvation, if all human beings should come
to repentance, and accept the offers of mercy;

\(d\) that if any come to Him truly penitent, and desirous to be saved,
they will not be cast off;

\(e\) that, since it is in accordance with His nature, that He should
desire that all people may be saved, it may be presumed that He has made
an arrangement by which it is possible that they should be; and,

\(f\) that, since this is His desire, it is proper for the ministers of
religion to offer salvation to every human being. Compare [Eze
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011).

[2 Peter 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 3:10</span></span>

But the day of the Lord - The day of the Lord Jesus. That is, the day in
which he will be manifested. It is called his day, because he will then
be the grand and prominent object as the Judge of all. Compare [Luk
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027).

Will come as a thief in the night - Unexpectedly; suddenly. See the
notes at [Th1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002).

In the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise - That is,
what seems to us to be the heavens. It cannot mean that the holy home
where God dwells will pass away; nor do we need to suppose that this
declaration extends to the starry worlds and systems as disclosed by
modern astronomy. The word is doubtless used in a popular sense - that
is, as things appear to us; and the fair interpretation of the passage
would demand only such a change as would occur by the destruction of
this world by fire. If a conflagration should take place, embracing the
earth and its surrounding atmosphere, all the phenomena would occur
which are here described; and, if this would be so, then this is all
that can be proved to be meant by the passage. Such a destruction of the
elements could not occur without "a great noise."

And the elements shall melt with fervent heat - Greek: "the elements
being burned, or burning, (καυσούμενα kausoumena,) shall be dissolved."
The idea is, that the cause of their being "dissolved" shall be fire; or
that there will be a conflagration extending to what are here called the
"elements," that shall produce the effects here described by the word
"dissolved." There has been much difference of opinion in regard to the
meaning of the word here rendered "elements," (στοιχεῖα stoicheia.) The
word occurs in the New Testament only in the following places: [Gal
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003), [Gal
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009); [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010), [Pe2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012), in which it is rendered
"elements;" [Col 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008), [Col
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020), in which it is rendered
"rudiments;" and in [Heb 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012), where
it is rendered "principles." For the general meaning of the word, see
the notes at [Gal 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003). The word
denotes the "rudiments" of anything; the minute parts or portions of
which anything is composed, or which constitutes the simple portions out
of which anything grows, or of which it is compounded.

Here it would properly denote the component parts of the material world;
or those which enter into its composition, and of which it is made up.
It is not to be supposed that the apostle used the term with the same
exact signification with which a chemist would use it now, but in
accordance with the popular use of the term in his day. In all ages, and
in all languages, some such word, with more or less scientific accuracy,
has been employed to denote the primary materials out of which others
were formed, just as, in most languages, there have been characters or
letters to denote the elementary sounds of which language is composed.
In general, the ancients supposed that the elements out of which all
things were formed were four in number - air, earth, fire, and water.
Modern science has overturned this theory completely, and has shown that
these, so far from being simple elements, are themselves compounds; but
the tendency of modern science is still to show that the elements of all
things are in fact few in number.

The word, as used here by Peter, would refer to the elements of things
as then understood in a popular sense; it would now not be an improper
word to be applied to the few elements of which all things are composed,
as disclosed by modern chemistry. In either case, the use of the word
would be correct. Whether applied to the one or the other, science has
shown that all are capable of combustion. Water, in its component parts,
is inflammable in a high degree; and even the diamond has been shown to
be combustible. The idea contained in the word "dissolved," is,
properly, only the change which heat produces. Heat changes the forms of
things; dissolves them into their elements; dissipates those which were
solid by driving them off into gases, and produces new compounds, but it
annihilates nothing. It could not be demonstrated from this phrase that
the world would be annihilated by fire; it could be proved only that it
will undergo important changes. So far as the action of fire is
concerned, the form of the earth may pass away, and its aspect be
changed; but unless the direct power which created it interposes to
annihilate it, the matter which now composes it will still be in
existence.

The earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burned up -
That is, whether they are the works of God or man - the whole vegetable
and animal creation, and all the towers, the towns, the palaces, the
productions of genius, the paintings, the statuary, the books, which man
has made:

"The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,

The solemn temples, the great globe itself,

And all that it inherits, shall dissolve,

And, like the baseless fabric of a vision,

Leave not one wreck behind."

The word rendered "burned up," like the word just before used and
rendered "fervent heat" - a word of the same origin, but here intensive
- means that they will undergo such a change as fire will produce; not,
necessarily, that the matter composing them will be annihilated. If the
matter composing the earth is ever to be destroyed entirely, it must be
by the immediate power of God, because only He who created can destroy.
There is not the least evidence that a particle of matter originally
made has been annihilated since the world began; and there are no fires
so intense, no chemical powers so mighty, as to cause a particle of
matter to cease wholly to exist. So far as the power of man is
concerned, and so far as one portion of matter can prey on another,
matter is as imperishable as mind, and neither can be destroyed unless
God destroys it. Whether it is His purpose to annihilate any portion of
the matter which He has made, does not appear from His Word; but it is
clear that He intends that the universe shall undergo important changes.
As to the possibility or probability of such a destruction by fire as is
predicted here, no one can have any doubt who is acquainted with the
disclosures of modern science in regard to the internal structure of the
earth.

Even the ancient philosophers, from some cause, supposed that the earth
would still be destroyed by fire (see my notes at [Pe2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007)), and modern science has made it
probable that the interior of the earth is a melted and intensely-heated
mass of burning materials; that the habitable world is only a
comparatively thin crust (shell) over those internal fires; that
earthquakes are caused by the vapors engendered by that heated mass when
water comes in contact with it; and that volcanoes are only openings and
vent-holes through which those internal flames make their way to the
surface. Whether these fires will everywhere make their way to the
surface, and produce an universal conflagration, perhaps could not be
determined by science, but no one can doubt that the simple command of
God would be all that is necessary to pour those burning floods over the
earth, just as He once caused the waters to roll over every mountain and
through every valley.

As to the question whether it is probable that such a change will be
produced by fire, bringing the present order of things to a close, it
may be further remarked that there is reason to believe that such
changes are in fact taking place in other worlds. "During the last two
or three centuries, upwards of thirteen fixed stars have disappeared.
One of them, situated in the northern hemisphere, presented a special
brilliancy, and was so bright as to be seen by the naked eye at mid-day.
It seemed to be on fire, appearing at first of a dazzling white, then of
a reddish yellow, and lastly of an ashy pale color. LaPlace supposes
that it was burned up, as it has never been seen since. The
conflagration was visible about sixteen months." The well-known
astronomer, Von Littrow, in the section of his work on "New and Missing
Stars" (entitled, Die Wunder der Himmels oder Gemeinfassliche
Darstellung der Weltsystems, Stuttgart, 1843, Section 227), observes:
"Great as may be the revolutions which take place on the surface of
those fixed stars, which are subject to this alternation of light, what
entirely different changes may those others have experienced, which in
regions of the firmament where no star had ever been before, appeared to
blaze up in clear flames, and then to disappear, perhaps forever."

He then gives a brief history of those stars which have excited the
particular attention of astronomers. "In the year 1572, on the 11th of
November," says he, "Tycho, on passing from his chemical laboratory to
the observatory, through the court of his house, observed in the
constellation Cassiopeia, at a place where before he had only seen very
small stars, a new star of uncommon magnitude. It was so bright that it
surpassed even Jupiter and Venus in splendor, and was visible even in
the daytime. During the whole time in which it was visible, Tycho could
observe no parallax or change of position. At the end of the year,
however, it gradually diminished; and at length, in March 1574, sixteen
months after its discovery, entirely disappeared, since which all traces
of it have been lost. When it first appeared, its light was of a
dazzling white color; in January 1573, two months after its reviving, it
became yellowish; in a few months it assumed a reddish hue, like Mars or
Aldebaran; and in the beginning of the year 1574, two or three months
before its total disappearance, it glimmered only with a gray or
lead-colored light, similar to that of Saturn." See Bibliotheca Sacra,
III., p. 181. If such things occur in other worlds, there is nothing
improbable or absurd in the supposition that they may yet occur on the
earth.

[2 Peter 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 3:11</span></span>

Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved - Since this is an
undoubted truth.

What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
godliness - In holy conduct and piety. That is, this fact ought to be
allowed to exert a deep and abiding influence on us, to induce us to
lead holy lives. We should feel that there is nothing permanent on the
earth that this is not our abiding home; and that our great interests
are in another world. We should be serious, humble, and prayerful; and
should make it our great object to be prepared for the solemn scenes
through which we are soon to pass. An habitual contemplation of the
truth, that all that we see is soon to pass away, would produce a most
salutary effect on the mind. It would make us serious. It would repress
ambition. It would lead us not to desire to accumulate what must so soon
be destroyed. It would prompt us to lay up our treasures in heaven. It
would cause us to ask with deep earnestness whether we are prepared for
these amazing scenes, should they suddenly burst upon us.

[2 Peter 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 3:12</span></span>

Looking for - Not knowing when this may occur, the mind should be in
that state which constitutes "expectation;" that is, a belief that it
will occur, and a condition of mind in which we would not be taken by
surprise should it happen at any moment. See the notes at [Tit
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013).

And hasting unto the coming - Margin, as in Greek: ""hasting the
coming."" The Greek word rendered "hasting," (σπεύδω speudō,) means to
urge on, to hasten; and then to hasten after anything, to await with
eager desire. This is evidently the sense here - Wetstein and Robinson.
The state of mind which is indicated by the word is that when we are
anxiously desirous that anything should occur, and when we would hasten
or accelerate it if we could. The true Christian does not dread the
coming of that day. He looks forward to it as the period of his
redemption, and would welcome, at any time, the return of his Lord and
Saviour. While he is willing to wait as long as it shall please God for
the advent of His Redeemer, yet to Him the brightest prospect in the
future is that hour when he shall come to take him to Himself.

The coming of the day of God - Called "the day of God," because God will
then be manifested in his power and glory.

[2 Peter 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 3:13</span></span>

Nevertheless we, according to his promise - The allusion here seems to
be, beyond a doubt, to two passages in Isaiah, in which a promise of
this kind is found. [Isa 65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017); "for,
behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth: and the former shall not
be remembered, nor come into mind." [Isa
66:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022); "for as the new heavens and the
new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord,"
etc. Compare [Rev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001), where John
says he had a vision of the new heaven and the new earth which was
promised: "And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven
and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea." See
the notes at [Isa 65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017).

Look for new heavens and a new earth - It may not be easy to answer many
of the questions which might be asked respecting the "new heaven and
earth" here mentioned. One of those which are most naturally asked is,
whether the apostle meant to say that this earth, after being purified
by fire, would be suited again for the home of the redeemed; but this
question it is impossible to answer with certainty. The following
remarks may perhaps embrace all that is known, or that can be shown to
be probable, on the meaning of the passage before us.

I. The "new heavens and the new earth" referred to will be such as will
exist after the world shall have been destroyed by fire; that is, after
the general judgment. There is not a word expressed, and not a hint
given, of any "new heaven and earth" previous to this, in which the
Saviour will reign personally over his saints, in such a renovated
world, through a long millennial period. The order of events, as stated
by Peter, is:

\(a\) that the heavens and earth which are now, are "kept in store,
reserved unto fire "against the day of judgment," and perdition of
ungodly men," [Pe2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007);

\(b\) that the day of the Lord will come suddenly and unexpectedly, [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010); that then the heavens and earth
will pass away with a great noise, the elements will melt, and the earth
with all its works be burned up, [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010); and,

\(c\) that after this [Pe2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013) we are
to expect the "new heavens and new earth."

Nothing is said of a personal reign of Christ; nothing of the
resurrection of the saints to dwell with him on the earth; nothing of
the world's being fitted up for their home previous to the final
judgment. If Peter had any knowledge of such events, and believed that
they would occur, it is remarkable that he did not even allude to them
here. The passage before us is one of the very few places in the New
Testament where allusion is made to the manner in which the affairs of
the world will be closed; and it cannot be explained why, if he looked
for such a glorious personal reign of the Saviour, the subject should
have been passed over in total silence.

II\. The word "new," applied to the heavens and the earth that are to
succeed the present, might express one of the following three things -
that is, either of these things would correspond with all that is fairly
implied in that word:

\(a\) If a new world was literally created out of nothing after this
world is destroyed; for that would be in the strictest sense "new." That
such an event is possible no one can doubt, though it is not revealed.

\(b\) If an inhabitant of the earth should dwell after death In any
other of the worlds now existing, it would be to him a "new" abode, and
everything would appear new. Let him, for instance, be removed to the
planet "Saturn," with its wonderful ring, and its seven moons, and the
whole aspect of the heavens, and of the world on which he would then
dwell, would be new to him. The same thing would occur if he were to
dwell on any other of the heavenly bodies, or if he were to pass from
world to world. See this illustrated at length in the works of Thomas
Dick, LL. D. - "Celestial Scenery," etc. Compare the notes at [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012).

\(c\) If the earth should be renovated, and suited for the home of man
after the universal conflagration, it would then be a new abode.

III\. This world, thus renovated, may be, from time to time, the
temporary abode of the redeemed, after the final judgment. No one can
prove that this may not be, though there is no evidence that it will be
their permanent and eternal home or that even all the redeemed will at
any one time find a home on this globe, for no one can suppose that the
earth is spacious enough to furnish a dwelling-place for all the
unnumbered millions that are to be saved. But that the earth may again
be revisited from time to time by the redeemed; that in a purified and
renovated form it may be one of the "many mansions" which are to be
fitted up for them [Joh 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002), may not
appear wholly improbable from the following suggestions:

\(1\) It seems to have been a law of the earth that in its progress it
should be "prepared" at one period for the dwelling-place of a higher
order of beings at another period. Thus, according to the disclosures of
geology, it existed perhaps for countless ages before it was fitted to
be an abode for man; and that it was occupied by the monsters of an
inferior order of existence, who have now passed away to make room for a
nobler race. Who can tell but the present order of thing may pass away
to make place for the manifestations of a more exalted mode of being?

\(2\) there is no certain evidence that any world has been annihilated,
though some have disappeared from human view. Indeed, as observed above,
(see the notes at [Pe2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010)) there is
no proof that a single particle of matter ever has been annihilated, or
ever will be. It may change its form, but it may still exist.

\(3\) it seems also to accord most with probability, that, though the
earth may undergo important changes by flood or fire, it will not be
annihilated. It seems difficult to suppose that, as a world, it will be
wholly displaced from the system of which it is now a part, or that the
system itself will disappear. The earth, as one of the worlds of God,
has occupied too important a position in the history of the universe to
make it to be easily believed that the place where the Son of God became
incarnate and died, shall be utterly swept away It would, certainly,
accord more with all the feelings which we can have on such a subject,
to suppose that a world once so beautiful when it came from the hand of
its Maker. should be restored to primitive loveliness; that a world
which seems to have been made primarily (see the notes at [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)) with a view to illustrate the
glory of God in redemption, should be preserved in some appropriate form
to be the theater of the exhibition of the developement of that plan in
far distant ages to come.

\(4\) to the redeemed, it would be most interesting again to visit the
spot where the great work of their redemption was accomplished; where
the Son of God became incarnate and made atonement for sin; and where
there would be so many interesting recollections and associations, even
after the purification by fire, connected with the infancy of their
existence, and their preparation for eternity. Piety would at least
"wish" that the world where Gethsemane and Calvary are should never be
blotted out from the universe.

\(5\) however, if, after their resurrection and reception into heaven,
the redeemed shall ever revisit a world so full of interesting
recollections and associations, where they began their being, where
their Redeemer lived and died, where they were renewed and sanctified,
and where their bodies once rested in the grave, there is no reason to
suppose that this will be their permanent and unchanging home. It may be
mere speculation, but it seems to accord best with the goodness of God,
and with the manner in which the universe is made, to suppose that every
portion of it may be visited, and become successively the home of the
redeemed; that they may pass from world to world, and survey the wonders
and the works of God as they are displayed in different worlds. The
universe, so vast, seems to have been suited for such a purpose, and
nothing else that we can conceive of will be so adapted to give
employment without weariness to the minds that God has made, in the
interminable duration before them.

IV\. The new heavens and earth will be "holy." They will be the home of
righteousness forever.

\(a\) This fact is clearly revealed in the verse before us; "wherein
dwelleth righteousness." It is also the correct statement of the
Scriptures, [Rev 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027); [Co1
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009); [Heb
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014).

\(b\) This will be in strong contrast with what has occurred on earth,
The history of this world has been almost entirely a history of sin - of
its nature, developements, results. There have been no perfectly holy
beings on the earth, except the Saviour, and the angels who have
occasionally visited it. There has been no perfectly holy place - city,
village, hamlet; no perfectly holy community. But the future world, in
strong contrast with this, will be perfectly pure, and will be a fair
illustration of what religion in its perfect form will do.

\(c\) It is for this that the Christian desires to dwell in that world,
and waits for the coming of his Saviour. It is not primarily that he may
be happy, desirable as that is, but that he may be in a world where he
himself will be perfectly pure, and where all around him will be pure;
where every being that he meets shall be "holy as God is holy," and
every place on which his eye rests, or his foot treads, shall be
uncontaminated by sin. To the eye of faith and hope, how blessed is the
prospect of such a world!

[2 Peter 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 3:14</span></span>

Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent -
That is, in securing your salvation. The effect of such hopes and
prospects should be to lead us to an earnest inquiry whether we are
prepared to dwell in a holy world, and to make us diligent in performing
the duties, and patient in bearing the trials of life. He who has such
hopes set before him, should seek earnestly that he may be enabled truly
to avail himself of them, and should make their attainment the great
object of his life. He who is so soon to come to an end of all weary
toil, should be willing to labor diligently and faithfully while life
lasts. He who is so soon to be relieved from all temptation and trial,
should he willing to bear a little longer the sorrows of the present
world. What are all these compared with the glory that awaits us?
Compare the [Co1 15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058) note; [Rom
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018) note, following; [Co2
4:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016) notes.

That ye may be found of him in peace - Found by him when he returns in
such a state as to secure your eternal peace.

Without spot, and blameless - See the notes at [Eph
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027). It should be an object of
earnest effort with us to have the last stain of sin and pollution
removed from our souls. A deep feeling that we are soon to stand in the
presence of a holy God, our final Judge, cannot but have a happy
influence in making us pure.

[2 Peter 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 3:15</span></span>

And account - that "the long-suffering of our Lord" is "salvation."
Regard his delay in coming to judge the world, not as an evidence that
he never will come, but as a proof of his desire that we should be
saved. Many had drawn a different inference from the fact that the
Saviour did not return, and had supposed that it was a proof that he
would never come, and that his promises had failed. Peter says that that
conclusion was not authorized, but that we should rather regard it as an
evidence of his mercy, and of his desire that we should be saved. This
conclusion is as proper now as it was then. Wicked men should not infer,
because God does not cut them down, that therefore they never will be
punished, or that God is not faithful to his threatenings. They should
rather regard it as a proof that he is willing to save them; because:

\(1\) He might justly cut them off for their sins;

\(2\) the only reason of which we have knowledge why he spares the
wicked is to give them space for repentance; and,

\(3\) as long as life is prolonged a sinner has the opportunity to
repent, and may turn to God. We may therefore, in our own case, look on
all the delays of God to punish - on all his patience and forbearance
toward us, notwithstanding our sins and provocations - on the numberless
tokens of his kindness scattered along our way, as evidence that he is
not willing that we should perish.

What an accumulated argument in any case would this afford of the
willingness of God to save! Let any man look on his own sins, his pride,
and selfishness, and sensuality; let him contemplate the fact that he
has sinned through many years, and against many mercies; let him
endeavor to estimate the number and magnitude of his offences, and upon
God's patience in bearing with him while these have been committed, and
who can overrate the force of such an argument in proof that God is slow
to anger, and is willing to save? Compare the notes at [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004).

Even as our beloved brother Paul also - From this reference to Paul the
following things are clear:

\(1\) that Peter was acquainted with his writings;

\(2\) that Peter presumed that those to whom he wrote were also
acquainted with them;

\(3\) that Peter regarded Paul as a "beloved brother," notwithstanding
the solemn rebuke which Paul had had occasion to administer to him, [Gal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002) ff.

\(4\) that Peter regarded Paul as an authority in inculcating the
doctrines and duties of religion; and,

\(5\) that Peter regarded Paul as an inspired man, and his writings as a
part of divine truth. See the notes at [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016).

That Peter has shown in his Epistles that he was acquainted with the
writings of Paul, has been abundantly proved by Eichhorn (Einleitung in
das N. Tes. viii. 606ff), and will be apparent by a comparison of the
following passages: [Eph 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003), with
[Pe1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001); [Col
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008), with [Pe1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001); [Eph
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#022), with [Pe1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001); [Eph
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021), with [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005); [Th1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006), with [Pe1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008); [Co1
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020), with [Pe1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#014); [Rom
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018), with [Pe1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001); [Rom
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#024), with [Pe1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021); [Rom
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001), [Rom
13:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003), with [Pe1
2:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013); [Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009), with [Pe1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003); [Ti1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005), with [Pe1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#005). The writings of the apostles were
doubtless extensively circulated; and one apostle, though himself
inspired, could not but feel a deep interest in the writings of another.
There would be cases also, as in the instance before us, in which one
would wish to confirm his own sentiments by the acknowledged wisdom,
experience, and authority of another.

According to the wisdom given unto him - Peter evidently did not mean to
disparage that wisdom, or to express a doubt that Paul was endowed with
wisdom; he meant undoubtedly that, in regard to Paul, the same thing was
true which he would have affirmed of himself or of any other man, that
whatever wisdom he had was to be traced to a higher than human origin.
This would at the same time tend to secure more respect for the opinion
of Paul than if he had said it was his own, and would keep up in the
minds of those to whom he wrote a sense of the truth that all wisdom is
from above. In reference to ourselves, to our friends, to our teachers,
and to all men, it is proper to bear in remembrance the fact that all
true wisdom is from the "Father of lights." Compare the notes at [Jam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005), [Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017).

Hath written unto you - It is not necessary to suppose that Paul had
written any epistles addressed specifically, and by name, to the persons
to whom Peter wrote. It is rather to be supposed that the persons to
whom Peter wrote [Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001) lived in the
regions to which some of Paul's epistles were addressed, and that they
might be regarded as addressed to them. The epistles to the Galatians,
Ephesians, and Colossians were of this description, all addressed to
churches in Asia Minor, and all, therefore, having reference to the same
people to whom Peter addressed his epistles.

[2 Peter 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 3:16</span></span>

As also in all his epistles - Not only in those which he addressed to
the churches in Asia Minor, but in his epistles generally. It is to be
presumed that they might have had an acquaintance with some of the other
epistles of Paul, as well as those sent to the churches in their
immediate vicinity.

Speaking in them of these things - The things which Peter had dwelt upon
in his two epistles. The great doctrines of the cross; of the depravity
of man; of the divine purposes; of the new birth; of the consummation of
all things; of the return of the Saviour to judge the world, and to
receive his people to himself; the duty of a serious, devout and
prayerful life, and of being prepared for the heavenly world. These
things are constantly dwelt upon by Paul, and to his authority in these
respects Peter might appeal with the utmost confidence.

In which - The common reading in this passage is ἐν οἷς en hois, and
according to this the reference is to the "subjects" treated of - "in
which things" - referring to what he had just spoken of - "speaking of
these things." This reading is found in the common editions of the New
Testament, and is supported by far the greater number of mss., and by
most commentators and critics. It is found in Griesbach, Tittman, and
Hahn, and has every evidence of being the genuine reading. Another
reading, however, (ἐν αἷς en hais,) is found in some valuable mss., and
is supported by the Syriac and Arabic versions, and adopted by Mill
(Prolegomena 1484), and by Beza. According to this, the reference is to
the "epistles" themselves - as would seem to be implied in our common
version. The true construction, so far as the evidence goes, is to refer
it not directly to the "epistles," but to the "things" of which Peter
says Paul wrote; that is, not to the style and language of Paul, but to
the great truths and doctrines which he taught. Those doctrines were
indeed contained in his epistles, but still, according to the fair
construction of the passage before us, Peter should not be understood as
accusing Paul of obscurity of style. He refers not to the difficulty of
understanding what Paul meant, but to the difficulty of comprehending
the great truths which he taught. This is, generally, the greatest
difficulty in regard to the statements of Paul. The difficulty is not
that the meaning of the writer is not plain, but it is either:

\(a\) that the mind is overpowered by the grandeur of the thought, and
the incomprehensible nature of the theme, or

\(b\) that the truth is so unpalatable, and the mind is so prejudiced
against it, that we are unwilling to receive it.

Many a man knows well enough what Paul means, and would receive his
doctrines without hesitation if the heart was not opposed to it; and in
this state of mind Paul is charged with obscurity, when the real
difficulty lies only in the heart of him who makes the complaint. If
this be the true interpretation of this passage, then it should not be
adduced to prove that Paul is an obscure writer, whatever may be true on
that point. There are, undoubtedly, obscure things in his writings, as
there are in all other ancient compositions, but this passage should not
be adduced to prove that he had not the faculty of making himself
understood. An honest heart, a willingness to receive the truth, is one
of the best qualifications for understanding the writings of Paul; and
when this exists, no one will fail to find truth that may be
comprehended, and that will be eminently adapted to sanctify and save
the soul.

Are some things hard to be understood - Things pertaining to high and
difficult subjects, and which are not easy to be comprehended. Peter
does not call in question the truth of what Paul had written; he does
not intimate that he himself would differ from him His language is
rather that which a man would use who regarded the writings to which he
referred as true, and what he says here is an honorable testimony to the
authority of Paul. It may be added,

\(1\) that Peter does not say that all the doctrines of the Bible, or
even all the doctrines of Paul, are hard to be understood, or that
nothing is plain.

\(2\) he says nothing about withholding the Bible, or even the writings
of Paul, from the mass of Christians, on the ground of the difficulty of
understanding the Scriptures; nor does he intimate that that was the
design of the Author of the Bible.

\(3\) it is perfectly manifest, from this very passage, that the
writings of Paul were in fact in the hands of the people, else how could
they wrest and pervert them?

\(4\) Peter says nothing about an infallible interpreter of any kind,
nor does he intimate that either he or his "successors" were authorized
to interpret them for the church.

\(5\) with what propriety can the pretended successor of Peter - the
pope - undertake to expound those difficult doctrines in the writings of
Paul, when even Peter himself did not undertake it, and when he did not
profess to be able to comprehend them? Is the Pope more skilled in the
knowledge of divine things than the apostle Peter? Is he better
qualified to interpret the sacred writings than an inspired apostle was?

\(6\) those portions of the writings of Paul, for anything that appears
to the contrary, are just as "hard to be understood" now, as they were
before the "infallible" church undertook to explain them. The world is
Little indebted to any claims of infallibility in explaining the meaning
of the oracles of God. It remains yet to be seen that any portion of the
Bible has been made clearer by "any" mere authoritative explanation.
And,

\(7\) it should be added, that without any such exposition, the humble
inquirer after truth may find enough in the Bible to guide his feet in
the paths of salvation. No one ever approached the sacred Scriptures
with a teachable heart, who did not find them "able to make him wise
unto salvation." Compare the notes at [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015).

Which they that are unlearned - The evil here adverted to is that which
arises in cases where those without competent knowledge undertake to
become expounders of the word of God. It is not said that it is not
proper for them to attempt to become instructed by the aid of the sacred
writings; but the danger is, that without proper views of
interpretation, of language, and of ancient customs, they might be in
danger of perverting and abusing certain portions of the writings of
Paul. Intelligence among the people is everywhere in the Bible presumed
to be proper in understanding the sacred Scriptures; and ignorance may
produce the same effects in interpreting the Bible which it will produce
in interpreting other writings. Every good thing is liable to abuse; but
the proper way to correct this evil, and to remove this danger, is not
to keep the people in ignorance, or to appoint some one to be an
infallible interpreter; it is to remove the ignorance itself by
enlightening the people, and rendering them better qualified to
understand the sacred oracles. The way to remove error is not to
perpetuate ignorance it is to enlighten the mind, so that it may be
qualified to appreciate the truth.

And unstable - Who have no settled principles and views. The evil here
adverted to is that which arises where those undertake to interpret the
Bible who have no established principles. They regard nothing as
settled. They have no landmarks set up to guide their inquiries. They
have no stability in their character, and of course nothing can be
regarded as settled in their methods of interpreting the Bible. They are
under the control of feeling and emotion, and are liable to embrace one
opinion to-day, and another directly opposite to-morrow. But the way to
prevent This evil is not by attempting to give to a community an
authoritative interpretation of the Bible; it is to diffuse abroad just
principles, that men may obtain from the Bible an intelligent view of
what it means.

Wrest - Pervert - στρεβλοῦσιν streblousin. The word here used occurs
nowhere else in the New Testament. It is derived from a word meaning a
windlass, winch, instrument of torture στρεβλή streblē and means to roll
or wind on a windlass; then to wrench, or turn away, as by the force of
a windlass; and then to wrest or pervert. It implies a turning out of
the way by the application of force. Here the meaning is, that they
apply those portions of the Bible to a purpose for which they were never
intended. It is doubtless true that this may occur. Men may abuse and
pervert anything that is good. But the way to prevent this is not to set
up a pretended infallible interpreter. With all the perversities arising
from ignorance in the interpretation of the Bible; in all the crude, and
weak, and fanciful expositions which could be found among those who have
interpreted the Scriptures for themselves - and they are many - if they
were all collected together, there would not be found so many adapted to
corrupt and ruin the soul, as have come from the interpretations
attempted to be palmed upon the world by the one church that claims to
be the infallible expounder of the word of God.

As they do also the other scriptures - This is an unequivocal
declaration of Peter that he regarded the writings of Paul as a part of
the holy Scriptures, and of course that he considered him as inspired.
The word "Scriptures," as used by a Jew, had a technical signification -
meaning the inspired writings, and was the common word which was applied
to the sacred writings of the Old Testament. As Peter uses this
language, it implies that he regarded the writings of Paul as on a level
with the Old Testament; and as far as the testimony of one apostle can
go to confirm the claim of another to inspiration, it proves that the
writings of Paul are entitled to a place in the sacred canon. It should
be remarked, also, that Peter evidently speaks here of the common
estimate in which the writings of Paul were held. He addresses those to
whom he wrote, not in such a way as to declare to them that the writings
of Paul were to be regarded as a part of the inspired volume, but as if
this were already known, and were an admitted point.

Unto their own destruction - By embracing false doctrines. Error
destroys the soul; and it is very possible for a man so to read the
Bible as only to confirm himself in error. He may find passages which,
by a perverted interpretation, shall seem to sustain his own views; and,
instead of embracing the truth, may live always under delusion, and
perish at last. It is not to be inferred that every man who reads the
Bible, or even every one who undertakes to be its public expounder, will
certainly be saved.

[2 Peter 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 3:17</span></span>

Seeing that ye know these things before - Being aware of this danger,
and knowing that such results may follow. People should read the Bible
with the feeling that it is possible that they may fall into error, and
be deceived at last. This apprehension will do much to make them
diligent, and candid, and prayerful, in studying the Word of God.

With the error of the wicked - Wicked men. Such as he had referred to in
2 Pet. 2, who became public teachers of religion.

Fall from your own steadfastness - Your firm adherence to the truth. The
particular danger here referred to is not that of falling from grace, or
from true religion, but from the firm and settled principles of
religious truth into error.

[2 Peter 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 3:18</span></span>

But grow in grace - Compare [Col 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#010).
Religion in general is often represented as "grace," since every part of
it is the result of grace, or of unmerited favor; and to "grow in grace"
is to increase in that which constitutes true religion. Religion is as
susceptible of cultivation and of growth as any other virtue of the
soul. It is feeble in its beginnings, like the grain of mustard seed, or
like the germ or blade of the plant, and it increases as it is
cultivated. There is no piety in the world which is not the result of
cultivation, and which cannot be measured by the degree of care and
attention bestowed upon it. No one becomes eminently pious, any more
than one becomes eminently learned or rich, who does not intend to; and
ordinarily men in religion are what they design to be. They have about
as much religion as they wish, and possess about the character which
they intend to possess. When men reach extraordinary elevations in
religion, like Baxter, Payson, and Edwards, they have gained only what
they meant to gain; and the gay and worldly professors of religion who
have little comfort and peace, have in fact the characters which they
designed to have. If these things are so, then we may see the propriety
of the injunction "to grow in grace;" and then too we may see the reason
why so feeble attainments are made in piety by the great mass of those
who profess religion.

And in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ - See the
notes at [Joh 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003). Compare the notes
at [Col 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#010). To know the Lord Jesus
Christ - to possess just views of his person, character, and work - is
the sum and essence of the Christian religion; and with this injunction,
therefore, the apostle appropriately closes this epistle. He who has a
saving knowledge of Christ, has in tact all that is essential to his
welfare in the life that is, and in that which is to come; he who has
not this knowledge, though he may be distinguished in the learning of
the schools, and may be profoundly skilled in the sciences, has in
reality no knowledge that will avail him in the great matters pertaining
to his eternal welfare.

To him be glory ... - Compare the [Rom
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#027) note; [Ti2
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018) note. With the desire that honor
and glory should be rendered to the Redeemer, all the aspirations of
true Christians appropriately close. There is no wish more deeply
cherished in their hearts than this; there is nothing that will enter
more into their worship in heaven. Compare [Rev
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005); [Rev
5:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Introduction](jo1000)

</div>
